[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp007)  [Next](gfp009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[*Prefatory Remarks.*\]

"Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul
unto Thee." (Psalm cxliii. S.)

"Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the sons of men." (Prov.
viii. 4)

"Bow down thine ear and hear the words of the wise, and apply thine
heart unto my knowledge." (Prov. xxii. 17.)

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

My primary object in this work is to explain certain words occurring in
the prophetic books. Of these some are homonyms, and of their several
meanings the ignorant choose the wrong ones; other terms which are
employed in a figurative sense are erroneously taken by such persons in
their primary signification. There are also hybrid terms, denoting
things which are of the same class from one point of view and of a
different class from another. It is not here intended to explain all
these expressions to the unlettered or to mere tyros, a previous
knowledge of Logic and Natural Philosophy being indispensable, or to
those who confine their attention to the study of our holy Law, I mean
the study of the canonical law alone; for the true knowledge of the
Torah is the special aim of this and similar works.

The object of this treatise is to enlighten a religious man who has been
trained to believe in the truth of our holy Law, who conscientiously
fulfils his moral and religious duties, and at the same time has been
successful in his philosophical studies. Human reason has attracted him
to abide within its sphere; and he finds it difficult to accept as
correct the teaching based on the literal interpretation of the Law, and
especially that which he himself or others derived from those
homonymous, metaphorical, or hybrid expressions. Hence he is lost in
perplexity and anxiety. If he be guided solely by reason, and renounce
his previous views which are based on those expressions, he would
consider that he had rejected the fundamental principles of the Law; and
even if he retains the opinions which were derived from those
expressions, and if, instead of following his reason, he abandon its
guidance altogether, it would still appear that his religious
convictions had suffered loss and injury. For he would then be left with
those errors which give rise to fear and anxiety, constant grief and
great perplexity.

This work has also a second object in view. It seeks to explain certain
obscure figures which occur in the Prophets, and are not distinctly
characterized as being figures. Ignorant and superficial readers take
them in a literal, not in a figurative sense. Even well informed persons
are bewildered if they understand these passages in their literal
signification, but they are entirely relieved of their perplexity when
we explain the figure, or merely suggest that the terms are figurative.
For this reason I have called this book *Guide for the Perplexed*.

I do not presume to think that this treatise settles every doubt in the
minds of those who understand it, but I maintain that it settles the
greater part of their difficulties. No intelligent man will require and
expect that on introducing any subject I shall completely exhaust it; or
that on commencing the exposition of a figure I shall fully explain all
its parts. Such a course could not be followed by a teacher in a *viva
voce* exposition, much less by an author in writing a book, without
becoming a target for every foolish conceited person to discharge the
arrows of folly at him. Some general principles bearing upon this point
have been fully discussed in our works on the Talmud, and we have there
called the attention of the reader to many themes of this kind. We also
stated (*Mishneh torah*, I. ii. 12, and iv. 10) that the expression
*Ma‘ase Bereshit* (Account of the Creation) signified" Natural Science,"
and *Ma‘aseh Mercabah* ("Description of the Chariot") Metaphysics, and
we explained the force of the Rabbinical dictum," The *Ma‘aseh Mercabah*
must not be fully expounded even in the presence of a

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

single student, unless he be wise and able to reason for himself, and
even then you should merely acquaint him with the heads of the different
sections of the subject. (Babyl. Talm. *Ḥagigah*, fol. II b). You must,
therefore, not expect from me more than such heads. And even these have
not been methodically and systematically arranged in this work, but have
been, on the contrary, scattered, and are interspersed with other topics
which we shall have occasion to explain. My object in adopting this
arrangement is that the truths should be at one time apparent, and at
another time concealed. Thus we shall not be in opposition to the Divine
Will (from which it is wrong to deviate) which has withheld from the
multitude the truths required for the knowledge of God, according to the
words, "The secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him" (Ps. xxv.
14).

Know that also in Natural Science there are topics which are not to be
fully explained. Our Sages laid down the rule, "The *Ma‘aseh Bereshith*
must not be expounded in the presence of two." If an author were to
explain these principles in writing, it would be equal to expounding
them unto thousands of men. For this reason the prophets treat these
subjects in figures, and our Sages, imitating the method of Scripture,
speak of them in metaphors and allegories; because there is a close
affinity between these subjects and metaphysics, and indeed they form
part of its mysteries. Do not imagine that these most difficult problems
can be thoroughly understood by any one of us. This is not the case. At
times the truth shines so brilliantly that we perceive it as clear as
day. Our nature and habit then draw a veil over our perception, and we
return to a darkness almost as dense as before. We are like those who,
though beholding frequent flashes of lightning, still find themselves in
the thickest darkness of the night. On some the lightning flashes in
rapid succession, and they seem to be in continuous light, and their
night is as clear as the day. This was the degree of prophetic
excellence attained by (Moses) the greatest of prophets, to whom God
said, "But as for thee, stand thou here by Me" (Deut. v. 31), and of
whom it is written "the skin of his face shone," etc. (Exod. xxxiv. 29).
\[Some perceive the prophetic flash at long intervals; this is the
degree of most prophets.\] By others only once during the whole night is
a flash of lightning perceived. This is the case with those of whom we
are informed, "They prophesied, and did not prophesy again" (Num. xi.
25). There are some to whom the flashes of lightning appear with varying
intervals; others are in the condition of men, whose darkness is
illumined not by lightning, but by some kind of crystal or similar
stone, or other substances that possess the property of shining during
the night; and to them even this small amount of light is not
continuous, but now it shines and now it vanishes, as if it were "the
flame of the rotating sword."

The degrees in the perfection of men vary according to these
distinctions. Concerning those who never beheld the light even for one
day, but walk in continual darkness, it is written, "They know not,
neither will they understand; they walk on in darkness" (Ps. lxxxii. 5).
Truth, in spite of all its powerful manifestations, is completely
withheld from them, and the following words of Scripture may be applied
to them, "And now men see not the light which is bright in the skies"
(Job xxxvii. 21). They are the multitude of ordinary men: there is no
need to notice them in this treatise.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

You must know that if a person, who has attained a certain degree of
perfection, wishes to impart to others, either orally or in writing, any
portion of the knowledge which he has acquired of these subjects, he is
utterly unable to be as systematic and explicit as he could be in a
science of which the method is well known. The same difficulties which
he encountered when investigating the subject for himself will attend
him when endeavouring to instruct others: viz., at one time the
explanation will appear lucid, at another time, obscure: this property
of the subject appears to remain the same both to the advanced scholar
and to the beginner. For this reason, great theological scholars gave
instruction in all such matters only by means of metaphors and
allegories. They frequently employed them in forms varying more or less
essentially. In most cases they placed the lesson to be illustrated at
the beginning, or in the middle, or at the end of the simile. When they
could find no simile which from beginning to end corresponded to the
idea which was to be illustrated, they divided the subject of the
lesson, although in itself one whole, into different parts, and
expressed each by a separate figure. Still more obscure are those
instances in which one simile is employed to illustrate many subjects,
the beginning of the simile representing one thing, the end another.
Sometimes the whole metaphor may refer to two cognate subjects in the
same branch of knowledge.

If we were to teach in these disciplines, without the use of parables
and figures, we should be compelled to resort to expressions both
profound and transcendental, and by no means more intelligible than
metaphors and similes: as though the wise and learned were drawn into
this course by the Divine Will, in the same way as they are compelled to
follow the laws of nature in matters relating to the body. You are no
doubt aware that the Almighty, desiring to lead us to perfection and to
improve our state of society, has revealed to us laws which are to
regulate our actions. These laws, however, presuppose an advanced state
of intellectual culture. We must first form a conception of the
Existence of the Creator according to our capabilities; that is, we must
have a knowledge of Metaphysics. But this discipline can only be
approached after the study of Physics: for the science of Physics
borders on Metaphysics, and must even precede it in the course of our
studies, as is clear to all who are familiar with these questions.
Therefore the Almighty commenced Holy Writ with the description of the
Creation, that is, with Physical Science; the subject being on the one
hand most weighty and important, and on the other hand our means of
fully comprehending those great problems being limited. He described
those profound truths, which His Divine Wisdom found it necessary to
communicate to us, in allegorical, figurative, and metaphorical
language. Our Sages have said (Yemen Midrash on Gen. i. 1), "It is
impossible to give a full account of the Creation to man. Therefore
Scripture simply tells us, In the beginning God created the heavens and
the earth" (Gen. i. 1). Thus they have suggested that this subject is a
deep mystery, and in the words of Solomon, "Far off and exceedingly
deep, who can find it out?" (Eccles. vii. 24). It has been treated in
metaphors in order that the uneducated may comprehend it according to
the measure of their faculties and the feebleness of their apprehension,
while educated persons may take it in a different sense. In our
commentary on the Mishnah we stated our intention to explain difficult

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

problems in the Book on Prophecy and in the Book of Harmony. In the
latter we intended to examine all the passages in the Midrash which, if
taken literally, appear to be inconsistent with truth and common sense,
and must therefore be taken figuratively. Many years have elapsed since
I first commenced those works. I had proceeded but a short way when I
became dissatisfied with my original plan. For I observed that by
expounding these passages by means of allegorical and mystical terms, we
do not explain anything, but merely substitute one thing for another of
the same nature, whilst in explaining them fully our efforts would
displease most people; and my sole object in planning to write those
books was to make the contents of Midrashim and the exoteric lessons of
the prophecies intelligible to everybody. We have further noticed that
when an ill-informed Theologian reads these Midrashim, he will find no
difficulty; for possessing no knowledge of the properties of things, he
will not reject statements which involve impossibilities. When, however,
a person who is both religious and well educated reads them, he cannot
escape the following dilemma: either he takes them literally, and
questions the abilities of the author and the soundness of his
mind-doing thereby nothing which is opposed to the principles of our
faith,--or he will acquiesce in assuming that the passages in question
have some secret meaning, and he will continue to hold the author in
high estimation whether he understood the allegory or not. As regards
prophecy in its various degrees and the different metaphors used in the
prophetic books, we shall give in the present work an explanation,
according to a different method. Guided by these considerations I have
refrained from writing those two books as I had previously intended. In
my larger work, the *Mishnah Torah*, I have contented myself with
briefly stating the principles of our faith and its fundamental truths,
together with such hints as approach a clear exposition. In this work,
however, I address those who have studied philosophy and have acquired
sound knowledge, and who while firm in religious matters are perplexed
and bewildered on account of the ambiguous and figurative expressions
employed in the holy writings. Some chapters may be found in this work
which contain no reference whatever to homonyms. Such chapters will
serve as an introduction to others: they will contain some reference to
the signification of a homonym which I do not wish to mention in that
place, or explain some figure: point out that a certain expression is a
figure: treat of difficult passages generally misunderstood in
consequence of the homonymy they include, or because the simile they
contain is taken in place of that which it represents, and *vice versâ*.

Having spoken of similes, I proceed to make the following remark:--The
key to the understanding and to the full comprehension of all that the
Prophets have said is found in the knowledge of the figures, their
general ideas, and the meaning of each word they contain. You know the
verse:

"I have also spoken in similes by the Prophets" (Hosea xii. 10); and
also the verse, "Put forth a riddle and speak a parable" (Ezek. xvii.
2). And because the Prophets continually employ figures, Ezekiel said,
"Does He not speak parables?" (xxi. 5). Again, Solomon begins his book
of Proverbs with the words, "To understand a proverb and figurative
speech, the words of the wise and their dark sayings" (Prov. i. 6); and
we read in Midrash, *Shir ha-shirim Rabba*, i. 1); "To what were the
words of the Law to be compared

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

before the time of Solomon? To a well the waters of which are at a great
depth, and though cool and fresh, yet no man could drink of them. A
clever man joined cord with cord, and rope with rope, and drew up and
drank. So Solomon went from figure to figure, and from subject to
subject, till he obtained the true sense of the Law." So far go the
words of our Sages. I do not believe that any intelligent man thinks
that "the words of the Law" mentioned here as requiring the application
of figures in order to be understood, can refer to the rules for
building tabernacles, for preparing the lulab, or for the four kinds of
trustees. What is really meant is the apprehension of profound and
difficult subjects, concerning which our Sages said, "If a man loses in
his house a sela, or a pearl, he can find it by lighting a taper worth
only one issar. Thus the parables in themselves are of no great value,
but through them the words of the holy Law are rendered intelligible."
These likewise are the words of our Sages; consider well their
statement, that the dee*per se*nse of the words of the holy Law are
pearls, and the literal acceptation of a figure is of no value in
itself. They compare the hidden meaning included in the literal sense of
the simile to a pearl lost in a dark room, which is full of furniture.
It is certain that the pearl is in the room, but the man can neither see
it nor know where it lies. It is just as if the pearl were no longer in
his possession, for, as has been stated, it affords him no benefit
whatever until he kindles a light. The same is the case with the
comprehension of that which the simile represents. The wise king said,
"A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in vessels of silver" (Prov.
xxv. 11). Hear the explanation of what he said:--The word *maskiyoth*,
the Hebrew equivalent for "vessels," denotes "filigree network"--i.e.,
things in which there are very small apertures, such as are frequently
wrought by silversmiths. They are called in Hebrew *maskiyyoth* (lit.
"transpicuous," from the verb *sakah*, "he saw," a root which occurs
also in the Targum of Onkelos, Gen. xxvi. 8), because the eye penetrates
through them. Thus Solomon meant to say, "just as apples of gold in
silver filigree with small apertures, so is a word fitly spoken."

See how beautifully the conditions of a good simile are described in
this figure! It shows that in every word which has a double sense, a
literal one and a figurative one, the plain meaning must be as valuable
as silver, and the hidden meaning still more precious: so that the
figurative meaning bears the same relation to the literal one as gold to
silver. It is further necessary that the plain sense of the phrase shall
give to those who consider it some notion of that which the figure
represents. just as a golden apple overlaid with a network of silver,
when seen at a distance, or looked at superficially, is mistaken for a
silver apple, but when a keen-sighted person looks at the object well,
he will find what is within, and see that the apple is gold. The same is
the case with the figures employed by prophets. Taken literally, such
expressions contain wisdom useful for many purposes, among others, for
the amelioration of the condition of society; e.g., the Proverbs (of
Solomon), and similar sayings in their literal sense. Their hidden
meaning, however, is profound wisdom, conducive to the recognition of
real truth.

Know that the figures employed by prophets are of two kinds: first,
where every word which occurs in the simile represents a certain idea;
and secondly, where the simile, as a whole, represents a general idea,
but has a great

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

many points which have no reference whatever to that idea: they are
simply required to give to the simile its proper form and order, or
better to conceal the idea: the simile is therefore continued as far as
necessary, according to its literal sense. Consider this well.

An example of the first class of prophetic figures is to be found in
Genesis:--"And, behold, a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it
reached to heaven; and, behold, the angels of God ascending and
descending on it" (Gen. xxviii. 12). The word "ladder" refers to one
idea: "set up on the earth" to another: "and the top of it reached to
heaven" to a third: "angels of God" to a fourth: "ascending" to a fifth;
"descending" to a sixth; "the Lord stood above it" (ver. 13) to a
seventh. Every word in this figure introduces a fresh element into the
idea represented by the figure.

An example of the second class of prophetic figures is found in Proverbs
(vii. 6-26):--"For at the window of my house I looked through my
casement, and beheld among the simple ones; I discerned among the youths
a young man void of understanding, passing through the street near her
corner: and he went the way to her house, in the twilight, in the
evening, in the black and dark night: and, behold, there met him a woman
with the attire of a harlot, and subtil of heart. (She is loud and
stubborn; her feet abide not in her house: now the is without, now in
the streets, and lieth in wait in every corner.) So she caught him, and
kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him, I have peace
offerings with me; this day have I paid my vows. Therefore came I forth
to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee. I have
decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with striped cloths of the yam
of Egypt. I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. Come,
let us take our fill of love until the morning: let us solace ourselves
with loves. For the goodman is not at home, he is gone a long journey:
he hath taken a bag of money with him, and will come home at the day
appointed. With her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the
flattering of her lips she forced him. He goeth after her straightway,
as an ox goeth to the slaughter, or as fetters to the correction of a
fool: till a dart strike through his liver: as a bird hasteth to the
snare, and knoweth not that it is for his life. Hearken unto me now
therefore, O ye children, and attend to the words of my mouth. Let not
thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths. For she
hath cast down many wounded: yea, many strong men have been slain by
her."

The general principle expounded in all these verses is to abstain from
excessive indulgence in bodily pleasures. The author compares the body,
which is the source of all sensual pleasures, to a married woman who at
the same time is a harlot. And this figure he has taken as the basis of
his entire book. We shall hereafter show the wisdom of Solomon in
comparing sensual pleasures to an adulterous harlot. We shall explain
how aptly he concludes that work with the praises of a faithful wife who
devotes herself to the welfare of her husband and of her household. All
obstacles which prevent man from attaining his highest aim in life, all
the deficiencies in the character of man, all his evil propensities, are
to be traced to the body alone. This will be explained later on. The
predominant idea running throughout the figure is, that man shall not be
entirely guided by his animal, or material nature; for the material
substance of man is identical with that of the brute creation.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

An adequate explanation of the figure having been given, and its meaning
having been shown, do not imagine that you will find in its application
a corresponding element for each part of the figure; you must not ask
what is meant by "I have peace offerings with me" (ver. 14); by "I have
decked my bed with coverings of tapestry" (ver. 16); or what is added to
the force of the figure by the observation "for the goodman is not at
home" (ver. 19), and so on to the end of the chapter. For all this is
merely to complete the illustration of the metaphor in its literal
meaning. The circumstances described here are such as are common to
adulterers. Such conversations take place between all adulterous
persons. You must well understand what I have said, for it is a
principle of the utmost importance with respect to those things which I
intend to expound. If you observe in one of the chapters that I
explained the meaning of a certain figure, and pointed out to you its
general scope, do not trouble yourself further in order to find an
interpretation of each separate portion, for that would lead you to one
of the two following erroneous courses: either you will miss the sense
included in the metaphor, or you will be induced to explain certain
things which require no explanation, and which are not introduced for
that purpose. Through this unnecessary trouble you may fall into the
great error which besets most modern sects in their foolish writings and
discussions: they all endeavour to find some hidden meaning in
expressions which were never uttered by the author in that sense. Your
object should be to discover inmost of the figures the general idea
which the author wishes to express. In some instances it will be
sufficient if you understand from my remarks that a certain expression
contains a figure, although I may offer no further comment. For when you
know that it is not to be taken literally, you will understand at once
to what subject it refers. My statement that it is a figurative
expression will, as it were, remove the screen from between the object
and the observer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Directions for the Study of this Work](gfp009.md)
