[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp006)  [Next](gfp008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### INTRODUCTION

\[*Letter of the Author to his Pupil, R. Joseph Ibn Aknin.*\]

In the name of GOD, Lord of the Universe.

To R. Joseph (may God protect him!), son of R. Jehudah (may his repose
be in Paradise!):--

My dear pupil, ever since you resolved to come to me, from a distant
country, and to study under my direction, I thought highly of your
thirst for knowledge, and your fondness for speculative pursuits, which
found expression in your poems. I refer to the time when I received your
writings in prose and verse from Alexandria. I was then not yet able to
test your powers of apprehension, and I thought that your desire might
possibly exceed your capacity. But when you had gone with me through a
course of astronomy, after having completed the \[other\] elementary
studies which are indispensable for the understanding of that science, I
was still more gratified by the acuteness and the quickness of your
apprehension. Observing your great fondness for mathematics, I let you
study them more deeply, for I felt sure of your ultimate success.
Afterwards, when I took you through a course of logic, I found that my
great expectations of you were confirmed, and I considered you fit to
receive from me an exposition of the esoteric ideas contained in the
prophetic books, that you might understand them as they are understood
by men of culture. When I commenced by way of hints, I noticed that you
desired additional explanation, urging me to expound some metaphysical
problems; to teach you the system of the Mutakallemim; to tell you
whether their arguments were based on logical proof; and if not, what
their method was. I perceived that you had acquired some knowledge in
those matters from others, and that you were perplexed and bewildered;
yet you sought to find out a solution to your difficulty. I urged you to
desist from this pursuit, and enjoined you to continue your studies
systematically; for my object was that the truth should present itself
in connected order, and that you should not hit upon it by mere chance.
Whilst you studied with me I never refused to explain difficult verses
in the Bible or passages in rabbinical literature which we happened to
meet. When, by the will of God, we parted, and you went your way, our
discussions aroused in me a resolution which had long been dormant. Your
absence has prompted me to compose this treatise for you and for those
who are like you, however few they may be. I have divided it into
chapters, each of which shall be sent to you as soon as it is completed.
Farewell!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prefatory Remarks](gfp008)
