[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp003)  [Next](gfp005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

### THE LIFE OF MOSES MAIMONIDES

"BEFORE the sun of Eli had set the son of Samuel had risen." Before the
voice of the prophets had ceased to guide the people, the Interpreters
of the Law, the Doctors of the Talmud, had commenced their labours, and
before the Academies of Sura and of Pumbadita were closed, centres of
Jewish thought and learning were already flourishing in the far West.
The circumstances which led to the transference of the head-quarters of
Jewish learning from the East to the West in the tenth century are thus
narrated in the *Sefer ha-kabbalah* of Rabbi Abraham ben David:

"After the death of Hezekiah, the head of the Academy and Prince of the
Exile, the academies were closed and no new Geonim were appointed. But
long before that time Heaven had willed that there should be a
discontinuance of the pecuniary gifts which used to be sent from
Palestine, North Africa and Europe. Heaven had also decreed that a ship
sailing from Bari should be captured by Ibn Romahis, commander of the
naval forces of Abd-er-rahman al-nasr. Four distinguished Rabbis were
thus made prisoners--Rabbi Ḥushiel, father of Rabbi Ḥananel, Rabbi
Moses, father of Rabbi Ḥanok, Rabbi Shemarjahu, son of Rabbi Elḥanan,
and a fourth whose name has not been recorded. They were engaged in a
mission to collect subsidies in aid of the Academy in Sura. The captor
sold them as slaves; Rabbi Ḥushiel was carried to Kairuan, R. Shemarjahu
was left in Alexandria, and R. Moses was brought to Cordova. These
slaves were ransomed by their brethren and were soon placed in important
positions. When Rabbi Moses was brought to Cordova, it was supposed that
he was uneducated. In that city there was a synagogue known at that time
by the name of *Keneset ha-midrash*, and Rabbi Nathan, renowned for his
great piety, was the head of the congregation. The members of the
community used to hold meetings at which the Talmud was read and
discussed. One day when Rabbi Nathan was expounding the Talmud and was
unable to give a satisfactory explanation of the passage under
discussion, Rabbi Moses promptly removed the difficulty and at the same
time answered several questions [which](errata.htm#0.md) were submitted to
him. Thereupon R. Nathan thus addressed the assembly:--'I am no longer
your leader; that stranger in sackcloth shall henceforth be my teacher,
and you shall appoint him to be your chief.' The admiral, on hearing of
the high attainments of his prisoner, desired to revoke the sale, but
the king would not permit this retraction, being pleased to learn that
his Jewish subjects were no longer dependent for their religious
instruction on the schools in the East.

Henceforth the schools in the West asserted their independence, and even
surpassed the parent institutions. The Caliphs, mostly opulent, gave
every encouragement to philosophy and poetry; and, being generally
liberal in sentiment, they entertained kindly feelings towards their
Jewish subjects.

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> These were allowed
to compete for the acquisition of wealth and honour on equal terms with
their Mohammedan fellow-citizens. Philosophy and poetry were
consequently cultivated by the Jews with the same zest as by the Arabs.
Ibn Gabirol, Ibn Ḥasdai, Judah ha-levi, Ḥananel, Alfasi, the Ibn Ezras,
and others who flourished in that period were the ornament of their age,
and the pride of the Jews at all times. The same favourable condition
was maintained during the reign of the Omeyades; but when the Moravides
and the Almohades came into power, the horizon darkened once more, and
misfortunes threatened to destroy the fruit of several centuries. Amidst
this gloom there appeared a brilliant luminary which sent forth rays of
light and comfort: this was Moses Maimonides.

Moses, the son of Maimon, was born at Cordova, on the 14th of Nisan,
4895 (March 30, 1135). Although the date of his birth has been recorded
with the utmost accuracy, no trustworthy notice has been preserved
concerning the early period of his life. But his entire career is a
proof that he did not pass his youth in idleness; his education must
have been in harmony with the hope of his parents, that one day he
would, like his father and forefathers, hold the honourable office of
*Dayyan* or *Rabbi*, and distinguish himself in theological learning. It
is probable that the Bible and the Talmud formed the chief subjects of
his study; but he unquestionably made the best use of the opportunities
which Mohammedan Spain, and especially Cordova, afforded him for the
acquisition of general knowledge. It is not mentioned in any of his
writings who were his teachers; his father, as it seems, was his
principal guide and instructor in many branches of knowledge. David
Conforte, in his historical work, *Ḳore ha-dorot*, states that
Maimonides was the pupil of two eminent men, namely, Rabbi Joseph Ibn
Migash and Ibn Roshd (Averroes); that by the former he was instructed in
the Talmud, and by the latter in philosophy. This statement seems to be
erroneous, as Maimonides was only a child at the time when Rabbi Joseph
died, and already far advanced in years when he became acquainted with
the writings of Ibn Roshd. The origin of this mistake, as regards Rabbi
Joseph, can easily be traced. Maimonides in his *Mishneh Tora*, employs,
in reference to R. Isaac Alfasi and R. Joseph, the expression "my
teachers" (*rabbotai*), and this expression, by which he merely
describes his indebtedness to their writings, has been taken in its
literal meaning.

Whoever his teachers may have been, it is evident that he was well
prepared by them for his future mission. At the age of twenty-three he
entered upon his literary career with a treatise on the Jewish Calendar.
It is unknown where this work was composed, whether in Spain or in
Africa. The author merely states that he wrote it at the request of a
friend, whom he, however, leaves unnamed. The subject was generally
considered to be very abstruse, and to involve a thorough knowledge of
mathematics. Maimonides must, therefore, even at this early period, have
been regarded as a profound scholar by those who knew him. The treatise
is of an elementary character.--It was probably about the same time that
he wrote, in Arabic, an explanation of Logical terms, *Millot higgayon*,
which Moses Ibn Tibbon translated into Hebrew.

The earlier period of his life does not seem to have been marked by any
incident worth noticing. It may, however, be easily conceived that the
later

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

period of his life, which was replete with interesting incidents,
engaged the exclusive attention of his biographers. So much is certain,
that his youth was beset with trouble and anxiety; the peaceful
development of science and philosophy was disturbed by wars raging
between Mohammedans and Christians, and also between the several
Mohammedan sects. The Moravides, who had succeeded the Omeyades, were
opposed to liberality and toleration; but they were surpassed in cruelty
and fanaticism by their successors. Cordova was taken by the Almohades
in the year 1148, when Maimonides was about thirteen years old. The
victories of the Almohades, first under the leadership of the Mahadi Ibn
Tamurt, and then under Abd-al-mumen, were, according to all testimonies,
attended by acts of excessive intolerance. Abd-al-mumen would not suffer
in his dominions any other faith but the one which he himself confessed.
Jews and Christians had the choice between Islam and emigration or a
martyr's death. The *Sefer ha-ḳabbalah* contains the following
description of one of the persecutions which then occurred:

"After the death of R. Joseph ha-levi the study of the Torah was
interrupted, although he left a son and a nephew, both of whom had under
his tuition become profound scholars. 'The righteous man (R. Joseph) was
taken away on account of the approaching evils. After the death of R.
Joseph there came for the Jews a time of oppression and distress. They
quitted their homes, 'Such as were for death, to death, and such as were
for the sword, to the sword; and such as were for the famine, to the
famine, and such as were for the captivity, to the captivity'; and--it
might be added to the words of Jeremiah (xv. 2)--'such as were for
apostasy, to apostasy.' All this happened through the sword of Ibn
Tamurt, who, in 4902 (1142), determined to blot out the name of Israel,
and actually left no trace of the Jews in any part of his empire."

Ibn Verga in his work on Jewish martyrdom, in *Shebeṭ Jehudah*, gives
the following account of events then happening:--"In the year 4902 the
armies of Ibn Tamurt made their appearance. A proclamation was issued
that any one who refused to adopt Islam would be put to death, and his
property would be confiscated. Thereupon the Jews assembled at the gate
of the royal palace and implored the king for mercy. He answered--'It is
because I have compassion on you, that I command you to become Muslemim;
for I desire to save you from eternal punishment.' The Jews
replied--'Our salvation depends on our observance of the Divine Law; you
are the master of our bodies and of our property, but our souls will be
judged by the King who gave them to us, and to whom they will return;
whatever be our future fate, you, O king, will not be held responsible
for it.' 'I do not desire to argue with you,' said the king; 'for I know
you will argue according to your own religion. It is my absolute will
that you either adopt my religion or be put to death. The Jews then
proposed to emigrate, but the king would not allow his subjects to serve
another king. In vain did the Jews implore the nobles to intercede in
their behalf; the king remained inexorable. Thus many congregations
forsook their religion; but within a month the king came to a sudden
death; the son, believing that his father had met with an untimely end
as a punishment for his cruelty to the Jews, assured the involuntary
converts that it would be indifferent to him what

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

religion they professed. Hence many Jews returned at once to the
religion of their fathers, while others hesitated for some time, from
fear that the king meant to entrap the apparent converts." From such
records it appears that during these calamities some of the Jews fled to
foreign countries, some died as martyrs, and many others submitted for a
time to outward conversion. Which course was followed by the family of
Maimon? Did they sacrifice personal comfort and safety to their
religious conviction, or did they, on the contrary, for the sake of mere
worldly considerations dissemble their faith and pretend that they
completely submitted to the dictates of the tyrant? An answer to this
question presents itself in the following note which Maimonides has
appended to his commentary on the Mishnah: "I have now finished this
work in accordance with my promise, and I fervently beseech the Almighty
to save us from error. If there be one who shall discover an inaccuracy
in this Commentary or shall have a better explanation to offer, let my
attention be directed unto it; and let me be exonerated by the fact that
I have worked with far greater application than any one who writes for
the sake of pay and profit, and that I have worked under the most trying
circumstances. For Heaven had ordained that we be exiled, and we were
therefore driven about from place to place; I was thus compelled to work
at the Commentary while travelling by land, or crossing the sea. It
might have sufficed to mention that during that time I, in addition, was
engaged in other studies, but I preferred to give the above explanation
in order to encourage those who wish to criticise or annotate the
Commentary, and at the same time to account for the slow progress of
this work. I, Moses, the son of Maimon, commenced it when I was
twenty-three years old, and finished it in Egypt, at the age of
thirty\[-three\] years, in the year 1479 Sel.(1168)."

The *Sefer Ḥaredim* of R. Eleazar Askari of Safed contains the following
statement of Maimonides:--"On Sabbath evening, the 4th of Iyyar, 4925
(1165), I went on board; on the following Sabbath the waves threatened
to destroy our lives. . . . On the 3rd of Sivan, I arrived safely at
Acco, *and was thus rescued from apostasy*. . . . On Tuesday, the 4th of
Marḥeshvan, 4926, I left Acco, arrived at Jerusalem after a journey
beset with difficulties and with dangers, and prayed on the spot of the
great and holy house on the 4th, 5th, and 6th of Marḥeshvan. On Sunday,
the 9th of that month, I left Jerusalem and visited the cave of
Machpelah, in Hebron."

From these two statements it may be inferred that in times of
persecution Maimonides and his family did not seek to protect their
lives and property by dissimulation. They submitted to the troubles of
exile in order that they might remain faithful to their religion.
Carmoly, Geiger, Munk, and others are of opinion that the treatise of
Maimonides on involuntary apostasy, as well as the accounts of some
Mohammedan authors, contain strong evidence to show that there was a
time when the family of Maimon publicly professed their belief in
Mohammed. A critical examination of these documents compels us to reject
their evidence as inadmissible.--After a long period of trouble and
anxiety, the family of Maimon arrived at Fostat, in Egypt, and settled
there. David, the brother of Moses Maimonides, carried on a trade in
precious stones, while Moses occupied himself with his studies and
interested himself in the communal affairs of the Jews.

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

It appears that for some time Moses was supported by his brother, and
when this brother died, he earned a living by practising as a physician;
but he never sought or derived any benefit from his services to his
community, or from his correspondence or from the works he wrote for the
instruction of his brethren; the satisfaction of being of service to his
fellow-creatures was for him a sufficient reward.

The first public act in which Maimonides appears to have taken a leading
part was a decree promulgated by the Rabbinical authorities in Cairo in
the year 1167. The decree begins as follows--"In times gone by, when
storms and tempests threatened us, we used to wander about from place to
place but by the mercy of the Almighty we have now been enabled to find
here a resting-place. On our arrival, we noticed to our great dismay
that the learned were disunited; that none of them turned his attention
to the needs of the congregation. We therefore felt it our duty to
undertake the task of guiding the holy flock, of inquiring into the
condition of the community, of "reconciling the hearts of the fathers to
their children," and of correcting their corrupt ways. The injuries are
great, but we may succeed in effecting a cure, and--in accordance with
the words of the prophet--'I will seek the lost one, and that which has
been cast out I will bring back, and the broken one I will cure' (Micah
iv. 6). When we therefore resolved to take the management of the
communal affairs into our hands, we discovered the existence of a
serious evil in the midst of the community," etc.

It was probably about that time that Maimon died. Letters of condolence
were sent to his son Moses from all sides, both from Mohammedan and from
Christian countries; in some instances the letters were several months
on their way before they reached their destination.

The interest which Maimonides now took in communal affairs did not
prevent him from completing the great and arduous work, the Commentary
on the Mishnah, which he had begun in Spain and continued during his
wanderings in Africa. In this Commentary he proposed to give the
quintessence of the Gemara, to expound the meaning of each dictum in the
Mishnah, and to state which of the several opinions had received the
sanction of the Talmudical authorities. His object in writing this work
was to enable those who are not disposed to study the Gemara, to
understand the Mishnah, and to facilitate the study of the Gemara for
those who are willing to engage in it. The commentator generally adheres
to the explanations given in the Gemara, and it is only in cases where
the *halakah*, or practical law, is not affected, that he ventures to
dissent. He acknowledges the benefit he derived from such works of his
predecessors as the Halakot of Alfasi, and the writings of the Geonim,
but afterwards he asserted that errors which were discovered in his
works arose from his implicit reliance on those authorities. His
originality is conspicuous in the Introduction and in the treatment of
general principles, which in some instances precedes the exposition of
an entire section or chapter, in others that of a single rule. The
commentator is generally concise, except when occasion is afforded to
treat of ethical and theological principles, or of a scientific subject,
such as weights and measures, or mathematical and astronomical problems.
Although exhortations to virtue and warnings against vice are found in
all parts of his work, they are especially abundant in the Commentary on
*Abot*, which is prefaced by a

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

separate psychological treatise, called *The Eight Chapters*. The dictum
"He who speaketh much commits a sin," elicited a lesson on the economy
of speech; the explanation of *‘olam ha-ba* in the treatise Sanhedrin
(xi. 1) led him to discuss the principles of faith, and to lay down the
thirteen articles of the Jewish creed. The Commentary was written in
Arabic, and was subsequently translated into Hebrew and into other
languages. The estimation in which the Commentary was held may be
inferred from the following fact: When the Jews in Italy became
acquainted with its method and spirit, through a Hebrew translation of
one of its parts, they sent to Spain in search of a complete Hebrew
version of the Commentary. R. Simḥah, who had been entrusted with the
mission, found no copy extant, but he succeeded, through the influence
of Rabbi Shelomoh ben Aderet, in causing a Hebrew translation of this
important work to be prepared.--In the Introduction, the author states
that he has written a Commentary on the Babylonian Talmud treatise
Ḥullin and on nearly three entire sections, viz., *Moëd*, *Nashim*, and
*Nezikin*. Of all these Commentaries only the one on *Rosh ha-shanah* is
known.

In the year 1572 Maimonides wrote the *Iggeret Teman*, or *Petaḥ-tiḳvah*
("Letter to the Jews in Yemen," or "Opening of hope") in response to a
letter addressed to him by Rabbi Jacob al-Fayumi on the critical
condition of the Jews in Yemen. Some of these Jews had been forced into
apostasy others were made to believe that certain passages in the Bible
alluded to the mission of Mohammed; others again had been misled by an
impostor who pretended to be the Messiah. The character and style of
Maimonides reply appear to have been adapted to the intellectual
condition of the Jews in Yemen, for whom it was written. These probably
read the Bible with Midrashic commentaries, and preferred the easy and
attractive *Agadah* to the more earnest study of the *Halakah*. It is
therefore not surprising that the letter contains remarks and
interpretations which cannot be reconciled with the philosophical and
logical method by which all the other works of Maimonides are
distinguished. After a few complimentary words, in which the author
modestly disputes the justice of the praises lavished upon him, he
attempts to prove that the present sufferings of the Jews, together with
the numerous instances of apostasy, were foretold by the prophets,
especially by Daniel, and must not perplex the faithful. It must be
borne in mind, he continues, that the attempts made in past times to do
away with the Jewish religion, had invariably failed; the same would be
the fate of the present attempts; for "religious persecutions are of but
short duration." The arguments which profess to demonstrate that in
certain Biblical passages allusion is made to Mohammed, are based on
interpretations which are totally opposed to common sense. He urges that
the Jews, faithfully adhering to their religion, should impress their
children with the greatness of the Revelation on Mount Sinai, and of the
miracles wrought through Moses; they also should remain firm in the
belief that God will send the Messiah to deliver their nation, but they
must abandon futile calculations of the Messianic period, and beware of
impostors. Although there be signs which indicate the approach of the
promised deliverance, and the times seem to be the period of the last
and most cruel persecution mentioned in the visions of Daniel (xi. and
xii.), the person in Yemen who pretends to be the Messiah

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

is an impostor, and if care be not taken, he is sure to do mischief.
Similar impostors in Cordova, France, and Africa, have deceived the
multitude and brought great troubles upon the Jews.--Yet, inconsistently
with this sound advice the author gives a positive date of the Messianic
time, on the basis of an old tradition; the inconsistency is so obvious
that it is impossible to attribute this passage to Maimonides himself.
It is probably spurious, and has, perhaps, been added by the translator.
With the exception of the rhymed introduction, the letter was written in
Arabic, "in order that all should be able to read and understand it";
for that purpose the author desires that copies should be made of it,
and circulated among the Jews. Rabbi Naḥum, of the Maghreb, translated
the letter into Hebrew.

The success in the first great undertaking of explaining the Mishnah
encouraged Maimonides to propose to himself another task of a still more
ambitious character. In the Commentary on the Mishnah, it was his object
that those who were unable to read the Gemara should be made acquainted
with the results obtained by the Amoraim in the course of their
discussions on the Mishnah. But the Mishnah, with the Commentary, was
not such a code of laws as might easily be consulted in cases of
emergency; only the initiated would be able to find the section, the
chapter, and the paragraph in which the desired information could be
found. The *halakah* had, besides, been further developed since the time
when the Talmud was compiled. The changed state of things had suggested
new questions; these were discussed and settled by the Geonim, whose
decisions, being contained in special letters or treatises, were not
generally accessible. Maimonides therefore undertook to compile a
complete code, which would contain, in the language and style of the
Mishnah, and without discussion, the whole of the Written and the Oral
Law, all the precepts recorded in the Talmud, Sifra, Sifre and Tosefta,
and the decisions of the Geonim. According to the plan of the author,
this work was to present a solution of every question touching the
religious, moral, or social duties of the Jews. It was not in any way
his object to discourage the study of the Talmud and the Midrash; he
only sought to diffuse a knowledge of the Law amongst those who, through
incapacity or other circumstances, were precluded from that study. In
order to ensure the completeness of the code, the author drew up a list
of the six hundred and thirteen precepts of the Pentateuch, divided them
into fourteen groups, these again he subdivided, and thus showed how
many positive and negative precepts were contained in each section of
the Mishneh torah. The principles by which he was guided in this
arrangement were laid down in a separate treatise, called *Sefer
ha-miẓvot*. Works of a similar kind, written by his predecessors, as the
*Halakot gedolot* of R. Shimon Kahira, and the several *Azharot* were,
according to Maimonides, full of errors, because their authors had not
adopted any proper method. But an examination of the rules laid down by
Maimonides and of their application leads to the conclusion that his
results were not less arbitrary; as has, in fact, been shown by the
criticisms of Naḥmanides. The *Sefer ha-miẓvot* was written in Arabic,
and thrice translated into Hebrew, namely, by Rabbi Abraham ben Ḥisdai,
Rabbi Shelomoh ben Joseph ben Job, and Rabbi Moses Ibn Tibbon.
Maimonides himself desired to translate the book into Hebrew, but to his
disappointment he found no time.

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

This *Sefer ha-miẓvot* was executed as a preparation for his principal
work, the *Mishneh Torah*, or *Yad ha-ḥazakah*, which consists of an
Introduction and fourteen Books. In the Introduction the author first
describes the chain of tradition from Moses to the close of the Talmud,
and then he explains his method in compiling the work. He distinguishes
between the dicta found in the Talmud, Sifre, Sifra, or Tosefta, on the
one hand, and the dicta of the Geonim on the other; the former were
binding on all Jews, the latter only as far as their necessity and their
utility or the authority of their propounders was recognized. Having
once for all stated the sources from which he compiled his work, he did
not deem it necessary to name in each case the authority for his opinion
or the particular passage from which he derived his dictum. Any addition
of references to each paragraph he probably considered useless to the
uninformed and superfluous to the learned. At a later time he discovered
his error, he being himself unable to find again the sources of some of
his decisions. Rabbi Joseph Caro, in his commentary on the *Mishneh
Torah*, termed *Keseph Mishneh*, remedied this deficiency. The
Introduction is followed by the enumeration of the six hundred and
thirteen precepts and a description of the plan of the work, its
division into fourteen books, and the division of the latter into
sections, chapters, and paragraphs.

According to the author, the Mishneh Torah is a mere compendium of the
Talmud; but he found sufficient opportunities to display his real
genius, his philosophical mind, and his ethical doctrines. For in
stating what the traditional Law enjoined he had to exercise his own
judgment, and to decide whether a certain dictum was meant to be taken
literally or figuratively whether it was the final decision of a
majority or the rejected opinion of a minority; whether it was part of
the Oral Law or a precept founded on the scientific views of a
particular author; and whether it was of universal application or was
only intended for a special period or a special locality. The first
Book, *Sefer ha-madda‘*, is the embodiment of his own ethical and
theological theories, although he frequently refers to the Sayings of
our Sages, and employs the phraseology of the Talmud. Similarly, the
section on the Jewish Calendar, *Hilkot ha-’ibur*, may be considered as
his original work. In each group of the *halakot*, its source, a certain
passage of the Pentateuch, is first quoted, with its traditional
interpretation, and then the detailed rules follow in systematic order.
The *Mishneh Torah* was written by the author in pure Hebrew; when
subsequently a friend asked him to translate it into Arabic, he said he
would prefer to have his Arabic writings translated into Hebrew instead
of the reverse. The style is an imitation of the Mishnah he did not
choose, the author says, the philosophical style, because that would be
unintelligible to the common reader; nor did he select the prophetic
style, because that would not harmonize with the subject.

Ten years of hard work by day and by night were spent in the compilation
of this code, which had originally been undertaken for "his own benefit,
to save him in his advanced age the trouble and the necessity of
consulting the Talmud on every occasion." Maimonides knew very well that
his work would meet with the opposition of those whose ignorance it
would expose, also of those who were incapable of comprehending it, and
of those who were inclined to condemn every deviation from their own
preconceived notions.

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But he had the
satisfaction to learn that it was well received in most of the
congregations of Israel, and that there was a general desire to possess
and study it. This success confirmed him in his hope that at a later
time, when all cause for jealousy would have disappeared, the *Mishneh
Torah* would be received by all Jews as an authoritative code. This hope
has not been realized. The genius, earnestness, and zeal of Maimonides
are generally recognized; but there is no absolute acceptance of his
dicta. The more he insisted on his infallibility, the more did the
Rabbinical authorities examine his words and point out errors wherever
they believed that they could discover any. It was not always from base
motives, as contended by Maimonides and his followers, that his opinions
were criticised and rejected. The language used by Rabbi Abraham ben
David in his notes (*hasagot*) on the *Mishneh Torah* appears harsh and
disrespectful, if read together with the text of the criticised passage,
but it seems tame and mild if compared with expressions used now and
then by Maimonides about men who happened to hold opinions differing
from his own.

Maimonides received many complimentary letters, congratulating him upon
his success; but likewise letters with criticisms and questions
respecting individual *halakot*. In most cases he had no difficulty in
defending his position. From the replies it must, however, be inferred
that Maimonides made some corrections and additions, which were
subsequently embodied in his work. The letters addressed to him on the
*Mishneh Torah* and on other subjects were so numerous that he
frequently complained of the time he had to spend in their perusal, and
of the annoyance they caused him; but "he bore all this patiently, as he
had learned in his youth to bear the yoke." He was not surprised that
many misunderstood his words, for even the simple words of the
Pentateuch, "the Lord is one," had met with the same fate. Some inferred
from the fact that he treated fully of *‘Olam ha-ba*, "the future state
of the soul," and neglected to expatiate on the resurrection of the
dead, that he altogether rejected that principle of faith. They
therefore asked Rabbi Samuel ha-levi of Bagdad to state his opinion; the
Rabbi accordingly discussed the subject; but, according to Maimonides,
he attempted to solve the problem in a very unsatisfactory manner. The
latter thereupon likewise wrote a treatise "On the Resurrection of the
Dead," in which he protested his adherence to this article of faith. He
repeated the opinion he had stated in the Commentary on the Mishnah and
in the *Mishneh Torah*, but "in more words; the same idea being
reiterated in various forms, as the treatise was only intended for women
and for the common multitude."

These theological studies engrossed his attention to a great extent, but
it did not occupy him exclusively. In a letter addressed to R. Jonathan,
of Lunel, he says: "Although from my birth the Torah was betrothed to
me, and continues to be loved by me as the wife of my youth, in whose
love I find a constant delight, strange women whom I at first took into
my house as her handmaids have become her rivals and absorb a portion of
my time." He devoted himself especially to the study of medicine, in
which he distinguished himself to such a degree, according to Alkifti,
that "the King of the Franks in Ascalon wanted to appoint him as his
physician." Maimonides declined the honour. Alfadhel, the Vizier of
Saladin king of Egypt, admired the genius of Maimonides, and bestowed
upon him many distinctions. The

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

name of Maimonides was entered on the roll of physicians, he received a
pension, and was introduced to the court of Saladin. The method adopted
in his professional practice he describes in a letter to his pupil, Ibn
Aknin, as follows: "You know how difficult this profession is for a
conscientious and exact person who only states what he can support by
argument or authority." This method is more fully described in a
treatise on hygiene, composed for Alfadhel, son of Saladin, who was
suffering from a severe illness and had applied to Maimonides for
advice. In a letter to Rabbi Samuel Ibn Tibbon he alludes to the amount
of time spent in his medical practice, and says I reside in Egypt (or
Fostat); the king resides in Cairo, which lies about two Sabbath-day
journeys from the first-named place. My duties to the king are very
heavy. I am obliged to visit him every day, early in the morning; and
when he or any of his children or the inmates of his harem are
indisposed, I dare not quit Cairo, but must stay during the greater part
of the day in the palace. It also frequently happens that one or two of
the royal officers fall sick, and then I have to attend them. As a rule,
I go to Cairo very early in the day, and even if nothing unusual happens
I do not return before the afternoon, when I am almost dying with
hunger; but I find the antechambers filled with Jews and Gentiles, with
nobles and common people, awaiting my return," etc.

Notwithstanding these heavy professional duties of court physician,
Maimonides continued his theological studies. After having compiled a
religious guide--*Mishneh Torah*--based on Revelation and Tradition, he
found it necessary to prove that the principles there set forth were
confirmed by philosophy. This task he accomplished in his *Dalalāt*
*al-ḥaïrin*, "The Guide for the Perplexed," of which an analysis will be
given below. It was composed in Arabic, and written in Hebrew
characters. Subsequently it was translated into Hebrew by Rabbi Samuel
Ibn Tibbon, in the lifetime of Maimonides, who was consulted by the
translator on all difficult passages. The congregation in Lunel,
ignorant of Ibn Tibbon's undertaking, or desirous to possess the most
correct translation of the Guide, addressed a very flattering letter to
Maimonides, requesting him to translate the work into Hebrew. Maimonides
replied that he could not do so, as he had not sufficient leisure for
even more pressing work, and that a translation was being prepared by
the ablest and fittest man, Rabbi Samuel Ibn Tibbon. A second
translation was made later on by Jehudah Alḥarizi. The Guide delighted
many, but it also met with much adverse criticism on account of the
peculiar views held by Maimonides concerning angels, prophecy, and
miracles, especially on account of his assertion that if the
Aristotelian proof for the Eternity of the Universe had satisfied him,
he would have found no difficulty in reconciling the Biblical account of
the Creation with that doctrine. The controversy on the Guide continued
long after the death of Maimonides to divide the community, and it is
difficult to say how far the author's hope to effect a reconciliation
between reason and revelation was realized. His disciple, Joseph Ibn
Aknin, to whom the work was dedicated, and who was expected to derive
from it the greatest benefit, appears to have been disappointed. His
inability to reconcile the two [antagonistic](errata.htm#1.md) elements of
faith and science, he describes allegorically in the form of a letter
addressed to Maimonides, in which the following passage occurs: "Speak,
for I desire that you be justified;

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

if you can, answer me. Some time ago your beloved daughter, the
beautiful and charming Kimah, obtained grace and favour in my sight, and
I betrothed her unto me in faithfulness, and married her in accordance
with the Law, in the presence of two trustworthy witnesses, viz., our
master, Abd-allah and Ibn Roshd. But she soon became faithless to me;
she could not have found fault with me, yet she left me and departed
from my tent. She does no longer let me behold her pleasant countenance
or hear her melodious voice. You have not rebuked or punished her, and
perhaps you are the cause of this misconduct. Now, 'send the wife back
to the man, for he is'--or might become--'a prophet; he will pray for
you that you may live, and also for her that she may be firm and
steadfast. If, however, you do not send her back, the Lord will punish
you. Therefore seek peace and pursue it; listen to what our Sages said:
'Blessed be he who restores to the owner his lost property'; for this
blessing applies in a higher degree to him who restores to a man his
virtuous wife, the crown of her husband." Maimonides replied in the same
strain, and reproached his "son-in-law" that he falsely accused his wife
of faithlessness after he had neglected her; but he restored him his
wife with the advice to be more cautious in future. In another letter
Maimonides exhorts Ibn Aknin to study his works, adding, "apply yourself
to the study of the Law of Moses; do not neglect it, but, on the
contrary, devote to it the best and the most of your time, and if you
tell me that you do so, I am satisfied that you are on the right way to
eternal bliss."

Of the letters written after the completion of the "Guide," the one
addressed to the wise men of Marseilles (1194) is especially noteworthy.
Maimonides was asked to give his opinion on astrology. He regretted in
his reply that they were not yet in the possession of his *Mishneh
Torah*; they would have found in it the answer to their question.
According to his opinion, man should only believe what he can grasp with
his intellectual faculties, or perceive by his senses, or what he can
accept on trustworthy authority. Beyond this nothing should be believed.
Astrological statements, not being founded on any of these three sources
of knowledge, must be rejected. He had himself studied astrology, and
was convinced that it was no science at all. If some dicta be found in
the Talmud which appear to represent astrology as a true source of
knowledge, these may either be referred to the rejected opinion of a
small minority, or may have an allegorical meaning, but they are by no
means forcible enough to set aside principles based on logical proof.

The debility of which Maimonides so frequently complained in his
correspondence, gradually increased, and he died, in his seventieth
year, on the 20th Tebeth, 4965 (1204). His death was the cause of great
mourning to all Jews. In Fostat a mourning of three days was kept; in
Jerusalem a fast was appointed; a portion of the *tochaḥah* (Lev. xxvi.
or Deut. xxix.) was read, and also the history of the capture of the Ark
by the Philistines (1 Sam. iv.). His remains were brought to Tiberias.
The general regard in which Maimonides was held, both by his
contemporaries and by succeeding generations, has been expressed in the
popular saying: "From Moses to Moses there was none like Moses."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Moreh Nebuchim Literature](gfp005.md)
