[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp019)  [Next](gfp021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X

WE have already remarked that when we treat in this work of homonyms, we
have not the intention to exhaust the meanings of a word (for this is
not a philological treatise); we shall mention no other significations
but those which bear on our subject. We shall thus proceed in our
treatment of the terms *‘alah* and *yarad*.

These two words, *‘alah*, "he went up," and *yarad*, "he went down," are
Hebrew terms used in the sense of ascending and descending. When a body
moves from a higher to a lower place, the verb *yarad*, "to go down," is
used; when it moves from a lower to a higher place, *‘alah*, "to go up,"
is applied. These two verbs were afterwards employed with regard to
greatness and power. When a man falls from his high position, we say "he
has come down," and when he rises in station "he has gone up." Thus the
Almighty says, "The stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee
very high, and thou shalt come down very low" (Deut. xxviii. 43). Again,
"The Lord thy God will set thee on high (*‘elyon*) above all nations of
the earth" (Deut. xxviii. 1): "And the Lord magnified Solomon
exceedingly" (*lema‘alah*) (1 Chron. xxix. 25). The Sages often employ
these expressions, as: "In holy matters men must ascend (*ma‘alin*) and
not descend (*moridin*)." The two words are also applied to intellectual
processes, namely, when we reflect on something beneath ourselves we are
said to go down, and when our attention is raised to a subject above us
we are said to rise.

Now, we occupy a lowly position, both in space and rank in comparison
with the heavenly sphere, and the Almighty is Most High not in space,
but with respect to absolute existence, greatness and power. When it
pleased the Almighty to grant to a human being a certain degree of
wisdom or prophetic inspiration, the divine communication thus made to
the prophet and the entrance of the Divine Presence into a certain place
is termed (*yeridah*), "descending," while the termination of the
prophetic communication or the departure of the divine glory from a
place is called *‘aliyah*, "ascending."

The expressions "to go up" and "to go down," when used in reference to
God, must be interpreted in this sense. Again, when, in accordance with
the divine will, some misfortune befalls a nation or a region of the
earth, and when the biblical account of that misfortune is preceded by
the statement that the Almighty visited the actions of the people, and
that He punished

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

them accordingly, then the prophetic author employs the term "to
descend": for man is so low and insignificant that his actions would not
be visited and would not bring punishment on him, were it not for the
divine will: as is clearly stated in the Bible, with regard to this
idea, "What is man that thou shouldst remember him, and the son of man
that thou shouldst visit him" (Ps. viii. 5).

The design of the Deity to punish man is, therefore, introduced by the
verb "to descend": comp. Go to, let us go down and there confound their
language" (Gen. xi. 7) "And the Lord came down to see" (Gen. xi. 5); "I
will go down now and see" (Gen. xviii. 21). All these instances convey
the idea that man here below is going to be punished.

More numerous, however, are the instances of the first case, viz., in
which these verbs are used in connection with the revelation of the word
and of the glory of God, e.g., "And I will come down and talk with thee
there" (Num. xi. 17); "And the Lord came down upon Mount Sinai (Exod.
xix. 20); "The Lord will come down in the sight of all the people (Exod.
xix. 11); "And God went up from him" (Gen. xxxv. 13); "And God went up
from Abraham" (Gen. xvii. 22). When, on the other hand, it says, "And
Moses went up unto God" (Exod. xix. 3), it must be taken in the third
signification of these verbs, in addition to its literal meaning that
Moses also ascended to the top of the mount, upon which a certain
material light (the manifestation of God's glory) was visible; but we
must not imagine that the Supreme Being occupies a place to which we can
ascend, or from which we can descend. He is far from what the ignorant
imagine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](gfp021.md)
