[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp009)  [Next](gfp011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Introductory Remarks*.

\[ON METHOD\]

THERE are seven causes of inconsistencies and contradictions to be met
with in a literary work. The first cause arises from the fact that the
author collects the opinions of various men, each differing from the
other, but neglects to mention the name of the author of any particular
opinion. In such a work contradictions or inconsistencies must occur,
since any two statements may belong to two different authors. Second
cause: The author holds at first one opinion which he subsequently
rejects: in his work., however, both his

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

original and altered views are retained. Third cause: The passages in
question are not all to be taken literally: some only are to be
understood in their literal sense, while in others figurative language
is employed, which includes another meaning besides the literal one: or,
in the apparently inconsistent passages, figurative language is employed
which, if taken literally, would seem to be contradictories or
contraries. Fourth cause: The premises are not identical in both
statements, but for certain reasons they are not fully stated in these
passages: or two propositions with different subjects which are
expressed by the same term without having the difference in meaning
pointed out, occur in two passages. The contradiction is therefore only
apparent, but there is no contradiction in reality. The fifth cause is
traceable to the use of a certain method adopted in teaching and
expounding profound problems. Namely, a difficult and obscure theorem
must sometimes be mentioned and assumed as known, for the illustration
of some elementary and intelligible subject which must be taught
beforehand the commencement being always made with the easier thing. The
teacher must therefore facilitate, in any manner which he can devise,
the explanation of those theorems, which have to be assumed as known,
and he must content himself with giving a general though somewhat
inaccurate notion on the subject. It is, for the present, explained
according to the capacity of the students, that they may comprehend it
as far as they are required to understand the subject. Later on, the
same subject is thoroughly treated and fully developed in its right
place. Sixth cause: The contradiction is not apparent, and only becomes
evident through a series of premises. The larger the number of premises
necessary to prove the contradiction between the two conclusions, the
greater is the chance that it will escape detection, and that the author
will not perceive his own inconsistency. Only when from each conclusion,
by means of suitable premises, an inference is made, and from the
enunciation thus inferred, by means of proper arguments, other
conclusions are formed, and after that process has been repeated many
times, then it becomes clear that the original conclusions are
contradictories or contraries. Even able writers are liable to overlook
such inconsistencies. If, however, the contradiction between the
original statements can at once be discovered, and the author, while
writing the second, does not think of the first, he evinces a greater
deficiency, and his words deserve no notice whatever. Seventh cause: It
is sometimes necessary to introduce such metaphysical matter as may
partly be disclosed, but must partly be concealed: while, therefore, on
one occasion the object which the author has in view may demand that the
metaphysical problem be treated as solved in one way, it may be
convenient on another occasion to treat it as solved in the opposite
way. The author must endeavour, by concealing the fact as much as
possible, to prevent the uneducated reader from perceiving the
contradiction.

Inconsistencies occurring in the Mishnah and Boraitot are traceable to
the first cause. You meet frequently in the Gemara with passages like
the following:--"Does not the beginning of the passage contradict the
end? No: the beginning is the dictum of a certain Rabbi: the end that of
an other"; or "Rabbi (Jehudah ha-Nasi) approved of the opinion of a
certain rabbi in one case and gave it therefore anonymously, and having
accepted

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

that of another rabbi in the other case he introduced that view without
naming the authority"; or "Who is the author of this anonymous dictum?
Rabbi A." "Who is the author of that paragraph in the Mishnah? Rabbi B."
Instances of this kind are innumerable.

Apparent contradictions or differences occurring in the Gemara may be
traced to the first cause and to the second, as e.g., "In this
particular case he agrees with this rabbi"; or "He agrees with him in
one point, but differs from him in another"; or "These two dicta are the
opinions of two Amoraim, who differ as regards the statement made by a
certain rabbi." These are examples of contradictions traceable to the
first cause. The following are instances which may be traced to the
second cause. "Rabba altered his opinion on that point"; it then becomes
necessary to consider which of the two opinions came second. Again," In
the first recension of the Talmud by Rabbi Ashi, he made one assertion,
and in the second a different one."

The inconsistencies and contradictions met with in some passages of the
prophetic books, if taken literally, are all traceable to the third or
fourth cause, and it is exclusively in reference to this subject that I
wrote the present Introduction. You know that the following expression
frequently occurs, "One verse says this, another that," showing the
contradiction, and explaining that either some premise is wanting or the
subject is altered. Comp. "Solomon, it is not sufficient that thy words
contradict thy father: they are themselves inconsistent, etc." Many
similar instances occur in the writings of our Sages. The passages in
the prophetical books which our Sages have explained, mostly refer to
religious or moral precepts. Our desire, however, is to discuss such
passages as contain apparent contradictions in regard to the principles
of our faith. I shall explain some of them in various chapters of the
present work: for this subject also belongs to the secrets of the Torah.
Contradictions traceable to the seventh cause occurring in the
prophetical works require special investigation: and no one should
express his opinion on that matter by reasoning and arguing without
weighing the matter well in his mind.

Inconsistencies in the writings of true philosophers are traceable to
the fifth cause. Contradictions occurring in the writings of most
authors and commentators, such as are not included in the
above-mentioned works, are due to the sixth cause. Many examples of this
class of contradictions are found in the Midrash and the Agada: hence
the saying, "We must not raise questions concerning the contradictions
met with in the Agada." You may also notice in them contradictions due
to the seventh cause. Any inconsistency discovered in the present work
will be found to arise in consequence of the fifth cause or the seventh.
Notice this, consider its truth, and remember it well, lest you
misunderstand some of the chapters in this book.

Having concluded these introductory remarks I proceed to examine those
expressions, to the true meaning of which, as apparent from the context,
it is necessary to direct your attention. This book will then be a key
admitting to places the gates of which would otherwise be closed. When
the gates are opened and men enter, their souls will enjoy repose, their
eyes will be gratified, and even their bodies, after all toil and
labour, will be refreshed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](gfp011)
