[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp032)  [Next](gfp034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXIII

*Yaẓa* ("he came out") is the opposite of *ba* ("he came in"). The term
*yaẓa* is applied to the motion of a body from a place in which it had
previously rested, to another place (whether the body be a living being
or not), e.g., "And when they were gone out (*yaẓeü*) if the city" (Gen.
xliv. 4); "If fire break out (*teẓe*)" (Exod. xxii. .5). It was then
figuratively employed to

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

denote the appearance of something incorporeal, as, "The word went out
(*yaẓa*) of the king's mouth" (Esth. vii. 8); "When this deed of the
queen shall come abroad (*yeẓe*) unto all women" (Esth. i. 17), that is
to say, "the report will spread." Again, "For out of Zion shall go forth
(*teẓe*) the Law" (Isa. ii. 3); further, "The sun had risen (*yaẓa*)
upon the earth" (Gen. xix. 23), i.e., its light became visible.

In this figurative sense we must take every expression of coming out
when applied to the Almighty, e.g., "Behold, the Lord cometh out
(*yoẓe*) of his place" (Isa. xxvi. 21), i.e., "The word of God, which
until now has been in secret, cometh out, and will become manifest,"
i.e., something will come into being which had not existed before: for
everything new emanating from God is ascribed to His word. Comp. "By the
word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the
breath of his mouth" (Ps. xxxiii. 6). This is a simile taken from the
conduct of kings, who employ the word as the means of carrying their
will into effect. God, however, requires no instrument wherewith to
operate in order to perform anything; the effect is produced solely by
His will alone. He does not employ any kind of speech, as will be
explained further on (chap. Iv.).

The verb "to come out" is thus employed to designate the manifestation
of a certain work of God, as we noticed in our interpretation of the
phrase, "Behold, the Lord cometh out of his place." In a similar manner
the term *shub*, "to return," has been figuratively employed to denote
the discontinuance of a certain act according to the will of God, as in
"I will go and return to my place" (Hosea v. 15); that is to say, the
Divine presence (Shechinah) which had been in our midst departed from
us, the consequence of which has been the absence of Divine protection
from amongst us. Thus the Prophet foretelling misfortune says, "And I
will hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured" (Deut. xxxi.
17); for, when man is deprived of Divine protection he is exposed to all
dangers, and becomes the butt of all fortuitous circumstances: his
fortune and misfortune then depend on chance. Alas! how terrible a
threat!--This is the idea contained in the words," I will go and return
to my place" (Hos. v. 15).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV](gfp034.md)
