[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp058)  [Next](gfp060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLIX

THE angels are likewise incorporeal: they are intelligences without
matter, but they are nevertheless created beings, and God created them,
as will be

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

explained below. In Bereshith Rabbah (on Gen. iii. 24) we read the
following remark of our Sages: "The angel is called 'the flame of the
sword which turned every way' (Gen. iii. 24), in accordance with the
words, 'His ministers a flaming fire' (Ps. civ. 4); the attribute,
'which turned every way' is added, because angels are changeable in form
they appear at one time as males, at another as females; now as spirits;
now as angels." By this remark they clearly stated that angels are
incorporeal, and have no permanent bodily form independent of the mind
\[of him who perceives them\], they exist entirely in prophetic vision,
and depend on the action of the imaginative power, as will be explained
when speaking on the true meaning of prophecy. As to the words "at
another time as females," which imply that the Prophets in prophetical
vision perceived angels also in the form of women, they refer to the
vision of Zechariah (v. 9), "And, behold, there came out two women, and
the wind was in their wings." You know very well how difficult it is for
men to form a notion of anything immaterial, and entirely devoid of
corporeality, except after considerable training: it is especially
difficult for those who do not distinguish between objects of the
intellect and objects of the imagination, and depend mostly on the mere
imaginative power. They believe that all imagined things exist or at
least have the possibility of existing: but that which cannot be
imagined does not exist, and cannot exist. For persons of this
class--and the majority of thinkers belong to it--cannot arrive at the
true solution of any question, or at the explanation of anything
doubtful. On account of this difficulty the prophetic books contain
expressions which, taken literally, imply that angels are corporeal,
moving about, endowed with human form, receiving commands of God,
obeying His word and performing whatever He wishes, according to His
command. All this only serves to lead to the belief that angels exist,
and are alive and perfect, in the same way as we have explained in
reference to God. If the figurative representation of angels were
limited to this, their true essence would be believed to be the same as
the essence of God, since, in reference to the Creator expressions are
likewise employed, which literally imply that He is corporeal, living,
moving and endowed with human form. In order, therefore, to give to the
mind of men the idea that the existence of angels is lower than the
existence of God, certain forms of lower animals were introduced in the
description of angels. It was thereby shown, that the existence of God
is more perfect than that of angels, as much as man is more perfect than
the lower animals. Nevertheless no organ of the brute creation was
attributed to the angels except wings. Without wings the act of flying
appears as impossible as that of walking without legs: for these two
modes of motion can only be imagined in connection with these organs.
The motion of flying has been chosen as a symbol to represent that
angels possess life, because it is the most perfect and most sublime
movement of the brute creation. Men consider this motion a perfection to
such an extent that they themselves wish to be able to fly, in order to
escape easily what is injurious, and to obtain quickly what is useful,
though it be at a distance. For this reason this motion has been
attributed to the angels.

There is besides another reason. The bird in its flight is sometimes
visible, sometimes withdrawn from our sight; one moment near to us, and
in the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

next far off: and these are exactly the circumstances which we must
associate with the idea of angels, as will be explained below. This
imaginary perfection, the motion of flight, being the exclusive property
of the brute creation, has never been attributed to God. You must not be
misled by the passage, "And he rode upon a cherub, and he did fly" (Ps.
xviii. 10), for it is the cherub that did fly, and the simile only
serves to denote the rapid arrival of that which is referred to in that
passage. Comp.: "Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud, and shall
come into Egypt" (Isa. xix. 1); that is, the punishment alluded to will
come down quickly upon Egypt. Nor should expressions like "the face of
an ox," "the face of a lion," "the face of an eagle," "the sole of the
foot of a calf," found in the prophecies of Ezekiel (i. 10 and 7)
mislead you; for all these are explained in a different manner, as you
will learn later, and besides, the prophet only describes the animals
(*ḥayyot*). The subject will be explained (III. 1.), though by mere
hints, as far as necessary, for directing your attention to the true
interpretation.

The motion of flying, frequently mentioned in the Bible, necessitates,
according to our imagination, the existence of wings: wings are
therefore given to the angels as symbols expressive of their existence,
not of their true essence. You must also bear in mind that whenever a
thing moves very quickly, it is said to fly, as that term implies great
velocity of motion. Comp. "As the eagle flieth" (Deut. xxviii. 49). The
eagle flies and moves with greater velocity than any other bird, and
therefore it is introduced in this simile. Furthermore, the wings are
the organs \[lit. causes\] of flight; hence the number of the wings of
angels in the prophetic vision corresponds to the number of the causes
which set a thing in motion, but this does not belong to the theme of
this chapter. (Comp. II. iv. and x.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter L](gfp060)
