[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp062)  [Next](gfp064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LIII

THE circumstance which caused men to believe in the existence of divine
attributes is similar to that which caused others to believe in the
corporeality of God. The latter have not arrived at that belief by
speculation, but by following the literal sense of certain passages in
the Bible. The same is the case with the attributes: when in the books
of the Prophets and of the Law, God is described by attributes, such
passages are taken in their literal sense, and it is then believed that
God possesses attributes: as if He were to be

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

exalted above corporeality, and not above things connected with
corporeality, i.e., the accidents, I mean psychical dispositions, all of
which are qualities \[and connected with corporeality\]. Every attribute
which the followers of this doctrine assume to be essential to the
Creator, you will find to express, although they do not distinctly say
so, a quality similar to those which they are accustomed to notice in
the bodies of all living beings. We apply to all such passages the
principle, "The Torah speaketh in the language of man," and say that the
object of all these terms is to describe God as the most perfect being,
not as possessing those qualities which are only perfections in relation
to created living beings. Many of the attributes express different acts
of God, but that difference does not necessitate any difference as
regards Him from whom the acts proceed. This fact, viz., that from one
agency different effects may result, although that agency has not free
will, and much more so if it has free will, I will illustrate by an
instance taken from our own sphere. Fire melts certain things and makes
others hard, it boils and burns, it bleaches and blackens. If we
described the fire as bleaching, blackening, burning, boiling, hardening
and melting, we should be correct, and yet he who does not know the
nature of fire, would think that it included six different elements, one
by which it blackens, another by which it bleaches, a third by which it
boils, a fourth by which it consumes, a fifth by which it melts, a sixth
by which it hardens things--actions which are opposed to one another,
and of which each has its peculiar property. He, however, who knows the
nature of fire, will know that by virtue of one quality in action,
namely, by heat, it produces all these effects. If this is the case with
that which is done by nature, how much more is it the case with regard
to beings that act by free will, and still more with regard to God, who
is above all description. If we, therefore, perceive in God certain
relations of various kinds--for wisdom in us is different from power,
and power from will--it does by no means follow that different elements
are really contained in Him, that He contains one element by which He
knows, another by which He wills, and another by which He exercises
power, as is, in fact, the signification of the attributes of God\]
according to the Attributists. Some of them express it plainly, and
enumerate the attributes as elements added to the essence. Others,
however, are more reserved with regard to this matter, but indicate
their opinion, though they do not express it in distinct and
intelligible words. Thus, e.g., some of them say: "God is omnipotent by
His essence, wise by His essence, living by His essence, and endowed
with a will by His essence." (I will mention to you, as an instance,
man's reason, which being one faculty and implying no plurality, enables
him to know many arts and sciences; by the same faculty man is able to
sow, to do carpenter's work, to weave, to build, to study, to acquire a
knowledge of geometry, and to govern a state. These various acts
resulting from one simple faculty, which involves no plurality, are very
numerous; their number, that is, the number of the actions originating
in man's reason, is almost infinite. It is therefore intelligible how in
reference to God, those different actions can be caused by one simple
substance, that does not include any plurality or any additional
element. The attributes found in Holy Scripture are either
qualifications of His actions, without any reference to His essence, or
indicate absolute perfection, but do not imply that the essence of God
is a compound of various

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

elements.) For in not admitting the *term* "compound," they do not
reject the *idea* of a compound when they admit a substance with
attributes.

There still remains one difficulty which led them to that error, and
which I am now going to mention. Those who assert the existence of the
attributes do not found their opinion on the variety of God's actions:
they say it is true that one substance can be the source of various
effects, but His essential attributes cannot be qualifications of His
actions, because it is impossible to imagine that the Creator created
Himself. They vary with regard to the so-called essential attributes--I
mean as regards their number-according to the text of the Scripture
which each of them follows. I will enumerate those on which all agree,
and the knowledge of which they believe that they have derived from
reasoning, not from some words of the Prophets, namely, the following
four:--life, power, wisdom, and will. They believe that these are four
different things, and such perfections as cannot possibly be absent from
the Creator, and that these cannot be qualifications of His actions.
This is their opinion. But you must know that wisdom and life in
reference to God are not different from each other: for in every being
that is conscious of itself, life and wisdom are the same thing, that is
to say, if by wisdom we understand the consciousness of self. Besides,
the subject and the object of that consciousness are undoubtedly
identical \[as regards God\]: for according to our opinion, He is not
composed of an element that apprehends, and another that does not
apprehend; He is not like man, who is a combination of a conscious soul
and an unconscious body. If, therefore, by "wisdom" we mean the faculty
of self-consciousness, wisdom and life are one and the same thing. They,
however, do not speak of wisdom in this sense, but of His power to
apprehend His creatures. There is also no doubt that power and will do
not exist in God in reference to Himself: for He cannot have power or
will as regards Himself: we cannot imagine such a thing. They take these
attributes as different relations between God and His creatures,
signifying that He has power in creating things, will in giving to
things existence as He desires, and wisdom in knowing what He created.
Consequently, these attributes do not refer to the essence of God, but
express relations between Him and His creatures.

Therefore we, who truly believe in the Unity of God, declare, that as we
do not believe that some element is included in His essence by which He
created the heavens, another by which He created the \[four\] elements,
a third by which He created the ideals, in the same way we reject the
idea that His essence contains an element by which He has power, another
element by which He has will, and a third by which He has a knowledge of
His creatures. On the contrary, He is a simple essence, without any
additional element whatever; He created the universe, and knows it, but
not by any extraneous force. There is no difference whether these
various attributes refer to His actions or to relations between Him and
His works; in fact, these relations, as we have also shown, exist only
in the thoughts of men. This is what we must believe concerning the
attributes occurring in the books of the Prophets: some may also be
taken as expressive of the perfection of God by way of comparison with
what we consider as perfections in us, as we shall explain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIV](gfp064)
