[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp095)  [Next](gfp097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX

WE have stated above that in the age of Aristotle the number of spheres
was not accurately known: and that those who at present count nine
spheres consider a sphere containing several rotating circles as one, a
fact well known to all who have a knowledge of astronomy. We need,
therefore, not reject the opinion of those who assume two spheres in
accordance with the words of Scripture: "Behold the heaven and the
heaven of heavens are the Lord's" (Deut. x. 14). They reckon all the
spheres with stars, i.e., with all the circles in which the stars move,
as one: the all-encompassing sphere in which there are no stars, is
regarded by them as the second: hence they maintain that there are two
spheres.

I will here introduce an explanation which is necessary for the
understanding of our view on the present subject. There is a difference
among

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

ancient astronomers whether the spheres of Mercury and Venus are above
or below the sun, because no proof can be given for the position of
these two spheres. At first it was generally assumed that they were
above the sun--note this well; later on Ptolemy maintained that they
were below the sun; because he believed that in this manner the whole
arrangement of the spheres would be most reasonable; the sun would be in
the middle, having three stars below and three above itself. More
recently some Andalusian scholars concluded, from certain principles
laid down by Ptolemy, that Venus and Mercury were above the sun. Ibn
Aflaḥ of Seville, with whose son I was acquainted, has written a famous
book on the subject; also the excellent philosopher Abu-Bekr ibn-Alẓaig,
one of whose pupils was my fellow-student, has treated of this subject
and offered certain proofs--which we have copied--of the improbability
of Venus and Mercury being above the sun. The proofs given by Abu-Bekr
show only the improbability, not the impossibility. In short, whether it
be so or not, the ancients placed Venus and Mercury above the sun, and
had, therefore, the following five spheres: that of the moon, which is
undoubtedly the nearest to us; that of the sun, which is, of course,
above the former; then that of the five planets, the sphere of the fixed
stars, and the outermost sphere, which does not contain any star.
Consequently there are four spheres containing figures, i.e., stars,
which were called figures by the ancients in their well-known
works--viz., the spheres of the fixed stars, of the five planets, of the
sun, and of the moon; above these there is one sphere which is empty,
without any star. This number is for me of great importance in respect
to an idea which none of the philosophers clearly stated, though I was
led to it by various utterances of the philosophers and of our Sages. I
will now state the idea and expound it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](gfp097)
