[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp010)  [Next](gfp012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART ONE

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

"*Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the truth
may enter in*."--(Isa. xxvi. 2.)

### CHAPTER I

Some have been of opinion that by the Hebrew *ẓelem*, the shape and
figure of a thing is to be understood, and this explanation led men to
believe in the corporeality \[of the Divine Being\]: for they thought
that the words "Let us make man in our *ẓelem*" (Gen. i. 26), implied
that God had the form of a human being, i.e., that He had figure and
shape, and that, consequently, He was corporeal. They adhered faithfully
to this view, and thought that if they were to relinquish it they would
*eo ipso* reject the truth of the Bible: and further, if they did not
conceive God as having a body possessed of face and limbs, similar to
their own in appearance, they would have to deny even the existence of
God. The sole difference which they admitted, was that He excelled in
greatness and splendour, and that His substance was not flesh and blood.
Thus far went their conception of the greatness and glory of God. The
incorporeality of the Divine Being, and His unity, in the true sense of
the word--for there is no real unity without incorporeality--will be
fully proved in the course of the present treatise. (Part II., ch. i.)
In this chapter it is our sole intention to explain the meaning of the
words *ẓelem* and *demut*. I hold that the Hebrew equivalent of "form"
in the ordinary acceptation of the word, viz., the figure and shape of a
thing, is *toär*. Thus we find "\[And Joseph was\] beautiful in *toär*
('form'), and beautiful in appearance" (Gen. xxxix. 6): "What form
(*toär*) is he of?" (1 Sam. xxviii. 14): "As the form (*toär*) of the
children of a king" (Judges viii. 18). It is also applied to form
produced by human labour, as "He marketh its form (*toär*) with a line,"
"and he marketh its form (*toär*) with the compass" (Isa. xliv. 13).
This term is not at all applicable to God. The term *ẓelem*, on the
other hand, signifies the specific form, viz., that which constitutes
the essence of a thing, whereby the thing is what it is; the reality of
a thing in so far as it is that particular being. In man the "form" is
that constituent which gives him human perception: and on account of
this intellectual perception the term *ẓelem* is employed in the
sentences "In the *ẓelem* of God he created him" (Gen. i. 27). It is
therefore rightly said, "Thou despisest their *ẓelem*" (Ps. lxiii. 20);
the "contempt" can only concern the soul--the specific form of man, not
the properties and shape of his body. I am also of opinion that the
reason why this term is used for "idols" may be found in the
circumstance that they are worshipped on account of some idea
represented by them, not on account of their figure and shape. For the
same reason the term is used in the expression, "the forms (*ẓalme*) of
your

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

emerods" (1 Sam. vi. 5), for the chief object was the removal of the
injury caused by the emerods, not a change of their shape. As, however,
it must be admitted that the term *ẓelem* is employed in these two
cases, viz. "the images of the emerods" and "the idols" on account of
the external shape, the term *ẓelem* is either a homonym or a hybrid
term, and would denote both the specific form and the outward shape, and
similar properties relating to the dimensions and the shape of material
bodies; and in the phrase "Let us make man in our *ẓelem*" (Gen. i. 26),
the term signifies "the specific form" of man, viz., his intellectual
perception, and does not refer to his "figure" or "shape." Thus we have
shown the difference between *ẓelem* and *toär*, and explained the
meaning of *ẓelem*.

*Demut* is derived from the verb *damah*, "he is like." This term
likewise denotes agreement with regard to some abstract relation: comp.
"I am like a pelican of the wilderness" (Ps. cii. 7); the author does
not compare himself to the pelican in point of wings and feathers, but
in point of sadness." Nor any tree in the garden of God was like unto
him in beauty" (Ezek. 8); the comparison refers to the idea of beauty.
"Their poison is like the poison of a serpent" (Ps. lviii. 5); "He is
like unto a lion" (Ps. xvii. 12); the resemblance indicated in these
passages does not refer to the figure and shape, but to some abstract
idea. In the same manner is used "the likeness of the throne" (Ezek. i.
26); the comparison is made with regard to greatness and glory, not, as
many believe, with regard to its square form, its breadth, or the length
of its legs: this explanation applies also to the phrase "the likeness
of the *ḥayyot* ("living creatures," Ezek. i. 13).

As man's distinction consists in a property which no other creature on
earth possesses, viz., intellectual perception, in the exercise of which
he does not employ his senses, nor move his hand or his foot, this
perception has been compared--though only apparently, not in truth--to
the Divine perception, which requires no corporeal organ. On this
account, i.e., on account of the Divine intellect with which man has
been endowed, he is said to have been made in the form and likeness of
the Almighty, but far from it be the notion that the Supreme Being is
corporeal, having a material form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](gfp012.md)
