[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp065)  [Next](gfp067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LVI

SIMILARITY is based on a certain relation between two things: if between
two things no relation can be found, there can be no similarity between
them, and there is no relation between two things that have no
similarity to each other; e.g., we do not say this heat is similar to
that colour, or this voice is similar to that sweetness. This is
self-evident. Since the existence of a relation between God and man, or
between Him and other beings has been denied, similarity must likewise
be denied. You must know that two things of the same kind--i.e., whose
essential properties are the same, and which are distinguished from each
other by greatness and smallness, strength and weakness, etc.--are
necessarily similar, though different in this one way; e.g., a grain of
mustard and the sphere of the fixed stars are similar as regards the
three dimensions, although the one is exceedingly great, the other
exceedingly small, the property of having \[three\] dimensions is the
same in both: or the heat of wax melted by the sun and the heat of the
element of fire, are similar as regards heat: although the heat is
exceedingly great in the one case, and exceedingly small in the other,
the existence of that quality (heat) is the same in both. Thus those who
believe in the presence of essential attributes in God, viz., Existence,
Life, Power, Wisdom, and Will, should know that these attributes, when
applied to God, have not the same meaning as when applied to us, and
that the difference does not only consist in magnitude, or in the degree
of perfection, stability, and durability. It cannot be said, as they
practically believe, that His existence is only more stable, His life
more permanent, His power greater, His wisdom more perfect, and His will
more general than ours, and that the same definition applies to both.
This is in no way admissible, for the expression "more than" is used in
comparing two things as regards a certain attribute predicated of both
of them in exactly the same sense, and consequently implies similarity
\[between God and His creatures\]. When they ascribe to God essential
attributes, these so-called essential attributes should not have any
similarity to the attributes of other things, and should according to
their own opinion not be included in one of the same definition, just as
there is no similarity between the essence of God and that of other
beings. They do not follow this principle, for they hold that one
definition may include them, and that, nevertheless, there is no
similarity between them. Those who are familiar with the meaning of
similarity will certainly understand that the term existence, when
applied to God and to other beings, is perfectly homonymous. In like
manner, the terms Wisdom, Power, Will, and Life are applied to God and
to other beings by way of perfect homonymity, admitting

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

of no comparison whatever. Nor must you think that these attributes are
employed as hybrid terms; for hybrid terms are such as are applied to
two things which have a similarity to each other in respect to a certain
property which is in both of them an accident, not an essential,
constituent element. The attributes of God, however, are not considered
as accidental by any intelligent person, while all attributes applied to
man are accidents, according to the Mutakallemim. I am therefore at a
loss to see how they can find any similarity \[between the attributes of
God and those of man\]; how their definitions can be identical, and
their significations the same! This is a decisive proof that there is,
in no way or sense, anything common to the attributes predicated of God,
and those used in reference to ourselves: they have only the same names,
and nothing else is common to them. Such being the case, it is not
proper to believe, on account of the use of the same attributes, that
there is in God something additional to His essence, in the same way as
attributes are joined to our essence. This is most important for those
who understand it. Keep it in memory, and study it thoroughly in order
to be well prepared for that which I am going to explain to you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVII](gfp067)
