[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp004)  [Next](gfp006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

### THE MOREH NEBUCHIM LITERATURE

I. *The Arabic Text*.--The *editio princeps*, the only edition of the
original text of the Guide (in Arabic, *Dĕlil*, or *Dalalat*
*al-h.aïrin*), was undertaken and executed by the late S. Munk. Its
title is: *Le Guide des Égarés, traité de Théologie et de Philosophie
par Moïse ben Maimon, publié pour la première fois dans l’original
Arabe, et accompagné d’une traduction Française et de notes critiques,
littéraires et explicatives, par S. Munk* (Paris, 1850-1866). The plan
was published, 1833, in *Reflexions sur le culte des anciens Hèbreux*
(La Bible, par S. Cahen, vol. iv.), with a specimen of two chapters of
the Third Part. The text adopted has been selected from the several MSS.
at his disposal with great care and judgment. Two Leyden MSS. (cod. 18
and 221), various MSS. of the *Bibliothèque Nationale* (No. 760, very
old; 761 and 758, written by R. Saadia Ibn Danan), and some MSS. of the
Bodleian Library were consulted. In the notes which accompany the French
translation, the various readings of the different MSS. are fully
discussed. At the end of the third volume a list is added of "Variantes
des Manuscrits Arabes et des deux Versions Hébraïques."

The library of the British Museum possesses two copies of the Arabic
text; the one Or. 5423 is complete, beautifully written, with
explanatory notes in the margin and between the lines. The name of the
copyist is not mentioned, nor the date when it has been written. The
volume has in the beginning an incomplete index to the Scriptural
passages referred to in the *Guide*, and at the end fragments of Psalm
cxli. in Arabic and of astronomical tables.

The second copy of the *Dalalat al-ḥaïrin* is contained in the MS. Or.
2423, written in large Yemen Rabbinic characters. It is very
fragmentary. The first fragment begins with the last paragraph of the
introduction; there are a few marginal notes in Hebrew.

In the Bodleian Library there are the following copies of the *Dalalat
al-ḥaïrin* according to the Catal, of Hebr. MSS. by Dr. A. Neubauer:--

No. 1236. The text is preceded by Jehudah al-Charizi's index of the
contents of the chapters, and by an index of Biblical quotations. In the
margin there are notes, containing omissions, by different hands, two in
Arabic characters. The volume was written 1473.

No. 1237. The Arabic text, with a few marginal notes containing various
readings the text is preceded by three Hebrew poems, beginning, *De’i
holek*, *Bi-sedeh tebunot*; and *Binu be-dat Mosheh*. Fol. 212 contains
a fragment of the book (III., xxix.).

No. 1238. Text with a few marginal notes.

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

No. 1239. The end of the work is wanting in this copy. The second part
has forty-nine chapters, as the introduction to Part II. is counted as
chapter i.; Part III. has fifty-six chapters, the introduction being
counted as chapter i., and chapter xxiv. being divided into two
chapters. The index of passages from the Pentateuch follows the ordinary
mode of counting the chapters of the *Guide*.

No. 1240. Arabic text transcribed in Arabic characters by Saadiah b.
Levi Azankoṭ for Prof. Golius in 1645.

No. 1245. First part of the *Dalalat al-ḥaïrin*, written by Saadiah b.
Mordecai b. Mosheh in the year 1431.

No. 1242 contains the same Part, but incomplete. Nos. 1243, 1244, 1245,
and 1246 contain Part II. of the Arabic text, incomplete in No,. 1245
and 1246.

Nos. 1247, 1248, and 1249 have Part III.; it is incomplete in Nos. 1248
and 1249. No. 1249 was written 1291, and begins with III, viii. A
fragment of the Arabic text, the end of Part III., is contained in No.
407, 2.

No. 2508 includes s fragment of the original (I. ii.-xxxii.), with a
Hebrew interlineary translation of some words and a few marginal notes.
It is written in Yemen square characters, and is marked as "holy
property of the Synagogue of Alsiani."

A fragment (I. i.) of a different recension from the printed is
contained in 2422, 16. On the margin the Commentaries of Shem-ṭob and
Ephodi are added in Arabic.

A copy of the *Dalalat* is also contained in the Berlin Royal Library
MS. Or. Qu., 579 (so; Cat. Steinschneider); it is defective in the
beginning and at the end.

The Cairo Genizah at Cambridge contains two fragments (*a*) I. lxiv. and
beginning of lxv; (*b*) II. end of xxxii. and xxxiii. According to Dr.
H. Hirschfeld, *Jewish Quarterly Review* (vol. xv. p. 677), they are in
the handwriting of Maimonides.

The valuable collection of MSS. in the possession of Dr. M. Gaster
includes a fragment of the *Dalalat al-ḥaïrin* (Codex 605). II.
xiii-xv., beginning and end defective.

II\. *Translations*, *a*. *Hebrew*.--As soon as European Jews heard of
the existence of this work, they procured its translation into Hebrew.
Two scholars, independently of each other, undertook the task: Samuel
Ibn Tibbon and Jehudah al-Ḥarizi. There is, besides, in the *Moreh
ha-moreh* of Shemṭob Palquera an original translation of some portions
of the Moreh. In the *Sifte yeshenim* (No. 112) a rhymed translation of
the Dalalat by Rabbi Mattityahu Kartin is mentioned. Ibn Tibbon's
version is very accurate; he sacrificed elegance of style to the desire
of conscientiously reproducing the author's work, and did not even
neglect a particle, however unimportant it may appear. Ibn Tibbon went
in his anxiety to retain peculiarities of the original so far as to
imitate its ambiguities, e.g., *meẓiut* (I. lviii.) is treated as a
masculine noun, only in order to leave it doubtful whether a pronoun
which follows agrees with *meẓiut*, "existence," or with *nimẓa*,
"existing being," both occurring in the same sentence (Br. Mus. MS.
Harl. 7586, marg. note by Ibn Tibbon). When he met with passages that
offered any difficulty he consulted Maimonides. Ḥarizi, on the other
hand, was less conscientious about words and particles, but wrote in a
superior style. *Vox populi*, however, decided in favour of the version
of Ibn Tibbon, the rival of which became almost forgotten. Also Abraham,
the son of Moses Maimonides, in *Milḥamoth ha-shem*, describes Ḥarizi's
version as being inaccurate. Most of the modern translations were made
from Ibn Tibbon's version. There are, therefore, MSS. of this version
almost in every library containing collections of Hebrew books and MSS.
It has the title *Moreh-nebuchim*. The British Museum has the following
eight copies of Ibn Tibbon's version:--

*Harl*. 7586 A. This codex was written in the year 1284, for Rabbi
Shabbatai ben Rabbi Mattityahu. In the year 1340 it came into the
possession of Jacob b. Shelomoh; his son Menaḥem sold it in the year
1378 to R. Mattityahu, son of R. Shabbatai, for

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

fifty gold florins. It was again sold in the year 1461 by Yeḥiel ben
Joab. There is, this peculiarity in the writing, that long words at the
end of a line are divided, and written half on the one line, half on the
next; in words which are vocalized, *pataḥ* is frequently found for
*ḳameẓ*. There are numerous various readings in the margin. The text is
preceded by a poem, written by Joseph Ibn Aknin, pupil of Maimonides, in
praise of his master, and beginning *Adon yizro*. This poem is
attributed to R. Yehudah ha-Levi (Luzzatto, in his Divan,
*Betulat-bat-Yehudah*, p. 104). At the end the copyist adds an epigram,
the translation of which is as follows:--

"The Moreh is finished--Praise to Him who formed and created
everything--written for the instruction and benefit of the few whom the
Lord calleth. Those who oppose the Moreh ought to be put to death; but
those who study and understand it deserve that Divine Glory rest upon
them, and inspire them with a spirit from above."

*Harl*. 7586 B. This codex, much damaged in the beginning and at the
end, contains the version of Ibn Tibbon, with marginal notes, consisting
of words omitted in the text, and other corrections. The version is
followed by the poems *Ḳarob meod*, etc., and *De’i bolek*, etc.

*Harl*. 5507 contains the Hebrew version of Ibn Tibbon, with the
translator's preface and marginal notes, consisting of various readings
and omissions from the text. The work of Maimonides is followed by Ibn
Tibbon's Vocabulary (*millot-zarot*), *Mesharet-mosheh*, *‘Arugot
ba-mezimmah*, *Millot higgayon*, *Ruaḥ-ḥen*, Alfarabi's *Hatḥalot*, a
Hebrew-Italian vocabulary of logical terms, and an explanation of
*koṭeb*. The passage in Part I., chap. lxxi., which refers to
Christianity, has been erased.

*Harl*. 5525 was the property of Shimshon Kohen Modon. The MS. begins
with Ḥarizi's *Kavvanat ha-peraḳim*; then follows the text, with a few
marginal notes of a later hand, mostly adverse criticisms and references
to ‘Arama's *‘Aḳedah* and the Biblical commentaries of Abarbanel. There
is also a note in Latin. The text is followed by Ibn Tibbon's Vocabulary
(*Millot-zarot*) and *Masoret ba-pesuḳim* (Index to the Biblical
quotations in the Moreh). In a poem, beginning *Moreh asher mennu
derakav gabehu*, the Moreh is compared to a musical instrument, which
delights when played by one that understands music, but is spoiled when
touched by an ignorant person.

*Add*. 27068 (Almanzi coll.). At the end the following remark is added:
I, Samuel Ibn Tibbon, finished the translation of this work in the month
of Tebet 4965 (1205). The text is preceded by the well-known epigrams,
*De’ï holek* and *Moreh-nebuchim sa shelomi*; the last page contains the
epigram *Ḳarob meod*. There are some notes in the margin, mostly
referring to various readings.

*Add*. 14763. This codex, written 1273 at Viterbo, contains the preface
of Ḥarizi to his translation of the Moreh and his index of contents, Ibn
Tibbon's version with a few marginal notes of different hands, including
some remarks of the translator, and the contents of the chapters. The
codex contains besides the following treatises: Commentary of Maimonides
on Abot; Comm. of Maim. on Mishnah Sanhedrin x. i; Letter of Maimonides
on the Resurrection of the Dead; Vocabulary of difficult words by Samuel
Ibn Tibbon; Maimonides' Letter to the wise men of Marseilles; his Letter
to Rabbi Jonathan; *Keter-malkut*, *Mesharet-mosheh*, *Ruaḥ-ḥen*, *Otot
ha-shamayim*, translated from the Arabic by Samuel Ibn Tibbon; *Hatḥalot
ha-nimẓaot*, of Alfarabi; *Sefer ha-ḥappuaḥ*, *Mishle ḥamishim
ha-talmidim*; on the seven zones of the earth; a fragment of a chronicle
from the exile of Babylon down to the fourth year of the Emperor
Nicepheros of Constantinople, and a poem, which begins *asher yishal*,
and has the following sense:--"If one asks the old and experienced for
advice, you may expect his success in all he undertakes but if one
consults the young, remember the fate of Rehoboam, son of Solomon."

*Add*. 4764. In addition to the Hebrew version of Ibn Tibbon (from end
of I. xxvii.) with a few marginal notes and index, the codex contains at
the end of Part I. an Index of references made by the author to
explanations given in preceding or succeeding chapters. At the end of
the text the statement is added, that the translation was finished in
the month of Tebet 968 (1208). The Moreh is followed by *Ruaḥ-ḥen*, and
Ibn Tibbon's Vocabulary of *millot-zarot* (incomplete), and is preceded
by four poems in praise of the Moreh, beginning *Shim’u nebone leb*,
*Moreh nebuchim sa shelomi*, *De’ï holek* and *Nofet maḥkim*.

Bibl. Reg. 16 A, xi. This codex, written in Prov. curs, characters in
the year 308, has in front a fragment of iii. i., then follows the poem
of Meshullam, beginning *Yehgu mezimmotai* (Grätz *Leket-shoshannim*, p.
1511), and other poems.

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

The following MS. copies of Ibn Tibbon's version are included in the
Oxford Bodleian Library; the numbers refer to Dr. Neubauer's catalogue
of the MSS.:--

1250\. An index of the passages from the Bible referred to in the work,
and an index of the contents precede the version. The marginal note,
contain chiefly omissions.

1251\. This codex was written in 1675. The marginal notes contain
omissions and explanations.

1252\. The marginal notes contain the translator's remarks on I. lxxiv.
4, and III. xlvii. The version is followed by Ibn Tibbon a vocabulary,
and his additional remarks on the reasons for the commandments. The MS.
was bought by Samuel ben Moses from a Christian after the pillage of
Padua, where it had belonged to a Synagogue of foreigners (*lo’ azim*);
he gave it to a Synagogue of the same character at Mantua.

1253\. The marginal notes include that of the translator on III. xlvii.

1254, I. Text with marginal note, containing omissions.

1255\. The marginal notes include those of the translator on I. xlvi.
and lxxiv. 5.

1256\. The marginal notes contain various reading, notes relating to
Ḥarizi's, translation and the Arabic text; on fol. 80 there is a note in
Latin. There are in this codex six epigrams concerning the Moreh.

1257\. Text incomplete; with marginal notes.

Fragments of the Version are contained in the following codices: 2047,3,
p.65; 2283, 8; 2309, 2, and 2336.

Among the MS. copies of the Moreh in the Bibl. Nat. in Paris, there is
one that has been the property of R. Eliah Mizraḥi, and another that had
been in the hands of Azariah de Rossi (No. 685 and No. 69!); the
Günzburg Library (Paris) possesses a copy (No. 775), that was written
1452 by Samuel son of Isaac for Rabbi Moses de Leon, and Eliah del
Medigo's copy of the Moreh is in the possession of Dr. Ginsburg
(London); it contains six poems, beginning *Moreh nebuchim sa*; *Emet
moreh emet*; *Bi-leshon esh*; *Mah-ba‘aru*; *Kamu more shav*.

The editio princeps of this version has no statement as to where and
when it was printed, and is without pagination. According to Fürst
(Bibliogr.) it is printed before 1480. The copy in the British Museum
has some MS. notes. Subsequent editions contain besides the Hebrew text
the Commentaries of Shem-ṭob and Efodi, and the index of contents by
Ḥarizi (Venice, 1551, fol.); also the Comm. of Crescas and Vocabulary of
Ibn Tibbon (Sabionetta, 1553, fol.; Jessnitz, 1742, fol. etc.); the
Commentaries of Narboni and S. Maimon (Berlin, 1791); the commentaries
of Efodi, Shem-tob, Crescas and Abarbanel (Warsaw, 1872, 4to); German
translation and Hebrew Commentary (*Biur*) Part I. (Krotoschin, 1839,
8vo); German translation and notes, Part II. (Wien. 1864), Part III.
(Frankfort-a-M., 1838).

The Hebrew version of Ibn Tibbon (Part I. to ch. lxxii.) has been
translated into Mishnaic Hebrew by M. Levin (Zolkiew, 1829, 4to).

There is only one MS. known of Ḥarizi's version, viz., No. 682 of the
Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris. It has been edited by L. Schlosberg,
with notes. London, 1851 (Part I.), 1876 (II.), and 1879 (III.). The
notes on Part I. were supplied by S. Scheyer.

The first Latin translation of the Moreh has been discovered by Dr. J.
Perles among the Latin MSS. of the Munic Library, Catal. Cod. latinorum
bibl. regiae Monacensis, tom. i, pars iii. pag. 208 (Kaish. 36 b), 1700
(7936 b). This version is almost identical with that edited by
Augustinus Justinianus,

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Paris, 1520, and
is based on Ḥarizi's Hebrew version of the Moreh. The name of the
translator is not mentioned. In the Commentary of Moses, son of Solomon,
of Salerno, on the Moreh, a Latin translation is quoted, and the
quotations agree with this version. It is called by this commentator *ha
‘ataḳat ha-noẓrit* ("the Christian translation"), and its author, *ha-ma
‘atiḳ ha-noẓer* (lit. "the Christian translator"). Dr. Perles is,
however, of opinion that these terms do not necessarily imply that a
Christian has made this translation, as the word *noẓer* may have been
used here for "Latin." He thinks that it is the result of the combined
efforts of Jewish and Christian scholars connected with the court of the
German Emperor Frederic II., especially as in the thirteenth century
several Jewish scholars distinguished themselves by translating Oriental
works into Latin. See Grätz Monatschrift, 1875, Jan.-June, "Die in einer
Münchener Handschrift aufgefundene erste lateinische Uebersetzung,"
etc., von Dr. J. Perles. The title has been variously rendered into
Latin: Director neutrorum, directorium dubitantium, director neutrorum,
nutantium or dubitantium; doctor perplexorum.

Gedaliah ibn Yahyah, in *Shalshelet ha-ḳabbalah*, mentions a Latin
translation of the Moreh by Jacob Monteno: but nothing is known of it,
unless it be the anonymous translation of the Munich MS., mentioned
above. Augustinus Justinianus edited this version (Paris, 1520), with
slight alterations and a great number of mistakes. Joseph Scaliger's
opinion of this version is expressed in a letter to Casaubonus, as
follows: Qui latine vertit, Hebraica, non Arabica, convertit, et quidem
sæpe hallucinatur, neque mentem Authoris assequitur. Magna seges
mendorum est in Latino. Præter illa quæ ab inertia Interpretis peccata
sunt accessit et inertia Librariorum aut Typographorum, e.g., prophetiæ
pro philosophiæ; altitudo pro aptitudo; bonitatem pro brevitatem.
(Buxtorf, Doctor Perplexorum, Præf.)

Johannes Buxtorfius, Fil., translated the Hebrew version of Ibn Tibbon
into Latin (Basileæ, 1629, 4to). In the Præfatio ad Lectorem, the
translator discusses the life and the works of Maimonides, and dwells
especially on the merits and the fate of the *Moreh-nebuchim*. The
preface is followed by a Hebrew poem of Rabbi Raphael Joseph of Treves,
in praise of an edition of the Moreh containing the Commentaries of
Efodi, Shem-tob, and Crescas.

Italian was the first living language into which the Moreh has been
translated. This translation was made by Yedidyah ben Moses (Amadeo de
Moïse di Recanati), and dedicated by him to "divotissimo e divinissimo
Signor mio il Signor Immanuel da Fano" (i.e., the Kabbalist Menaḥem
Azarriah). The translator dictated it to his brother Eliah, who wrote it
in Hebrew characters; it was finished the 8th of February, 1583. The MS.
copy is contained in the Royal Library at Berlin, MS. Or. Qu. 487 (M.
Steinschneider Catal., etc.)--The Moreh has been translated into Italian
a second time, and annotated by D. J. Maroni: Guida degli Smarriti,
Firenze, 1870, fol.

The Moreh has been translated into German by R. Fürstenthal (Part I.,
Krotoschin, 1839), M. Stern (Part II., Wien, 1864), and S. Scheyer (Part
III.. Frankfort-a.-M., 1838). The translation is based on Ibn Tibbon's
Hebrew version. The chapters on the Divine Attributes have been
translated into

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> German, and fully
discussed, by Dr. Kaufmann in his *Geschichte der Attributenlehre*
(Gotha, 1877). An excellent French translation, based on the Arabic
original, has been supplied by the regenerator of the *Guide*, S. Munk.
It was published together with the Arabic text (Paris, 1850-1866).

The Moreh has also been translated into the Hungarian language by Dr.
Klein. The translation is accompanied by notes (Budapest, 1878-80).

The portion containing the reasons of the Commandments (Part III. ch.
xxvi.-xlix.) has been translated into English by James Townley (London,
1827). The translation is preceded by an account on the life and works
of Maimonides, and dissertations on various subjects; among others,
Talmudical and Rabbinical writings, the Originality of the Institutions
of Moses, and Judicial astrology.

III\. *Commentaries*.--It is but natural that in a philosophical work
like the Moreh, the reader will meet with passages that at first thought
seem unintelligible, and require further explanation, and this want has
been supplied by the numerous commentators that devoted their attention
to the study of the Moreh. Joseph Solomon del Medigo (1597) saw eighteen
Commentaries. The four principal ones he characterizes thus (in
imitation of the Hagadah for Passover): Moses Narboni is *rasha‘*, has
no piety, and reveals all the secrets of the Moreh. Shem-ṭob is *ḥakam*,
"wise," expounds and criticises; Crescas is *tam*, "simple," explains
the book in the style of the Rabbis; Epodi is *she-eno yode‘a lishol*,
"does not understand to ask," he simply explains in short notes without
criticism (*Miktab-aḥuz*; ed. A. Geiger, Berlin, 1840, p. i8). The
earliest annotations were made by the author himself on those passages,
which the first translator of the Moreh was unable to comprehend. They
are contained in a letter addressed to Samuel Ibn Tibbon, beginning,
*lefi siklo yehullal ish* (Bodl Library, No. 2218, s.; comp. *The
Guide*, etc., I. 21, 343; II. 8, 99). Ibn Tibbon, the translator,
likewise added a few notes, which are found in the margin of MSS. of the
Hebrew version of the Moreh (on I. xlv. lxxiv.; II. xxiv.; and III.
xlvii.--MSS. Bodl. 1252, 1; 1253, 1255, 1257; Brit. Mus. Add. 14,763 and
27,068).

Both translators wrote explanations of the philosophical terms employed
in the versions. Ḥarizi wrote his vocabulary first, and Ibn Tibbon, in
the introductory remarks, to *Perush millot zarot* ("Explanation of
difficult words"), describes his rival's vocabulary as full of blunders.
Ibn Tibbon's *Perush* is found almost in every copy of his version, both
MS. and print; so also Ḥarizi's index of the contents of the chapters of
the Moreh (*Kavvanat ha-peraḳim*).

The following is an alphabetical list of Commentaries on the Moreh:--

*Abarbanel* (*Don Isaak*) wrote a Commentary on I. i.-lv.; II.
xxxi.-xlv., and a separate book *Shamayim-ḥadashim*, "New Heavens," on
II. xix., in which he fully discusses the question concerning *Creatio
ex nihilo*. The opinion of Maimonides is not always accepted. Thus
twenty-seven objections are raised against his interpretation of the
first chapter of Ezekiel. These objections he wrote at Molin, in the
house of R. Abraham Treves Ẓarfati. The Commentary is followed by a
short essay (*maamar*) on the plan of the Moreh. The method adopted by
Abarbanel in all his Commentaries, is also employed in this essay. A
series of questions is put forth on the subject, and then the author
sets about to answer them. M. J. Landau edited the Commentary without
text, with a Preface, and with explanatory notes, called *Moreh
li-ẓeddakah* (Prag. 1831; MS. Bodl. 2385). In addition to

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

these the same author wrote *Teshubot* "Answers" to several questions
asked by Rabbi Shaul ha-Cohen on topics discussed in the Moreh (Venice,
1754).

*Abraham Abulafia* wrote "Sodot ha-moreh," or *Sitre-torah*, a
kabbalistic Commentary on the Moreh. He gives the expression, ‏גן ערן‎
(Paradise), for the number (177) of the chapters of the Moreh. MS. Nat.
Bibl. 226, 3. Leipsic Libr. 232,4. MS. Bodl. 2360, contains a portion of
Part III.

*Buchner A. Ha-moreh li-zedaḳah* (Warsaw, 1838). Commentary on "The
Reasons of the Laws," Moreh III. xxix.-xlix. The Commentary is preceded
by an account of the life of Maimonides.

Comtino, Mordecai b. Eliezer, wrote a short commentary on the Moreh (Dr.
Ginsburg's collection of MSS. No. 10). Narboni, who "spread light on
dark passages in the Guide," is frequently quoted. Reference is also
made to his own commentary on Ibn Ezra's *Yesod-mora*.

*Crescas* (*Asher b. Abraham*), expresses in the Preface to his
Commentary the conviction that he could not always comprehend the right
sense of the words of Maimonides, for "there is no searching to his
understanding." He nevertheless thinks that his explanations will help
"the young" to study the Moreh with profit. A long poem in praise of
Maimonides and his work precedes the Preface. His notes are short and
clear, and in spite of his great respect of Maimonides, he now and then
criticises and corrects him.

*David Yaḥya* is named by Joseph Del Medigo (*Miktab-aḥuz* ed. A.
Geiger, Berlin, 1840; p. 18, and note 76), as having written a
Commentary on the Moreh.

*David ben Yehudah Leon Rabbino* wrote *‘En ha-ḳore*, MS. Bodl. 1263. He
quotes in his Commentary among others ‘Arama's *‘Akedat yiẓḥak*. The
Preface is written by Immanuel ben Raphael Ibn Meir, after the death of
the author.

*Efodi* is the name of the Commentary written by Isaac ben Moses, who
during the persecution of 1391 had passed as Christian under the name of
Profiat Duran. He returned to Judaism, and wrote against Christianity
the famous satire "*Al tehee ka-aboteka*" ("Be not like your Fathers"),
which misled Christians to cite it as written in favour of Christianity.
It is addressed to the apostate En Bonet Bon Giorno. The same author
also wrote a grammatical work, *Ma‘aseh-efod*. The name *Efod* (‏אפד‎),
is explained as composed of the initials *Amar Profiat Duran*. His
Commentary consists of short notes, explanatory of the text. The
beginning of this Commentary is contained in an Arabic translation in
MS. Bodl. 2422, 16.

*Ephraim Al-Naqavah* in *Sha‘ar Kebod ha-shem* (MS. Bodl. 939, 2 and
1258, 2), answers some questions addressed to him concerning the Moreh.
He quotes Ḥiṣdai's *Or adonai*.

*Fürstenthal, R.*, translator and commentator of the Maḥzor, added a
Biur, short explanatory notes, to his German translation of Part I. of
the Moreh (Krotoschin, 1839).

*Gershon, Moreh-derek*, Commentary on Part I. of the Moreh (MS. Bodl.
1265).

Hillel b. Samuel b. Elazar of Verona explained the Introduction to Part
II, (the 25 Propos.). S. H. Halberstam edited this Commentary together
with *Tagmule ha-nefesh* of the same author, for the Society
*Meḳiẓe-nirdamim* (Lyck, 1874).

*Joseph ben Aba-mari b. Joseph*, of Caspi (Argentière), wrote three
Commentaries on the Moreh. The first is contained in a Munich MS. (No.
263); and seems to have been recast by the author, and divided into two
separate Commentaries: *‘Ammude Kesef*, and *Maskiyot Kesef*. The former
was to contain plain and ordinary explanation, whilst profound and
mysterious matter was reserved for the second (Steinschn. Cat.). In II.,
chap. xlviii., Caspi finds fault with Maimonides that he dues not place
the book of Job among the highest class of inspired writings, "its
author being undoubtedly Moses." These Commentaries have been edited by
T. Werblumer (Frankfort-a.-M., 1848). R. Kirchheim added a Hebrew
introduction discussing the character of these commentaries, and
describing the manuscripts from which these were copied; a Biography of
the author is added in German.

*Joseph Giqatilia* wrote notes on the Moreh, printed with "Questions of
Shaul ha-kohen" (Venice, 1574. MS. Bodl.. 1911, 3).

*Joseph b. Isaac ha-Levi's* *Gib’at ha-Moreh* is a short Commentary on
portions of the Moreh, with notes by R. Yom-tub Heller, the author of
*Tosafot Yam-tob* (Prag., 1612).

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

*Isaac Satanov* wrote a commentary on Parts II. and III. of the *Moreh*
(see Maimon Solomon p. xxi.).

*Isaac ben Shem-ṭob ibn Shem-ṭob* wrote a lengthy Commentary on the
Moreh, Part I. (MS. Brit. Mus, Or. 1358). The object of the Commentary
is to show that there is no contradiction between Maimonides and the
Divine Law. He praises Maimonides as a true believer in *Creatio ex
nihilo*, whilst Ibn Ezra and Gersonides assumed a *prima materia*,
(*Yoẓer*, *ḳadosh*). Nachmanides is called *ha-ḥasid ha-gadol*, but is
nevertheless blamed, together with Narboni and Zeraḥyah ha-Levi, for
criticising Maimonides, instead of trying to explain startling
utterances even in "a forced way" (*bederek raḥok*) and Narboni, "in
spite of his wisdom, frequently misunderstood the Moreh." At the end of
each chapter a résumé‚ (*derush*) of the contents of the chapter is
given, and the lesson to be derived from it. The MS. is incomplete,
chaps. xlvi.-xlviii. are missing.

*Kauffmann, D.*, in his *Geschichte der Atributenlehre*, translated Part
I. chap. l.-lxiii. into German, and added critical and explanatory
notes.

*Kalonymos* wrote a kind of introduction to the Moreh (*Mesharet
Mosheh*), in which he especially discusses the theory of Maimonides on
Providence.

*Leibnitz* made extracts from Buxtorf's. Latin version of the Moreh, and
added his own remarks, *Observationes ad R. Mosen Maimoniden* (Foucher
de Careil, C.A., *La Philosophie Juive*, 1861).

*Levin, M.*, wrote *Allon-moreh* as a kind of introduction to his
retranslation of Tibbon's Hebrew version into the language of the
Mishnah.

*Maimon, Solomon*, is the author of *Gib’at ha-moreh*, a lengthy
commentary on Book I. (Berlin, 1791). The author is fond of expatiating
on topics of modern philosophy, to the introduction he gives a short
history of philosophy. The commentary on Books II. and III. was written
by Isaac Satanov.

*Meir ben Jonah ha-mekunneh Ben-shneor* wrote a commentary on the
*Moreh* in Fez 1560 (MS. Bodl. 1262).

*Menaḥem Kara* expounded the twenty-five propositions enumerated in the
Introduction to Part II. of the Moreh (MS. Bodl. 1649, 13).

*Mordecai Yaffe*, in his *Or Yeḳarot* or *Pinnat Yiḳrat*, one of his ten
*Lebushim*, comments upon the theories contained in the *Moreh*.

*Moses, son of Abraham Provençal*, explains the passage in Part I. chap.
lxxiii. Prop. 3, in which Maimonides refers to the difference between
commensurable and incommensurable lines (MS. Bodl.. 2033, 8).

*Moses, son of Jehudah Nagari*, made an index of the subjects treated in
the Moreh, indicating in each case the chapters in which allusion is
made to the subject. He did so, "in obedience to the advice of
Maimonides, to consider the chapters in connected order" (Part I. p.
20). It has been printed together with the questions of Shaul ha-kohen
(Venice, 1574).

*Moses son of Solomon of Salerno*, is one of the earliest expounders of
the *Moreh*. He wrote his commentary on Parts I. and II., perhaps
together with a Christian scholar. He quotes the opinion of "the
Christian scholar with whom he worked together." Thus he names Petrus de
Bernia and Nicolo di Giovenazzo. R. Jacob Anatoli, author of the *Malmed
ha-talmidim*, is quoted as offering an explanation for the passage from
*Pirḳe di-rabbi Eliezer*, which Maimonides (II. chap. xxvi.) considers
as strange and inexplicable (Part I., written 1439; MS. of *Bet
ha-midrash*, London; Parts I.- II., MS. Bodl, 1261, written, 1547; MS.
Petersburg, No. 82; Munich MS. 60 and 370).

*Moses ha-ḳatan, son of Jehudah, son of Moses*, wrote *To’aliyot pirḳe
ha-maamar* ("Lessons taught in the chapters of this work"). It is an
index to the *Moreh* (MS. Bodl. 1267).

Moses Leiden explained the 25 Prop. of the Introduction to Part II. (MS.
Günzburg, Paris).

Moses Narboni wrote a short commentary at Soria 1362. He freely
criticizes Maimonides, and uses expressions like the following:--"He
went too far, may God pardon him" (II. viii.). Is. Euchel ed. Part I.
(Berlin, 1791); J. Goldenthal, I. to III. (Wien, 1852). The Bodl. Libr.
possesses several MS. copies of this commentary (Nos. 1260, 1264, 2, and
1266).

*Munk, S.*, added to his French translation of the Moreh numerous
critical and explanatory notes.

*S. Sachs* (Ha-teḥiyah, Berlin, 1850, p. 5) explains various passages of
the Moreh, with

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

a view of discovering the names of those who are attacked by Maimonides
without being named.

*Scheyer, S.*, added critical and explanatory notes to his German
translation of the Moreh, Part 3, and to the Hebrew version of Ḥarizi,
Part I. He also wrote *Das Psychologische System des Maimonides*, an
Introduction to the Moreh (Frankf.-a-M., 1845).

*Shem ṭob Ibn Palquera's Moreh ha-moreh* consists of 3 parts:(1) a
philosophical explanation of the Moreh, (2) a description of the
contents of the chapters of the Moreh, Part I, i.-lvii. (Presburg,
1827); (3) Corrections of Ibn Tibbon's version. He wrote the book for
himself, that in old age he might have a means of refreshing his memory.
The study of science and philosophy is to be recommended, but only to
those who have had a good training in "the fear of sin." Ibn Roshd
(Averroes) is frequently quoted, and referred to as *he-ḥakam ha-nizkar*
(the philosopher mentioned above).

*Shem-ṭob ben Joseph ben Shem-ṭob* had the commentary of Efodi before
him, which he seems to have quoted frequently *verbatim* without naming
him. In the preface he dwells on the merits of the Moreh as the just
mediator between religion and philosophy. The commentary of Shem-tobh is
profuse, and includes almost a paraphrase of the text. He apologises in
conclusion for having written many superfluous notes and added
explanation where no explanation was required; his excuse is that he did
not only intend to write a commentary (*biur*) but also a work complete
in itself (*ḥibbur*). He often calls the reader's attention to things
which are plain and clear.

*Shem-ṭob Ibn Shem-ṭob*, in *Sefer ha-emunot* (Ferrara, 1556),
criticises some of the various theories discussed in the Moreh, and
rejects them as heretic. His objections were examined by Moses
Al-ashkar, and answered in *Hasagot ‘al mah she-katab Rabbi Shem-ṭob
neged ha-Rambam* (Ferrara, 1556).

*Salomon b. Jehudah ha-nasi* wrote in Germany *Sitre-torah*, a
kabbalistic commentary on the Moreh, and dedicated it to his pupil Jacob
b. Samuel (MS. Bet-ha-midrash, London).

*Tabrizi*. The twenty-five Propositions forming the introduction to Part
2, have been fully explained by Mohammed Abu-becr ben Mohammed
al-tabrizi. His Arabic explanations have been translated by Isaac b.
Nathan of Majorca into Hebrew (Ferraro, 1556). At the end the following
eulogy is added:--The author of these Propositions is the chief whose
sceptre is "wisdom" and whose throne is "understanding," the Israelite
prince, that has benefited his nation and all those who love God, etc.
Moses b. Maimon b. Ebed-elohim, the Israelite. . . . May God lead us to
the truth. Amen!

*Tishbi*. In MS. Bodl. 2279, 1, there are some marginal notes on Part
III. which are signed Tishbi (Neub. Cat.).

*Yaḥya Ibn Suleiman* wrote in Arabic a Commentary on the *Guide of the
Perplexed*. A fragment is contained in the Berlin MS. Or. Qu., 554, 2
(Steinschneider, Cat. No. 92).

*Zeraḥyah b. Isaac ha-Levi*. Commentary on the Moreh, I., i.-lxxi., and
some other portions of the work. (See Maskir, 1861, p. 125).

MS. Bodl. 2360, 8, contains a letter of Jehudah b. Shelomoh on some
passages of the Moreh, and Zeraḥyah's reply.

*Anonymous Commentaries*.--The MS. Brit. Mus. 1423 contains marginal and
interlineary notes in Arabic. No author or date is given, nor is any
other commentary referred to in the notes. The explanations given are
mostly preceded by a question, and introduced by the phrase, "the answer
is," in the same style as is employed in the Hebrew-Arabic Midrash, MS.
Brit. Mus. Or. 2213. The Midrashic character is prominent in the notes.
Thus the verse "Open, ye gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth
the truth may enter in," is explained as meaning: Open, ye gates of
wisdom, that human understanding that perceiveth truth may enter. The
notes are numerous, especially in the first part, explaining almost
every word; e.g., on "Rabbi": Why does Maimonides employ this title
before the name of his pupil? The answer is: either the word is not to
be taken literally ("master"), but as a mere compliment, or it has been
added by later copyists. Of a similar style seem to be the Arabic notes
in the Berlin MS. Or. Oct. 258, 2, 8, so. (Cat. Steinschneider, No.
108.)--Anonymous marginal

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

notes are met with almost in every MS. of the Moreh; e.g., Brit. Mos.
Harl. 5525; Add. 14,763, 14,764; Bodl. 1264, I; 2282, 10; 2423, 3;
Munich MS., 239, 6.

The explanation of passages from the Pentateuch contained in the Moreh
have been collected by D. Ottensosser, and given as an appendix
(*Moreh-derek*) to *Derek-selulah* (Pent. with Comm. etc., Furth, 1824).

IV\. *Controversies*.--The seemingly new ideas put forth by Maimonides
in the Moreh and in the first section of his Mishneh-torah (Sefer
ha-madda) soon produced a lively controversy as regards the merits of
Maimonides theories. It was most perplexing to pious Talmudists to learn
how Maimonides explained the anthropomorphisms employed in the Bible,
the Midrashim and the Talmud, what he thought about the future state of
our soul, and that he considered the study of philosophy as the highest
degree of Divine worship, surpassing even the study of the Law and the
practice of its precepts. The objections and attacks of Daniel of
Damascus were easily silenced by a *ḥerem* (excommunication) pronounced
against him by the *Rosh ha-golah* Rabbi David. Stronger was the
opposition that had its centre in Montpellier. Rabbi Solomon ben Abraham
noticed with regret in his own community the fruit of the theories of
Maimonides in the neglect of the study of the Law and of the practice of
the Divine precepts. It happened to Moses Maimonides what in modern
times happened to Moses Mendelssohn. Many so-called disciples and
followers of the great master misunderstood or misinterpreted his
teaching in support of their dereliction of Jewish law and Jewish
practice, and thus brought disrepute on him in the eyes of their
opponents. Thus it came that Rabbi Solomon and his disciples turned
their wrath against the writings of Maimonides instead of combating the
arguments of the pseudo-Maimonists. The latter even accused Solomon of
having denounced the *Moreh* and the *Sefer ha-madda‘* to the
Dominicans, who condemned these writings to the flames; when
subsequently copies of the Talmud were burnt, and some of the followers
of the Rabbi of Montpellier were subjected to cruel tortures, the
Maimonists saw in this event a just punishment for offending Maimonides.
(Letters of Hillel of Verona, *Ḥemdah Genuzah*, ed. H. Edelmann, p. 58
*sqq*.).

*Meir b. Todros ha-levi Abulafia* wrote already during the lifetime of
Maimonides to the wise men in Lunel about the heretic doctrines he
discovered in the works of Maimonides. Ahron b. Meshullam and Shesheth
Benvenisti defended Maimonides. About 1232 a correspondence opened
between the Maimonists and the Anti-maimonists (Grätz, Gesch. d. J. vii.
note I). The Grammarian David Kimḥi wrote in defence of Maimonides three
letters to Jehudah Alfachar, who answered each of them in the sense of
Rabbi Solomon of Montpellier. Abraham b. Ḥisdai and Samuel b. Abraham
Saportas on the side of the Maimonists, took part in the controversy.
Meshullam b. Kalonymos b. Todros of Narbonne begged Alfachar to treat
Kimḥi with more consideration, whereupon Alfachar resolved to withdraw
from the controversy. Naḥmanides, though more on the side of Rabbi
Solomon, wrote two letters of a conciliatory character, advising
moderation on both sides. Representatives of the congregations of
Saragossa, Huesca, Monzon, Kalatajud, and Lerida signed declarations
against R. Solomon. A herem was proclaimed from Lunel and Narbonne
against

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

the Anti-Maimonists. The son of Maimonides, Abraham, wrote a pamphlet
*Milḥamot adonai*, in defence of the writings of his father. The
controversy raised about fifty years later by Abba Man Don Astruc and R.
Solomon ben-Aderet of Barcelona, concerned the Moreh less directly. The
question was of a more general character: Is the study of philosophy
dangerous to the religious belief of young students? The letters written
in this controversy are contained in *Minḥat-ḳenaot* by Abba Mari Don
Astruc (Presburg, 1838), and Kitab alrasail of Meir Abulafia ed. J.
Brill (Paris, 1871). Yedaya Bedrasi took part in this controversy, and
wrote *Ketab hitnaẓlut* in defence of the study of philosophy (Teshubot
Rashba, Hanau, 1610, p. iii b.). The whole controversy ended in the
victory of the Moreh and the other writings of Maimonides. Stray remarks
are found in various works, some in praise and some in condemnation of
Maimonides. A few instances may suffice. Rabbi Jacob Emden in his
*Mitpaḥat-sefarim* (Lemberg, 1870, p. 56) believes that parts of the
Moreh are spurious; he even doubts whether any portion of it is the work
of "Maimonides, the author of the Mishneh-torah, who was not capable of
writing such heretic doctrines," S. D. Luzzato regards Maimonides with
great reverence, but this does not prevent him from severely criticising
his philosophical theories (Letters to S. Rappoport, No. 79, 83, 266,
*Iggeroth Shedal* ed. E. Graber, Premys’l, 1882), and from expressing
his conviction that the saying "From Moses to Moses none rose like
Moses," was as untrue as that suggested by Rappoport, "From Abraham to
Abraham (Ibn-Ezra) none rose like Abraham." Rabbi Hirsch Chayyuth in
*Darke-Mosheh* (Zolkiew, 5840) examines the attacks made upon the
writings of Maimonides, and tries to refute them, and to show that they
can be reconciled with the teaching of the Talmud.

The Bodl. MS. 2240, 3a, contains a document signed by Josselman and
other Rabbis, declaring that they accept the teaching of Maimonides as
correct, with the exception of his theory about angels and sacrifices.

Numerous poems were written, both in admiration and in condemnation of
the Moreh. Most of them precede or follow the Moreh in the printed
editions and in the various MS. copies of the work. A few have been
edited in *Dibre-ḥakamim*, pp. 75 and 86; in the Literaturblatt d. Or.
I. 379, II. 26-27, IV. 748, and *Leket-shoshannim* by Dr. Grätz. In the
*Sammelband* of the Mekize Nirdamim (1885) a collection of 69 of these
poems is contained, edited and explained by Prof. Dr. A. Berliner. In
imitation of the Moreh and with a view of displacing Maimonides work,
the Karaite Ahron II. b. Eliah wrote a philosophical treatise,
*Eẓ-ḥayyim* (Ed. F. Delitzsch. Leipzig, 1841).

Of the works that discuss the whole or part of the philosophical system
of the Moreh the following are noteworthy:--

Bacher, W. Die Bibilexegese Moses Maimûni's, in the Jahresbericht der
Landes Rabbinerschule zu Buda-Pest. 1896.

Eisler, M. Vorlesungen über die jüdischen Philosophers des Mittelalters.
Abtheil. II., Moses Maimonides (Wien, 1870).

Geiger, A. Das Judenthum u. seine Geschichte (Breslau, 1865), Zehnte
Vorlesung: Aben Ezra u. Maimonides.

Grätz, H. Geschichte d. Juden, VI. p. 363 *sqq*.

Joel, M. Religionsphilosophie des Moses b. Maimon (Breslau, 1859).

Joel, M. Albertus Magnus u. seim Vorhältniss zu Maimonides (Breslau,
1863).

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

Kaufmann, D. Geschichte der Attributenlehre, VII. Gotha, 1874.

Philippsohn, L. Die Philosophie des Maimonides. Predigt und
Schul-Magazin, I. xviii. (Magdeburg, 1834.)

Rosin, D. Die Ethik d. Maimonides (Breslau, 1876).

Rubin, S. Spinoza u. Maimonides, ein Psychologisch-Philosophisches
Antitheton (Wien, 1868).

Scheyer, S. Das psychologische System des Maimonides. Frankfort-a.-M.,
1845.

Weiss, T. H. *Beth-Talmud*, I. x. p. 289.

David Yellin and Israel Abrahams, Maimonides.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Analysis of the Guide for the Perplexed](gfp006)
