[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp035)  [Next](gfp037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVI

You, no doubt, know the Talmudical saying, which includes in itself all
the various kinds of interpretation connected with our subject. It runs
thus:

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "The Torah speaks
according to the language of man," that is to say, expressions, which
can easily be comprehended and understood by all, are applied to the
Creator. Hence the description of God by attributes implying
corporeality, in order to express His existence: because the multitude
of people do not easily conceive existence unless in connection with a
body, and that which is not a body nor connected with a body has for
them no existence. Whatever we regard as a state of perfection, is
likewise attributed to God, as expressing that He is perfect in every
respect, and that no imperfection or deficiency whatever is found in
Him. But there is not attributed to God anything which the multitude
consider a defect or want; thus He is never represented as eating,
drinking, sleeping, being ill, using violence, and the like. Whatever,
on the other hand, is commonly regarded as a state of perfection is
attributed to Him, although it is only a state of perfection in relation
to ourselves; for in relation to God, what we consider to be a state of
perfection, is in truth the highest degree of imperfection. If, however,
men were to think that those human perfections were absent in God, they
would consider Him as imperfect.

You are aware that locomotion is one of the distinguishing
characteristics of living beings, and is indispensable for them in their
progress towards perfection. As they require food and drink to supply
animal waste, so they require locomotion, in order to approach that
which is good for them and in harmony with their nature, and to escape
from what is injurious and contrary to their nature. It makes, in fact,
no difference whether we ascribe to God eating and drinking or
locomotion; but according to human modes of expression, that is to say,
according to common notions, eating and drinking would be an
imperfection in God, while motion would not, in spite of the fact that
the necessity of locomotion is the result of some want. Furthermore, it
has been clearly proved, that everything which moves is corporeal and
divisible; it will be shown below that God is incorporeal and that He
can have no locomotion; nor can rest be ascribed to Him; for rest can
only be applied to that which also moves. All expressions, however,
which imply the various modes of movement in living beings, are employed
with regard to God in the manner we have described and in the same way
as life is ascribed to Him: although motion is an accident pertaining to
living beings, and there is no doubt that, without corporeality,
expressions like the following could not be imagined: "to descend, to
ascend, to walk, to place, to stand, to surround, to sit, to dwell, to
depart, to enter, to pass, etc.

It would have been superfluous thus to dilate on this subject, were it
not for the mass of the people, who are accustomed to such ideas. It has
been necessary to expatiate on the subject, as we have attempted, for
the benefit of those who are anxious to acquire perfection, to remove
from them such notions as have grown up with them from the days of
youth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII](gfp037)
