[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp085)  [Next](gfp087.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXXVI

THE reasonings and arguments of the Mutakallemim to demonstrate the
Incorporeality of God are very weak., and indeed inferior to their
arguments for the Unity of God. They treat the doctrine of the
Incorporeality of God as if it were the logical sequence of the theory
of His Unity, and they say that the attribute "one" cannot be applied to
a corporeal object. Those who maintain that God is incorporeal because a
corporeal object consists of substance and form--a combination known to
be impossible in the Divine Being, are not in my opinion Mutakallemim,
and such an argument is not founded on the propositions of the Kalâm; on
the contrary, it is a logical

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

proof based on the theory of substance and form, and on a right
conception of their properties. It has the character of a philosophical
argument, and I shall fully explain it when treating of the arguments of
the philosophers. Here we only propose to discuss the arguments by which
the Mutakallemim desire to prove the Incorporeality of God in accordance
with their propositions and the method of their reasoning.

*First Argument*.

If God were corporeal, His true essence would necessarily either exist
entirely in every part of the body, that is to say, in each of its
atoms, or would be confined to one of the atoms. In the latter
alternative the other atoms would be superfluous, and the existence of
the corporeal being \[with the exception of the one atom\] would be of
no purpose. If, on the other hand, each atom fully represented the
Divine Being, the whole body would not be one deity, but a complex of
deities, and this would be contrary to the doctrine adopted by the
*kalâm* that God is one. An examination of this argument shows that it
is based on the first and fifth propositions. But there is room for the
following objection: "God does not consist of atoms, that is to say, He
is not, as you assert, composed of a number of elements created by
Himself, but is one continuous body, and indivisible except in man's
imagination, which affords no test; for in man's imagination the
substance of the heavens may be torn or rent asunder. The philosopher
holds that such a possibility results from assuming a similarity and an
analogy between the visible, i.e., the bodies which exist among us, and
the invisible."

*Second Argument*.

This argument, they believe, is of great importance. Its main support is
the impossibility of comparison, i.e., the belief that God cannot be
compared to any of His creatures; and that He would be comparable to
other corporeal objects if He were corporeal. They put great stress on
this argument, and say as follows: "If it were asserted that God is
corporeal, but that His substance is not like that of other corporeal
beings, it would be self-contradictory: for all bodies are alike as
regards their substance, and are distinguished from each other by other
things, viz., the accidents." They also argue that if God were corporeal
it would follow that He has created another being like Himself. This
argument is refuted in two ways. First, the objector does not admit the
impossibility of comparison; he asks how it could be proved that God
cannot be compared to any of His creatures. No doubt that, in support of
their view, that a comparison between the Almighty and any other being
is inadmissible, they would have to cite the words of the Prophets, and
thus accept this doctrine by the authority of tradition, not by the
authority of reason. The argument that God, if comparable to any of His
creatures, would be found to have created beings like Himself, is
refuted by the objector in the following way: "The created things are
not like Him in every respect; for I do not deny that God has many
properties and peculiarities." For he who admits the corporeality of God
does not deny the existence of properties in the divine Being. Another
and more forcible argument is this: All who have studied philosophy, and
have made themselves thoroughly acquainted with philosophical theories,
assume as demonstrated

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

facts, first that the term substance, when applied to the spheres above
and to the corporeal objects here on earth is a perfect homonym, for the
substance of the one is not the substance of the other: and secondly
that the forms of the things on this earth are different from the forms
of the spheres; the terms substance and form when applied both to things
below and to the spheres above are homonyms; although there is no doubt
that the spheres have \[like the things below, three\] dimensions, they
are corporeal because they consist of substance and form, not because
they have dimensions. If this explanation is admitted with reference to
the spheres, how much more is he who believes that God is corporeal
justified in saying that God is a corporeal being which has dimensions,
but which in its substance, its true nature and properties is very
different from all created bodies, and that the term "substance" is
applied to Him and to His creatures homonymously, in the same manner as
the true believers, who have a correct conception of the divine idea,
apply the term "existence" homonymously to Him and to His creatures. The
Corporealists do not admit that all bodies consist of similar atoms:
they believe that God created all things, and that these differ from
each other both in their substances and in their constituent properties:
and just as the substance of dung differs from the substance of the sun,
so does, according to this theory, the substance of the spheres and the
stars differ from the substance of the created light, i.e., the Divine
Glory (*Shechinah*), and again the substance of the Divine Glory, or the
pillar of cloud created \[for the purpose\], differ from the substance
of the Most High; for the substance of the latter is sublime, perfect,
simple, constant and immutable. His absolute existence remains always
the same, and He creates all things according to His will and desire.
How could this argument, though it be weak, be refuted by these strange
methods of the Mutakallemim, which I pointed out to you?

*Third Argument*.

If God were corporeal, He would be finite, and so far this argument is
correct; if He were finite, He would have certain dimensions and a
certain form; this is also a correct conclusion. But they continue thus:
Attribute to God any magnitude or form whatever: He might be either
larger or smaller, and might also have a different form. The fact that
He has one special magnitude and one special form presupposes the
existence of a determining *agens*. I have heard that they attach great
importance to this argument, but in truth it is the weakest of all the
arguments mentioned above. It is founded on the tenth proposition, the
feebleness of which in ignoring the actual properties of things, we have
clearly shown in regard to ordinary beings and must be much more evident
in regard to the Creator. There is no difference between this argument
and their assertion that the fact of the existence of the Universe
having been preferred to its non-existence proves the existence of an
*agens* that preferred the existence of the Universe to its
non-existence at a time when both were equally possible. If it were
asked why this argument should not be applied to God-viz., that His mere
existence proved the existence of an *agens* which determined His
existence and rejected His non-existence--they would undoubtedly answer
that this admission would only lead to a repetition of the same argument
until at

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

length a being be found whose existence is not merely potential but
necessary, and which does not require a *causa efficiens*. But this same
answer can also be applied to dimensions and to form. It can only be
said in reference to all other forms and magnitudes, the existence of
which is possible, that is to say which came into existence after a
state of non-existence, that they might have been larger or smaller than
they actually are, or that they might have had a form different from
that which they actually possess, and require for this reason some
determining *agens*. But the forms and dimensions of God (who is above
all imperfection and similitude)! did not come into existence according
to the opinion of the Corporealist after a state of non-existence, and
therefore no determining *agens* was necessary: His substance with its
dimensions and forms has a necessary existence; no *agens* was required
to decide upon His existence, and to reject His non-existence, since
nonexistence is altogether inadmissible in God. In like manner there was
no force required to determine His magnitude and form, they were
absolutely inseparable from His existence.

If you wish to go in search of truth, to cast aside your passions, your
tradition, and your fondness of things you have been accustomed to
cherish, if you wish to guard yourself against error: then consider the
fate of these speculators and the result of their labours: observe how
they rushed, as it were, from the ashes into the fire. They denied the
nature of the existing things, misrepresented the properties of heaven
and earth, and thought that they were able, by their propositions, to
prove the creation of the world, but in fact they were far from proving
the *creatio ex nihilo*, and have weakened the arguments for the
existence, the unity, and the incorporeality of God. The proofs of all
these doctrines must be based on the well-known nature of the existing
things, as perceived by the senses and the intellect.

Having thus discussed the arguments of the Mutakallemim, we shall now
proceed to consider the propositions of the philosophers and their
arguments for the existence of God, His Unity and His Incorporeality,
and we shall for the present assume the Eternity of the Universe without
finally accepting it. Next to this we shall develop our own method,
which is the result of deep study, in demonstrating these three
principles, and we shall then examine the theory of the Eternity of the
Universe as assumed by the philosophers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](gfp087.md)
