[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp081)  [Next](gfp083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXXII

KNOW that this Universe, in its entirety, is nothing else but one
individual being: that is to say, the outermost heavenly sphere,
together with all included therein, is as regards individuality beyond
all question a single being like Said and Omar. The variety of its
substances--I mean the substances of that sphere and all its component
parts--is like the variety of the substances of a human being: just as,
e.g., Said is one individual, consisting of various solid substances,
such as flesh, bones, sinews, of various humours, and of various
spiritual elements: in like manner this sphere in its totality is
composed of the celestial orbs, the four elements and their
combinations: there is no vacuum whatever therein, but the whole space
is filled up with matter. Its centre is occupied by the earth, earth is
surrounded by water, air encompasses the water, fire envelopes the air,
and this again is enveloped by the fifth substance (quintessence). These
substances form numerous spheres, one being enclosed within another so
that no intermediate empty space, no vacuum, is left. One sphere
surrounds and closely joins the other. All the spheres revolve with
constant uniformity, without acceleration or retardation; that is to
say, each sphere retains its individual nature as regards its velocity
and the peculiarity of its motion; it does not move at one time quicker,
at another slower. Compared with each other, however, some of the
spheres move with less, others with greater velocity. The outermost,
all-encompassing sphere, revolves with the greatest speed; it completes
its revolution in one day, and causes everything to participate in its
motion, just as every particle of a thing moves when the entire body is
in motion: for existing beings stand in the same relation to that sphere
as a part of a thing stands to the whole. These spheres have not a
common centre: the centres of some of them are identical with the centre
of the Universe, while those of the rest are different from it. Some of
the spheres

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

have a motion independent of that of the whole Universe, constantly
revolving from East to West, while other spheres move from West to East.
The stars contained in those spheres are part of their respective
orbits: they are fixed in them, and have no motion of their own, but
participating in the motion of the sphere of which they are a part, they
appear themselves to move. The entire substance of this revolving fifth
element is unlike the substance of those bodies which consist of the
other four elements, and are enclosed by the fifth element.

The number of these spheres encompassing the Universe cannot possibly be
less than eighteen: it may even be larger; but this is a matter for
further investigation. It also remains an open question whether there
are spheres which, without moving round the centre of the Universe, have
nevertheless a circular motion. Within that sphere which is nearest to
us, a substance is contained which is different from the substance of
the fifth element: it first received four primary forms, and then became
in these four forms, four kinds of matter: earth, water, air, fire. Each
of the four elements occupies a certain position of its own assigned to
it by nature: it is not found in another place, so long as no other but
its own natural force acts upon it; it is a dead body; it has no life,
no perception, no spontaneous motion, and remains at rest in its natural
place. When moved from its place by some external force, it returns
towards its natural place as soon as that force ceases to operate. For
the elements have the property of moving back to their place in a
straight line, but they have no properties which would cause them to
remain where they are, or to move otherwise than in a straight line. The
rectilinear motions of these four elements when returning to their
original place are of two kinds, either centrifugal, viz., the motion of
the air and the fire; or centripetal, viz., the motion of the earth, and
the water; and when the elements have reached their original place, they
remain at rest.

The spherical bodies, on the other hand, have life, possess a soul by
which they move spontaneously; they have no properties by which they
could at any time come to a state of rest: in their perpetual rotations
they are not subject to any change, except that of position. The
question whether they are endowed with an intellect, enabling them to
comprehend, cannot be solved without deep research. Through the constant
revolution of the fifth element, with all contained therein, the four
elements are forced to move and to change their respective positions, so
that fire and air are driven into the water, and again these three
elements enter the depth of the earth. Thus are the elements mixed
together; and when they return to their respective places, parts of the
earth, in quitting their places, move together with the water, the air
and the fire. In this whole process the elements act and react upon each
other. The elements intermixed, are then combined, and form at first
various kinds of vapours; afterwards the several kinds of minerals,
every species of plants, and many species of living beings, according to
the relative proportion of the constituent parts. All transient beings
have their origin in the elements, into which again they resolve when
their existence comes to an end. The elements themselves are subject to
being transformed from one into another; for although one substance is
common to all, substance without form is in reality impossible, just as
the physical form of these transient beings cannot exist without
substance. The formation

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

and the dissolution of the elements, together with the things composed
of them, and resolving into them, follow each other in rotation. The
changes of the finite substance, in successively receiving one form
after the other, may therefore be compared to the revolution of the
sphere in space, when each part of the sphere periodically reappears in
the same position.

As the human body consists both of principal organs and of other members
which depend on them and cannot exist without the control of those
organs, so does the universe consist both of principal parts, viz., the
quintessence, which encompasses the four elements and of other parts
which are subordinated and require a leader, viz., the four elements and
the things composed of them.

Again, the principal part in the human body, namely, the heart, is in
constant motion, and is the source of every motion noticed in the body:
it rules over the other members, and communicates to them through its
own pulsations the force required for their functions. The outermost
sphere by its motion rules in a similar way over all other parts of the
universe, and supplies all things with their special properties. Every
motion in the universe has thus its origin in the motion of that sphere:
and the soul of every animated being derives its origin from the soul of
that same sphere.

The forces which according to this explanation are communicated by the
spheres to this sublunary world are four in number, viz., (*a*) the
force which effects the mixture and the composition of the elements, and
which undoubtedly suffices to form the minerals: (*b*) the force which
supplies every growing thing with its vegetative functions: (*c*) the
force which gives to each living being its vitality, and (*d*) the force
which endows rational beings with intellect. All this is effected
through the action of light and darkness, which are regulated by the
position and the motion of the spheres round the earth.

When for one instant the beating of the heart is interrupted, man dies,
and all his motions and powers come to an end. In a like manner would
the whole universe perish, and everything therein cease to exist if the
spheres were to come to a standstill.

The living being as such is one through the action of its heart,
although some parts of the body are devoid of motion and sensation, as,
e.g., the bones, the cartilage, and similar parts. The same is the case
with the entire universe; although it includes many beings without
motion and without life, it is a single being living through the motion
of the sphere, which may be compared to the heart of an animated being.
You must therefore consider the entire globe as one individual being
which is endowed with life, motion, and a soul. This mode of considering
the universe is, as will be explained, indispensable, that is to say, it
is very useful for demonstrating the unity of God; it also helps to
elucidate the principle that He who is One has created only *one* being.

Again, it is impossible that any of the members of a human body should
exist by themselves, not connected with the body, and at the same time
should actually be organic parts of that body, that is to say, that the
liver should exist by itself, the heart by itself, or the flesh by
itself. In like manner, it is impossible that one part of the Universe
should exist independently of the other parts in the existing order of
things as here considered,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

viz., that the fire should exist without the co-existence of the earth,
or the earth without the heaven, or the heaven without the earth.

In man there is a certain force which unites the members of the body,
controls them, and gives to each of them what it requires for the
conservation of its condition, and for the repulsion of injury--the
physicians distinctly call it the leading force in the body of the
living being: sometimes they call it "nature." The Universe likewise
possesses a force which unites the several parts with each other,
protects the species from destruction, maintains the individuals of each
species as long as possible, and endows some individual beings with
permanent existence. Whether this force operates through the medium of
the sphere or otherwise remains an open question.

Again, in the body of each individual there are parts which are intended
for a certain purpose, as the organs of nutrition for the preservation
of the individual, the organs of generation for the preservation of the
species, the hands and eyes for administering to certain wants, as to
food, etc.: there are also parts which, in themselves, are not intended
for any purpose, but are mere accessories and adjuncts to the
constitution of the other parts. The peculiar constitution of the
organs, indispensable for the conservation of their particular forms and
for the performance of their primary functions, produces, whilst it
serves its special purpose, according to the nature of the substance,
other things, such as the hair and the complexion of the body. Being
mere accessories, they are not formed according to a fixed rule: some
are altogether absent in many individuals; and vary considerably in
others. This is not the case with the organs of the body. You never find
that the liver of one person is ten times larger than that of another
person, but you may find a person without a beard, or without hair on
certain parts of his body, or with a beard ten times longer than that of
another man. Instances of this phenomenon, viz., great variation as
regards hair and colour, are not rare. The same differences occur in the
constitution of the Universe. Some species exist as an integral part of
the whole system: these are constant and follow a fixed law; though they
vary as far as their nature permits, this variation is insignificant in
quantity and quality. Other species do not serve any purpose: they are
the mere result of the general nature of transient things, as, e.g., the
various insects which are generated in dunghills, the animals generated
in rotten fruit, or in fetid liquids, and worms generated in the
intestines, etc. In short, everything devoid of the power of generation
belongs to this class. You will, therefore, find that these things do
not follow a fixed law, although their entire absence is just as
impossible as the absence of different complexions and of different
kinds of hair amongst human beings.

In man there are substances the individual existence of which is
permanent, and there are other substances which are only constant in the
species not in the individuals, as, e.g., the four humours. The same is
the case in the Universe: there are substances which are constant in
individuals, such as the fifth element, which is constant in all its
formations, and other substances which are constant in the species, as,
e.g., the four elements and all that is composed of them.

The same forces which operate in the birth and the temporal existence of
the human being operate also in his destruction and death. This truth

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

holds good with regard to this whole transient world. The causes of
production are at the same time the causes of destruction. This may be
illustrated by the following example. If the four forces which are
present in every being sustained by food, viz., attraction, retention,
digestion, and secretion, were, like intelligent forces, able to confine
themselves to what is necessary, and to act at the proper time and
within the proper limits, man would be exempt from those great
sufferings and the numerous diseases \[to which he is exposed\]. Since,
however, such is not the case, and since the forces perform their
natural functions without thought and intelligence, without any
consciousness of their action, they necessarily cause dangerous maladies
and great pains, although they are the direct cause of the birth and the
temporal existence of the human being. This fact is to be explained as
follows: if the attractive force would absorb nothing but that which is
absolutely beneficial, and nothing but the quantity which is required,
man would be free from many such sufferings and disorders. But such is
not the case: the attractive force absorbs any humour that comes within
the range of its action, although such humour be ill-adapted in quality
or in quantity. It is, therefore, natural that sometimes a humour is
absorbed which is too warm, too cold, too thick, or too thin, or that
too much humour is absorbed, and thus the veins are choked, obstruction
and decay ensue, the quality of the humour is deteriorated, its
quantities altered, diseases are originated, such as scurvy, leprosy,
abscess, or a dangerous illness, such as cancer, elephantiasis,
gangrene, and at last the organ or organs are destroyed. The same is the
case with every one of the four forces, and with all existing beings.
The same force that originates all things, and causes them to exist for
a certain time, namely, the combination of the elements which are moved
and penetrated by the forces of the heavenly spheres, that same cause
becomes throughout the world a source of calamities, such as devastating
rain, showers, snow-storms, hail, hurricanes, thunder, lightning,
malaria, or other terrible catastrophes by which a place or many places
or an entire country may be laid waste, such as landslips, earthquakes,
meteoric showers and floods issuing forth from the seas and from the
interior of the earth.

Bear in mind, however, that in all that we have noticed about the
similarity between the Universe and the human being, nothing would
warrant us to assert that man is a microcosm; for although the
comparison in all its parts applies to the Universe and any living being
in its normal state, we never heard that any ancient author called the
ass or the horse a microcosm. This attribute has been given to man alone
on account of his peculiar faculty of thinking, I mean the intellect,
viz., the hylic intellect which appertains to no other living being.
This may be explained as follows. An animal does not require for its
sustenance any plan, thought or scheme; each animal moves and acts by
its nature, eats as much as it can find of suitable things, it makes its
resting-place wherever it happens to be, cohabits with any mate it meets
while in heat in the periods of its sexual excitement. In this manner
does each individual conserve itself for a certain time, and perpetuates
the existence of its species without requiring for its maintenance the
assistance or support of any of its fellow creatures: for all the things
to which it has to attend it performs by itself. With man it is
different; if an individual had a solitary existence, and were, like an
animal, left without guidance, he

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

would soon perish, he would not endure even one day, unless it were by
mere chance, unless he happened to find something upon which he might
feed. For the food which man requires for his subsistence demands much
work and preparation, which can only be accomplished by reflection and
by plan; many vessels must be used, and many individuals, each in his
peculiar work, must be employed. It is therefore necessary that one
person should organize the work and direct men in such a manner that
they should properly cooperate, and that they should assist each other.
The protection from heat in summer and from cold in winter, and shelter
from rain, snow, and wind, require in the same manner the preparation of
many things, none of which can properly be done without design and
thought. For this reason man has been endowed with intellectual
faculties, which enable him to think, consider, and act, and by various
labours to prepare and procure for himself food, dwelling and clothing,
and to control every organ of his body, causing both the principal and
the secondary organs to perform their respective functions.
Consequently, if a man, being deprived of his intellectual faculties,
only possessed vitality, he would in a short time be lost. The intellect
is the highest of all faculties of living creatures: it is very
difficult to comprehend, and its true character cannot be understood as
easily as man's other faculties.

There also exists in the Universe a certain force which controls the
whole, which sets in motion the chief and principal parts, and gives
them the motive power for governing the rest. Without that force, the
existence of this sphere, with its principal and secondary parts, would
be impossible. It is the source of the existence of the Universe in all
its parts. That force is God: blessed be His name! It is on account of
this force that man is called microcosm: for he likewise possesses a
certain principle which governs all the forces of the body, and on
account of this comparison God is called "the life of the Universe";
comp. "and he swore by the life of the Universe" (Dan. xii. 7).

You must understand that in the parallel which we have drawn between the
whole universe, on the one hand, and the individual man, on the other,
there is a complete harmony in all the points which we mentioned above
only in the following three points a discrepancy may be noticed.

First, the principal organ of any living being which has a heart,
derives a benefit from the organs under the control of the heart, and
the benefits of the organs thus become the benefits of the heart. This
is not the case in the constitution of the universe. That part which
bestows authority or distributes power, does not receive in return any
benefit from the things under its control: whatever it grants, is
granted in the manner of a generous [benefactor](errata.htm#10), not
from any selfish motive, but from a natural generosity and kindliness;
only for the sake of imitating the ways of the Most High.

Secondly, living creatures endowed with a heart have it within the body
and in the midst thereof: there it is surrounded by organs which it
governs. Thus it derives a benefit from them, for they guard and protect
it, and they do not allow that any injury from without should approach
it. The reverse occurs in the case of the Universe. The superior part
encompasses the inferior parts, it being certain that it cannot be
affected by the action of any other being; and even if it could be
affected, there is nobody without it

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

that could affect it. While it influences all that is contained within,
it is not influenced by any act or force of any material being. There
is, however, some similarity \[between the universe and man\] in this
point. In the body of animals, the organs more distant from the
principal organ are of less importance than those nearer to it. Also in
the universe, the nearer the parts are to the centre, the greater is
their turbidness, their solidity, their inertness, their dimness and
darkness, because they are further away from the loftiest element, from
the source of light and brightness, which moves by itself and the
substance of which is the most rarefied and simplest: from the outermost
sphere. At the same ratio at which a body is nearer this sphere, it
derives properties from it, and rises above the spheres below it.

Thirdly. The faculty of thinking is a force inherent in the body, and is
not separated from it, but God is not a force inherent in the body of
the universe, but is separate from all its parts. How God rules the
universe and provides for it is a complete mystery: man is unable to
solve it. For, on the one hand, it can be proved that God is separate
from the universe, and in no contact whatever with it; but, on the other
hand, His rule and providence can be proved to exist in all parts of the
universe, even in the smallest. Praised be He whose perfection is above
our comprehension.

It is true, we might have compared the relation between God and the
universe, to the relation between the absolute acquired intellect and
man; it is not a power inherent in the body, but a power which is
absolutely separate from the body, and is from without brought into
contact with the body. The rational faculty of man may be further
compared to the intelligence of the spheres, which are, as it were,
material bodies. But the intelligence of the spheres, purely spiritual
beings, as well as man's absolute and acquired intellect, are subjects
of deep study and research: the proof of their existence, though
correct, is abstruse, and includes arguments which present doubts, are
exposed to criticism, and can be easily attacked by objectors. We have,
therefore, preferred to illustrate the relation of God to the universe
by a simile which is clear, and which will not be contradicted in any of
the points which have been laid down by us without any qualification.
The opposition can only emanate either from an ignorant man, who
contradicts truths even if they are perfectly obvious, just as a person
unacquainted with geometry rejects elementary propositions which have
been clearly demonstrated, or from the prejudiced man who deceives
himself. Those, however, who wish to study the subject must persevere in
their studies until they are convinced that all our observations are
true, and until they understand that our account of this universe
unquestionably agrees with the existing order of things. If a man is
willing to accept this theory from one who understands how to prove
things which can be proved, let him accept it, and let him establish on
it his arguments and proofs. If, on the other hand, he refuses to accept
without proof even the foregoing principles, let him inquire for
himself, and ultimately he will find that they are correct. "Lo this, we
have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it for thy good" (Job
v. 27).

After these preliminary remarks, we will treat of the subject which we
promised to introduce and to explain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXIII](gfp083)
