[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp084)  [Next](gfp086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXXV

IN this chapter I shall explain to you how the Mutakallemim prove the
Unity of God. They contend that the Maker and Creator of the Universe,
the existence of whom is testified by all nature, is One. Two
propositions are employed by them in demonstrating the Unity of God,
viz., two deities or

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

more would neutralize each other, and if several deities existed they
would be distinguished from each other by a specific difference.

*First Argument*.

The first argument is that of mutual neutralization, and is employed by
the majority of the Mutakallemim. It is to the following effect:--If the
Universe had two Gods, it would necessarily occur that the atom--subject
to a combination with one or two opposite qualities--either remained
without either of them, and that is impossible, or, though being only
one atom, included both qualities at the same time, and that is likewise
impossible. E.g., whilst one of the two deities determined that one atom
or more should be warm, the other deity might determine that the same
should be cold: the consequence of the mutual neutralization of the two
divine beings would thus be that the atoms would be neither warm nor
cold--a contingency which is impossible, because all bodies must combine
with one of two opposites; or they would be at the same time both warm
and cold. Similarly, it might occur that whilst one of the deities
desired that a body be in motion, the other might desire that it be at
rest; the body would then be either without motion and rest, or would
both move and rest at the same time. Proofs of this kind are founded on
the atomic theory contained in the first proposition of the
Mutakallemim, on the proposition which refers to the creation of the
accidents, and on the proposition that negatives are properties of
actual existence and require for their production an *agens*. For if it
were assumed that the substance of this world which, according to the
philosophers is subject to successive production and destruction, is
different from the substance of the world above, viz., from the
substance of the spheres--a fact established by proof-and that as the
Dualists assert, there are two divine beings, one of whom rules this
world without influencing the spheres, whilst the other governs the
world above without interfering with this world--such theory would not
involve the mutual neutralization of the two deities. If it were then
objected, that the existence of two deities would necessitate an
imperfection in both of them, in so far as one deity would be unable to
influence the province of the other, the objection would be met by the
reply that this inability need not be considered a defect in either of
them: for that which is not included within the sphere of action of a
being can of course not be performed by that being, and an *agens* is
not deficient in power, if it is unable to perform what is intrinsically
impossible. Thus we, Monotheists, do not consider it a defect in God,
that He does not combine two opposites in one object, nor do we test His
omnipotence by the accomplishment of any similar impossibility. When the
Mutakallemim noticed the weakness of their argument, for which they had
some apparent support, they had recourse to another argument.

*Second Argument*.

If there were two Gods, there would necessarily be some element common
to both, whilst some element present in the one would be absent in the
other, and constitute the specific difference between them. This is a
philosophic and sound argument for those who are able to examine it, and
to obtain a clear insight into its premises, which will be further
explained, in our exposition

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

of the view of the philosophers on this point. But it cannot be accepted
by those who admit the existence of divine attributes. For according to
their opinion, the Primal Cause includes many different elements. They
represent its wisdom and its omnipotence as two different things, and
again the omnipotence as different from the will. Consequently it would
not be impossible that either of the two divine beings possessed several
properties, some of which would be common to both, and some peculiar to
only one of them.

*Third Argument*.

This argument is likewise based on one of the Propositions of the Kalâm.
For some of the Mutakallemim belonging to the old school assume, that
when the Creator *wills* a thing, the will is not an element superadded
to the essence of God: it is a will without a substratum. In accordance
with the propositions which we have mentioned, and of which, as you will
see, it is difficult to form a true conception, they say that *one*
will, which is independent of any substratum, cannot be ascribed to
*two* beings: for, as they assert, *one* cause cannot be the source of
two laws for two essences. This is, as I told you, the method of
explaining one difficulty by means of another and still greater
difficulty. For as they define the Will, it is inconceivable, and some
have, therefore, considered it to be a mere non-entity: others who admit
its existence, meet with many insuperable difficulties. The
Mutakallemim, nevertheless, establish on its existence one of the proofs
for the unity of God.

*Fourth Argument*.

The existence of an action is necessarily positive evidence of the
existence of an *agens*, but does not prove the existence of more than
one *agens*. There is no difference whether the existence of one God be
assumed or the existence of two, or three, or twenty, or any number.
This is plain and clear. But the argument does not seem to prove the
non-existence of a multitude of deities; it only shows that their number
is unknown; the deity may be one sole being, but may also include
several divine beings. The following supplemental argument has therefore
been advanced: possibility is inapplicable to the existence of God,
which is absolute: the possibility of the existence of more than one God
must therefore be denied. This is the whole essence of the proof, and
its fallacy is self-evident; for although the notion of possibility
cannot be applied to the existence of God, it can be applied to our
knowledge of God: for an alternative in our knowledge of a thing does
not involve an alternative in the actual existence of the thing, and
perhaps there is neither a tripartite deity as the Christians believe,
nor an undivided Unity as we believe. This is clear to those who have
been taught to notice the conclusions implied in given premises.

*Fifth Argument*.

One of the modern Mutakallemim thought that he found a proof of the
Unity of God in the idea of requisiteness. Suppose there were two divine
beings; if one of them were able to create the universe, the second God
would be superfluous, and there would be no need for his existence. If,
on the other hand, the entire universe could not be created or governed
except

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

by both of them, each of them. would be imperfect in to far as he would
require the co-operation of another being, and would thus be limited in
power. This argument is, in fact, only a variation of "the mutual
neutralization of two deities." There is this difficulty in such proofs,
that a certain degree of imperfection is ascribed to a Being which does
not accomplish tasks beyond its sphere. We do not call a person weak
because he cannot move a thousand hundredweights, and we do not say that
God is imperfect because He cannot transform Himself into a body, or
cannot create another being like Himself, or make a square whose
diagonal should be equal to one of its sides. In the same manner we
should not consider it an imperfection in God, if He were not the only
Creator, and if it were absolutely necessary that there should be two
Creators; not because the one God required the assistance of the other,
but because the existence of both of them was equally necessary, and
because it was impossible that it should be otherwise. Further we do not
say that the Almighty is imperfect, because He does not, according to
the opinion of the Mutakallemim, produce a body otherwise than by the
creation of atoms, and by their combination with accidents created in
them. That inability is not called want or imperfection, since another
process is impossible. In like manner the Dualist might say, that it is
impossible for one Being to act alone, and that this circumstance
constitutes no imperfection in either of the Deities, because the
absolute existence of one Deity necessitates the coexistence of the
other. Some of the Mutakallemim, weary of these arguments, declared that
the Unity of God is a doctrine which must be received as a matter of
faith, but most of them rejected this theory, and reviled its authors.
I, however, hold, that those who accept this theory are right-minded,
and shrink from admitting an erroneous opinion; when they do not
perceive any cogency in the arguments, and find that the proofs advanced
in favour of the doctrine are inconclusive, they prefer to assume that
it could only be received as a matter of faith. For the Mutakallemim do
not hold that the Universe has any defined properties on which a true
proof could be founded, or that man's intellect is endowed with any such
faculty as would enable him to form correct conclusions. It is, however,
not without a motive that they defend this theory: they wish to assume
such a form of the Universe, as could be employed to support a doctrine
for which otherwise no proof could be found, and would lead us to
neglect the investigation of that which in fact can be proved. We can
only appeal to the Almighty and to those intelligent persons who confess
their error when they discover it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVI](gfp086)
