[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp080)  [Next](gfp082.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXXI

KNOW that many branches of science relating to the correct solution of
these problems, were once cultivated by our forefathers, but were in the
course of

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

time neglected, especially in consequence of the tyranny which barbarous
nations exercised over us. Besides, speculative studies were not open to
all men, as we have already stated (Introd. [p. 2](gfp008.htm#page_2.md),
and I. chap. xxxi.), only the subjects taught in the Scriptures were
accessible to all. Even the traditional Law, as you are well aware, was
not originally committed to writing, in conformity with the rule to
which our nation generally adhered, "Things which I have communicated to
you orally, you must not communicate to others in writing." With
reference to the Law, this rule was very opportune; for while it
remained in force it averted the evils which happened subsequently,
viz., great diversity of opinion, doubts as to the meaning of written
words, slips of the pen, dissensions among the people, formation of new
sects, and confused notions about practical subjects. The traditional
teaching was in fact, according to the words of the Law, entrusted to
the Great Tribunal, as we have already stated in our works on the
Talmud. (Introd. to *Mishneh Torah* and Introd. to Commen. on the
Mishnah).

Care having been taken, for the sake of obviating injurious influences,
that the Oral Law should not be recorded in a form accessible to all, it
was but natural that no portion of "the secrets of the Law" (i.e.,
metaphysical problems) would be permitted to be written down or divulged
for the use of all men. These secrets, as has been explained, were
orally communicated by a few able men to others who were equally
distinguished. Hence the principle applied by our teachers, "The secrets
of the Law can only be entrusted to him who is a councillor, a cunning
artificer, etc." The natural effect of this practice was that our nation
lost the knowledge of those important disciplines. Nothing but a few
remarks and allusions are to be found in the Talmud and the Midrashim,
like a few kernels enveloped in such a quantity of husk, that the reader
is generally occupied with the husk, and forgets that it encloses a
kernel.

In addition you will find that in the few works composed by the Geonim
and the Karaites on the unity of God and on such matter as is connected
with this doctrine, they followed the lead of the Mohammedan
Mutakallemim, and what they wrote is insignificant in comparison with
the kindred works of the Mohammedans. It also happened, that at the time
when the Mohammedans adopted this method of the Kalām, there arose among
them a certain sect, called Mu’tazilah, i.e., Separatists. In certain
things our scholars followed the theory and the method of these
Mu’tazilah. Although another sect, the Asha’ariyah, with their own
peculiar views, was subsequently established amongst the Mohammedans,
you will not find any of these views in the writings of our authors: not
because these authors preferred the opinions of the first-named sect to
those of the latter, but because they chanced first to become acquainted
with the theory of the Mu’tazilah, which they adopted and treated as
demonstrated truth. On the other hand our Andalusian scholars followed
the teachings of the philosophers, from whom they accepted those
opinions which were not opposed to our own religious principles. You
will find that they did not adopt any of the methods of the
Mutakallemim; in many respects they approached the view expressed in the
present treatise, as may be noticed in the few works which were recently
written by authors of that school. You should also know that whatever
the Mohammedans, that is, the Mu’tazilah and the Asha’ariyah, said on
those subjects,

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

consists in nothing but theories founded on propositions which are taken
from the works of those Greek and Syrian scholars who attempted to
oppose the system of the philosophers, and to refute their arguments.
The following was the cause of that opposition: At the time when the
Christian Church brought the Greeks and Syrians into its fold, and
promulgated its well-known dogmas, the opinions of the philosophers were
current amongst those nations: and whilst philosophy flourished, kings
became defenders of the Christian faith. The learned Greek and Syrian
Christians of the age, seeing that their dogmas were unquestionably
exposed to severe attacks from the existing philosophical systems, laid
the foundation for this science of Dogmatics; they commenced by putting
forth, such propositions as would support their doctrines, and be useful
for the refutation of opinions opposed to the fundamental principles of
the Christian religion.

When the Mohammedans caused Arabic translations of the writings of the
Philosophers to be made, those criticisms were likewise translated. When
the opinions of John the Grammarian, of Ibn Adi, and of kindred authors
on those subjects were made accessible to them, they adopted them, and
imagined that they had arrived at the solution of important problems.
Moreover, they selected from the opinions of the ancient philosophers
whatever seemed serviceable to their purposes, although later critics
had proved that those theories were false; as, e.g., the theories of
atoms and of a vacuum. They believed that the discussions of those
authors were of a general character, and contained propositions useful
for the defence of positive religion. At a subsequent period the same
theories were more fully developed, and presented an aspect unknown to
those Theologians of the Greeks and other nations who were the immediate
successors of the Philosophers. At a later time, when the Mohammedans
adopted certain peculiar theological theories they were naturally
obliged to defend them; and when their new theories, again became the
subject of controversy among them, each party laid down such
propositions as suited their special doctrine.

Their arguments undoubtedly involved certain principles which concerned
the three communities--Jews, Christians, and Mohammedans, such as the
*creatio ex nihilo*, which afforded support to the belief in miracles
and to various other doctrines. There are, however, other subjects of
belief which the Christians and Mohammedans have undertaken to defend,
such as the doctrine of the Trinity in the theological works of the
former, and "the Word" in the works of some Mohammedan sects; in order
to prove the dogmas which they thus desired to establish, they were
compelled to resort to certain hypotheses. It is not our object to
criticize things which are peculiar to either creed, or books which were
written exclusively in the interest of the one community or the other.
We merely maintain that the earlier Theologians, both of the Greek
Christians and of the Mohammedans, when they laid down their
propositions, did not investigate the real properties of things: first
of all they considered what must be the properties of the things which
should yield proof for or against a certain creed; and when this was
found they asserted that the thing must be endowed with those
properties; then they employed the same assertion as a proof for the
identical arguments which had led to the assertion, and by which they
either supported or refuted a certain opinion. This course was followed
by able

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

men who originated this method, and adopted it in their writings. They
professed to be free from preconceived opinions, and to have been led to
a stated result by actual research. Therefore when philosophers of a
subsequent date studied the same writings they did not perceive the true
character of the arguments; on the contrary, they found in the ancient
works strong proofs and a valuable support for the acceptance or the
rejection of certain opinions, and thus thought that, so far as
religious principles were concerned, there was no necessity whatever to
prove or refute any of their propositions, and that the first
Mutakallemim had discussed those subjects with the sole object of
defeating certain views of the philosophers, and demonstrating the
insufficiency of their proofs. Persons who hold this opinion, do not
suspect how much they are mistaken; for the first Mutakallemim tried to
prove a proposition when it was expedient to demonstrate its truth; and
to disprove it, when its rejection was desirable, and when it was
contrary to the opinion which they wished to uphold, although the
contradiction might only become obvious after the application of a
hundred successive propositions. In this manner the earlier Mutakallemim
effected a radical cure of the malady! I tell you, however, as a general
rule, that Themistius was right in saying that the properties of things
cannot adapt themselves to our opinions, but our opinions must be
adapted to the existing properties.

Having studied the works of these Mutakallemim, as far as I had an
opportunity, just as I had studied the writings of the philosophers
according to the best of my ability, I found that the method of all
Mutakallemim was the same in its general characteristics, namely, they
assume that the really existing form of things proves nothing at all,
because it is merely one of the various phases of the things, the
opposite of which is equally admissible to our minds. In many instances
these Theologians were guided by their imagination, and thought that
they were following the dictates of the intellect. They set forth the
propositions which I shall describe to you, and demonstrated by their
peculiar mode of arguing that the Universe had a beginning. The theory
of the *creatio ex nihilo* being thus established, they asserted, as a
logical consequence, that undoubtedly there must be a Maker who created
the Universe. Next they showed that this Maker is One, and from the
Unity of the Creator they deduced His Incorporeality. This method was
adopted by every Mohammedan Mutakallem in the discussion of this
subject, and by those of our co-religionists who imitated them and
walked in their footsteps Although the Mutakallemim disagree in the
methods of their proofs, and employ different propositions in
demonstrating the act of creation or in rejecting the eternity of the
Universe, they invariably begin with proving the *creatio ex nihilo*,
and establish on that proof the existence of God. I have examined this
method, and find it most objectionable. It must be rejected, because all
the proofs for the creation have weak points, and cannot be considered
as convincing except by those who do not know the difference between a
proof, a dialectical argument, and a sophism. Those who understand the
force of the different methods will clearly see that all the proofs for
the creation are questionable, because propositions have been employed
which have never been proved. I think that the utmost that can be
effected by believers in the truth of Revelation is to expose the
shortcomings in the proofs of philosophers who hold that the Universe is

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

eternal, and if forsooth a man has effected this, he has accomplished a
great deed! For it is well known to all clear and correct thinkers who
do not wish to deceive themselves, that this question, namely, whether
the Universe has been created or is eternal, cannot be answered with
mathematical certainty; here human intellect must pause. We shall have
occasion to speak more fully on this subject, but for the present it may
suffice to state that the philosophers have for the last three thousand
years been continually divided on that subject, as far as we can learn
from their works and the record of their opinions.

Such being the nature of this theory, how can we employ it as an axiom
and establish on it the existence of the Creator? In that case the
existence of God would be uncertain: if the universe had a beginning,
God does exist: if it be eternal, God does not exist; the existence of
God would therefore remain either an open question, or we should have to
declare that the creation had been proved, and compel others by mere
force to accept this doctrine, in order thus to be enabled to declare
that we have proved the existence of God. Such a process is utterly
inadmissible. The true method, which is based on a logical and
indubitable proof, consists, according to my opinion, in demonstrating
the existence of God, His unity, and His incorporeality by such
philosophical arguments as are founded on the theory of the eternity of
the Universe. I do not propose this method as though I believed in the
eternity of the Universe, for I do not follow the philosophers on this
point, but because by the aid of this method these three principles,
viz., the existence of God, His unity and His incorporeality can be
fully proved and verified, irrespectively of the question whether the
universe has had a beginning or not. After firmly establishing these
three principles by an exact proof, we shall treat of the problem of
creation and discuss it as fully as possible. You are at liberty to
content yourself with the declaration of the Mutakallemim, and to
believe that the act of creation has been demonstrated by proof: nor can
there be any harm if you consider it unproven that the universe had a
beginning, and accept this theory as supported by the authority of the
Prophets. Before you learn our opinion on prophecy, which will be given
in the present work, do not ask, how could the belief in prophecy be
justified, if it were assumed that the universe was eternal, We will not
now expatiate on that subject. You should, however, know that some of
the propositions, started and proved by the Radicals, i.e., the
Mutakallemim, in order to prove the act of creation, imply an order of
things contrary to that which really exists, and involve a complete
change in the laws of nature: this fact will be pointed out to you, for
it will be necessary to mention their propositions and their
argumentation. My method, as far as I now can explain it in general
terms, is as follows. The universe is either eternal or has had a
beginning; if it had a beginning, there must necessarily exist a being
which caused the beginning; this is clear to common sense; for a thing
that has had a beginning, cannot be the cause of its own beginning,
another must have caused it. The universe was, therefore, created by
God. If on the other hand the universe were eternal, it could in various
ways be proved that apart from the things which constitute the universe,
there exists a being which is neither body nor a force in a body, and
which is one, eternal, not preceded by any cause, and immutable. That
being is God. You see that the proofs for the Existence, the Unity and
the Incorporeality of God

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

must vary according to the propositions admitted by us. Only in this way
can we succeed in obtaining a perfect proof, whether we assume the
eternity or the creation of the universe. For this reason you will find
in my works on the Talmud, whenever I have to speak of the fundamental
principles of our religion, or to prove the existence of God, that I
employ arguments which imply the eternity of the universe. I do not
believe in that eternity, but I wish to establish the principle of the
existence of God by an indisputable proof, and should not like to see
this most important principle founded on a basis which every one could
shake or attempt to demolish, and which others might consider as not
being established at all; especially when I see that the proofs of the
philosophers are based on those visible properties of things, which can
only be ignored by persons possessing certain preconceived notions,
while the Mutakallemim establish their arguments on propositions which
are to such an extent contrary to the actual state of things as to
compel these arguers to deny altogether the existence of the laws of
nature. When I shall have to treat of the creation, I shall in a special
chapter prove my opinion to some extent, and shall attain the same end
which every one of the Mutakallemim had in view, yet I shall not
contradict the laws of nature, or reject any such part of the
Aristotelean theory as has been proved to be correct. Even the most
cogent of the Proofs offered by the Mutakallemim respecting the act of
creation, has only been obtained by reversing the whole order of things
and by rejecting everything fully demonstrated by the philosophers. I,
however, shall be able to give a similar proof without ignoring the laws
of nature and without being forced to contradict facts which have been
clearly perceived. I find it necessary to mention to you the general
propositions of the Mutakallemim, by which they prove the act of
creation, the Existence of God, His Unity and His Incorporeality. I
intend to explain their method, and also to point out the inferences
which are to be drawn from each proposition. After this, I shall
describe those theories of the philosophers which are closely connected
with our subject, and I shall then explain their method.

Do not ask me to prove in this work the propositions of the
philosophers, which I shall briefly mention to you: they form the
principal part of Physics and Metaphysics. Nor must you expect that I
should repeat the arguments of the Mutakallemim in support of their
propositions, with which they wasted their time, with which the time of
future generations will likewise be wasted, and on which numerous books
have been written. Their propositions, with few exceptions, are
contradicted by the visible properties of things, and beset with
numerous objections. For this reason they were obliged to write man
books and controversial works in defence of their theories, for the
refutation of objections, and for the reconciliation of all apparent
contradictions, although in reality this object cannot be attained by
any sophistical contrivance. As to the propositions of the philosophers
which I shall briefly explain, and which are indispensable for the
demonstration of the three principles--the Existence, the Unity, and the
Incorporeality of God, they will for the greater part be admitted by you
as soon as you shall hear them and understand their meaning; whilst in
the discussion of other parts reference must be made for their proofs to
works on Physics and Metaphysics, and if you direct your attention to
such passages

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

as will be pointed out to you, you will find everything verified that
requires verification.

I have already told you that nothing exists except God and this
universe, and that there is no other evidence for His Existence but this
universe in its entirety and in its several parts. Consequently the
universe must be examined as it is: the propositions must be derived
from those properties of the universe which are clearly perceived, and
hence you must know its visible form and its nature. Then only will you
find in the universe evidence for the existence of a being not included
therein. I have considered it, therefore, necessary to discuss first in
a merely colloquial manner, in the next chapter, the totality of
existing things, and to confine our remarks to such as have been fully
proved and established beyond all doubt. In subsequent chapters I shall
treat of the propositions of the Mutakallemim, and describe the method
by which they explain the four fundamental principles. In the chapters
which will follow, I propose to expound the propositions of the
philosophers and the methods applied by them in verifying those
principles. In the last place, I shall explain to you the method applied
by me in proving those four principles, as I have stated to you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXII](gfp082.md)
