[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp079)  [Next](gfp081.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXX

THE term *rakab*, "to ride," is a synonym. In its primary signification
it is applied to man's riding on an animal, in the usual way; e.g., "Now
he was riding (*rokeb*) upon his ass" (Num. xxii. 22). It has then been
figuratively used to denote "dominion over a thing"; because the rider
governs and rules the animal he rides upon; e.g., "He made him ride
(*yarkibehu*) on the high places of the earth" (Deut. xxxii. 13); "and I
will cause thee to ride (*ve-hirkabtika*) upon the high places of the
earth" (Isa. lviii. 14), that is, you shall have dominion over the
highest (people) on earth; "I will make Ephraim to ride (*arkib*)" (Hos.
x. 11), i.e., I shall give him rule and dominion. In this same sense it
is said of God, "who rideth (*rokeb*) upon the heaven in thy help"
(Deut. xxxiii. 26), that is, who rules the heaven; and "Him that rideth
(*la-rokeb*) upon the ‘arabot" (Ps. lxviii. 4), i.e., who rules the
*‘arabot*, the uppermost, all-encompassing sphere. It has also been
repeatedly stated by our Sages that there are seven *reki‘im*
(firmaments, heavens), and that the uppermost of them, the
all-surrounding, is called *‘arabot*. Do not object to the number seven
given by them, although there are more *reki‘im*, for there are spheres
which contain several circles (*gilgallim*), and are counted as one;
this is clear to those who have studied that subject, and I shall also
explain it; here I wish merely to point out that our Sages always
assumed that *‘arabot* is the uppermost sphere. The *‘arabot* is also
referred to in the words, "who rideth upon the heaven in thy help." Thus
we read in Talm. B. *Ḥagigah*, p. 12," The high and exalted dwelleth on
*‘arabot*, as it is said, 'Extol Him that rideth upon *‘arabot*'" (Ps.
lxviii. 4). How is it proved that "heaven" and "*‘arabot*" are
identical? The one passage has "who rideth on *‘arabot*," the other "who
rideth upon the heaven." Hence it is clear that in all these passages
reference is made to the same all-surrounding sphere, concerning which
you will hereafter (II. xxiv.) receive more information. Consider well
that the expression "dwelling over it," is used by them, and not
"dwelling in it." The latter

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

expression would have implied that God occupies a place or is a power in
the sphere, as was in fact believed by the Sabeans, who held that God
was the soul of the sphere. By saying "dwelling over it," they indicated
that God was separate from the sphere, and was not a power in it. Know
also that the term "riding upon the heavens," has figuratively been
applied to God in order to show the following excellent comparison. The
rider is better than the animal upon which he rides--the comparative is
only used for the sake of convenience, for the rider is not of the same
class as the animal upon which he rides--furthermore, the rider moves
the animal and leads it as he likes; it is as it were his instrument,
which he uses according to his will; he is separate from it, apart from
it, not connected with it. In like manner the uppermost sphere, by the
rotation of which everything moveable is set in motion, is moved by God,
who is separate from the sphere, and is not a power in it. In *Bereshit
Rabba* we read that in commenting on the Divine words, "The eternal God
is a refuge" (lit., a dwelling, Deut. xxxiii. 27), our Sages said, "He
is the dwelling of His world, the world is not His dwelling." This
explanation is then followed by the remark, "The horse is secondary to
the rider, the rider is not subservient to the horse; this is meant by
'Thou wilt ride upon thy horses'" (Hab. iii. 8). Consider and learn how
they described the relation of God to the sphere, asserting that the
latter is His instrument, by means of which He rules the universe. For
whenever you find our Sages saying that in a certain heaven are certain
things, they do not mean to say that in the heavens there are any
extraneous things, but that from a certain heaven the force emanates
which is required for the production of certain things, and for their
continuing in proper order. The proof for my statement you may find in
the following sayings of our Sages--"The *‘arabot*, in which there are
justice, charity, right, treasures of life and peace, treasures of
blessing, of the souls of the righteous, of the souls and the spirits of
those to be born, and of the dew by which God will at some future time
revive the dead, etc." It is clear that the things enumerated here are
not material, and do not occupy a place--for "dew" is not to be taken in
its literal sense.--Consider also that here the phrase "in which,"
meaning "in the *‘arabot*," is used, and not "over which," as if to say
that all the things existing in the universe derive their existence from
powers emanating from the *‘arabot*, which God made to be the origin and
the place of these powers. They are said to include "the treasures of
life"; a perfectly true and correct assertion! For all existing life
originates in that treasure of life, as will be mentioned below (chap.
lxii., and II. chap. x.). Reflect on the fact that the souls of the
righteous as well as the souls and the spirits of those to be born are
mentioned here! How sublime is this idea to him who understands it! for
the soul that remains after the death of man, is not the soul that lives
in a man when he is born; the latter is a mere faculty, while that which
has a separate existence after death, is a reality; again, the soul and
the spirit of man during his life are two different things: therefore
the souls and the spirits are both named as existing in man; but
separate from the body only one of them exists. We have already
explained the homonymity of *ruaḥ* (spirit) in this work, and also at
the end of *Sefer ha madda‘* (*Mishneh torah Hil. teshubah*, viii. 3-4)
we treated of the homonymity of these expressions. Consider how these
excellent and true ideas, comprehended only by the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

greatest philosophers, are found scattered in the Midrashim. When a
student who disavows truth reads them, he will at first sight deride
them, as being contrary to the real state of things. The cause of this
is the circumstance, that our Sages spoke of these subjects in
metaphors: they are too difficult for the common understanding of the
people, as has been noticed by us several times.

I will now return to the subject which I commenced to explain, in order
to bring it to a conclusion. Our Sages commenced to adduce proofs from
Scripture for their assertion that the things enumerated above are
contained in the *‘arabot*. As to justice and right they quote "Justice
and judgment are the habitation of thy throne" (Ps. lxxxix. 18). In the
same way they prove their assertion concerning all things enumerated by
them, by showing that they are described as being related to God, as
being near Him. Note this. In the Pirḳe Rabbi Eliezer it is said: God
created seven *reki‘im* (heavens), and out of all of them He selected
the *‘araboth* for His royal throne: comp. "Exalt him who rideth upon
the *‘arabot*" (Ps. lxviii. 4). These are his (Rabbi Eliezer's) words.
Note them likewise.

You must know that in Hebrew the collective noun denoting animals used
for riding is "mercabah." Instances of this noun are not rare. "And
Joseph made ready his chariot" (*merkabto*) (Gen. xlvi. 29); "in the
second chariot" (*be-mirkebet*) (*ib*. xli. 43); "Pharaoh's chariots"
(*markebot*) (Exod. xv. 4). The following passage especially proves that
the Hebrew *merkabah* denotes a collection of animals: "And a *merkabah*
came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and a
horse for an hundred and fifty" (1 Kings X. 21). Hence we may learn that
*mercabah* denotes here four horses. Therefore I think that when it was
stated, according to the literal sense of the words, that four *Ḥayyot*
(beasts) carry the Throne of Glory, our Sages called this "*mercabah*"
on account of its similarity with the mercabah consisting of four single
animals. So far has the theme of this chapter carried us, and we shall
be compelled to make many further remarks on this subject. Here,
however, it is our object, and the aim of all we have said, to show that
"who rideth upon heaven" (Deut. xxxiii. 26) means "who sets the
all-surrounding sphere in motion, and turns it by His power and will."
The same sense is contained in the conclusion of that verse: "and in his
excellency the spheres," i.e., who in His excellency moves the spheres
(*sheḥakim*). In reference to the first sphere, the *‘arabot*, the verb
"to ride" is used, in reference to the rest, the noun "excellency,"
because through the motion of the uppermost sphere in its daily circuit,
all the spheres move, participating as parts in the motion of the whole;
and this being that great power that sets everything in motion, it is
called "excellency." Let this subject constantly remain in your memory
when you study what I am going to say; for it--i.e., the motion of the
uppermost sphere is the greatest proof for the existence of God, as I
shall demonstrate. Note this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXI](gfp081.md)
