[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp096)  [Next](gfp098.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X

IT is a well-known fact that the philosophers, when they discuss in
their works the order of the Universe, assume that the existing order of
things in this sublunary world of transient beings depends on forces
which emanate from the spheres. We have mentioned this several times. In
like manner our Sages say, "There is no single herb below without its
corresponding star above, that beats upon it and commands it to grow."
Comp. "Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven? Canst thou set the
dominion thereof in the earth?" (Job xxxviii. 33). The term *mazzal*,
literally meaning a constellation in the Zodiac, is also used of every
star, as may be inferred from the following passage in the beginning of
*Bereshit Rabba* (chap. x.): "While one star (*mazzal*) completes its
circuit in thirty days, another completes it in thirty years." They have
thus clearly expressed it, that even each individual being in this world
has its corresponding star. Although the influences of the spheres
extend over all beings, there is besides the influence of a particular
star directed to each particular species; a fact noticed also in
reference to the several forces in one organic body; for the whole
Universe is like one organic body, as we have stated above. Thus the
philosophers speak of the peculiar influence of the moon on the
particular element water. That this is the case is proved by the
increase and decrease of the water in the seas and rivers according to
the

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

increase and decrease of the moon; also by the rising and the falling of
the seas according to the advance or return of the moon, i.e., her
ascending and her descending in the several quarters of her course. This
is clear to every one who has directed his attention to these phenomena.
The influence of the sun's rays upon fire may easily be noticed in the
increase of heat or cold on earth, according as the sun approaches the
earth or recedes or is concealed from it. All this is so clear that I
need not explain it further. Now it occurred to my mind that the four
spheres which contain stars exercise influence upon all beings on earth
that come into existence, and, in fact, are the cause of their
existence: but each of the four spheres is the exclusive source of the
properties of one only of the four elements, and becomes by its own
motion the cause of the motion and changes of that element. Thus water
is set in motion by the moon-sphere, fire by the sun-sphere, air by the
other planets, which move in many and different courses with
retrogressions, progressions, and stations, and therefore produce the
various forms of the air with its frequent changes, contractions, and
expansions: the sphere of the other stars, namely, the fixed stars, sets
earth in motion; and it may be that on this account, viz., on account of
the slow motion of the fixed stars, earth is but slowly set in motion to
change and to combine with other elements. The particular influence
which the fixed stars exercise upon earth is implied in the saying of
our Sages, that the number of the species of plants is the same as that
of the individuals included in the general term "stars."

The arrangement of the Universe may therefore be assumed to be as
follows: there are four spheres, four elements set in motion by them,
and also four principal properties which earthly beings derive from
them, as has been stated above. Furthermore, there are four causes of
the motion of every sphere, namely, the following four essential
elements in the sphere; its spherical shape, its soul, its intellect, by
which the sphere is capable of forming ideas, and the Intelligence,
which the sphere desires to imitate. Note this well. The explanation of
what I said is this: the sphere could not have been continuously in
motion, had it not this peculiar form; continuity of motion is only
possible when the motion is circular. Rectilinear motion, even if
frequently repeated in the same moment, cannot be continuous: for when a
body moves successively in two opposite directions, it must pass through
a moment of rest, as has been demonstrated in its proper place. The
necessity of a continuous motion constantly repeated in the same path
implies the necessity of a circular form. The spheres must have a soul;
for only animate beings can move freely. There must be some cause for
the motion, and as it does not consist in the fear of that which is
injurious, or the desire of that which is profitable, it must be found
in the notion which the spheres form of a certain being, and in the
desire to approach that being. This formation of a notion demands, in
the first place, that the spheres possess intellect; it demands further
that something exists which corresponds to that notion, and which the
spheres desire to approach. These are the four causes of the motion of
the spheres. The following are the four principal forces directly
derived from the spheres: the nature of minerals, the properties
peculiar to plants, the animal faculties, and the intellect. An
examination of these forces shows that they have two functions, namely,
to produce things and to perpetuate them; that is to say, to preserve
the species

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

perpetually, and the individuals in each species for a certain time.
These are also the functions ascribed to Nature, which is said to be
wise, to govern the Universe, to provide, as it were, by plan for the
production of living beings, and to provide also for their preservation
and perpetuation. Nature creates formative faculties, which are the
cause of the production of living beings, and nutritive faculties as the
source of their temporal existence and preservation. It may be that by
Nature the Divine Will is meant, which is the origin of these two kinds
of faculties through the medium of the spheres.

As to the number four, it is strange, and demands our attention. In
*Midrash Tanḥuma* the following passage occurs: "How many steps were in
Jacob's ladder?--Four." The question refers to the verse, "And behold a
ladder set upon the earth," etc. (Gen. xxviii. 12). In all the Midrashim
it is stated that there were four hosts of angels: this statement is
frequently repeated. Some read in the above passage: "How many steps
were in the ladder?--Seven." But all readings and all Midrashim
unanimously express that the angels whom Jacob saw ascending the ladder,
and descending, were only four; two of whom were going up and two coming
down. These four angels, the two that went up and the two that came
down, occupied one step of the ladder, standing in one line. Hence it
has been inferred that the breadth of the ladder in this vision was
four-thirds of the world. For the breadth of an angel in a prophetic
vision is equal to one-third of the world; comp. "And his body was like
*tarshish* (two-sixths)" (Dan. x. 6); the four angels therefore occupied
four-thirds of the world.--Zechariah, in describing the allegorical
vision of "the four chariots that came out from between two mountains,
which mountains were mountains of brass" (Zech. vi. 1), adds the
explanation, "These are the four spirits of the heavens which go forth
from standing before the Lord of all the earth" (*ibid*. ver. 5). By
these four spirits the causes are meant which produce all changes in the
Universe. The term "brass" (*neḥoshet*), employed here, and the phrase
"burnished brass" (*neḥoshet kalal*), used by Ezekiel (i. 7), are to
some extent homonymous, and will be discussed further on.

The saying of our Sages, that the angel is as broad as the third part of
the Universe, or, in the words of Bereshit Rabba (chap. x.), that the
angel is the third part of the world, is quite clear; we have already
explained it in our large work on the Holy Law. The whole creation
consists of three parts, (1) the pure intelligences, or angels; (2) the
bodies of the spheres; and (3) the *materia prima*, or the bodies which
are below the spheres, and are subject to constant change.

In this manner may those understand the dark sayings of the prophets who
desire to understand them, who awake from the sleep of forgetfulness,
deliver themselves from the sea of ignorance, and raise themselves
upward nearer the higher beings. But those who prefer to swim in the
waters of their ignorance, and to "go down very low," need not exert the
body or heart; they need only cease to move, and they will go down by
the law of nature. Note and consider well all we have said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](gfp098.md)
