[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp056)  [Next](gfp058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLVII

WE have already stated several times that the prophetic books never
attribute to God anything which ordinary men consider a defect, or which
they cannot in their imagination combine with the idea of the Almighty,
although such terms may not otherwise be different from those which were
employed as metaphors in relation to Goa. Indeed all things which are
attributed to God are considered in some way to be perfection, or can at
least be imagined \[as appertaining to Him\].

We must now show why, according to this principle, the senses of
hearing, sight and smell, are attributed to God, but not those of taste
and touch. He is equally elevated above the use of all the five senses:
they are all defective as regards perception, even for those who have no
other source of knowledge: because they are passive, receive impressions
from without, and are subject to interruptions and sufferings, as much
as the other organs of the body. By saving that God sees, we mean to
state that He perceives visible things; "He hears" is identical with
saying "He perceives audible things"; in the same way we might say, "He
tastes and He touches," in the sense of "He perceives objects which man
perceives by means of taste and touch." For, as regards perception, the
senses are identical: if we deny the existence of one sensation in God,
we must deny that of all other sensations, i.e., the perceptions of the
five senses: and if we attribute the existence of one sensation to Him,
i.e., the perception appertaining to one of the senses, we must
attribute all the five sensations. Nevertheless, we find in Holy Writ,
"And God saw" (Gen. vi. 5); "And God heard" (Num. xi. 1); "And God
smelt" (Gen. viii. 21); but we do not meet with the expressions, "And
God tasted," "And God touched." According to our opinion the reason of
this is to be found in the idea, which has a firm hold in the minds of
all men, that God does not come into contact with a body in the same
manner as one body comes into contact with another, since He is not even
seen by the eye. While these two senses, namely, taste and touch, only
act when in close contact with the object, by sight, hearing, and smell,
even distant

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

objects are perceived. These, therefore, were considered by the
multitude appropriate expressions \[to be figuratively applied to God\].
Besides, the object in figuratively applying the sensations to Him,
could only have been to express that He perceives our actions: but
hearing and sight are sufficient for that, namely, for the perception of
what a man does or says. Thus our Sages, among other admonitions, gave
the following advice and warning: "Know what is above thee, a seeing
eye, and a hearing ear." (Mishnah Abot, ii. 1.)

You, however, know that, strictly speaking, the condition of all the
sensations is the same, that the same argument which is employed against
the existence of touch and taste in God, may be used against sight,
hearing, and smell; for they all are material perceptions and
impressions which are subject to change. There is only this difference,
that the former, touch and taste, are at once recognized as
deficiencies, while the others are considered as perfections. In a
similar manner the defect of the imagination is easily seen, less easily
that of thinking and reasoning. Imagination (*ra‘ayon*) therefore, was
never employed as a figure in speaking of God, while thought and reason
are figuratively ascribed to Him. Comp. "The thoughts which the Lord
thought" (Jer. xlix. 20); "And with his understanding he stretched out
the heavens" (*ib*. x. 12). The inner senses were thus treated in the
same way as the external; some are figuratively applied to God, some
not. All this is according to the language of man; he ascribes to God
what he considers a perfection, and does not ascribe to Him what he
considers a defect. In truth, however, no real attribute, implying an
addition to His essence, can be applied to Him, as will be proved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVIII](gfp058)
