[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp078)  [Next](gfp080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXIX

THE philosophers, as you know, call God the First Cause (in Hebrew
*‘illah* and *sibbah*): but those who are known by the name of
Mutakallemim are very much opposed to the use of that name, and call Him
*Agens*, believing that there is a great difference whether we say that
God is the Cause or that He is the *Agens*. They argue thus: If we say
that God is the Cause, the coexistence of the Cause with that which was
produced by that Cause would necessarily be implied: this again would
involve the belief that the Universe was eternal, and that it was
inseparable from God. When, however, we say that God is the *Agens*, the
co-existence of the *Agens* with its product is not implied: for the
*agens* can exist anterior to its product: we cannot even imagine how an
*agens* can be in action unless it existed before its own production.
This is an argument advanced by persons who do not distinguish between
the potential and the actual. You, however, should know that in this
case there is no difference whether you employ the term "cause" or
"*agens*"; for if you take the term "cause" in the sense of a mere
potentiality, it precedes its effect; but if you mean the cause in
action, then the effect must necessarily co-exist with the cause in
action. The same is the case with the *agens*; take it as an *agens* in
reality, the work must necessarily co-exist with its *agens*. For the
builder, before he builds the house, is not in reality a builder, but
has the faculty for building a house-in the same way as the materials
for the house before it is being built are merely *in potentiâ*--but
when the house has been built, he is the builder in reality, and his
product must likewise be in actual existence. Nothing is therefore
gained by choosing the term "*agens*" and rejecting the term "cause." My
object here is to show that these two terms are equal, and in the same

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

manner as we call God an *Agens*, although the work does not yet exist,
only because there is no hindrance or obstacle which might prevent Him
from doing it whenever He pleases, we may also call Him the Cause,
although the effect may not yet be in existence.

The reason why the philosophers called God the Cause, and did not call
Him the *Agens*, is not to be sought in their belief that the universe
is eternal, but in other motives, which I will briefly describe to you.
It has been shown in the science of Physics that everything, except the
Primal Cause, owes its origin to the following four causes:--the
substance, the form, the *agens*, the final cause. These are sometimes
direct, sometimes indirect causes; but each by itself is called "a
cause." They also believe--and I do not differ from their opinion--that
God Himself is the *agens*, the form, and the end: therefore they call
God "the Cause," in order to express that He unites in Himself these
three causes, viz., that He is the *agens*, the form, and the final
cause of the universe. In the present chapter I only wish to show you in
what sense it may be said of God that He is the *agens*, the form, and
also the final cause of the universe. You need not trouble yourself now
with the question whether the universe has been created by God, or
whether, as the philosophers have assumed, it is eternal, co-existing
with Him. You will find \[in the pages of this treatise\] full and
instructive information on the subject. Here I wish to show that God is
the "cause" of every event that takes place in the world, just as He is
the Creator of the whole universe as it now exists. It has already been
explained in the science of Physics, that a cause must again be sought
for each of the four divisions of causes. When we have found for any
existing thing those four causes which are in immediate connexion with
it, we find for these again causes, and for these again other causes,
and so on until we arrive at the first causes. E.g., a certain
production has its *agens*, this *agens* again has its *agens*, and so
on and on until at last we arrive at a first *agens*, which is the true
*agens* throughout all the intervening links. If the letter *aleph* be
moved by *bet*, *bet* by *gimel*, *gimel* by *dalet*, and *dalet* by
*hé*--and as the series does not extend to infinity, [let](errata.htm#9)
us stop at *hé*--there is no doubt that the *hé* moves the letters
*aleph*, *bet*, *gimel*, and *dalet*, and we say correctly that the
*aleph* is moved by *hé*. In that sense everything occurring in the
universe, although directly produced by certain nearer causes, is
ascribed to the Creator, as we shall explain. He is the *Agens*, and He
is therefore the ultimate cause. We shall also find, after careful
examination, that every physical and transient form must be preceded by
another such form, by which the substance has been fitted to receive the
next form: the previous form again has been preceded by another, and we
arrive at length at that form which is necessary for the existence of
all intermediate forms, which are the causes of the present form. That
form to which the forms of all existing things are traced is God. You
must not imagine that when we say that God is the first form of all
forms existing in the Universe, we refer to that first form which
Aristotle, in the Book of Metaphysics, describes as being without
beginning and without end, for he treats of a form which is a physical,
and not a purely intellectual one. When we call God the ultimate form of
the universe, we do not use this term in the sense of form connected
with substance, namely, as the form of that substance, as though God
were the form of a material being. It is not in this

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

sense that we use it, but in the following: Everything existing and
endowed with a form, is whatever it is through its form, and when that
form is destroyed its whole existence terminates and is obliterated. The
same is the case as regards the relation between God and all distant
causes of existing beings: it is through the existence of God that all
things exist, and it is He who maintains their existence by that process
which is called emanation (in Hebrew *shepha’*), as will be explained in
one of the chapters of the present work. If God did not exist, suppose
this were possible, the universe would not exist, and there would be an
end to the existence of the distant causes, the final effects, and the
intermediate causes. Consequently God maintains the same relation to the
world as the form has to a thing endowed with a form: through the form
it is what it is, and on it the reality and essence of the thing
depends. In this sense we may say that God is the ultimate form, that He
is the form of all forms: that is to say, the existence and continuance
of all forms in the last instance depend on Him, the forms are
maintained by Him, in the same way as all things endowed with forms
retain their existence through their forms. On that account God is
called, in the sacred language, *ḥe ha-‘olamim*, "the life of the
Universe," as will be explained (chap. lxxii.). The same argument holds
good in reference to all final causes. If you assign to a thing a
certain purpose, you can find for that purpose another purpose. We
mention, e.g., a (wooden) chair; its substance is wood, the joiner is
its *agens*, the square its form, and its purpose is that one should sit
upon it. You may then ask, For what purpose does one sit upon it? The
answer will be that he who is sitting upon it desires to be high above
the ground. If again you ask, For what purpose does he desire to be high
above the ground, you will receive the answer that he wishes to appear
high in the eyes of those who see him. For what purpose does he wish to
appear higher in the eyes of those who see him? That the people may
respect and fear him. What is the good of his being feared? His commands
will be respected. For what purpose are his commands to be respected?
That people shall refrain from injuring each other. What is the object
of this precaution? To maintain order amongst the people. In this way
one purpose necessitates the pre-existence of another, except the final
purpose, which is the execution of the will of God, according to one of
the opinions which have been propounded, as will be explained (III.
xiii. and xvii.), and the final answer will be, "It is the will of God."
According to the view of others, which will likewise be explained, the
final purpose is the execution of the decree of His wisdom, and the
final answer will be, "It has been decreed by His wisdom." According to
either opinion, the series of the successive purposes terminates, as has
been shown, in God's will or wisdom, which, in our opinion, are
identical with His essence, and are not any thing separate from Himself
or different from His essence. Consequently, God is the final purpose of
everything. Again, it is the aim of everything to become, according to
its faculties, similar to God in perfection: this is meant by the
expression, "His will, which is identical with His essence," as will be
shown below (*ibid*.). In this sense God is called the End of all ends.

I have thus explained to you in what sense God is said to be the
*Agens*, the Form, and the End. This is the reason why the philosophers
not only call

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Him "the Maker"
but also the "Cause." Some of the scholars belonging to the Mutakallemim
(Mohammedan theologians), went so far in their folly and in their
vainglory as to say that the non-existence of the Creator, if that were
possible, would not necessarily imply the non-existence of the things
created by Him, i.e., the Universe: for a production need not
necessarily cease to exist when the producer, after having produced it,
has ceased to exist. They would be right, if God were only the maker of
the Universe, and if its permanent existence were not dependent on Him.
The storehouse does not cease to exist at the death of the builder; for
he does not give permanent existence to the building. God, however, is
Himself the form of the Universe, as we have already shown, and it is He
who causes its continuance and permanency. It is therefore wrong to say
that a thing can remain durable and permanent, after the being that
makes it durable and permanent has ceased to exist, since that thing can
possess no more durability and permanency than it has received from that
being. Now you understand the greatness of the error into which they
have fallen through their assumption that God is only the *Agens*, and
not the End or the Form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXX](gfp080)
