[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp169)  [Next](gfp171.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXIV

IT is also important to note that the Law does not take into account
exceptional circumstances; it is not based on conditions which rarely
occur. Whatever the Law teaches, whether it be of an intellectual, a
moral, or a practical character, is founded on that which is the rule
and not on that which is the exception: it ignores the injury that might
be caused to a single person through a certain maxim or a certain divine
precept. For the Law is a divine institution, and \[in order to
understand its operation\] we must consider how in Nature the various
forces produce benefits which are general, but in some solitary cases
they cause also injury. This is clear from what has been said by
ourselves as well as by others. We must consequently not be surprised
when we find that the object of the Law does not fully appear in every
individual; there must naturally be people who are not perfected by the
instruction of the Law, just as there are beings which do not receive
from the specific forms in Nature all that they require. For all this
comes from one God, is the result of one act; "they are all given from
one shepherd" (Eccles. xii. 11). It is impossible to be otherwise; and
we have already explained (chap. xv.) that that which is impossible
always remains

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

impossible and never changes. From this consideration it also follows
that the laws cannot like medicine vary according to the different
conditions of persons and times; whilst the cure of a person depends on
his particular constitution at the particular time, the divine guidance
contained in the Law must be certain and general, although it may be
effective in some cases and ineffective in others. If the Law depended
on the varying conditions of man, it would be imperfect in its totality,
each precept being left indefinite. For this reason it would not be
right to make the fundamental principles of the Law dependent on a
certain time or a certain place; on the contrary, the statutes and the
judgments must be definite, unconditional and general, in accordance
with the divine words: "As for the congregation, one ordinance shall be
for you and for the stranger" (Num. xv. 15); they are intended, as has
been stated before, for all persons and for all times.

After having Premised these introductory remarks I will now proceed to
the exposition of that which I intended to explain

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV](gfp171.md)
