[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp099)  [Next](gfp101.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIII

AMONG those who believe in the existence of God, there are found three
different theories as regards the question whether the Universe is
eternal or not.

*First Theory*.--Those who follow the Law of Moses, our Teacher, hold
that the whole Universe, i.e., everything except God, has been brought
by Him into existence out of non-existence. In the beginning God alone
existed, and nothing else; neither angels, nor spheres, nor the things
that are contained within the spheres existed. He then produced from
nothing all existing things such as they are, by His will and desire.
Even time itself is among the things created; for time depends on
motion, i.e., on an accident in things which move, and the things upon
whose motion time depends are themselves created beings, which have
passed from non-existence into existence. We say that God *existed*
before the creation of the Universe, although the verb *existed* appears
to imply the notion of time; we also believe that He existed an infinite
space of time before the Universe was created; but in these cases we do
not mean time in its true sense. We only use the term to signify
something analogous or similar to time. For time is undoubtedly an
accident, and, according to our opinion, one of the created accidents,
like blackness and whiteness; it is not a quality, but an accident
connected with motion. This must be clear to all who understand what
Aristotle has said on time and its real existence.

The following remark does not form an essential part of our present
research; it will nevertheless be found useful in the course of this
discussion. Many scholars do not know what time really is, and men like
Galen were so perplexed about it that they asked whether time has a real
existence or not; the reason for this uncertainty is to be found in the
circumstance that time is an accident of an accident. Accidents which
are directly connected with material bodies, e.g., colour and taste, are
easily understood, and correct notions are formed of them. There are,
however, accidents which are connected with other accidents, e.g., the
splendour of colour, or the inclination and the curvature of a line: of
these it is very difficult to form a correct notion, especially when the
accident which forms the substratum for the other accident is not
constant but variable. Both difficulties are present in the notion of
time: it is an accident of motion, which is itself an accident of a
moving object; besides, it is not a fixed property; on the contrary, its
true and essential condition is, not to remain in the same state for two
consecutive moments. This is the source of ignorance about the nature of
time.

We consider time a thing created: it comes into existence in the same
manner as other accidents, and the substances which form the substratum
for the accidents. For this reason, viz., because time belongs to the
things created, it cannot be said that God produced the Universe *in the
beginning*.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Consider this
well; for he who does not understand it is unable to refute forcible
objections raised against the theory of *Creatio ex nihilo*. If you
admit the existence of time before the Creation, you will be compelled
to accept the theory of the Eternity of the Universe. For time is an
accident and requires a substratum. You will therefore have to assume
that something \[beside God\] existed before this Universe was created,
an assumption which it is our duty to oppose.

This is the first theory, and it is undoubtedly a fundamental principle
of the Law of our teacher Moses; it is next in importance to the
principle of God's unity. Do not follow any other theory. Abraham, our
father, was the first that taught it, after he had established it by
philosophical research. He proclaimed, therefore, "the name of the Lord
the God of the Universe" (Gen. xxi. 33); and he had previously expressed
this theory in the words, "The Possessor of heaven and earth" (*ibid*.
xiv. 22).

*Second Theory*.--The theory of all Philosophers whose opinions and
works are known to us is this: It is impossible to assume that God
produced anything from nothing, or that He reduces anything to nothing;
that is to say, it is impossible that an object consisting of matter and
form should be produced when that matter is absolutely absent, or that
it should be destroyed in such a manner that that matter be absolutely
no longer in existence. To say of God that He can produce a thing from
nothing or reduce a thing to nothing is, according to the opinion of
these philosophers, the same as if we were to say that He could cause
one substance to have at the same time two opposite properties, or
produce another being like Himself, or change Himself into a body, or
produce a square the diagonal of which be equal to its side, or similar
impossibilities. The philosophers thus believe that it is no defect in
the Supreme Being that He does not produce impossibilities, for the
nature of that which is impossible is constant--it does not depend on
the action of an agent, and for this reason it cannot be changed,
Similarly there is, according to them, no defect in the greatness of
God, when He is unable to produce a thing from nothing, because they
consider this as one of the impossibilities. They therefore assume that
a certain substance has coexisted with God from eternity in such a
manner that neither God existed without that substance nor the latter
without God. But they do not hold that the existence of that substance
equals in rank that of God: for God is the cause of that existence, and
the substance is in the same relation to God as the clay is to the
potter, or the iron to the smith: God can do with it what He pleases; at
one time He forms of it heaven and earth, at another time He forms some
other thing. Those who hold this view also assume that the heavens are
transient, that they came into existence, though not from nothing, and
may cease to exist, although they cannot be reduced to nothing. They are
transient in the same manner as the individuals among living beings
which are produced from some existing substance, and are again reduced
to some substance that remains in existence. The process of genesis and
destruction is, in the case of the heavens, the same as in that of
earthly beings.

The followers of this theory are divided into different schools, whose
opinions and principles it is useless to discuss here: but what I have
mentioned is common to all of them. Plato holds the same opinion.
Aristotle says in

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

his *Physics*, that according to Plato the heavens are transient. This
view is also stated in Plato's *Timaeus*. His opinion, however, does not
agree with our belief: only superficial and careless persons wrongly
assume that Plato has the same belief as we have. For whilst we hold
that the heavens have been created from absolutely nothing, Plato
believes that they have been formed out of something.--This is the
second theory.

*Third Theory*.--viz., that of Aristotle, his followers, and
commentators. Aristotle maintains, like the adherents of the second
theory, that a corporeal object cannot be produced without a corporeal
substance. He goes, however, farther, and contends that the heavens are
indestructible. For he holds that the Universe in its totality has never
been different, nor will it ever change: the heavens, which form the
permanent element in the Universe, and are not subject to genesis and
destruction, have always been so; time and motion are eternal,
permanent, and have neither beginning nor end; the sublunary world,
which includes the transient elements, has always been the same, because
the *materia prima* is itself eternal, and merely combines successively
with different forms; when one form is removed, another is assumed. This
whole arrangement, therefore, both above and here below, is never
disturbed or interrupted, and nothing is produced contrary to the laws
or the ordinary course of Nature. He further says--though not in the
same terms--that he considers it impossible for God to change His will
or conceive a new desire; that God produced this Universe in its
totality by His will, but not from nothing. Aristotle finds it as
impossible to assume that God changes His will or conceives a new
desire, as to believe that He is non-existing, or that His essence is
changeable. Hence it follows that this Universe has always been the same
in the past, and will be the same eternally.

This is a full account of the opinions of those who consider that the
existence of God, the First Cause of the Universe, has been established
by proof. But it would be quite useless to mention the opinions of those
who do not recognize the existence of God, but believe that the existing
state of things is the result of accidental combination and separation
of the elements, and that the Universe has no Ruler or Governor. Such is
the theory of Epicurus and his school, and similar philosophers, as
stated by Alexander \[Aphrodisiensis\]; it would be superfluous to
repeat their views, since the existence of God has been demonstrated
whilst their theory is built upon a basis proved to be untenable. It is
likewise useless to prove the correctness of the followers of the second
theory in asserting that the heavens are transient, because they at the
same time believe in the Eternity of the Universe, and so long as this
theory is adopted, it makes no difference to us whether it is believed
that the heavens are transient, and that only their substance is
eternal, or the heavens are held to be indestructible, in accordance
with the view of Aristotle. All who follow the Law of Moses, our
Teacher, and Abraham, our Father, and all who adopt similar theories,
assume that nothing is eternal except God, and that the theory of
*Creatio ex nihilo* includes nothing that is impossible, whilst some
thinkers even regard it as an established truth.

After having described the different theories, I will now proceed to
show how Aristotle proved his theory, and what induced him to adopt it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](gfp101.md)
