[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp189) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LIV

THE term *ḥokmah* ("wisdom") in Hebrew is used of four different things:
(1) It denotes the knowledge of those truths which lead to the knowledge
of God. Comp. "But where shall wisdom be found?" (Job xxviii. 12); "If
thou seekest her like silver" (Prov. ii. 4). The word occurs frequently
in this sense. (2) The expression *ḥokmah* denotes also knowledge of any
workmanship. Comp. "And every wise-hearted among you shall come and make
all that the Lord hath commanded" (Exod. xxxv. 10);" And all the women
that were wise-hearted did spin" (*ibid*. ver. 25). (3) It is also used
of the acquisition of moral principles. Comp. "And teach his senators
wisdom" (Ps. cv. 22); "With the ancient is wisdom" (Job xii. 12); for it
is chiefly the disposition for acquiring moral principles that is
developed by old age alone. (4) It implies, lastly, the notion of
cunning and subtlety; comp. "Come on, let us deal wisely with them"
(Exod. i. 10). In the same

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

sense the term is used in the following passages: "And fetched thence a
wise woman" (2 Sam. xiv. 2); "They are wise to do evil" (Jer. iv. 22).
It is possible that the Hebrew *ḥokmah* ("wisdom") expresses the idea of
cunning and planning, which may serve in one case as a means of
acquiring intellectual perfection, or good moral principles; but may in
another case produce skill in workmanship, or even be employed in
establishing bad opinions and principles. The attribute *ḥakam* ("wise")
is therefore given to a person that possesses great intellectual
faculties, or good moral principles, or skill in art; but also to
persons cunning in evil deeds and principles.

According to this explanation, a person that has a true knowledge of the
whole Law is called wise in a double sense; he is wise because the Law
instructs him in the highest truths, and secondly, because it teaches
him good morals. But as the truths contained in the Law are taught by
way of tradition, not by a philosophical method, the knowledge of the
Law, and the acquisition of true wisdom, are treated in the books of the
Prophets and in the words of our Sages as two different things; real
wisdom demonstrates by proof those truths which Scripture teaches us by
way of tradition. It is to this kind of wisdom, which proves the truth
of the Law, that Scripture refers when it extols wisdom, and speaks of
the high value of this perfection, and of the consequent paucity of men
capable of acquiring it, in sayings like these: "Not many are wise" (Job
xxxii. 9); "But where shall wisdom be found" (*ibid*. xxviii. 12)? In
the writings of our Sages we notice likewise many passages in which
distinction is made between knowledge of the Law and wisdom. They say of
Moses, our Teacher, that he was Father in the knowledge of the Law, in
wisdom and in prophecy. When Scripture says of Solomon, "And he was
wiser than all men" (1 Kings v. 11), our Sages add, "but not greater
than Moses"; and the phrase, "than all men," is explained to mean, "than
all men of his generation"; for this reason \[only\] "Heman, Chalcol,
and Darda, the sons of Mahol," the renowned wise men of that time, are
named. Our Sages further say, that man has first to render account
concerning his knowledge of the Law, then concerning the acquisition of
wisdom, and at last concerning the lessons derived by logical
conclusions from the Law, i.e., the lessons concerning his actions. This
is also the right order: we must first learn the truths by tradition,
after this we must be taught how to prove them, and then investigate the
actions that help to improve man's ways. The idea that man will have to
render account concerning these three things in the order described, is
expressed by our Sages in the following passage: "When man comes to the
trial, he is first asked, 'Hast thou fixed certain seasons for the study
of the Law? Hast thou been engaged in the acquisition of wisdom? Hast
thou derived from one thing another thing?'" This proves that our Sages
distinguished between the knowledge of the Law on the one hand, and
wisdom on the other, as the means of proving the lessons taught in the
Law by correct reasoning.

Hear now what I have to say after having given the above explanation.
The ancient and the modem philosophers have shown that man can acquire
four kinds of perfection. The first kind, the lowest, in the acquisition
of which people spend their days, is perfection as regards property; the
possession of money, garments, furniture, servants, land, and the like;
the

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

possession of the title of a great king belongs to this class. There is
no close connexion between this possession and its possessor; it is a
perfectly imaginary relation when on account of the great advantage a
person derives from these possessions, he says, This is my house, this
is my servant, this is my money, and these are my hosts and armies. For
when he examines himself he will find that all these things are
external, and their qualities are entirely independent of the possessor.
When, therefore, that relation ceases, he that has been a great king may
one morning find that there is no difference between him and the lowest
person, and yet no change has taken place in the things which were
ascribed to him. The philosophers have shown that he whose sole aim in
all his exertions and endeavours is the possession of this kind of
perfection, only seeks perfectly imaginary and transient things; and
even if these remain his property all his lifetime, they do not give him
any perfection.

The second kind is more closely related to man's body than the first. It
includes the perfection of the shape, constitution, and form of mans
body; the utmost evenness of temperaments, and the proper order and
strength of his limbs. This kind of perfection must likewise be excluded
from forming our chief aim; because it is a perfection of the body, and
man does not possess it as man, but as a living being: he has this
property besides in common with the lowest animal; and even if a person
possesses the greatest possible strength, he could not be as strong as a
mule, much less can he be as strong as a lion or an elephant; he,
therefore, can at the utmost have strength that might enable him to
carry a heavy burden, or break a thick substance, or do similar things,
in which there is no great profit for the body. The soul derives no
profit whatever from this kind of perfection.

The third kind of perfection is more closely connected with man himself
than the second perfection. It includes moral perfection, the highest
degree of excellency in man's character. Most of the precepts aim at
producing this perfection; but even this kind is only a preparation for
another perfection, and is not sought for its own sake. For all moral
principles concern the relation of man to his neighbour; the perfection
of man's moral principles is, as it were, given to man for the benefit
of mankind. Imagine a person being alone, and having no connexion
whatever with any other person, all his good moral principles are at
rest, they are not required, and give man no perfection whatever. These
principles are only necessary and useful when man comes in contact with
others.

The fourth kind of perfection is the true perfection of man: the
possession of the highest, intellectual faculties; the possession of
such notions which lead to true metaphysical opinions as regards God.
With this perfection man has obtained his final object; it gives him
true human perfection; it remains to him alone; it gives him
immortality, and on its account he is called man. Examine the first
three kinds of perfection, you will find that, if you possess them, they
are not your property, but the property of others; according to the
ordinary view, however, they belong to you and to others. But the last
kind of perfection is exclusively yours; no one else owns any part of
it, "They shall be only thine own, and not strangers' with thee" (Prov.
v. 17). Your aim must therefore be to attain this \[fourth\] perfection
that is exclusively yours, and you ought not to continue to work and
weary

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

yourself for that which belongs to others, whilst neglecting your soul
till it has lost entirely its original purity through the dominion of
the bodily powers over it. The same idea is expressed in the beginning
of those poems, which allegorically represent the state of our soul. "My
mother's children were angry with me; they made me the keeper of the
vineyards; but mine own vineyard have I not kept" (Song i. 6). Also the
following passage refers to the same subject, "Lest thou give thine
honour unto others, and thy years unto the cruel" (Prov. v. 9).

The prophets have likewise explained unto us these things, and have
expressed the same opinion on them as the philosophers. They say
distinctly that perfection in property, in health, or in character, is
not a perfection worthy to be sought as a cause of pride and glory for
us: that the knowledge of God, i.e., true wisdom, is the only perfection
which we should seek, and in which we should glorify ourselves.
Jeremiah, referring to these four kinds of perfection, says: "Thus saith
the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the
mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches;
but let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and
knoweth me" (Jer. ix. 22, 23). See how the prophet arranged them
according to their estimation in the eyes of the multitude. The rich man
occupies the first rank; next is the mighty man; and then the wise man;
that is, the man of good moral principles: for in the eyes of the
multitude, who are addressed in these words, he is likewise a great man.
This is the reason why the three classes are enumerated in this order.

Our Sages have likewise derived from this passage the above-mentioned
lessons, and stated the same theory that has been explained in this
chapter, viz., that the simple term *ḥokmah*, as a rule, denotes the
highest aim of man, the knowledge of God; that those properties which
man acquires, makes his peculiar treasure, and considers as his
perfection, in reality do not include any perfection: and that the
religious acts prescribed in the Law, viz., the various kinds of worship
and the moral principles which benefit all people in their social
intercourse with each other, do not constitute the ultimate aim of man,
nor can they be compared to it, for they are but preparations leading to
it. Hear the opinion of our Sages on this subject in their own words.
The passage occurs in *Bereshit Rabba*, and runs thus, "In one place
Scripture says, 'And all things that are desirable (*ḥafaẓim*) are not
to be compared to her' (Prov. viii. 11); and in another place, 'And all
things that thou desirest (*hafaẓeḥa*) are not to be compared unto her'"
(*ibid*. iii. 15). By "things that are desirable" the performance of
Divine precepts and good deeds is to be understood, whilst "things that
thou desirest" refer to precious stones and pearls. Both--things that
are desirable, and things that thou desirest--cannot be compared to
wisdom, but "in this let him that glorieth glory, that he understandeth
and knoweth me." Consider how concise this saying is, and how perfect
its author; how nothing is here omitted of all that we have put forth
after lengthy explanations and preliminary remarks.

Having stated the sublime ideas contained in that Scriptural passage,
and quoted the explanation of our Sages, we will now complete what the
remainder of that passage teaches us. The prophet does not content
himself with explaining that the knowledge of God is the highest kind of
perfection;

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

for if this only had been his intention, he would have said, "But in
this let him who glorieth glory, that he understandeth and knoweth me,"
and would have stopped there; or he would have said, "that he
understandeth and knoweth me that I am One," or, "that I have not any
likeness," or, "that there is none like me," or a similar phrase. He
says, however, that man can only glory in the knowledge of God and in
the knowledge of His ways and attributes, which are His actions, as we
have shown (Part 1. liv.) in expounding the passage, "Show me now thy
ways" (Exod. xxxviii. 13). We are thus told in this passage that the
Divine acts which ought to be known, and ought to serve as a guide for
our actions, are, *ḥesed*, "loving-kindness," *mishpat*, "judgment," and
*ẓedakah*, "righteousness." Another very important lesson is taught by
the additional phrase, "in the earth." It implies a fundamental
principle of the Law; it rejects the theory of those who boldly assert
that God's providence does not extend below the sphere of the moon, and
that the earth with its contents is abandoned, that "the Lord hath
forsaken the earth" (Ez. viii. 12). It teaches, as has been taught by
the greatest of all wise men in the words, "The earth is the Lord's"
(Exod. ix. 29), that His providence extends to the earth in accordance
with its nature, in the same manner as it controls the heavens in
accordance with their nature. This is expressed in the words, "That I am
the Lord which exercise loving-kindness, judgment, and righteousness in
the earth." The prophet thus, in conclusion, says, "For in these things
I delight, saith the Lord," i.e., My object \[in saying this\] is that
you shall practise loving-kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the
earth. In a similar manner we have shown (Part I. liv.) that the object
of the enumeration of God's thirteen attributes is the lesson that we
should acquire similar attributes and act accordingly. The object of the
above passage is therefore to declare, that the perfection, in which man
can truly glory, is attained by him when he has acquired--as far as this
is possible for man--the knowledge of God, the knowledge of His
Providence, and of the manner in which it influences His creatures in
their production and continued existence. Having acquired this knowledge
he will then be determined always to seek loving-kindness, judgment, and
righteousness, and thus to imitate the ways of God. We have explained
this many times in this treatise.

This is all that I thought proper to discuss in this treatise, and which
I considered useful for men like you. I hope that, by the help of God,
you will, after due reflection, comprehend all the things which I have
treated here. May He grant us and all Israel with us to attain what He
promised us, "Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears
of the deaf shall be unstopped" (Isa. xxxv. 5); "The people that walked
in darkness have seen a great light; they that dwell in the shadow of
death upon them hath the light shined" (*ibid*. ix. 1).

God is near to all who call Him, if they call Him in truth, and turn to
Him. He is found by every one who seeks Him, if he always goes towards
Him, and never goes astray. AMEN.

 

 
