[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp188)  [Next](gfp190.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LIII

THIS chapter treats of the meaning of three terms which we find
necessary to explain, viz., *ḥesed* ("loving kindness"), *mishpat*
("judgment"), and *ẓedakah* ("righteousness").

In our Commentary on the Sayings of the Fathers (chap. v. 7) we have
explained the expression *ḥesed* as denoting an excess \[in some moral
quality\]. It is especially used of extraordinary kindness.
Loving-kindness is practised in two ways: first, we show kindness to
those who have no claim whatever upon us; secondly, we are kind to those
to whom it is due, in a greater measure than is due to them. In the
inspired writings the term *ḥesed* occurs mostly in the sense of showing
kindness to those who have no claim to it whatever. For this reason the
term *ḥesed* is employed to express the good bestowed upon us by God: "I
will mention the loving-kindness of the Lord" (Isa. lxiii. 7). On this
account, the very act of the creation is an act of God's
loving-kindness. "I have said, The Universe is built up in
loving-kindness" (Ps. lxxxix. 3); i.e., the building up of the Universe
is an act of loving-kindness. Also, in the enumeration of God's
attributes, Scripture says: "And abundant in loving-kindness" (Exod.
xxxiv. 6).

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

The term *ẓedakah* is derived from *ẓedek*, "righteousness"; it denotes
the act of giving every one his due, and of showing kindness to every
being according as it deserves. In Scripture, however, the expression
*ẓedakah* is not used in the first sense, and does not apply to the
payment of what we owe to others. When we therefore give the hired
labourer his wages, or pay a debt, we do not perform an act of
*ẓedakah*. But we do perform an act of *ẓedakah* when we fulfil those
duties towards our fellow-men which our moral conscience imposes upon
us; e.g., when we heal the wound of the sufferer. Thus Scripture says,
in reference to the returning of the pledge \[to the poor debtor\]: "And
it shall be *ẓedakah* (righteousness) unto thee" (Deut. xxiv. 11). When
we walk in the way of virtue we act righteously towards our intellectual
faculty, and pay what is due unto it; and because every virtue is thus
*ẓedakah*, Scripture applies the term to the virtue of faith in God.
Comp. "And he believed in the Lord, and he accounted it to him as
righteousness" (Gen. xv. 6); "And it shall be our righteousness" (Deut.
vi. 25).

The noun *mishpat*, "judgment," denotes the act of deciding upon a
certain action in accordance with justice which may demand either mercy
or punishment.

We have thus shown that *ḥesed* denotes pure charity; *ẓedakah*
kindness, prompted by a certain moral conscience in man, and being a
means of attaining perfection for his soul, whilst *mishpat* may in some
cases find expression in revenge, in other cases in mercy.

In discussing the impropriety of admitting attributes of God (Part I.,
chap. liii., seq.), we stated that the divine attributes which occur in
Scripture are attributes of His actions; thus He is called *ḥasid*,
"kind," because He created the Universe; *ẓaddik*, "righteous," on
account of His mercy with the weak, in providing for every living being
according to its powers; and *shofet*, "judge," on account of the
relative good and the great relative evils that are decreed by God's
justice as directed by His wisdom. These three names occur in the
Pentateuch: "Shall not the judge (*shofet*) of all the earth," etc.
(Gen. xviii. 25); "Righteous (*ẓaddik*) and upright is he" (Deut. xxxii.
4); "Abundant in loving-kindness" (*ḥesed*, Exod. xxxiv. 6).

We intended in explaining these three terms to prepare the reader for
the next chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIV](gfp190.md)
