[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp177)  [Next](gfp179.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLII

THE precepts of the seventh class are the civil laws enumerated in the
Section on judgments, and part of the Section on Property. The object of
these precepts is obvious. They define the ways of equity in the various
transactions which must take place between man and man. Those that are
engaged in such transactions must mutually promote each other's
interests; neither of the parties must strive to increase only his own
profit, and that he alone should enjoy the whole benefit of the
transaction. In the first place, no overcharge is permitted; only the
ordinary and known rate of profit may

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

be taken. The law fixes the limits of profits within which the
transaction is valid. Even imposition in mere words \[where no material
harm is inflicted\] is forbidden, as is well known. Next comes the law
of the four kinds of bailees: the fairness of the law is evident. If one
keeps the property of his neighbour for nothing, without deriving
therefrom any benefit for himself, and is only obliging his neighbour,
he is free from all responsibility, and if any injury is done to the
property, the owner alone must bear the loss. He who borrows a thing
keeps it only for his own advantage, whilst the owner lends it to him to
oblige him; he is therefore responsible for everything; any loss in the
property must be borne by the borrower. If one takes wages for keeping
the property or pays for using it, he as well as the owner profit
thereby; the losses must therefore be divided between them. It is done
in this manner; the bailee pays for any loss caused through want of
care, namely, when the property is stolen or lost; for this happens only
when the bailee does not take sufficient precaution. The owner, on the
other hand, bears such losses as cannot be prevented; namely, if by
accident the animal falls and breaks its limbs, or is carried away by
armed men as booty, or if it dies. The Law further ordains merciful
conduct towards hired workmen because of their poverty. Their wages
should be paid without delay, and they must not be wronged in any of
their rights; they must receive their pay according to their work.
Another instance of kindness to workmen is this: according to the
regulations of this law, workmen, and even animals, must be permitted to
partake of the food in the preparation of which they have been engaged.
The laws which relate to property include laws concerning inheritance.
They are based on the sound principle that man must not "withhold good
from those to whom it is due" (Prov. iii. 27), and when he is about to
die, he must not conceive ill-will against his heirs, by squandering his
property, but leave it to the one who has the greatest claim on it, that
is, to him who is his nearest relation, "unto his kinsman that is next
to him of his family" (Num. xxvii. 11). It is clearly stated that the
son has the first claim, then comes the daughter, then the brother, and
then the father's brothers, as is well known. The father must leave the
right of the first-born to his eldest son, because his love for this son
came first: he must not be guided by his inclination. He may not make
the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated (Deut. xxi.
16). Thus our highly equitable Law preserves and strengthens the virtue
of respecting all kinsmen, and doing well unto them, as the prophet
says: "He that is cruel troubleth his own flesh" (Prov. xi. 17). The Law
correctly says, "Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy brother, unto
thy poor" (Deut. xv. 11). Our Sages bestow much praise upon him who is
kind to his relatives, and him who marries the daughter of his sister.
The Law has taught us how far we have to extend this principle of
favouring those who are near to us, and of treating kindly every one
with whom we have some relationship, even if he offended or wronged us;
even if he is very bad, we must have some consideration for him. Thus
the Law says: "Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy brother"
(*ibid*. xxiii. 7). Again, if we find a person in trouble, whose
assistance we have once enjoyed, or of whom we have received some
benefit, even if that person has subsequently done evil to us, we must
bear in mind his previous \[good\] conduct. Thus the Law tells us: "Thou
shalt not abhor an Egyptian,

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

because thou wast a stranger in his land" (*ibid*.), although the
Egyptians have subsequently oppressed us very much, as is well-known.
See how many moral lessons we have derived from these precepts. The last
two precepts do not belong to the seventh class: but the discussion of
the preference due to relatives as regards inheritance led us to speak
of the Egyptians and the Edomites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII](gfp179.md)
