[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp117)  [Next](gfp119.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXI

IT is perhaps clear why the laws concerning Sabbath are so severe, that
their transgression is visited with death by stoning, and that the
greatest of the prophets put a person to death for breaking the Sabbath.
The commandment of the Sabbath is the third from the commandment
concerning the existence and the unity of God. For the commandment not
to worship any other being is merely an explanation of the first. You
know already from what I have said, that no opinions retain their
vitality except those which are

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

confirmed, published, and by certain actions constantly revived among
the people. Therefore we are told in the Law to honour this day; in
order to confirm thereby the principle of Creation which will spread in
the world, when all peoples keep Sabbath on the same day. For when the
question is asked, why this is done, the answer is given: "For in six
days the Lord hath made," etc. (Exod. xx. 11). Two different reasons are
given for this commandment, because of two different objects. In the
Decalogue in Exodus, the following reason is given for distinguishing
the Sabbath: "For in six days," etc. But in Deuteronomy (chap. v. 15)
the reason is given: "And thou shalt remember that thou hast been a
slave in the land of Egypt, etc., therefore the Lord thy God commanded
thee," etc. This difference can easily be explained. In the former, the
cause of the honour and distinction of the day is given; comp.
"Therefore the Lord hath blessed the day of the Sabbath and sanctified
it" (Exod. xx. 10), and the cause for this is, "For in six days," etc.
But the fact that God has given us the law of the Sabbath and commanded
us to keep it, is the consequence of our having been slaves; for then
our work did not depend on our will, nor could we choose the time for
it; and we could not rest. Thus God commanded us to abstain from work on
the Sabbath, and to rest, for two purposes; namely, (1) That we might
confirm the true theory, that of the Creation, which at once and clearly
leads to the theory of the existence of God. (2) That we might remember
how kind God has been in freeing us from the burden of the
Egyptians.--The Sabbath is therefore a double blessing: it gives us
correct notions, and also promotes the well-being of our bodies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII](gfp119.md)
