[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp160)  [Next](gfp162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXV

\[MAN'S\] actions are divided as regards their object into four classes;
they are either *purposeless*, *unimportant*, *in vain*, or *good*. An
action is *in vain* if the object which is sought by it is not obtained
on account of some obstacles. Thus people frequently use the phrase
"thou hast worked in vain" in reference to a person who looks out for
some one and cannot find him: or who undertakes the troubles of a
journey for his business without profit. Our endeavours and exertions
are *in vain* as regards a patient that is not cured. This applies to
all actions which are intended for certain purposes that are not
realized. *Purposeless* are such actions, which serve no purpose at all.
Some persons, e.g., do something with their hands whilst thinking of
something else. The actions of the insane and confused are of this kind.
*Unimportant* are such actions by which a trivial object is sought, an
object that is not necessary and is not of great use. This is the case
when a person dances without seeking to benefit his digestion by that
exercise, or performs certain actions for the purpose of causing
laughter. Such actions are certainly mere pastimes. Whether an action
belongs to this class or not depends on the intention of those who
perform it, and on the degree of their perfection. For many things are
necessary or very useful in the opinion of one person and superfluous in
the opinion of another. E.g., bodily exercise, in its different kinds,
is necessary for the proper preservation of health in the opinion of him
who understands the science of medicine; writing is considered as very
useful by scholars. When people take exercise by playing with the ball,
wrestling, stretching out the hands or keeping back the breathing, or do
certain things as preparation for writing, shape the pen and get the
paper ready, such actions are mere pastimes in the eyes of the ignorant,
but the wise do not consider them as unimportant. *Useful* are such
actions as serve a proper purpose: being either necessary or useful for
the purpose which is to be attained. This division \[of man's actions\]
is, as I believe, not open to any objection. For every action is either
intended for a certain purpose or is not intended; and if intended for a
certain purpose, that purpose

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

may be important or unimportant, is sometimes attained and sometimes
missed. This division is therefore complete.

After having explained this division, I contend that no intelligent
person can assume that any of the actions of God can be in vain,
purposeless, or unimportant. According to our view and the view of all
that follow the Law of Moses, all actions of God are "exceedingly good."
Thus Scripture says, "And God saw everything that he had made, and
behold, it was very good" (Gen. i. 31). And that which God made for a
certain thing is necessary or \[at least) very useful for the existence
of that thing. Thus food is necessary for the existence of living
beings: the possession of eyes is very useful to man during his life,
although food only serves to sustain living beings a certain time, and
the senses are only intended to procure to animals the advantages of
sensation. The philosophers likewise assume that in Nature there is
nothing in vain, so that everything that is not the product of human
industry serves a certain purpose, which may be known or unknown to us.
There are thinkers that assume that God does not create one thing for
the sake of another, that existing things are not to each other in the
relation of cause and effect; that they are all the direct result of the
Will of God, and do not serve any purpose. According to this opinion we
cannot ask why has He made this and not that; for He does what pleases
Him, without following a fixed system. Those who defend this theory must
consider the actions of God as purposeless, and even as inferior to
purposeless actions: for when we perform purposeless actions, our
attention is engaged by other things and we do not know what we are
doing; but God, according to these theorists, knows what He is doing,
and knowingly does it for no purpose or use whatever. The absurdity of
assuming that some of God's actions are trivial, is apparent even at
first sight, and no notice need be taken of the nonsensical idea that
monkeys were created for our pastime. Such opinions originate only in
man's ignorance of the nature of transient beings, and in his
overlooking the principle that it was intended by the Creator to produce
in its present form everything whose existence is possible; a different
form was not decreed by the Divine Wisdom, and the existence \[of
objects of a different form\] is therefore impossible, because the
existence of all things depends on the decree of God's wisdom. Those who
hold that God's works serve no purpose whatever believe that an
examination of the totality of existing things compels them to adopt
this theory. They ask what is the purpose of the whole Universe? they
necessarily answer, like all those who believe in the Creation, that it
was created because God willed it so, and for no other purpose. The same
answer they apply to all parts of the Universe, and do not admit that
the hole in the uvea and the transparency of the cornea are intended for
the purpose of allowing the *spiritus visus* to pass and to perceive
certain objects; they do not assume that these circumstances are causes
for the sight; the hole in the uvea and the transparent matter over it
are not there because of the sight, but because of the Will of God,
although the sense of sight could have been created in a different form.
There are passages in the Bible which at first sight we might understand
to imply this theory. E.g., "The Lord hath done whatever he pleased"
(Ps. cxxxv. 6); "His soul desired it and he made it" (Job xxiii. 13);
"Who will say unto thee, What doest thou?" (Eccles. viii. 4). The
meaning of these and similar

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

verses is this: whatever God desires to do is necessarily done; there is
nothing that could prevent the realization of His will. The object of
His will is only that which is possible, and of the things possible only
such as His wisdom decrees upon. When God desires to produce the best
work, no obstacle or hindrance intervenes between Him and that work.
This is the opinion held by all religious people, also by the
philosophers; it is also our opinion. For although we believe that God
created the Universe from nothing, most of our wise and learned men
believe that the Creation was not the exclusive result of His will; but
His wisdom, which we are unable to comprehend, made the actual existence
of the Universe necessary. The same unchangeable wisdom found it as
necessary that non-existence should precede the existence of the
Universe. Our Sages frequently express this idea in the explanation of
the words, "He hath made everything beautiful in his time" (Eccles. iii.
11), only in order to avoid that which is objectionable, viz., the
opinion that God does things without any purpose whatever. This is the
belief of most of our Theologians: and in a similar manner have the
Prophets expressed the idea that all parts of natural products are well
arranged, in good order, connected with each other, and stand to each
other in the relation of cause and effect; nothing of them is
purposeless, trivial, or in vain; they are all the result of great
wisdom. Comp. "O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou
made them all: the earth is full of thy riches" (Ps. civ. 24); "And all
his works are done in truth" (*ibid*. 4) The Lord by wisdom hath founded
the earth" (Prov. iii. 19). This idea occurs frequently; there is no
necessity to believe otherwise; philosophic speculation leads to the
same result; viz., that in the whole of Nature there is nothing
purposeless, trivial, or unnecessary, especially in the Nature of the
spheres, which are in the best condition and order, in accordance with
their superior substance.

Know that the difficulties which lead to confusion in the question what
is the purpose of the Universe or of any of its parts, arise from two
causes: firstly, man has an erroneous idea of himself, and believes that
the whole world exists only for his sake; secondly, he is ignorant both
about the nature of the sublunary world, and about the Creator's
intention to give existence to all beings whose existence is possible,
because existence is undoubtedly good. The consequences of that error
and of the ignorance about the two things named, are doubts and
confusion, which lead many to imagine that some of God's works are
trivial, others purposeless, and others in vain. Those who adopt this
absurd idea that God's actions are utterly purposeless, and refuse to
consider them as the result of His wisdom, are afraid they might
otherwise be compelled to admit the theory of the Eternity of the
Universe, and guard themselves against it by the above theory I have
already told you the view which is set forth in Scripture on this
question, and which it is proper to accept. It is this: it is not
unreasonable to assume that the works of God, their existence and
preceding non-existence, are the result of His wisdom, but we are unable
to understand many of the ways of His wisdom in His works. On this
principle the whole Law of Moses is based; it begins with this
principle: "And God saw all that He had made, and, behold, it was very
good" (Gen. i. 31); and it ends with this principle: "The Rock, perfect
is His work" (Deut. xxxii. 4). Note it. When you examine this

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

view and that of the philosophers, taking into consideration all
preceding chapters which are connected with this subject, you will find
that there is no other difference of opinion as regards any portions of
the Universe, except that the philosophers believe in the Eternity of
the Universe and we believe in the Creation. Note this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](gfp162)
