[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp123)  [Next](gfp125.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXVII

IT is necessary to consider the nature of the divine influence, which
enables us to think, and gives us the various degrees of intelligence.
For this influence may reach a person only in a small measure, and in
exactly the same proportion would then be his intellectual condition,
whilst it may reach another person in such a measure that, in addition
to his own perfection, he can be the means of perfection for others. The
same relation may be observed throughout the whole Universe. There are
some beings so perfect that they can govern other beings, but there are
also beings that are only perfect in so far as they can govern
themselves and cannot influence other beings. In some cases the

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

influence of the \[Active\] Intellect reaches only the logical and not
the imaginative faculty; either on account of the insufficiency of that
influence, or on account of a defect in the constitution of the
imaginative faculty, and the consequent inability of the latter to
receive that influence: this is the condition of wise men or
philosophers. If, however, the imaginative faculty is naturally in the
most perfect condition, this influence may, as has been explained by us
and by other philosophers, reach both his logical and his imaginative
faculties: this is the case with prophets. But it happens sometimes that
the influence only reaches the imaginative faculty on account of the
insufficiency of the logical faculty, arising either from a natural
defect, or from a neglect in training. This is the case with statesmen,
lawgivers, diviners, charmers, and men that have true dreams, or do
wonderful things by strange means and secret arts, though they are not
wise men; all these belong to the third class. It is further necessary
to understand that some persons belonging to the third class perceive
scenes, dreams, and confused images, when awake, in the form of a
prophetic vision. They then believe that they are prophets; they wonder
that they perceive visions, and think that they have acquired wisdom
without training. They fall into grave errors as regards important
philosophical principles, and see a strange mixture of true and
imaginary things. All this is the consequence of the strength of their
imaginative faculty, and the weakness of their logical faculty, which
has not developed, and has not passed from potentiality to actuality.

It is well known that the members of each class differ greatly from each
other. Each of the first two classes is again subdivided, and contains
two sections, namely, those who receive the influence only as far as is
necessary for their own perfection, and those who receive it in so great
a measure that it suffices for their own perfection and that of others.
A member of the first class, the wise men, may have his mind influenced
either only so far, that he is enabled to search, to understand, to
know, and to discern, without attempting to be a teacher or an author,
having neither the desire nor the capacity; but he may also be
influenced to such a degree that he becomes a teacher and an author. The
same is the case with the second class. A person may receive a prophecy
enabling him to perfect himself but not others; but he may also receive
such a prophecy as would compel him to address his fellowmen, teach
them, and benefit them through his perfection. It is clear that, without
this second degree of perfection, no books would have been written, nor
would any prophets have persuaded others to know the truth. For a
scholar does not write a book with the object to teach himself what he
already knows. But the characteristic of the intellect is this: what the
intellect of one receives is transmitted to another, and so on, till a
person is reached that can only himself be perfected by such an
influence, but is unable to communicate it to others, as has been
explained in some chapters of this treatise (chap. xi.). It is further
the nature of this element in man that he who possesses an additional
degree of that influence is compelled to address his fellowmen, under
all circumstances, whether he is listened to or not, even if he injures
himself thereby. Thus we find prophets that did not leave off speaking
to the people until they were slain; it is this divine influence that
moves them, that does not allow them to rest in any way, though they
might

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

bring upon themselves great evils by their action. E.g., when Jeremiah
was despised, like other teachers and scholars of his age, he could not,
though he desired it, withhold his prophecy, or cease from reminding the
people of the truths which they rejected. Comp. "For the Word of the
Lord was unto me a reproach and a mocking all day, and I said, I will
not mention it, nor will I again speak in His name; but it was in mine
heart as a burning fire, enclosed in my bones, and I was wearied to keep
it, and did not prevail" (Jer. xx. 8, 9). This is also the meaning of
the words of another prophet, "The Lord God hath spoken, who shall not
prophesy?" (Amos iii. 8) Note it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII](gfp125.md)
