[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp149)  [Next](gfp151) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIV

IN order to obtain a correct estimate of ourselves, we must reflect on
the results of the investigations which have been made into the
dimensions and the distances of the spheres and the stars. The distances
are clearly stated in radii of the earth, and are well known, since the
circumference and the radius of the earth are known. It has been proved
that the distance between the centre of the earth and the outer surface
of the sphere of Saturn is a journey of nearly eight thousand seven
hundred solar years. Suppose a day's journey to be forty legal miles of
two thousand ordinary cubits, and consider the great and enormous
distance! or in the words of Scripture, "Is not God in the height of
heaven? and behold the height of the stars, how high they are!" (Job
xxii. 12); that is to say, learn from the height of the heavens how far
we are from comprehending God, for there is an enormous distance between
ourselves and these corporeal objects, and the latter are greatly
distinguished from us by their position, and hidden from us as regards
their essence and most of their actions. How much more incomprehensible
therefore is their Maker, who is incorporeal! The great distance which
has been proved is, in fact, the least that can be assumed. The distance
between the centre of the earth and the surface of the sphere of the
fixed stars can by no means be less, but it may possibly be many times
as great: for the measure of the thickness of the body of the spheres
has not been proved, and the least possible has been assumed, as appears
from the treatises *On the Distances*. The same is the case with the
substances which are between every two spheres. According to logical
inference, as has been mentioned by Thabit, the thickness of these
substances cannot be accurately stated, since they do not contain any
star, which might serve as a means if obtaining it. As to the thickness
of the sphere of the fixed stars, it is at least four years' journey, as
may be inferred from the measure of the stars contained in the sphere.
The body of each of these stars is more than ninety times as big as the
globe of the earth, and it is possible that the thickness of the sphere
is still greater. Of the ninth sphere, that causes the daily revolution
of the whole system of spheres, we do not know the dimensions; it
contains no stars, and therefore we have no means of finding out its
magnitude. Now consider the enormous dimensions and the large number of
these material beings. If the whole earth is infinitely small in
comparison with the sphere of the stars, what is man compared with all
these created beings! How, then, could any one of us imagine that these
things exist for his sake

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

and benefit, and that they are his tools! This is the result of an
examination of the corporeal beings: how much more so will this be the
result of an examination into the nature of the Intelligences!

The following question may be asked against the opinion of philosophers
on this subject: There is no doubt that from a philosophical point of
view it would be a mistake to assume that the spheres exist for the
purpose of regulating the fate of one individual person or community;
but it is not absurd to think that they serve to regulate the affairs of
mankind, since these mighty individual beings would serve to give
existence to the individual members of the species, the number of which,
according to the philosophers, will never come to an end. We can best
illustrate this by the following simile: An artisan makes iron tools of
a hundred-weight for the purpose of making a small needle of the weight
of a grain. If only one needle had to be produced, we admit that it
would certainly be bad management, though it would not be entirely a
failure: but if with those enormous tools needle after needle is
produced, even many hundred-weights of needles, the preparation of those
tools would be a wise act and excellent management. In a similar manner
the object of the spheres may be the continuance of successive genesis
and destruction; and the succession of genesis and destruction serves,
as has already been said, to give existence to mankind. This idea is
supported by Biblical texts and sayings \[of our Sages\]. The
philosopher replies thus: If the difference between the heavenly bodies
and the transient individual members of the species consisted in their
different sizes, this opinion could be maintained: but as the difference
consists in their essence, it remains improbable that the superior
beings should be the means of giving existence to the lower ones. In
short, this question supports our belief in the Creation; and this is
the principal object of this chapter. \[It serves\] besides \[a second
purpose\]. I frequently hear from those who know something about
astronomy, that our Sages exaggerated the distances \[of the heavenly
bodies\] when they said that the thickness of each sphere is five
hundred years' journey; the distance of the seven spheres from each
other five hundred years' journey, so that the distance of the outer
surface of the seventh sphere from the centre of the earth is seven
thousand years' journey. Those who hear such statements consider them
\[at first thought\] as exaggeration, and believe that the distance is
not so great. But you may ascertain from the data proved in scientific
treatises on the distances, that the centre of the earth is distant from
the inner surface of the seventh sphere, that of Saturn, nearly seven
thousand and twenty-four years' journey. The number eight thousand and
seven hundred given by us, refers to the distance of the centre of the
earth from the inner surface of the eighth sphere. The distance of the
spheres from each other, mentioned by astronomers, is identical with the
thickness of the substance that intervenes between one sphere and the
other, and does not imply that there is a vacuum. You must, however, not
expect that everything our Sages say respecting astronomical matters
should agree with observation, for mathematics were not fully developed
in those days: and their statements were not based on the authority of
the Prophets, but on the knowledge which they either themselves
possessed or derived from contemporary men of science. But I will not on
that account denounce what they say correctly in accordance with real
fact, as untrue or

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

accidentally true. On the contrary, whenever the words of a person can
be interpreted in such a manner that they agree with fully established
facts, it is the duty of every educated and honest man to do so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](gfp151)
