[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp134)  [Next](gfp136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLVIII

IT is clear that everything produced must have an immediate cause which
produced it; that cause again a cause, and so on, till the First Cause,
viz., the will and decree of God is reached. The prophets therefore omit
sometimes the intermediate causes, and ascribe the production of an
individual thing directly to God, saying that God has made it. This
method is well known, and we, as well as others of those who seek the
truth, have explained it; it is the belief of our co-religionists.

After having heard this remark, listen to what I will explain in this
chapter; direct your special attention to it more than you have done to
the other chapters of this part. It is this: As regards the immediate
causes of things produced, it makes no difference whether these causes
consist in substances, physical properties, freewill, or chance--by
freewill I mean that of man--or even in the will of another living
being. The prophets \[omit them and\] ascribe the production directly to
God and use such phrases as, God has done it, commanded it, or said it:
in all such cases the verbs "to say," "to speak," "to command," "to
call," and "to send" are employed. What I desired to state in this
chapter is this: According to the hypothesis and theory accepted, it is
God that gave will to dumb animals, freewill to the human being, and
natural properties to everything; and as accidents originate in the
redundancy of some natural force, as has been explained \[by Aristotle\]
and are mostly the result of the combined action of nature, desire, and
freewill: it can consequently be said of everything which is produced by
any of these causes, that God commanded that it should be made, or said
that it should be so. I will give you instances, and they will guide you
in the interpretation of passages which I do not mention. As regards
phenomena produced regularly by natural causes, such as the melting of
the snow when the atmosphere becomes warm, the roaring of the sea when a
storm rages \[I quote the following passages\], "He sendeth his word and
melteth them" (Ps. cxlvii. 18); "And he saith, and a storm-wind riseth,
and lifteth up its waves" (*ibid*. cvii. 25) In reference to the rain we
read: "I will command the clouds that they shall not rain," etc. (Isa.
v. 6). Events caused by man's freewill, such as war, the dominion of one
nation over another, the attempt of one person to hurt another, or to
insult him, \[are ascribed to God, as\] e.g., in reference to the
dominion of Nebuchadnezzar and his host, "I have commended my holy ones,
also I have called my heroes for my anger" (Isa. xiii. 3); and "I will
send him against a hypocrite nation" (*ibid*. x. 6) in reference to
Shimei, son of Gera, "For God said to him, Curse David" (2 Sam. xvi.
10); in reference

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

to the deliverance of Joseph, the righteous, from prison, "He sent an
angel and loosed him" (Ps. cv. 20); in reference to the victory of the
Persians over the Chaldees, "I will send to Babylon scatterers, and they
shall scatter it" (Jer. li. 2); in reference to the providing of food to
Eliah, "I have commanded there a woman, a widow, to maintain thee" (1
Kings xvii. 9); and Joseph, the righteous, says: "Not ye have sent me
hither," etc. (Gen. xlv. 8). The case that the will of an animal or its
desire for some of its natural wants is the cause of some event, may be
illustrated by the following instance: "And God spake unto the fish, and
it vomited out Jonah" (ii. 11). The act is ascribed to God, because He
gave the fish the will, and not because He made it a prophet or endowed
it with a prophetical spirit. Similarly it is said of the locusts that
appeared in the days of Joel, son of Pethuel, "Mighty is he that
accomplishes his word" (Joel ii. 11); or of the beasts that took
possession of the land of Edom when destroyed in the days of
Sennacherib, "He cast lot for them, and his hand divided it unto them by
a line" (Isa. xxxiv. 27). Although here the verbs "to say," "to
command," "to send," are not used, the meaning is evidently the same,
and you must explain all passages that are analogous to it in a similar
manner. Events evidently due to chance are ascribed to God: e.g., in
reference to Rebecca, "Let her be a wife to the son of thy master, as
the Lord spake" (Gen. xxiv. 51); in reference to David and Jonathan,
"Go, for the Lord has sent thee." (1 Sam. xx. 22); in reference to
Joseph, "God sent me before you" (Gen. xlv. 7). You see clearly that the
providing of a cause, in whatever manner this may take place, by
substance, accident, freewill, or win, is always expressed by one of the
five terms, commanding, saying, speaking, sending, or calling. Note
this, and apply it everywhere according to the context. Many
difficulties will thereby be removed, and passages apparently containing
things far from truth will prove to be true. This is the conclusion of
the treatise on Prophecy, its allegories and language. It is all I
intend to say on this subject in this treatise. We will now commence to
treat of other subjects, with the help of the Most High.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](gfp136)
