[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp166)  [Next](gfp168.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXI

THERE are persons who find it difficult to give a reason for any of the
commandments, and consider it right to assume that the commandments and
prohibitions have no rational basis whatever. They are led to adopt this
theory by a certain disease in their soul, the existence of which they
perceive, but which they are unable to discuss or to describe. For they
imagine that these precepts, if they were useful in any respect, and
were commanded because of their usefulness, would seem to originate in
the thought and reason of some intelligent being. But as things which
are not objects of reason and serve no purpose, they would undoubtedly
be attributed to God, because no thought of man could have produced
them. According to the theory of those weak-minded persons, man is more
perfect than his Creator. For what man says or does has a certain
object, whilst the actions of God are different; He commands us to do
what is of no use to us, and forbids us to do what is harmless. Far be
this! On the contrary, the sole object of the Law is to benefit us. Thus
we explained the Scriptural passage, "for our good always, that He might
preserve us alive, as it is this day" (Deut. vi. 24). Again, "which
shall hear all those statutes (*ḥuḳḳim*), and say, surely this great
nation is a wise and understanding people" (*ibid*. iv. 6). He thus says
that even every one of these "statutes" convinces all nations of the
wisdom and understanding it includes. But if no reason could be found
for

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

these statutes, if they produced no advantage and removed no evil, why
then should he who believes in them and follows them be wise,
reasonable, and so excellent as to raise the admiration of all nations?
But the truth is undoubtedly as we have said, that every one of the six
hundred and thirteen precepts serves to inculcate some truth, to remove
some erroneous opinion, to establish proper relations in society, to
diminish evil, to train in good manners or to warn against bad habits.
All this depends on three things: opinions, morals, and social conduct.
We do not count words, because precepts, whether positive or negative,
if they relate to speech, belong to those precepts which regulate our
social conduct, or to those which spread truth, or to those which teach
morals. Thus these three principles suffice for assigning a reason for
every one of the Divine commandments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII](gfp168.md)
