[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp141)  [Next](gfp143.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI

THE sublime and great subject which Ezekiel by prophetic impulse began
to teach us in the description of the *Mercabah*, is exactly the same
which Isaiah taught us in general outlines, because he did not require
all the detail. Isaiah says, "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high
and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. Above it stood
seraphims," etc. (Isa. vi. 1 *seq*.). Our Sages have already stated all
this clearly, and called our attention to it. For they say that the
vision of Ezekiel is the same as that of Isaiah, and illustrate their
view by the following simile:--Two men saw the king riding, the one a
townsman, the other a countryman. The former, seeing that his neighbours
know well how the king rides, simply tells them that he saw the king;
but the villager, wishing to tell his friends things which they do not
know, relates in detail how the king was riding, describes his
followers, and

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

the officers who execute his order and command. This remark is a most
useful hint; it is contained in the following passage (*Ḥagigah*, 13 b):
"Isaiah saw all that has been seen by Ezekiel: Isaiah is like a townsman
that sees the king, Ezekiel like a countryman that sees the king." These
words can be explained in the manner which I have just mentioned, viz.,
the generation of Isaiah did not require the detailed description: his
account, "I saw the Lord," etc., sufficed. The generation of the
Babylonian exile wanted to learn all the details. It is, however,
possible that the author of this saying held Isaiah as more perfect than
Ezekiel, so that the vision might have overawed Ezekiel and appeared
fearful to him; but Isaiah was so familiar with it that he did not
consider it necessary to communicate it to others as a new thing,
especially as it was well known to the intelligent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](gfp143.md)
