[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp101)  [Next](gfp103.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XV

IN this chapter I intend to show that Aristotle was well aware that he
had not proved the Eternity of the Universe. He was not mistaken in this
respect. He knew that he could not prove his theory, and that his
arguments and proofs were only apparent and plausible. They are the
least objectionable, according to Alexander; but, according to the same
authority, Aristotle could not have considered them conclusive, after
having himself taught us the rules of logic, and the means by which
arguments can be refuted or confirmed.

The reason why I have introduced this subject is this: Later
philosophers, disciples of Aristotle, assume that he has proved the
Eternity of the Universe, and most of those who believe that they are
philosophers blindly follow him in this point, and accept all his
arguments as conclusive and absolute proofs. They consider it wrong to
differ from Aristotle, or to think that he was ignorant or mistaken in
anything. For this reason, taking their standpoint, I show that
Aristotle himself did not claim to have proved the Eternity of the
Universe. He says in his book *Physics* (viii., chap. i.) as follows:
"All the Physicists before us believed that motion is eternal, except
Plato, who holds that motion is transient; according to his opinion the
heavens are likewise transient." Now if Aristotle had conclusive proofs
for his theory, he would not have considered it necessary to support it
by citing the opinions of preceding Physicists, nor would he have found
it necessary to point out the folly and absurdity of his opponents. For
a truth, once established by proof, does neither gain force nor
certainty by the consent of all scholars, nor lose by the general
dissent. We further find that Aristotle, in the book *The Heavens and
the World*, introduces his theory of the Eternity of the Universe in the
following manner: "Let us inquire into the nature of the heavens, and
see whether they are the product of something or not, destructible or
not." After this statement of the problem, he proceeds to cite the views
of those who hold that the heavens have had a beginning, and continues
thus: "By doing this, our theory will be most plausible and acceptable
in the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

opinion of profound thinkers; and it will be the more so, when, as we
propose, the arguments of our opponents are first heard. For if we were
to state our opinion and our arguments without mentioning those of our
opponents, our words would be received less favourably. He who desires
to be just must not show himself hostile to his opponent; he must have
sympathy with him, and readily acknowledge any truth contained in his
words; he must admit the correctness of such of his opponent's arguments
as he would admit if they were in his own favour." This is the contents
of the words of Aristotle. Now, I ask you, men of intelligence, can we
have any complaint against him after this frank statement? Or can any
one now imagine that a real proof has been given for the Eternity of the
Universe? Or can Aristotle, or any one else, believe that a theorem,
though fully proved, would not be acceptable unless the arguments of the
opponents were fully refuted? We must also take into consideration that
Aristotle describes this theory as his *opinion*, and his proofs as
*arguments*. Is Aristotle ignorant of the difference between argument
and proof? between opinions, which may be received more or less
favourably, and truths capable of demonstration? or would rhetorical
appeal to the impartiality of opponents have been required for the
support of his theory if a real proof had been given? Certainly not.
Aristotle only desires to show that his theory is better than those of
his opponents, who hold that philosophical speculation leads to the
conviction that the heavens are transient, but have never been entirely
without existence; or that the heavens have had a beginning, but are
indestructible; or to defend any of the other views mentioned by him. In
this he is undoubtedly right; for his opinion is nearer the truth than
theirs, so far as a proof can be taken from the nature of existing
things: we differ from him, as will be explained. Passion, that
exercises great influence in most of the different sects, must have
influenced even the philosophers who wished to affirm that Aristotle
demonstrated his theory by proof. Perhaps they really believe it, and
assume that Aristotle himself was not aware of it, as it was only
discovered after his death! My conviction is, that what Aristotle says
on the Eternity of the Universe, the cause of the variety in the motion
of the spheres and the order of the Intelligences, cannot be proved, and
that Aristotle never intended to prove these things. I agree with him
that the ways of proving this theory have their gates closed before us,
there being no foundation on which to build up the proof. His words on
this subject are well known. He says, "There are things concerning which
we are unable to reason, or which we find too high for us: to say why
these things have a certain property is as difficult as to decide
whether the Universe is eternal or not." So far Aristotle. The
interpretation which Abu-nasr offers of this parallel is well known. He
denies that Aristotle had any doubt about the Eternity of the Universe,
and is very severe upon Galen, who maintains that this theory is still
doubtful, and that no proof has been offered. According to Abu-nasr, it
is clear and demonstrable by proof that the heavens are eternal, but all
that is enclosed within the heavens is transient. We hold, that by none
of the methods mentioned in this chapter can a theory be established,
refuted, or shaken.

We have mentioned these things only because we know that the majority of
those who consider themselves wise, although they know nothing of
science, accept the theory of the Eternity of the Universe on the
authority

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

of famous scholars. They reject the words of the prophets, because the
latter do not employ any scientific method by which only a few persons
would be instructed who are intellectually well prepared, but simply
communicate the truth as received by Divine inspiration.

In the chapters which follow we will expound the theory of the Creation
in accordance with the teaching of Scripture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](gfp103.md)
