[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp100)  [Next](gfp102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

IT is not necessary to repeat in every chapter that I write this
treatise with the full knowledge of what you have studied: that I
therefore need not quote the exact words of the philosophers: it will
suffice to give an abstract of their views. I will, however, point out
the methods which they employ, in the same manner as I have done when I
discussed the theories of the Mutakallemim. No notice will be taken of
the opinion of any philosopher but that of Aristotle; his opinions alone
deserve to be criticized, and if our objections or doubts with regard to
any of these be well founded, this must be the case in a far higher
degree in respect to all other opponents of our fundamental principles.

I now proceed to describe the methods of the philosophers.

*First Method*.--According to Aristotle, motion, that is to say, motion
par excellence, is eternal. For if the motion had a beginning, there
must already have been some motion when it came into existence, for
transition from potentiality into actuality, and from non-existence into
existence, always implies motion; then that previous motion, the cause
of the motion which follows, must be eternal, or else the series would
have to be carried back *ad infinitum*. On the same principle he
maintains that time is eternal, for time is related to and connected
with motion: there is no motion except in time, and time can only be
perceived by motion, as has been demonstrated by proof. By this argument
Aristotle proves the eternity of the Universe.

*Second Method*.--The First Substance common to the four elements is
eternal. For if it had a beginning it would have come into existence
from another substance; it would further be endowed with a form, as
coming into existence is nothing but receiving Form. But we mean by
"First Substance" a formless substance; it can therefore not have come
into existence from another substance, and must be without beginning and
without end: hence it is concluded that the Universe is eternal.

*Third Method*.--The substance of the spheres contains no opposite
elements: for circular motion includes no such opposite directions as
are found in rectilinear motion. Whatever is destroyed, owes its
destruction to the opposite elements it contains. The spheres contain no
opposite elements; they are therefore indestructible, and because they
are indestructible they are also without beginning. Aristotle thus
assumes the axiom that everything that has had a beginning is
destructible, and that everything destructible has had a beginning; that
things without beginning are indestructible, and indestructible things
are without beginning. Hence follows the Eternity of the Universe.

*Fourth Method*.--The actual production of a thing is preceded in time
by its possibility. The actual change of a thing is likewise preceded in
time by its possibility. From this proposition Aristotle derives the
eternity of the circular motion of the spheres. The Aristotelians in
more recent time employ this proposition in demonstrating the Eternity
of the Universe. They argue thus: When the Universe did not yet exist,
its existence was either possible or necessary, or impossible. If it was
necessary, the Universe could never have been non-existing; if
impossible, the Universe could never have been in existence; if
possible, the question arises, What was the substratum

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

of that possibility? for there must be in existence something of which
that possibility can be predicated. This is a forcible argument in
favour of the Eternity of the Universe. Some of the later schools of the
Mutakallemim imagined that they could confute this argument by objecting
that the possibility rests with the agent, and not with the production.
But this objection is of no force whatever: for there are two distinct
possibilities, viz., the thing produced has had the possibility of being
produced before this actually took place: and the agent has had the
possibility of producing it before he actually did so. There are,
therefore, undoubtedly two possibilities--that of the substance to
receive a certain form, and that of the agent to perform a certain act.

These are the principal methods, based on the properties of the
Universe, by which Aristotle proves the Eternity of the Universe. There
are, however, other methods of proving the Eternity of the Universe.
They are based on the notions formed of God, and philosophers after
Aristotle derived them from his philosophy. Some of them employed the
following argument:--

*Fifth Method*.--If God produced the Universe from nothing, He must have
been a potential agent before He was an actual one, and must have passed
from a state of potentiality into that of actuality--a process that is
merely possible, and requires an agent for effecting it. This argument
is likewise a source of great doubts, and every intelligent person must
examine it in order to refute it and to expose its character.

*Sixth Method*.--An agent is active at one time and inactive at another,
according as favourable or unfavourable circumstances arise. The
unfavourable circumstances cause the abandonment of an intended action.
The favourable ones, on the other hand, even produce a desire for an
action for which there has not been a desire previously. As, however,
God is not subject to accidents which could bring about a change in His
will, and is not affected by obstacles and hindrances that might appear
or disappear, it is impossible, they argue, to imagine that God is
active at one time and inactive at another. He is, on the contrary,
always active in the same manner as He is always in actual existence.

*Seventh Method*.--The actions of God are perfect; they are in no way
defective, nor do they contain anything useless or superfluous. In
similar terms Aristotle frequently praises Him, when he says that Nature
is wise and does nothing in vain, but makes everything as perfect as
possible. The philosophers therefore contend that this existing Universe
is so perfect that it cannot be improved, and must be permanent; for it
is the result of God's wisdom, which is not only always present in His
essence, but is identical with it.

All arguments in favour of the Eternity of the Universe are based on the
above methods, and can be traced to one or other of them. The following
objection is also raised against *Creatio ex nihilo*: How could God ever
have been inactive without producing or creating anything in the
infinite past? How could He have passed the long infinite period which
preceded the Creation without producing anything, so as to commence, as
it were, only yesterday, the Creation of the Universe? For even if you
said, e.g., that God created previously as many successive worlds as the
outermost sphere could contain grains of mustard, and that each of these
worlds existed as

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

many years: considering the infinite existence of God, it would be the
same as if He had only yesterday commenced the Creation. For when we
once admit the beginning of the existence of things after their
non-existence, it makes no difference whether thousands of centuries
have passed since the beginning, or only a short time. Those who defend
the Eternity of the Universe find both assumptions equally improbable.

*Eighth Method*.--The following method is based on the circumstance that
the theory implies a belief which is so common to all peoples and ages,
and so universal, that it appears to express a real fact and not merely
an hypothesis. Aristotle says that all people have evidently believed in
the permanency and stability of the heavens; and thinking that these
were eternal, they declared them to be the habitation of God and of the
spiritual beings or angels. By thus attributing the heavens to God, they
expressed their belief that the heavens are indestructible. Several
other arguments of the same kind are employed by Aristotle in treating
of this subject in order to support the results of his philosophical
speculation by common sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](gfp102)
