[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp111)  [Next](gfp113.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXV

WE do not reject the Eternity of the Universe, because certain passages
in Scripture confirm the Creation; for such passages are not more
numerous than those in which God is represented as a corporeal being;
nor is it impossible or difficult to find for them a suitable
interpretation. We might have explained them in the same manner as we
did in respect to the Incorporeality of God. We should perhaps have had
an easier task in showing that the Scriptural passages referred to are
in harmony with the theory of the Eternity of the Universe if we
accepted the latter, than we had in explaining the anthropomorphisms in
the Bible when we rejected the idea that God is corporeal. For two
reasons, however, we have not done so, and have not accepted the
Eternity of the Universe. First, the Incorporeality of God has been
demonstrated by proof: those passages in the Bible, which in their
literal sense contain statements that can be refuted by proof, must and
can be interpreted otherwise. But the Eternity of the Universe has not
been proved; a mere argument in favour of a certain theory is not
sufficient reason for rejecting the literal meaning of a Biblical text,
and explaining it figuratively, when the opposite theory can be
supported by an equally good argument.

Secondly, our belief in the Incorporeality of God is not contrary to any
of the fundamental principles of our religion: it is not contrary to the
words of any prophet. Only ignorant people believe that it is contrary
to the teaching of Scripture: but we have shown that this is not the
case: on the contrary, Scripture teaches the Incorporeality of God. If
we were to accept the Eternity of the Universe as taught by Aristotle,
that everything in the Universe is the result of fixed laws, that Nature
does not change, and that there is nothing supernatural, we should
necessarily be in opposition to the foundation of our religion, we
should disbelieve all miracles and signs, and certainly reject all hopes
and fears derived from Scripture, unless the miracles are also explained
figuratively. The Allegorists amongst the Mohammedans have done this,
and have thereby arrived at absurd conclusions. If, however, we accepted
the Eternity of the Universe in accordance with the second of the
theories which we have expounded above (ch. xxiii.), and assumed, with
Plato, that the heavens are likewise transient, we should not be in
opposition to the fundamental principles of our religion; this theory
would not imply the rejection of miracles, but, on the contrary, would
admit them as possible. The Scriptural text might have been explained
accordingly, and many expressions might have been found in the Bible and
in other writings that would confirm and support this theory. But there
is no necessity for this expedient, so long as the theory has not been
proved. As there is no proof sufficient to convince us, this theory need
not be taken into consideration, nor the other one; we take the text of
the Bible literally, and say that it teaches us a truth which we cannot
prove; and the miracles are evidence for the correctness of our view.

Accepting the Creation, we find that miracles are possible, that
Revelation

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

is possible, and that every difficulty in this question is removed. We
might be asked, Why has God inspired a certain person and not another?
Why has He revealed the Law to one particular nation, and at one
particular time? why has He commanded this, and forbidden that? why has
He shown through a prophet certain particular miracles? what is the
object of these laws? and Why has He not made the commandments and the
prohibitions part of our nature, if it was His object that we should
live in accordance with them? We answer to all these questions: He
willed it so; or, His wisdom decided so. Just as He created the world
according to His will, at a certain time, in a certain form, and as we
do not understand why His will or His wisdom decided upon that peculiar
form, and upon that peculiar time, so we do not know why His will or
wisdom determined any of the things mentioned in the preceding
questions. But if we assume that the Universe has the present form as
the result of fixed laws, there is occasion for the above questions; and
these could only be answered in an objectionable way, implying denial
and rejection of the Biblical texts, the correctness of which no
intelligent person doubts. Owing to the absence of all proof, we reject
the theory of the Eternity of the Universe; and it is for this very
reason that the noblest minds spent and will spend their days in
research. For if the Creation had been demonstrated by proof, even if
only according to the Platonic hypothesis, all arguments of the
philosophers against us would be of no avail. If, on the other hand,
Aristotle had a proof for his theory, the whole teaching of Scripture
would be rejected, and we should be forced to other opinions. I have
thus shown that all depends on this question. Note it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](gfp113.md)
