[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp139)  [Next](gfp141) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV

IT is necessary to call your attention to an idea expressed by Jonathan,
the son of Uzziel. When he saw that the prophet says in reference to the
*Ofannim*, "It was cried unto them in my hearing, O *gilgal*" ("sphere")
(x. 13), he assumed that by *Ofannim* the heavens are meant, and
rendered *Ofan* by *gilgal*, "sphere," and *Ofannim* by *gilgelaya*,
"spheres." I have no doubt that he found a confirmation of his opinion
in the words of the prophet that the *Ofannim* were like unto the colour
of *tarshish* (ver. 16), a colour ascribed to the heavens, as is well
known. When he, therefore, noticed the passage, "Now as I beheld the
*Ḥayyot*, behold one *Ofan* upon the earth" (i. 15), which clearly shows
that the *Ofannim* were upon the earth, he had a difficulty in
explaining it in accordance with his opinion. Following, however, his
interpretation, he explains the terms erez, employed here as denoting
the inner surface of the heavenly sphere, which may be considered as
erez ("earth" or "below"), in relation to all that is above that
surface. He

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

therefore translates the words *ofan eḥad ba-areẓ*, as follows: "One
*ofan* was below the height of the heavens." Consider what his
explanation of the passage must be. I think that he gave this
explanation because he thought that gilgal denotes in its original
meaning "heaven." My opinion is that gilgal means originally "anything
rolling"; comp. "And I will roll thee (*ve-gilgaltika*) down from the
rocks" (Jer. li. 25); "and rolled (*va-yagel*) the stone" (Gen. xxix.
10); the same meaning the word has in the phrase: "Like a rolling thing
(*galgal*) before the whirlwind" (Isa. xvii. 13). The poll of the head,
being round, is therefore called *gulgolet*; and because everything
round rolls easily, every spherical thing is called *gilgal*; also the
heavens are called *gilgallim* on account of their spherical form. Thus
our Sages use the phrase, "It is a wheel (*gilgal*) that moves round the
world"; and a wooden ball, whether small or large, is called gilgal. If
so, the prophet merely intended by the words, "As for the *Ofannim*, it
is cried to them in my hearing, O sphere" (*gilgal*), to indicate the
shape of the *Ofannim*, as nothing has been mentioned before respecting
their form and shape; but he did not mean to say that the *Ofannim* are
the same as the heavens. The term "like *tarshish*" is explained in the
second account, in which it is said of the *Ofannim*: "And the
appearance of the *Ofannim* was like the colour of *tarshish*." This
latter passage is translated by Jonathan, the son of Uzziel, "like the
colour of a precious stone, "exactly in the same manner as Onkelos
translates the phrase *ke-ma‘ase libnat ha-sappir*, "like the work of
the whiteness of sapphire" (Exod. xxix. 10). Note this. You will not
find it strange that I mention the explanation of Jonathan, son of
Uzziel, whilst I gave a different explanation myself: for you will find
many of the wise men and the commentators differ sometimes from him in
the interpretation of words and in many things respecting the prophets.
Why should it be otherwise in these profound matters? Besides, I do not
decide in favour of my interpretation. It is for you to learn both--the
whole of his explanation, from what I have pointed out to you, and also
my own opinion. God knoweth which of the two explanations is in
accordance with that which the prophet intended to say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](gfp141)
