[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp135)  [Next](gfp137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART THREE

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

### INTRODUCTION

WE have stated several times that it is our primary object in this
treatise to expound, as far as possible, the Biblical account of the
Creation (*Ma‘aseh bereshit*) and the description of the Divine Chariot
(*Ma‘aseh Mercabah*) in a manner adapted to the training of those for
whom this work is written.

We have also stated that these subjects belong to the mysteries of the
Law. You are well aware how our Sages blame those who reveal these
mysteries, and praise the merits of those who keep them secret, although
they are perfectly clear to the philosopher. In this sense they explain
the passage, "Her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the
Lord, to eat sufficiently" (Isa. xxiii. 18), which concludes in the
original with the words *ve-li-me-kasseh ‘atik*, i.e., that these
blessings are promised to him who hides things which the Eternal has
revealed \[to him\], viz., the mysteries of the Law (Babyl. Talmud,
*Pesaḥim* 119a). If you have understanding you will comprehend that
which our Sages pointed out. They have clearly stated that the Divine
Chariot includes matters too deep and too profound for the ordinary
intellect. It has been shown that a person favoured by Providence with
reason to understand these mysteries is forbidden by the Law to teach
them except viva voce, and on condition that the pupil possess certain
qualifications, and even then only the heads of the sections may be
communicated. This has been the cause why the knowledge of this mystery
has entirely disappeared from our nation, and nothing has remained of
it. This was unavoidable, for the explanation of these mysteries was
always communicated *vivâ voce*, it was never committed to writing. Such
being the case, how can I venture to call your attention to such
portions of it as may be known, intelligible, and perfectly clear to me?
But if, on the other hand, I were to abstain from writing on this
subject, according to my knowledge of it, when I die, as I shall
inevitably do, that knowledge would die with me, and I would thus
inflict great injury on you and all those who are perplexed \[by these
theological problems\]. I would then be guilty of withholding the truth
from those to whom it ought to be communicated, and of jealously
depriving the heir of his inheritance. I should in either case be guilty
of gross misconduct.

To give a full explanation of the mystic passages of the Bible is
contrary to the Law and to reason; besides, my knowledge of them is
based on reasoning, not on divine inspiration \[and is therefore not
infallible\]. I have not

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

received my belief in this respect from any teacher, but it has been
formed by what I learnt from Scripture and the utterances of our Sages,
and by the philosophical principles which I have adopted. It is
therefore possible that my view is wrong, and that I misunderstood the
passages referred to. Correct thought and divine help have suggested to
me the proper method, viz., to explain the words of the prophet Ezekiel
in such a manner that those who will read my interpretation will believe
that I have not added anything to the contents of the text, but only, as
it were, translated from one language into another, or given a short
exposition of plain things. Those, however, for whom this treatise has
been composed, will, on reflecting on it and thoroughly examining each
chapter, obtain a perfect and clear insight into all that has been clear
and intelligible to me. This is the utmost that can be done in treating
this subject so as to be useful to all without fully explaining it.

After this introductory remark I ask you to study attentively the
chapters which follow on this sublime, important, and grand subject,
which is the pin upon which everything hangs, and the pillar upon which
everything rests.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](gfp137)
