[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp165)  [Next](gfp167.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXX

ON examining these old and foolish doctrines we find that it was most
generally believed by the people that by the worship of stars the earth
will become inhabited, and the ground fertilized. The wise, pious, and
sin-fearing men among them reproved the people and taught them that
agriculture, on which the preservation of mankind depended, would become
perfect and satisfy man's wishes, when he worshipped the sun and the
stars. If man provoked these beings by his rebelliousness, the towns
would become empty and waste. In the above-named books it is stated that
Mars was angry with \[lands, that form now\] deserts and wastes, and in
consequence of that anger they were deprived of water and trees, and
have become the habitation of demons. Tillers of the ground and
husbandmen are praised in those books, because they are engaged with the
cultivation of the land in accordance with the will and desire of the
stars. The idolaters also held cattle in esteem on account of their use
in agriculture, and went even so far as to say, that it is not allowed
to slay them, because they combine in themselves strength and
willingness to do the work of man in tilling the ground. The oxen,
notwithstanding their great strength, do this, and submit to man,
because it is the will of God that they should be employed in
agriculture. When these views became generally known, idolatry was
connected with agriculture, because the latter is indispensable for the
maintenance of man, and of most animals. The idolatrous priests then
preached to the people who met in the temples, and taught them that by
certain religious acts, rain would come down, the trees of the field
would yield their fruit, and the land would be fertile and inhabited.
See what is said in the

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Nabatean
Agriculture* in the chapter on vineyards. The following words of the
Sabeans are quoted there: "All ancient wise men advised, and prophets
likewise commanded and enjoined to play before the images on certain
instruments during the festivals. They also said--and what they said is
true--that the deities are pleased with it, and reward those who do it.
They promise, indeed, very great reward for these things; e.g., length
of life, protection from illness, exemption from great bodily
deformities, plenty of the produce of the earth, and of the fruits of
the trees." These are the words of the Sabeans. When these ideas spread,
and were considered as true, God, in His great mercy for us, intended to
remove this error from our minds, and to protect our bodies from
trouble; and therefore desired us to discontinue the practice of these
useless actions. He gave us His Law through Moses, our teacher, who told
us in the name of God, that the worship of stars and other corporeal
beings would effect that rain would cease, the land be waste, and would
not produce anything, and the fruit of the trees would wither;
calamities would befall the people, their bodies would be deformed, and
life would be shortened. These are the contents of "the words of the
covenant which God made" (Deut. xxviii. 6-9). It is frequently expressed
in all parts of Scripture, that the worship of the stars would be
followed by absence of rain, devastation of the land, bad times,
diseases, and shortness of life. But abandonment of that worship, and
the return to the service of God, would be the cause of the presence of
rain, fertility of the ground, good times, health and length of life.
Thus Scripture teaches, in order that man should abandon idolatry, the
reverse of that which idolatrous priests preached to the people, for, as
has been shown by us, the principal object of the Law is to remove this
doctrine, and to destroy its traces.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI](gfp167.md)
