[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp102)  [Next](gfp104.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVI

IN this chapter I will first expound my view on this question, and then
support it by argument-not by such arguments as those of the
Mutakallemim, who believe that they have proved the *Creatio ex nihilo*.
I will not deceive myself, and consider dialectical methods as proofs;
and the fact that a certain proposition has been proved by a dialectical
argument win never induce me to accept that proposition, but, on the
contrary, will weaken my faith in it, and cause me to doubt it. For when
we understand the fallacy of a proof, our faith in the proposition
itself is shaken. It is therefore better that a proposition which cannot
be demonstrated be received as an axiom, or that one of the two opposite
solutions of the problem be accepted on authority. The methods by which
the Mutakallemim proved the *Creatio ex nihilo* have already been
described by me, and I have exposed their weak points. As to the proofs
of Aristotle and his followers for the Eternity of the Universe, they
are, according to my opinion, not conclusive; they are open to strong
objections, as will be explained. I intend to show that the theory of
the Creation, as taught in Scripture, contains nothing that is
impossible; and that all those philosophical arguments which seem to
disprove our view contain weak points which make them inconclusive, and
render the attacks on our view untenable. Since I am convinced of the
correctness of my method, and consider either of the two theories--viz.,
the Eternity of the Universe, and the Creation--as admissible, I accept
the latter on the authority of Prophecy, which can teach things beyond
the reach of philosophical speculation. For the belief in prophecy is,
as will be shown in the course of this treatise, consistent even with
the belief in the Eternity of the Universe. When I have established the
admissibility of our theory, I will, by philosophical reasoning, show
that our theory of the Creation is more acceptable than that of the
Eternity of the Universe; and although our theory includes points open
to criticism, I will show that there are much stronger reasons for the
rejection of the theory of our opponents.

I will now proceed to expound the method by which the proofs given for
the Eternity of the Universe can be refuted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](gfp104.md)
