[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp115)  [Next](gfp117.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXIX

IF we hear a person speaking whose language we do not understand, we
undoubtedly know that he speaks, but do not know what his words mean; it
may even happen that we hear some words which mean one thing in the
tongue of the speaker, and exactly the reverse in our language, and
taking the words in the sense which they have in our language, we
imagine that the speaker employed them in that sense. Suppose, e.g., an
Arab hears of a Hebrew the word *abah*, he thinks that the Hebrew
relates how a man despised and refused a certain thing, whilst the
Hebrew in reality says that the man was pleased and satisfied with it.
The very same thing happens to the ordinary reader of the Prophets: some
of their words he does not understand at all, like those to whom the
prophet says (Isa. xxix. 11), "the vision of all is become unto you as
the words of a book that is sealed"; in other passages he finds the
opposite or the reverse of what the prophet meant; to this case
reference is made in the words, "Ye have perverted the words of the
living God" (Jer. xxiii. 36). Besides, it must be borne in mind that
every prophet has his own peculiar diction, which is, as it were, his
language, and it is in that language that the prophecy addressed to him
is communicated to those who understand it. After this preliminary
remark you will understand the metaphor frequently employed by Isaiah,
and less frequently by other prophets, when they describe the ruin of a
kingdom or the destruction of a great nation in phrases like the
following:--"The stars have fallen," "The heavens are overthrown," "The
sun is darkened," "The earth is waste, and trembles," and similar
metaphors. The Arabs likewise say of a person who has met with a serious
accident, "His heavens, together with his earth, have been covered"; and
when they speak of the approach of a nation's prosperity, they say, "The
light of the sun and moon has increased," "A new heaven and a new earth
has been created," or they use similar phrases. So also the prophets, in
referring to the ruin of a person, of a nation, or of a country,
describe it as the result of God's great anger and wrath, whilst the
prosperity

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

of a nation is the result of God's pleasure and satisfaction. In the
former case the prophets employ such phrases as "He came forth," "came
down," "roared," "thundered," or" caused his voice to be heard": also
"He commanded," "said," "did," "made," and the like, as will be shown.
Sometimes the prophets use the term "mankind" instead of "the people of
a certain place," whose destruction they predict: e.g., Isaiah speaking
of the destruction of Israel says, "And the Lord will remove man far
away" (Isa. vi. 12). So also Zephaniah (i. 3, 4), "And I will cut off
man from off the earth. I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah."
Note this likewise.

Having spoken of the language of the prophets in general, I will now
verify and prove my statement. When Isaiah received the divine mission
to prophesy the destruction of the Babylonian empire, the death of
Sennacherib and that of Nebuchadnezzar, who rose after the overthrow of
Sennacherib, he commences in the following manner to describe their fall
and the end of their dominion, their defeat, and such evils as are
endured by all who are vanquished and compelled to flee before the
victorious sword \[of the enemy\]: "For the stars of heaven, and the
constellations thereof, shall not give their light: the sun is darkened
in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine"
(xiii. 10); again, "Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth
shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of hosts, and in
the day of his fierce anger" (xiii. 13). I do not think that any person
is so foolish and blind, and so much in favour of the literal sense of
figurative and oratorical phrases, as to assume that at the fall of the
Babylonian kingdom a change took place in the nature of the stars of
heaven, or in the light of the sun and moon, or that the earth moved
away from its centre. For all this is merely the description of a
country that has been defeated: the inhabitants undoubtedly find all
light dark, and all sweet things bitter: the whole earth appears too
narrow for them, and the heavens are changed in their eyes. He speaks in
a similar manner when he describes the poverty and humiliation of the
people of Israel, their captivity and their defeat, the continuous
misfortunes caused by the wicked Sennacherib when he ruled over all the
fortified places of Judah, or the loss of the entire land of Israel when
it came into the possession of Sennacherib. He says (xxiv. 17): "Fear,
and the pit, and the snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth.
And it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the noise of the fear
shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh out of the midst of the pit
shall be taken in the snare: for the windows from on high are open, and
the foundations of the earth do shake. The earth is utterly broken down,
the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly. The earth
shall reel to and fro like a drunkard." At the end of the same prophecy,
when Isaiah describes how God will punish Sennacherib, destroy his
mighty empire, and reduce him to disgrace, he uses the following figure
(xxiv. 23): "Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed,
when the Lord of hosts shall reign," etc. This verse is beautifully
explained by Jonathan, the son of Uzziel; he says that when Sennacherib
will meet with his fate because of Jerusalem, the idolaters will
understand that this is the work of God; they will faint and be
confounded. He therefore translates the verse thus: "Those who worship
the moon will be ashamed, and those who bow down to the sun will be
humbled, when the kingdom of God shall reveal

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

itself," etc. The prophet then pictures the peace of the children of
Israel after the death of Sennacherib, the fertility and the cultivation
of their land, and the increasing power of their kingdom through
Hezekiah. He employs here the figure of the increase of the light of the
sun and moon. When speaking of the defeated, he says that for them the
light of the sun and moon will be diminished and darkened: in the same
sense their light is said to increase for the victorious. We can
frequently notice the correctness of this figure of speech. When great
troubles befall us, our eyes become dim, and we cannot see clearly
because the *spiritus visus* is made turbid by the prevailing vapours,
and is weakened and diminished by great anxiety and straits of the soul:
whilst in a state of gladness and comfort of the soul the *spiritus
visus* becomes clear, and man feels as if the light had increased. Thus
the good tidings that the people shall dwell in Zion, and in Jerusalem,
and shall weep no more, etc., conclude in the following manner:
"Moreover, the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and
the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in
the day that the Lord bindeth up the breaches of his people, and healeth
the stroke of their wound" (Isa. xxx. 19, 26); that is to say, when God
will raise them up again after they had fallen through the wicked
Sennacherib. The, phrase" as the light of seven days" signifies,
according to the commentators," very great light": for in this same
sense the number "seven" is frequently used in Hebrew. I think that
reference is made by this phrase to the seven days of the dedication of
the temple in the reign of Solomon; for there was never a nation so
great, prosperous, and happy in every respect, as Israel was at that
time, and therefore the prophet says, that Israel's greatness and
happiness will be the same as it was in those seven days. Speaking of
wicked Edom, Israel's oppressor, Isaiah says: "Their slain also shall be
cast out, and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the
mountains shall be melted with their blood. And all the host of heaven
shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a
scroll: and all their host shall fall down, as a leaf falleth off from
the vine, and as a fig falleth from the fig-tree. For my sword shall be
bathed in heaven; behold, I shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the
people of my curse, to judgment," etc. (Isa. xxxiv. 3-5). Will any
person who has eyes to see find in these verses any expression that is
obscure, or that might lead him to think that they contain an account of
what will befall the heavens? or anything but a figurative description
of the ruin of the Edomites, the withdrawal of God's protection from
them, their decline, and the sudden and rapid fall of their nobles? The
prophet means to say that the individuals, who were like stars as
regards their permanent, high, and undisturbed position, will quickly
come down, as a leaf falleth from the vine, and as a fig falling from
the fig-tree. This is self-evident; and there would be no need to
mention it, much less to speak on it at length, had it not become
necessary, owing to the fact that the common people, and even persons
who are considered as distinguished scholars, quote this passage without
regarding its context or its purpose, \[in support of their view of the
future destruction of the heavens\]. They believe that Scripture
describes here what will, in future, happen to the heavens, in the same
manner as it informs us how the heavens have come into existence. Again,
when Isaiah told the Israelites--what afterwards became a well-known
fact--that Sennacherib, with his

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

allied nations and kings, would perish, and that the Israelites would be
helped by God alone, he employed figurative language, and said: "See how
the heavens decay and the earth withers away, and all beings on the
earth die, and you are saved"; that is to say, those who have filled the
earth, and have been considered, to use an hyperbole, as permanent and
stable as the heavens, will quickly perish and disappear like smoke; and
their famous power, that has been as stable as the earth, will be
destroyed like a garment. The passage to which I refer begins: "For the
Lord hath comforted Zion; He hath comforted all her waste places," etc.
"Hearken unto me, my people," etc. "My righteousness is near: my
salvation is gone forth," etc. It continues thus: "Lift up your eyes to
the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath; for the heavens shall
vanish like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they
that dwell therein shall die in like manner; for my salvation shall be
for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished" (Isa. li. 3-6).
The restoration of the kingdom of Israel, its stability and permanence,
is described as a creation of heaven and earth. For Isaiah frequently
speaks of the land of a king as if it were the whole Universe, as if
heaven and earth belonged to him. He therefore comforts Israel and says:
"I, even I, am he that comforteth you," etc. "And I have put my words in
thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I
may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say
unto Zion, Thou art my people" (li. 12-16). In the following verses,
Isaiah declares that the dominion of Israel will continue, whilst that
of the renowned and mighty people will cease: "For the mountains shall
depart," etc. (liv. so). In order to express that the kingdom of the
Messiah will be permanent, and that the kingdom of Israel will not be
destroyed any more, he says, "Thy sun shall no more go down," etc. (lx.
20). In metaphors like these, which are intelligible to those who
understand the context, Isaiah continues to describe the details of the
exile, the restoration, and the removal of all sorrow, and says
figuratively as follows: "I will create new heavens and a new earth; for
the first shall be forgotten, and their memory shall be blotted out." He
explains this in the course of the speech, by pointing out that by the
phrase, "I will create," he means that God will give them perpetual
gladness and joy in place of the previous grief and mourning, which
shall no longer be remembered. I will now describe the sequence of the
ideas, and the order of the verses in which these ideas are contained.
The prophet begins as follows: "I will mention the loving-kindnesses of
the Lord," etc. (lxiii. 7). He then gives (1) an account of God's past
kindness to us, concluding with the words, "And he bare them and carried
them all the days of old" (ver. 9). (2) Next follows our rebellion: "But
they rebelled, and vexed his holy spirit," etc. (ver. 10); (3) the
dominion of our enemies over us: "Our adversaries have trodden down thy
sanctuary; we are like those over whom thou hast never ruled," etc.
(vers. 18, 59); (4) and the prophet's prayer on our account: "Be not
wroth very sore," etc. (lxiv. 9). (5) The prophet then describes how we
deserved these punishments, and how we were called to the truth but did
not respond: "I offered myself to be sought of them that asked not for
me," etc. (lxv. i); (6) promises mercy and pardon: "Thus saith the Lord,
As the new wine is found in the cluster," etc. (ver. 8); (7) predicts
evil for our oppressors: "Behold, my servant shall eat, but ye shall

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

be hungry," etc. (ver. 13); (8) and moral improvement of our nation to
such a degree that we shall be a blessing on the earth, and the previous
troubles will be forgotten: "And he shall call his servants by another
name: that he who blesseth himself in the earth, shall bless himself in
the God of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth, shall swear by the
God of truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and because
they are hid from mine eyes. For, behold, I create new heavens, and a
new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.
But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for, behold,
I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy. And I will rejoice
in Jerusalem, and joy in my people," etc. (lxv. 15-19). The whole
subject must now be clear and evident; for the words, "I create new
heavens, and a new earth," etc., are followed by the explanation, "I
create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy," etc. The prophet
then adds that the seed and name of Israel will be as permanent as their
faith and as the rejoicing in it, which God promised to create and to
spread over the whole earth: for faith in God and rejoicing in it are
two possessions which, once obtained, are never lost or changed. This is
expressed in the words: "For as the new heavens and the new earth, which
I will make, remain before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and
your name remain" (lxvi. 22). But of other nations, in some instances,
the seed remains, whilst the name has perished; so, e.g., many people
are of the seed of the Persians or Greeks, without being known by that
special name; they bear the names of other nations, of which they form
part. According to my opinion, we have here a prophecy that our
religion, which gives us our special name, will remain permanently.

As these figures are frequent in Isaiah, I explained an of them. But we
meet with them also in the words of other prophets. Jeremiah, in
describing the destruction of Jerusalem in consequence of our sins, says
(iv. 23): "I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was without form, and void,"
etc. Ezekiel (xxxii. 7, 8) foretells the destruction of the kingdom of
Egypt, and the death of Pharaoh, through Nebuchadnezzar, in the
following words: "And when I shall put thee out, I will cover the
heaven, and make the stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun with a
cloud, and the moon shall not give her light. All the bright lights of
heaven will I make dark over thee, and set darkness upon thy land, saith
the Lord." Joel, the son of Pethuel (ii. 10), describes the multitude of
locusts that came in his days as follows: "The earth shall quake before
them: the heavens shall tremble: the sun and the moon shall be dark, and
the stars shall withdraw their shining." Amos (viii. 9, 10), speaking of
the destruction of Samaria, says: "I will cause the sun to go down at
noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear day; and I win turn your
feasts," etc. Micah (i. 3, 4), in relating the fall of Samaria, uses the
following well-known rhetorical figures: "For, behold, the Lord cometh
forth out of his place, and will come down, and tread upon the high
places of the earth. And the mountains shall be molten," etc. Similarly
Haggai (ii. 6, 7), in describing the destruction of the kingdom of the
Medes and Persians: "I will shake the heavens and the earth, and the
sea, and the dry land: and I will shake all nations," etc. When
\[David\] (Ps. lx. 4) describes how, during the expedition of Joab
against the Edomites, the nation was low and weak, and how he prayed to
God for His assistance, he says: "Thou

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

hast made the earth to tremble; thou hast broken it: heal the breaches
thereof: for it shaketh." In another instance he expresses the idea that
we need not fear when we see other nations die and perish, because we
rely on God's support, and not on our sword and strength, in accordance
with the words: "A people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help"
(Deut. xxxiii. 29); he says (Ps. xlvi. 2): "Therefore will we not fear,
though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be shaken in the
midst of the sea."

The following figurative language is employed in Scripture in referring
to the death of the Egyptians in the Red Sea: "The waters saw thee; they
were afraid: the depths also were troubled, etc. The voice of thy
thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings lightened the world; the earth
trembled and shook" (Ps. lxxvii. 17-19). "Was the Lord displeased
against the rivers?" etc. (Hab. iii. 8). "There went up a smoke out of
his nostrils," etc. (Ps. xviii. 9). "The earth trembled," etc. (Judges
v. 4, in the Song of Deborah). There are many other instances; but those
which I have not quoted can be explained in accordance with those which
I have cited.

Let us now consider the words of Joel (iii. 3-5): "And I will show
wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood and fire, and pillars of
smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood,
before the great and terrible day of the Lord come. And it shall come to
pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be
delivered, for in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance,"
etc. I refer them to the defeat of Sennacherib near Jerusalem; but they
may be taken as an account of the defeat of Gog and Magog near Jerusalem
in the days of the Messiah, if this appears preferable, although nothing
is mentioned in this passage but great slaughter, destruction, fire, and
the diminution of the light of the two luminaries. You may perhaps
object: How can the day of the fall of Sennacherib, according to our
explanation, be called "the great and the terrible day of the Lord?" But
you must know that a day of great salvation or of great distress is
called "the great and terrible day of the Lord." Thus Joel (ii. 11) says
of the day on which the locusts came over the land, "For the day of the
Lord is great and terrible, and who can abide it?"

Our opinion, in support of which we have quoted these passages, is
clearly established, namely, that no prophet or sage has ever announced
the destruction of the Universe, or a change of its present condition,
or a permanent change of any of its properties. When our Sages say, "The
world remains six thousand years, and one thousand years it will be
waste," they do not mean a complete cessation of existing things; the
phrase "one thousand years it will be waste" distinctly shows that
*time* will continue: besides, this is the individual opinion of one
Rabbi, and in accordance with one particular theory. But on the other
hand the words, "There is nothing new under the sun" (Eccles. i. 9), in
the sense that no new creation takes place in any way and under any
circumstances, express the general opinion of our Sages, and include a
principle which every one of the doctors of the Mishnah and the Talmud
recognises and makes use of in his arguments. Even those who understand
the words "new heavens and a new earth" in their literal sense hold that
the heavens, which will in future be formed, have already been created
and are in existence, and that for this reason the present tense
"remain" is used, and not the future "will remain." They support their

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

view by citing the text, "There is nothing new under the sun." Do not
imagine that this is opposed to our opinion. They mean, perhaps, to say
that the natural laws, by which the promised future condition of Israel
will be effected, have been in existence since the days of the Creation,
and in that they are perfectly correct. When I, however, said that no
prophet ever announced "a *permanent* change of any of its properties,"
I intended to except miracles. For although the rod was turned into a
serpent, the water into blood, the pure and noble hand into a leprous
one, without the existence of any natural cause that could effect these
or similar phenomena, these changes were *not permanent*, they have not
become a physical property. On the contrary, the Universe since
continues its regular course. This is my opinion; this should be our
belief. Our Sages, however, said very strange things as regards
miracles: they are found in *Bereshit Rabba*, and in *Midrash Koheleth*,
namely, that the miracles are to some extent also natural: for they say,
when God created the Universe with its present physical properties, He
made it part of these properties, that they should produce certain
miracles at certain times, and the sign of a prophet consisted in the
fact that God told him to declare when a certain thing will take place,
but the thing itself was effected according to the fixed laws of Nature.
If this is really the meaning of the passage referred to, it testifies
to the greatness of the author, and shows that he held it to be
impossible that there should be a change in the laws of Nature, or a
change in the will of God \[as regards the physical properties of
things\] after they have once been established. He therefore assumes,
e.g., that God gave the waters the property of joining together, and of
flowing in a downward direction, and of separating only at the time when
the Egyptians were drowned, and only in a particular place. I have
already pointed out to you the source of this passage, and it only tends
to oppose the hypothesis of a new creation. It is said there: R.
Jonathan said, God made an agreement with the sea that it should divide
before the Israelites: thus it is said, "And the sea returned to its
strength when the morning appeared" (Exod. xiv. 27). R. Jeremiah, son of
Elazar, said: Not only with the sea, but with all that has been created
in the six days of the beginning \[was the agreement made\]: this is
referred to in the words, "I, even my hands have stretched out the
heavens, and all their host have I commanded" (Isa. xlv. 12); i.e., I
have commanded the sea to divide, the fire not to hurt Hananiah,
Mishael, and Azariah, the lions not to harm Daniel, and the fish to spit
out Jonah. The same is the case with the rest of the miracles.

We have thus clearly stated and explained our opinion, that we agree
with Aristotle in one half of his theory. For we believe that this
Universe remains perpetually with the same properties with which the
Creator has endowed it, and that none of these will ever be changed
except by way of miracle in some individual instances, although the
Creator has the power to change the whole Universe, to annihilate it, or
to remove any of its properties. The Universe, had, however, a beginning
and commencement, for when nothing was as yet in existence except God,
His wisdom decreed that the Universe be brought into existence at a
certain time, that it should not be annihilated or changed as regards
any of its properties, except in some instances; some of these are known
to us, whilst others belong to the future, and are therefore unknown to
us. This is our opinion and the basis of our

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

religion. The opinion of Aristotle is that the Universe, being permanent
and indestructible, is also eternal and without beginning. We have
already shown that this theory is based on the hypothesis that the
Universe is the necessary result of causal relation, and that this
hypothesis includes a certain amount of blasphemy. Having come thus far
we will make in the next chapter a few remarks on passages in the first
chapters of Genesis. For the primary object in this treatise has been to
expound as much as possible of the Scriptural account of the Creation
(*ma‘aseh bereshit*), and the description of the heavenly chariot
(*ma‘aseh mercabah*). But let us premise two general observations.

First, the account given in Scripture of the Creation is not, as is
generally believed, intended to be in all its parts literal. For if this
were the case, wise men would not have kept its explanation secret, and
our Sages would not have employed figurative speech \[in treating of the
Creation\] in order to hide its true meaning, nor would they have
objected to discuss it in the presence of the common people. The literal
meaning of the words might lead us to conceive corrupt ideas and to form
false opinions about God, or even entirely to abandon and reject the
principles of our Faith. It is therefore right to abstain and refrain
from examining this subject superficially and unscientifically. We must
blame the practice of some ignorant preachers and expounders of the
Bible, who think that wisdom consists in knowing the explanation of
words, and that greater perfection is attained by employing more words
and longer speech. It is, however, right that we should examine the
Scriptural texts by the intellect, after having acquired a knowledge of
demonstrative science, and of the true hidden meaning of prophecies. But
if one has obtained some knowledge in this matter he must not preach on
it, as I stated in my Commentary on the Mishnah (Ḥagigah, ii. 7), and
our Sages said distinctly: From the beginning of the book to this
place--after the account of the sixth day of the Creation--it is "the
glory of God to conceal a thing" (Prov. xxv. 2).

We have thus clearly stated our opinion. It is, however, part of the
Divine plan that every one who has obtained some perfection transmit it
to some other persons, as will be shown in the chapter on Prophecy. It
is, therefore, impossible for a scholar to possess knowledge of these
problems, whether it be through his own researches or through his
master's teaching, without communicating part of that knowledge to
others; it cannot be done in clear words; it must be done sparingly
byway of hints. We find in the words of some of our Sages numerous hints
and notes of this kind, but mixed up with the words of others and with
other subjects. In treating of these mysteries, as a rule, I quote as
much as contains the principal idea, and leave the rest for those who
are worthy of it.

Secondly, the prophets employ homonymous terms and use words which are
not meant to be understood in their ordinary signification, but are only
used because of some other meaning which they admit, e.g., "a rod of an
almond-tree (*shaked*)," because of the words which follow, "for I will
hasten (*shaked*)" (Jer. i. 11, 12), as will be shown in the chapter on
Prophecy. According to the same principle Ezekiel in the account of the
Divine Chariot employs, as we have stated the term *ḥashmal* (Ezek. i.
4); also *regel egel* (v. 7), *neḥoshet kalal* (v. 7), and similar
terms; Zechariah (vi. 1) likewise

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

adopts this method, and says: "And the mountains were mountains of
*neḥoshet* (brass)," and the like.

After these two remarks I will proceed to the chapter which I have
promised.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX](gfp117.md)
