[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp110)  [Next](gfp112.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

### CHAPTER XXIV

You know of Astronomy as much as you have studied with me, and learnt
from the book Almagest; we had not sufficient time to go beyond this.
The theory that \[the spheres\] move regularly, and that the assumed
courses of the stars are in harmony with observation, depends, as you
are aware, on two hypotheses: we must assume either epicycles, or
excentric spheres, or a combination of both. Now I will show that each
of these two hypotheses is irregular, and totally contrary to the
results of Natural Science. Let us first consider an epicycle, such as
has been assumed in the spheres of the moon and the five planets,
rotating on a sphere, but not round the centre of the sphere that
carries it. This arrangement would necessarily produce a revolving
motion; the epicycle would then revolve, and entirely change its place;
but that anything in the spheres should change its place is exactly what
Aristotle considers impossible. For that reason Abu-bekr ibn-Alzaig, in
an astronomical treatise which he wrote, rejects the existence of
epicycles. Besides this impossibility, he mentions others, showing that
the theory of epicycles implies other absurd notions. I will here
explain them:--(1) It is absurd to assume that the revolution of a cycle
has not the centre of the Universe for its centre; for it is a
fundamental principle in the order of the Universe that there are only
three kinds of motion--from the centre, towards the centre, and round
the centre; but an epicycle does not move away from the centre, nor
towards it, nor round it. (2) Again, according to what Aristotle
explains in Natural Science, there must be something fixed round which
the motion takes place: this is the reason why the earth remains
stationary. But the epicycle would move round a centre which is not
stationary. I have heard that Abu-bekr discovered a system in which no
epicycles occur; but excentric spheres are not excluded by him. I have
not heard it from his pupils; and even if it be correct that he
discovered such a system, he has not gained much by it: for excentricity
is likewise as contrary as possible to the principles laid down by
Aristotle. For it seems to me that an excentric sphere does not move
round the centre of the Universe, but round an imaginary point distant
from the centre, and therefore round a point which is not fixed. A
person ignorant of astronomy might think that the motion of the
excentric spheres may still be considered as taking place round
something fixed, since their centre is apparently within the sphere of
the moon. I would admit this if the centre were situated in the region
of fire or air, although the spheres would not move round a stable
point. But I will show that the amount of excentricity has, in a certain
way, been described in the Almagest; and later scholars have calculated
the exact amount of excentricity in terms of radii of the earth, and
have proved the result. The same measure has been used in astronomy in
describing all distances and magnitudes. It has [thus](errata.htm#13.md)
been shown that the point round which the sun moves lies undoubtedly
beyond the sphere of the moon, and below the superficies of the sphere
of Mercury. The centre for the circuit of Mars, that is, the centre of
the excentric sphere of Mars, is beyond the sphere of Mercury, and below
the sphere of Venus. The centre of Jupiter has the same distance; it
lies between the sphere of Venus and that of Mercury, whilst the centre
of Saturn lies between the spheres of Mars and Jupiter. Now, consider
how improbable all this appears according to the laws of Natural
Science. You will

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

find it out when you consider the known distances and magnitudes of each
sphere and each star, all expressed in terms of the radii of the earth.
There is a uniform measure for all, and the excentricity of each sphere
is not determined by units proportionate to its own magnitude.

It is still more improbable and more objectionable to assume that there
are two spheres, the one within the other; that these are closely joined
from all sides, and have, nevertheless, different centres. For in this
case the smaller sphere might move whilst the larger be at rest; but the
smaller cannot be at rest when the larger moves, and must move with the
larger when the latter rotates round any other axis than that which
passes through the two centres. Now we have this proposition which can
be proved; and, further, the established theory that there is no vacuum,
and also the assumed excentricity of the spheres; from all this it
follows that in every two spheres the motion of the upper one should
cause the lower sphere to move in the same way, and round the same
centre. But this is not the case: the outer and the inner spheres do not
move in the same way, and not round the same centre or the same axis:
each of them has its peculiar motion. For this reason it has been
assumed that between every two spheres there are substances different
from those of the spheres. It may be very much doubted whether this is
the case: for where should the centres of these intermediate substances
be placed? have these substances likewise their own peculiar motion?
Thabith has explained the above-mentioned theory in one of his
treatises, and proved that we must assume a substance of a spherical
form intermediate between one sphere and the other. All this is part of
that which I have not explained to you when you studied with me, for I
was afraid you might become confused and would not understand even those
things which I wished to show you. But as to the inclination and the
deviation assumed in respect to the latitude of the paths of Venus and
Mercury, I have already clearly shown you viva voce that it is
impossible to imagine material beings under such conditions. You have
seen that Ptolemy has already pointed out this difficulty. He says as
follows: "Let no one think that these and similar principles are
improbable. If any one considers what we have here expounded in the same
light as he considers things produced by skill and subtle work, he will
find it improbable; but it is not right to compare human things to
divine things." This is, as you know, what Ptolemy says, and I have
already pointed out to you the passages by which you can verify all I
said, except what I stated about the position of the centres of the
excentric spheres; for I have not heard that any one has paid attention
to this question. But you will understand it when you know the length of
the diameter of each sphere, and the extent of its excentricity in terms
of radii of the earth, according to the facts which Kabici has
established in his treatise on the distances. When you notice these
distances you will confirm my words.

Consider, therefore, how many difficulties arise if we accept the theory
which Aristotle expounds in Physics. For, according to that theory,
there are no epicycles, and no excentric spheres, but all spheres rotate
round the centre of the earth! How then can the different courses of the
stars be explained? how is it possible to assume a uniform perfect
rotation with the phenomena which we perceive, except by admitting one
of the two hypotheses

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

or both of them? The difficulty is still more apparent when we find that
admitting what Ptolemy said as regards the epicycle of the moon, and its
inclination towards a point different both from the centre of the
Universe and from its own centre, the calculations according to these
hypotheses are perfectly correct, within one minute: that their
correctness is confirmed by the most accurate calculation of the time,
duration, and extent of the eclipses, which is always based on these
hypotheses. Furthermore, how can we reconcile, without assuming the
existence of epicycles, the apparent retrogression of a star with its
other motions? How can rotation or motion take place round a point which
is not fixed? These are real difficulties.

I have explained to you already *vivâ voce*, that these difficulties do
not concern the astronomer: for he does not profess to tell us the
existing properties of the spheres, but to suggest, whether correctly or
not, a theory in which the motion of the stars is circular and uniform,
and yet in agreement with our observation. You know that Abu-bekr
al-Zaig, in his treatise on Physics, expresses a doubt whether Aristotle
knew the excentricity of the sun but ignored it, and only discussed the
effect of the inclination, because he saw that the effect of the
excentricity was identical with that of the inclination; or whether he
did not perceive it. The truth is that he did not notice it or hear of
it; the science was not perfect in his age. If he had heard of it, he
would have strongly opposed it; if he had been convinced of its
correctness, he would have been greatly embarrassed as regards all that
he said on the question. What I said before (ch. xxii.) I will repeat
now, namely, that the theory of Aristotle, in explaining the phenomena
in the sublunary world, is in accordance with logical inference: here we
know the causal relation between one phenomenon and another; we see how
far science can investigate them, and the management of nature is clear
and intelligible. But of the things in the heavens man knows nothing
except a few mathematical calculations, and you see how far these go. I
say in the words of the poet, "The heavens are the Lord's, but the earth
He hath given to the sons of man" (Ps. cxv. 16); that is to say, God
alone has a perfect and true knowledge of the heavens, their nature,
their essence, their form, their motions, and their causes; but He gave
man power to know the things which are under the heavens: here is man's
world, here is his home, into which he has been placed, and of which he
is himself a portion. This is in reality the truth. For the facts which
we require in proving the existence of heavenly beings are withheld from
us: the heavens are too far from us, and too exalted in place and rank.
Man's faculties are too deficient to comprehend even the general proof
the heavens contain for the existence of Him who sets them in motion. It
is in fact ignorance or a kind of madness to weary our minds with
finding out things which are beyond our reach, without having the means
of approaching them. We must content ourselves with that which is within
our reach, and that which cannot be approached by logical inference let
us leave to him who has been endowed with that great and divine
influence, expressed in the words: "Mouth to mouth do I speak with Him"
(Num. xii. 8).

This is all I can say on this question; another person may perhaps be
able to establish by proof what appears doubtful to me. It is on account
of my great love of truth that I have shown my embarrassment in these
matters

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

and I have not heard, nor do I know that any of these theories have been
established by proof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](gfp112.md)
