[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp144)  [Next](gfp146) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX

THE corporeal element in man is a large screen and partition that
prevents him from perfectly perceiving abstract ideals: this would be
the case even if the corporeal element were as pure and superior as the
substance of the spheres; how much more must this be the case with our
dark and opaque body. However great the exertion of our mind may be to
comprehend the Divine Being or any of the ideals, we find a screen and
partition between Him

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

and ourselves. Thus the prophets frequently hint at the existence of a
partition between God and us. They say He is concealed from us in
vapours, in darkness, in mist, or in a thick cloud: or use similar
figures to express that on account of our bodies we are unable to
comprehend His essence. This is the meaning of the words, "Clouds and
darkness are round about Him" (Ps. xcvii. 2). The prophets tell us that
the difficulty consists in the grossness of our substance: they do not
imply, as might be gathered from the literal meaning of their words,
that God is corporeal, and is invisible because He is surrounded by
thick clouds, vapours, darkness, or mist. This figure is also expressed
in the passage, "He made darkness His secret place" (Ps. xviii. 12). The
object of God revealing Himself in thick clouds, darkness, vapours, and
mist was to teach this lesson; for every prophetic vision contains some
lesson by means of allegory; that mighty vision, therefore, though the
greatest of all visions, and above all comparison, viz., His revelation
in a thick cloud, did not take place without any purpose, it was
intended to indicate that we cannot comprehend Him on account of the
dark body that surrounds us. It does not surround God, because He is
incorporeal. A tradition is current among our people that the day of the
revelation on Mount Sinai was misty, cloudy, and a little rainy. Comp.
"Lord, when thou wentest forth from Seir, when thou marchedst out of the
field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped water"
(Judges v. 4). The same idea is expressed by the words "darkness,
clouds, and thick darkness" (Deut. iv. 11). The phrase does not denote
that darkness surrounds God, for with Him there is no darkness, but the
great, strong, and permanent light, which, emanating from Him,
illuminates all darkness, as is expressed by the prophetic simile, "And
the earth shined with His glory" (Ezek. xliii. 2).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](gfp146)
