[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp183)  [Next](gfp185.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLVIII

THE precepts of the thirteenth class are those which we have enumerated
in the "Laws concerning forbidden food" (*Hilkot maakalot asurot*),
"Laws concerning killing animals for food" (*Hilkot sheḥitah*), and
"Laws concerning vows and Nazaritism" (*Hilkot nedarim u-nezirot*). We
have fully and very explicitly discussed the object of this class in
this treatise, and in our Commentary on the Sayings of the Fathers. We
will here add a few remarks in reviewing the single commandments which
are mentioned there.

I maintain that the food which is forbidden by the Law is unwholesome.
There is nothing among the forbidden kinds of food whose injurious
character is doubted, except pork (Lev. xi. 7), and fat (*ibid*. vii.
23). But also in these cases the doubt is not justified. For pork
contains more moisture than necessary \[for human food\], and too much
of superfluous matter. The principal reason why the Law forbids swine's
flesh is to be found in the circumstance that its habits and its food
are very dirty and loathsome. It has already been pointed out how
emphatically the Law enjoins the removal of

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

the sight of loathsome objects, even in the field and in the camp; how
much more objectionable is such a sight in towns. But if it were allowed
to eat swine's flesh, the streets and houses would be more dirty than
any cesspool, as may be seen at present in the country of the Franks. A
saying of our Sages declares: "The mouth of a swine is as dirty as dung
itself" (B. T. Ber. 25a).

The fat of the intestines makes us full, interrupts our digestion, and
produces cold and thick blood; it is more fit for fuel \[than for human
food\].

Blood (Lev. xvii. 12), and *nebelah*, i.e., the flesh of an animal that
died of itself (Deut. xiv. 21), are indigestible, and injurious as food;
*Trefah*, an animal in a diseased state (Exod. xxii. 30), is on the way
of becoming a *nebelah*.

The characteristics given in the Law (Lev. xi., and Deut. xiv.) of the
permitted animals, viz., chewing the cud and divided hoofs for cattle,
and fins and scales for fish, are in themselves neither the cause of the
permission when they are present, nor of the prohibition when they are
absent; but merely signs by which the recommended species of animals can
be discerned from those that are forbidden.

The reason why the sinew that shrank is prohibited is stated in the Law
(Gen. xxxii. 33).

It is prohibited to cut off a limb of a living animal and eat it,
because such act would produce cruelty, and develop it: besides, the
heathen kings used to do it: it was also a kind of idolatrous worship to
cut off a certain limb of a living animal and to eat it.

Meat boiled in milk is undoubtedly gross food, and makes overfull; but I
think that most probably it is also prohibited because it is somehow
connected with idolatry, forming perhaps part of the service, or being
used on some festival of the heathen. I find a support for this view in
the circumstance that the Law mentions the prohibition twice after the
commandment given concerning the festivals "Three times in the year all
thy males shall appear before the Lord God" (Exod. xxiii. 17, and xxxiv.
73), as if to say, "When you come before me on your festivals, do not
seethe your food in the manner as the heathen used to do." This I
consider as the best reason for the prohibition: but as far as I have
seen the books on Sabean rites, nothing is mentioned of this custom.

The commandment concerning the killing of animals is necessary, because
the natural food of man consists of vegetables and of the flesh of
animals: the best meat is that of animals permitted to be used as food.
No doctor has any doubts about this. Since, therefore, the desire of
procuring good food necessitates the slaying of animals, the Law enjoins
that the death of the animal should be the easiest. It is not allowed to
torment the animal by cutting the throat in a clumsy manner, by
poleaxing, or by cutting off a limb whilst the animal is alive.

It is also prohibited to kill an animal with its young on the same day
(Lev. xxii. 28), in order that people should be restrained and prevented
from killing the two together in such a manner that the young is slain
in the sight of the mother; for the pain of the animals under such
circumstances is very great. There is no difference in this case between
the pain of man and the pain of other living beings, since the love and
tenderness of the mother for her young ones is not produced by
reasoning, but by imagination, and this faculty exists not only in man
but in most living beings. This law applies only to ox and

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

lamb, because of the domestic animals used as food these alone are
permitted to us, and in these cases the mother recognises her young.

The same reason applies to the law which enjoins that we should let the
mother fly away when we take the young. The eggs over which the bird
sits, and the young that are in need of their mother, are generally
unfit for food, and when the mother is sent away she does not see the
taking of her young ones, and does not feel any pain. In most cases,
however, this commandment will cause man to leave the whole nest
untouched, because \[the young or the eggs\], which he is allowed to
take, are, as a rule, unfit for food. If the Law provides that such
grief should not be caused to cattle or birds, how much more careful
must we be that we should not cause grief to our fellowmen. When in the
Talmud (Ber. p. 33*b*) those are blamed who use in their prayer the
phrase, "Thy mercy extendeth to young birds," it is the expression of
the one of the two opinions mentioned by us, namely, that the precepts
of the Law have no other reason but the Divine will. We follow the other
opinion.

The reason why we cover the blood when we kill animals, and why we do it
only when we kill clean beasts and clean birds, has already been
explained by us (*supra*, chap. xlvi., p. 362).

In addition to the things prohibited by the Law, we are also commanded
to observe the prohibitions enjoined by our own vows (Num. xxx.). If we
say, This bread or this meat is forbidden for us, we are not allowed to
partake of that food. The object of that precept is to train us in
temperance, that we should be able to control our appetites for eating
and drinking. Our Sages say accordingly, "Vows are a fence for
abstinence." As women are easily provoked to anger, owing to their
greater excitability and the weakness of their mind, their oaths, if
entirely under their own control, would cause great grief, quarrel, and
disorder in the family; one kind of food would be allowed for the
husband, and forbidden for the wife; another kind forbidden for the
daughter, and allowed for the mother. Therefore the Law gives the father
of the family control over the vows of those dependent on him. A woman
that is independent, and not under the authority of a chief of the
family, is, as regards vows, subject to the same laws as men; I mean a
woman that has no husband, or that has no father, or that is of age,
i.e., twelve years and six months.

The object of Nazaritism (Num. vi.) is obvious. It keeps away from wine
that has ruined people in ardent and modern times. "Many strong men have
been slain by it" (Prov. xxvii. 26). "But they also have erred through
wine. . . . the priest and the prophet" (Isa. xxviii. 7). In the law
about the Nazarite we notice even the prohibition, "he shall eat nothing
that is made of the vine tree" (Num. vi. 4), as an additional
precaution, implying the lesson that man must take of wine only as much
as is absolutely necessary. For he who abstains from drinking it is
called "holy"; his sanctity is made equal to that of the high-priest, in
not being allowed to defile himself even to his father, to his mother,
and the like. This honour is given him because he abstains from wine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIX](gfp185.md)
