[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp119)  [Next](gfp121.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXIII

IT is clear to me that what Moses experienced at the revelation on Mount
Sinai was different from that which was experienced by all the other
Israelites, for Moses alone was addressed by God, and for this reason
the second person singular is used in the Ten Commandments; Moses then
went down to the foot of the mount and told his fellow-men what he had
heard. Comp., "I stood between the Lord and you at that time to tell you
the word of the Lord" (Deut. v. 5). Again, "Moses spake, and God
answered him with a loud voice" (Exod. xix. 19). In the Mechilta our
Sages say distinctly that he brought to them every word as he had heard
it. Furthermore, the words, "In order that the people hear when I speak
with thee" (Exod. xix. 9), show that God spoke to Moses, and the people
only heard the mighty sound, not distinct words. It is to the perception
of this mighty sound that Scripture

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

refers in the passage, "When ye hear the sound" (Deut. v. 20); again it
is stated, "You heard a sound of words" (*ibid*. iv. 12), and it is not
said "You heard words"; and even where the hearing of the words is
mentioned, only the perception of the sound is meant. It was only Moses
that heard the words, and he reported them to the people. This is
apparent from Scripture, and from the utterances of our Sages in
general. There is, however, an opinion of our Sages frequently expressed
in the Midrashim, and found also in the Talmud, to this effect: The
Israelites heard the first and the second commandments from God, i.e.,
they learnt the truth of the principles contained in these two
commandments in the same manner as Moses, and not through Moses. For
these two principles, the existence of God and His Unity, can be arrived
at by means of reasoning, and whatever can be established by proof is
known by the prophet in the same way as by any other person; he has no
advantage in this respect. These two principles were not known through
prophecy alone. Comp., "Thou hast been shown to know that," etc. (Deut.
iv. 34). But the rest of the commandments are of an ethical and
authoritative character, and do not contain \[truths\] perceived by the
intellect. Notwithstanding all that has been said by our Sages on this
subject, we infer from Scripture as well as from the words of our Sages,
that the Israelites heard on that occasion a certain sound which Moses
understood to proclaim the first two commandments, and through Moses all
other Israelites learnt them when he in intelligible sounds repeated
them to the people. Our Sages mention this view, and support it by the
verse, "God hath spoken once; twice have I heard this" (Ps. lxii. 11).
They state distinctly, in the beginning of *Midrash Ḥazita*, that the
Israelites did not hear any other command directly from God; comp. "A
loud voice, and it was not heard again" (Deut. v. 19). It was after this
first sound was heard that the people were seized with the fear and
terror described in Scripture, and that they said, "Behold the Lord our
God has shown us, etc., and now why shall we die, etc. Come thou near,"
etc. Then Moses, the most distinguished of all mankind, came the second
time, received successively the other commandments, and came down to the
foot of the mountain to proclaim them to the people, whilst the mighty
phenomena continued; they saw the fire, they heard the sounds, which
were those of thunder and lightning during a storm, and the loud sound
of the shofar: and all that is said of the many sounds heard at that
time, e.g., in the verse, "and all the people perceived the sounds,"
etc., refers to the sound of the shofar, thunder, and similar sounds.
But the voice of the Lord, that is, the voice created for that purpose,
which was understood to include the diverse commandments, was only heard
once, as is declared in the Law, and has been clearly stated by our
Sages in the places which I have indicated to you. When the people heard
this voice their soul left them; and in this voice they perceived the
first two commandments. It must, however, be noticed that the people did
not understand the voice in the same degree as Moses did. I will point
out to you this important fact, and show you that it was a matter of
tradition with the nation, and well known by our Sages. For, as a rule,
Onkelos renders the word *va-yedabber* by *u-mallel* ("and God spake");
this is also the case with this word in the beginning of the twentieth
chapter of Exodus, but the words *ve-al yedabber immanu elohim*, "let
not God speak to us"

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Exod. xx. 19),
addressed by the people to Moses, is rendered *vela yitmallel immanu min
kodam adonai* ("Let not aught be spoken to us by the Lord"). Onkelos
makes thus the same distinction which we made. You know that according
to the Talmud Onkelos received all these excellent interpretations
directly from R. Eliezer and R. Joshua, the wisest men in Israel. Note
it, and remember it, for it is impossible for any person to expound the
revelation on Mount Sinai more fully than our Sages have done, since it
is one of the secrets of the Law. It is very difficult to have a true
conception of the events, for there has never been before, nor will
there ever be again, anything like it. Note it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV](gfp121.md)
