[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp127)  [Next](gfp129) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLI

I NEED not explain what a dream is, but I will explain the meaning of
the term *mareh*, "vision," which occurs in the passage: "In a vision
(*be-mareh*) do I make myself known unto him" (Num. xii. 6). The term
signifies that which is also called *mareh ha-nebuah*, "prophetic
vision," *yad ha-shem*, "the hand of God," and *maḥazeh*, "a vision." It
is something terrible and fearful which the prophet feels while awake,
as is distinctly stated by

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Daniel: "And I saw
this great vision, and there remained no strength in me, for my
comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength"
(Dan, x. 8). He afterwards continues, "Thus was I in deep sleep on my
face, and my face toward the ground" (*ibid*. ver. 9). But it was in a
prophetic vision that the angel spoke to him and "set him upon his
knees." Under such circumstances the senses cease to act, and the
\[Active Intellect\] influences the rational faculties, and through them
the imaginative faculties, which become perfect and active. Sometimes
the prophecy begins with a prophetic vision, the prophet greatly
trembles, and is much affected in consequence of the perfect action of
the imaginative faculty: and after that the prophecy follows. This was
the case with Abraham. The commencement of the prophecy is, "The word of
the Lord came to Abraham in a vision" (Gen. xv. 1); after this, "a deep
sleep fell upon Abraham"; and at last, "he said unto Abraham," etc. When
prophets speak of the fact that they received a prophecy, they say that
they received it from an angel, or from God; but even in the latter case
it was likewise received through an angel. Our Sages, therefore, explain
the words, "And the Lord said unto her" that He spake through an angel.
You must know that whenever Scripture relates that the Lord or an angel
spoke to a person, this took place in a dream or in a prophetic vision.

There are four different ways in which Scripture relates the fact that a
divine communication was made to the prophet. (1) The prophet relates
that he heard the words of an angel in a dream or vision; (2) He reports
the words of the angel without mentioning that they were perceived in a
dream or vision, assuming that it is well known that prophecy can only
originate in one of the two ways, "In a vision I will make myself known
unto him, in a dream I will speak unto him" (Num. xii. 6). (3) The
prophet does not mention the angel at all; he says that God spoke to
him, but he states that he received the message in a dream or a vision.
(4) He introduces his prophecy by stating that God spoke to him, or told
him to do a certain thing, or speak certain words, but he does not
explain that he received the message in a dream or vision, because he
assumes that it is well known, and has been established as a principle
that no prophecy or revelation originates otherwise than in a dream or
vision, and through an angel. Instances of the first form are the
following:--"And the angel of the Lord said unto me in a dream, Jacob"
(Gen. xxxi. 11); "And an angel said unto Israel in a vision of night"
(*ibid*. xlvi. 2); "And an angel came to Balaam by night"; "And an angel
said unto Balaam" (Num. xxii. 20-72). Instances of the second form are
these: "And *Elohim* (an angel), said unto Jacob, Rise, go up to Bethel"
(Gen. xxxv. 1); "And *Elohim* said unto him, Thy name is Jacob," etc.
(*ibid*. xxxv. 10); "And an angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of
heaven the second time" (*ibid*. xxii. 15); "And *Elohim* said unto
Noah" (*ibid*. vi. 13). The following is an instance of the third form:
"The word of the Lord came unto Abraham in a vision" (*ibid*. xv. 1).
Instances of the fourth form are: "And the Lord said unto Abraham"
(*ibid*. xviii. 13); "And the Lord said unto Jacob, Return," etc.
(*ibid*. xxxi. 3); "And the Lord said unto Joshua" (Josh. v. 9); "And
the Lord said unto Gideon" (Judges vii. 2). Most of the prophets speak
in a similar manner: "And the Lord said unto me" (Deut. ii. 2); "And the
word of the Lord came unto me"

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Ezek. xxx. 1);
"And the word of the Lord came" (2 Sam. xxiv. 11); "And behold, the word
of the Lord came unto him" (1 Kings xix. 9); "And the word of the Lord
came expressly" (Ezek. i. 3); "The beginning of the word of the Lord by
Hosea" (Hos. i. 2); "The hand of the Lord was upon me" (Ezek. xxxvii.
1). There are a great many instances of this class. Every passage in
Scripture introduced by any of these four forms is a prophecy proclaimed
by a prophet; but the phrase, "And *Elohim* (an angel) came to a certain
person in the dream of night," does not indicate a prophecy, and the
person mentioned in that phrase is not a prophet; the phrase only
informs us that the attention of the person was called by God to a
certain thing, and at the same time that this happened at night. For
just as God may cause a person to move in order to save or kill another
person, so He may cause, according to His will, certain things to rise
in man's mind in a dream by night. We have no doubt that the Syrian
Laban was a perfectly wicked man, and an idolater; likewise Abimelech,
though a good man among his people, is told by Abraham concerning his
land \[Gerar\] and his kingdom, "Surely there is no fear of God in this
place" (Gen. xx. 11). And yet concerning both of them, viz., Laban and
Abimelech, it is said \[that an angel appeared to them in a dream\].
Comp. "And Elohim (an angel) came to Abimelech in a dream by night"
(*ibid*. ver. 3); and also, "And *Elohim* came to the Syrian Laban in
the dream of the night" (*ibid*. xxxi. 24). Note and consider the
distinction between the phrases, "And *Elohim* came," and "*Elohim*
said," between "in a dream by night," and "in a vision by night." In
reference to Jacob it is said, "And an angel said to Israel in the
visions by night" (Gen. xlvi. 2), but in reference to Laban and
Abimelech, "And *Elohim* came," etc. Onkelos makes the distinction
clear; he translates, in the last two instances, *ata memar min kodam
adonai*, "a word came from the Lord," and not *ve-itgeli*, "and the Lord
appeared." The phrase, "And the Lord said to a certain person," is
employed even when this person was not really addressed by the Lord, and
did not receive any prophecy, but was informed of a certain thing
through a prophet. E.g., "And she went to inquire of the Lord" (Gen.
xxv. 22); that is, according to the explanation of our Sages, she went
to the college of Eber, and the latter gave her the answer; and this is
expressed by the words, "And the Lord said unto her" (*ibid*. ver. 23).
These words have also been explained thus, God spoke to her through an
angel; and by "angel" Eber is meant here, for a prophet is sometimes
called "angel," as will be explained; or the angel that appeared to Eber
in this vision is referred to, or the object of the Midrash explanation
is merely to express that wherever God is introduced as directly
speaking to a person, i.e., to any of the ordinary prophets, He speaks
through an angel, as has been set forth by us (chap. xxxiv.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLII](gfp129)
