[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp175)  [Next](gfp177.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

### CHAPTER XL

THE precepts of the fifth class, enumerated in the Section--"On Damages"
(*Sepher neziḳin*), aim at the removal of wrong and the prevention of
injury. As we are strongly recommended to prevent damage, we are
responsible for every damage caused by our property or through our work
in so far as it is in our power to take care and to guard it from
becoming injurious. We are, therefore, responsible for all damage caused
by our cattle; we must guard them. The same is the case with fire and
pits; they are made by man, and he can be careful that they do not cause
damage. I win point out the equity of the various laws in this respect.
No compensation is enforced for damage caused by the mouth or the foot
of an animal in a public thoroughfare; because this cannot be guarded
against, and the damage caused there is not very large. Those who place
their things in a public place are themselves guilty of neglect, and
expose their property to injury. But compensation is given for damage
caused to the property of a person in his own field by the tooth or the
foot of an animal. It is different in the case of damage caused by the
horn of animals or the like. The animal can be guarded everywhere land
prevented from causing injury\], whilst those who pass public
thoroughfares cannot sufficiently take care against accidents of this
kind. In this case the law is the same for all places: but there is a
difference whether the owner of the animal has been warned concerning it
or not (*mu‘ad* or *tam*). If the animal has not been in the habit of
causing damage, the owner need only pay half the damage; but damage
caused by an animal which has been in the habit of doing so, and has
been known as savage, must be paid in full. The compensation for a slave
is uniformly estimated at half the value fixed for a free man. For in
the law concerning the valuation of man you find the highest valuation
at sixty shekels, whilst the money to be paid for a slave is fixed at
thirty shekels silver. The killing of an animal that has killed a human
being (Exod. xxi. 28, 29) is not a punishment to the animal, as the
dissenters insinuate against us, but it is a fine imposed on the owner
of that animal. For the same reason the use of its flesh is prohibited.
The owner of an animal will, therefore, take the greatest possible care
in guarding it; he will know that if any person is killed by the animal,
whether that person be grown up or young, free or in bondage, he
forfeits at least the animal; and in case he has already received a
warning concerning it, he will have to pay a ransom in addition to the
loss of the animal. This is also the reason why a beast is killed that
has been used by a human being for an immoral purpose (Lev. xx. 15, 16);
its owner will be more careful as regards his beast, will guard it, and
never lose sight of it, just as he watches his household: for people
fear the loss of their property as much as that of their own life: some
even more, but most people hold both in the same estimation. Comp. "and
to take us for bondmen, and our asses" (Gen. xliii. 18).

This class includes also the duty of killing him who pursues another
person; that is to say, if a person is about to commit a crime we may
prevent it by killing him. Only in two cases is this permitted; viz.,
when a person runs after another in order to murder him, or in order to
commit fornication: because in these two cases the crime, once
committed; cannot be remedied. In the case of other sins, punished with
death by the court of law, such as

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

idolatry and profanation of the Sabbath, by which the sinner does no
harm to another person, and which concern only his own principles, no
person may be killed for the mere intention, if he has not carried it
out.

It is known that desire is denounced because it leads to coveting, and
the latter is prohibited because it leads to robbery, as has been said
by our Sages.

The object of the law of restoring lost property to its owner (Deut.
xxii. 1-3) is obvious. In the first instance, it is in itself a good
feature in man's character. Secondly, its benefit is mutual; for if a
person does not return the lost property of his fellow-man, nobody will
restore to him what he may lose, just as those who do not honour their
parents cannot expect to be honoured by their children.

A person who killed another person unknowingly must go into exile (Exod.
xii. 13: Num. xxxv. 11-28); because the anger of "the avenger of the
blood" (Num. xxxv. 19) cools down while the cause of the mischief is out
of sight. The chance of returning from the exile depends on the death of
\[the high-priest\], the most honoured of men, and the friend of all
Israel. By his death the relative of the slain person becomes reconciled
(*ibid*. ver. 25); for it is a natural phenomenon that we find
consolation in our misfortune when the same misfortune or a greater one
has befallen another person. Amongst us no death causes more grief than
that of the high-priest.

The beneficial character of the law concerning "the breaking of the neck
of a heifer" (Deut. xii. 1-8) is evident. For it is the city that is
nearest to the slain person that brings the heifer, and in most cases
the murderer comes from that place. The elders of the place call upon
God as their witness, according to the interpretation of our Sages, that
they have always kept the roads in good condition, have protected them,
and have directed every one that asked his way; that the person has not
been killed because they were careless in these general provisions, and
they do not know who has slain him. As a rule the investigation, the
procession of the elders, the measuring, and the taking of the heifer,
make people talk about it, and by making the event public, the murderer
may be found out, and he who knows of him, or has heard of him, or has
discovered him by any due, will now name the person that is the
murderer, and as soon as a man, or even a woman or handmaid, rises up
and names a certain person as having committed the murder, the heifer is
not killed. It is well known that it is considered great wickedness and
guilt on the part of a person who knows the murderer, and is silent
about him whilst the elders call upon God as witness that they know
nothing about the murderer. Even a woman will, therefore, communicate
whatever knowledge she has of him. When the murderer is discovered, the
benefit of the law is apparent. If the court of justice cannot sentence
him to death, the king may find him guilty, who has the power to
sentence to death on circumstantial evidence; and if the ling does not
put him to death, the avenger of blood may scheme and plan his death,
and at last kill him. We have thus shown the use of the law concerning
the breaking of the neck of the heifer in discovering the murderer.
Force is added to the law by the rule that the place in which the neck
of the heifer is broken should never be cultivated or sown. The owner of
the land will therefore use all means in his power to search and to find
the murderer, in order that the heifer be not killed and his land be not
made useless to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLI](gfp177.md)
