[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Virgil](../index)  [Index](index)  [Latin](geol01)  [Previous](geo00.md) 
[Next](geo02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE GEORGICS

## BOOK FIRST

WHAT makes the cornfields glad; beneath what star it befits to upturn
the ground, Maecenas, and clasp the vine to her elm; the tending of oxen
and the charge of the keeper of a flock; and all the skill of thrifty
bees; of this will I begin to sing. You, O bright splendours of the
world, who lead on the rolling year through heaven; Liber and gracious
Ceres, if by your gift Earth exchanged Chaonian acorns for the swelling
ear, and tempered her draughts of Achelous with the discovered grape;
and you, O Fauns, guardian presences of the country, trip it together,
Fauns and Dryad girls; of your gifts I sing. And thou, Neptune, at whose
mighty trident-stroke Earth first bore the neighing steed; and thou, O
forester, whose three hundred snow-white bullocks crop the rich Cean
brakes; even thou, leaving thy native woodland and thy Lycean lawns, Pan
of Tegea, shepherd of the flock, so thou love thy Maenalus, be gracious
and come; and Minerva inventress of the olive, and thou, boy teacher of
the crooked plough, and Silvanus carrying thy slim cypress uprooted;
gods and goddesses all who keep the fields in your care, or who feed the
fresh plants from no sown seed, or who send down on the crops plentiful
rain from heaven; and thou, whatsoever place thou art soon to hold in
the gods' consistory, whether thou wilt look on cities and have earth in
keeping, and the vast world receive thee as fosterer of harvests and
sovereign of seasons, and wreathe thy brows with thy mother's myrtle; or
whether thou come as god of the infinite sea, and thy deity only be
adored of sailors, to thee utmost Thule be tributary, thy hand Tethys
purchase for her daughter with dower of all her waves; or whether thou
set thyself as a new sign among the lingering months, where space opens
between Erigone

{p. 296}

and the following Claws, while before thee the blazing Scorpion draws in
his arms, and retreats from more than the allotted space of heaven;
whatso thou wilt be--for neither does hell hope thy reign, nor may so
dread a desire of reigning ever be thine, though Greece be enrapt in her
Elysian plains, and Proserpine care not to follow the mother who calls
her back: grant a fair passage, and favour my bold endeavour, and with
me pitying the country folk who know not of the way, advance, and even
now learn to be called on in prayer.

In early spring, when chilly moisture trickles from the hoar hills and
the crumbling clod thaws in the west wind, even then would I have the
bull begin to groan over the deep-driven plough and the share glitter
with polish of the furrow. That field at last replies to the greedy
farmer's prayers, which has twice felt the sun, twice the frost; that
bursts his granaries with overflowing harvests.

And ere yet our iron cleaves the unknown plain, be our care first to
learn the winds, and the sky's shifting mood, and the ground's native
nurture and dress, and what each quarter will bear and what each will
reject. Here corn, there grapes come more prosperously; yonder the tree
drops her seedlings, and unbidden grasses kindle into green. Seest thou
not how Tmolus sends scent of saffron, India ivory, the soft Sabaeans
their spice; but the naked Chalybes steel, and Pontus the castor drug,
Epirus mares for Elean palms? From of old Nature laid such laws upon
certain regions, an everlasting covenant, what time Deucalion of old
cast on the unpeopled globe those stones whence the hard race of man was
born. Come therefore, from the first months of the year straightway let
the strong bulls upturn the rich floor of earth, and the full strength
of summer suns bake the flat clods to dust. But if the land be not
fertile, it will serve to ridge it by shallow furrows hard on Arcturus'
rising; there, lest weeds choke the corn's luxuriance; here, lest scant
moisture leave a barren waste of sand.

In turn likewise shalt thou let the stubbles lie fallow, and the idle
field crust over unstirred; or else there under changed

{p. 291}

skies sow golden spelt, where before thou hadst reaped the pea with
wealth of rattling pods, or the tiny vetch crop, or the brittle stalks
and rustling underwood of the bitter lupin. For the field is drained by
flax-harvest and wheat-harvest, drained by the slumber-steeped poppy of
Lethe, but yet rotation lightens the labour; only scorn not to soak the
dry soil with fattening dung, nor to scatter grimy ashes over the
exhausted lands. Thus too the fields find rest in change of crop; nor
meanwhile are thanks lost on unploughed land. Often likewise it is well
to burn barren fields and consume the light stubble in crackling flame:
whether that earth thence conceives secret strength and sustenance, or
all her evil is melted away and her useless moisture sweats out in the
fire; or that the heat opens more of these ducts and blind pores that
carry her juices to the fresh herbage; or rather hardens and binds her
gaping veins against fine rain or the fierce sun's mastery or the
frostbite of the searching North.

Great service withal he does the fields who breaks their dull clods with
the mattock and drags osier hurdles over them, nor from high Olympus
does golden Ceres regard him in vain; or he who, raising ridges along
the furrowed plain, again turns his plough to break them across, and
labours earth incessantly and makes the fields own his sway.

Pray for dripping midsummers and clear winters, O husbandmen; from
winter dust the spelt grows strongest, and the field is glad; never does
Mysia triumph in such pride of tillage, or Gargarus himself wonder at
his harvests. Why tell of him, who, when the seed is cast, follows close
over the field and breaks down the lumps of sticky soil? then guides
over the crops chasing runlets from the river; and when the blade is
dying on the scorched and feverous field, look! on the brow of the slope
he lures the wave from her channel; the falling wave wakens a hoarse
chatter among the smooth pebbles, and gushes cool over the parched
fields. Why of him, who, lest the stalk sink prone under the heavy car,
grazes down the rankness of the cornfield in the tender blade, when the
crop first levels the furrow? or who gathers and drains away the
moisture

{p. 298}

of the marsh with porous gravel, above all if in the doubtful months the
floods go out on the river, covering all the broad flats with mud, and
leave pools steaming with warm moisture in the hollows.

Nor yet, though labours of men and oxen have so wrought in turning the
soil, are the villain goose and Strymonian crane and the bitter-fibred
succory unavailing to injure, or the shade to harm. Our Lord himself
willed the way of tillage to be hard, and long ago set art to stir the
fields, sharpening the wits of man with care, nor suffered his realm to
slumber in heavy torpor. Before Jove no tillers made the fields subject;
not even might the plain be parted by landmark or boundary line; men
gathered to a common store, and unaided and unasked earth bore all
things in a fuller plenty. He it was who gave the black snake his venom,
and bade wolves ravin and the sea be tossed, who shook the honey from
the leaves and took fire away, and stopped the brooks that ran wandering
with wine: that so practice and pondering might slowly forge out many an
art, might seek the corn-blade in the furrow and strike hidden fire from
the veins of flint. Then first rivers felt the hollowed alder, then the
sailor gave the stars their number and name, Pleiads and Hyades and the
bright Lycaonian Bear. Then was invented the snare to catch game and the
treacherous lime-twig, and the ring of dogs round the wide forest-lawn;
and even now one whips the wide stream and searches the pool with his
casting-net, and another draws his lines dripping from the sea. Then
rigid iron and the blade of the shrill saw came--for they of old split
wood in clefts with wedges--then arts many in sort; nothing but yielded
to unrelenting toil and the hard pressure of poverty. Ceres first
instructed mortals to upturn earth with iron, when now acorns and
arbute-berries were failing from the sacred forest, and Dodona denied
them sustenance. Soon the labour of the cornfield too increased; vile
mildew must devour the stalk and the thistle lift over the field his
lazy spears: the crop dwindles, a rough forest of clivers and burs
advances, and fruitless darnel and barren wild-oats reign over the
shining

{p. 299}

tilth. Nay, except thou wilt harass the weeds with ceaseless mattock,
and frighten off the birds with clamour, and thy pruning-hook lop the
darkening rustic shades and thy prayers call down the rain, ah! all in
vain wilt thou eye the garner pile of another, and allay thine own
hunger from the shaken oak in the woodland.

Likewise must be told what are the weapons of the hardy countryfolk,
without which can be neither sowing nor springing of harvests: the share
first, and the heavy strength of the curved plough, and the slow rolling
wagons of our Lady of Eleusis, sledges and harrows and the weary weight
of the mattock; withal the slight wicker ware of Celeus, arbutus
hurdles, and Iacchus' mystical winnowing-fan. All these thou wilt
heedfully provide and lay up long in store, if the divine country keeps
her due honour in thine eyes. Early the forest elm is bowed by main
force to bend into a share-beam, and takes the shape of the curving
plough; to the stock of it are fitted the long eight-foot pole, the two
mould-boards, and the double back of the share-head; and the light lime
is cut to season for the yoke, and the tall beech for the plough-tail
that is to turn the carriage from above and behind, and oak battens are
hung over the fire for the smoke to search them through.

I can repeat to thee many a counsel of them of old, if thou shrink not
back nor weary to learn of lowly cares. Above all must the
threshing-floor be levelled with the ponderous roller, and wrought by
hand and cemented with clinging potter's clay, that it may not gather
weeds nor crack in the reign of dust, and be playground withal for
manifold destroyers. Often the tiny mouse builds his house and makes his
granaries underground, or the eyeless mole scoops his cell; and in
chinks is found the toad, and all the swarming vermin that are bred in
earth; and the weevil, and the ant that fears a destitute old age,
plunder the great pile of spelt.

Look thou likewise, when the walnut in the woodland attires herself in
wealth of blossom, and bends with scented boughs; if her fruit exceed,
the corn will keep pace with it, and abundant threshing come with
abundant beat; but if her

{p. 300}

shade overflow in luxuriance of leaf, vainly will the chaff-laden straw
be beaten on the winnowing-floor.

In truth I have seen many a sower steep his seeds and wash them
beforehand in black olive-lees, that the fruit in the treacherous pod
might be larger and soften quickly even over a little fire: I have seen
them, though long chosen and toilsomely approved, still fall off unless
the strong hand of man picked the largest year by year: so it is fated
that all things run to the worse and fall dropping backwards; even as
one who with strain of oarage urges a skiff up stream, if once he
slacken his arms, the prone river current sweeps him headlong down.

Likewise must we no less regard the star of Arcturus and the days of the
Kids and the gleaming Serpent, than they who sailing homeward over
windswept seas adventure the Pontic and the straits by Abydus'
oyster-beds. When the Scales make daylight and sleep equal in hours and
just halve the globe between light and shadow, set your bulls at work, O
men! sow the barley-fields, right into the showery skirts of frost-bound
mid-winter: no less is it time to cover in earth the flax-plant and the
corn-poppy, and to urge on the belated ploughs while the dry soil allows
it, while the clouds hang aloft. In spring beans are sown; then the
crumbling furrows receive thee likewise, clover of Media, and the yearly
care of the millet crop approaches; when the milk-white Bull with gilded
horns opens the year, and the setting Dogstar retires backwards. But if
for wheaten harvest or strong spelt thou wilt work thy ground, and the
corn-ear alone is thy desire, first let the Atlantides be at their
morning setting and the blazing star of the Cretan Crown sink away, ere
thou yield their debt of seed to the furrows, or ere thou hasten to
intrust the year's hope to an unwilling earth. Many begin before the
setting of Maia; but a harvest of empty stalks mocks their expectation.
If indeed thou wilt sow the vetch or the common kidney-bean, nor despite
the care of the Pelusiac lentil, the setting Bear-warden will send thee
no uncertain sign; begin, and carry thy sowing on to the mid-frost.

{p. 301}

To this end the golden sun rules an orbit measured out in certain
divisions through the twelvefold star-girdle of the world. Five zones
are placed in heaven; whereof one ever reddens in the blazing sun and
ever is parched by his fire; and round it right and left sweep the
utmost two, bleak, stiff in ice and dark with showers; two between these
and the central zone are granted by grace of the gods to weary mortals,
and through both a path is drawn where the slant procession of the signs
may turn. The world, rising steeply towards Scythia and the Rhipean
fortresses, sinks sloping to Libya and the south. This pole of ours is
ever uplifted; but the other black Styx and the deep world of ghosts see
underneath their feet. Here the enormous Serpent glides forth, wreathing
his coils in fashion of a river around and between the two Bears, the
Bears that dare not dip under the Ocean floor: there, one saith, either
dead night is soundless, and the gloom thickens in night's perpetual
pall, or dawn returns from us and leads back the day; and when dayspring
touches us with his panting horses' breath, there crimson Hesperus
kindles his lamp at evenfall. Hence can we foreknow the changeful sky's
seasons, hence the day of harvest and the time of sowing, and when it
befits to drive our oars through the treacherous sparkling sea, when to
launch armed fleets, or in due season lay low the woodland pine.

Neither in vain do we mark the signs in their dawning and decease, and
the four seasons that make equal division of the year. Whensoever chilly
rain keeps the husbandman indoors, many a thing, which must else be
hurried through in clear weather afterward, may be done at leisure; the
ploughman beats out the stubborn point of his blunted share; one hollows
troughs out of the tree; one marks the stamp on the flock or the numbers
on the grain-sacks; others sharpen stakes and forked poles, and sort
Amerian bands for the trailing vine. Now let the basket be lightly woven
of briar-rods, now parch corn over the fire and pound it in the stone.
Nay, and even on holydays some works are right and lawful; no scruple
forbids to guide forth the rivulet, to fence off the cornfield, to

{p. 302}

set snares for birds, to burn brambles, and to plunge the bleating flock
in the healthful stream: often the driver loads his slow-paced donkey's
sides with oil or cheap apples, and returning, carries a dressed
mill-stone or a lump of black pitch back with him from the town.

The moon's self ordains the days in their several order to be diverse in
luck of labour. Shun the fifth, birthday of pale Orcus and the
Eumenides; on it earth bore that accursed brood, Coeus and Iapetus and
fell Typhoeus, and the brothers that leagued to pluck down heaven.
Thrice they essayed to plant Ossa on Pelion, ay, and roll up leafy
Olympus upon Ossa: thrice our Lord smote asunder the piled mountains
with his thunderbolt. The seventeenth is lucky for setting the vine, for
catching and breaking oxen, for stringing loops in the loom: the ninth
favours runaways, but thwarts the thief.

Many a thing even makes better way in the chill of night, or when at
sundawn earth is dewy under the orient star. By night the light
stubbles, by night the parched meadows are better mown; clinging
moisture fails not through the night. And one I know keeps awake late by
the winter firelight, and points torchwood with sharp steel: meanwhile,
lightening her long toil with song, the wife runs her ringing comb
through the web, or boils down the sweet liquid must over the fire and
skims with leaves the wave of the bubbling copper. But ruddy corn is cut
in noon-day heat, and in noon-day heat the parched grain is trodden on
the threshing-floor.

Strip to plough, strip to sow; winter is the farmer's holiday, and the
husbandmen feast on their stores all through the frozen time, and spread
the banquet among themselves in mirthful round. Merry winter bids the
guest and lightens the heart; even as when laden keels at last touch
their haven, and the rejoicing mariners hang garlands on the stern. But
then nevertheless is the season to strip acorns from the oak and berries
of the laurel, the olive and the blood-red myrtle: then to set snares
for the crane and nets for the stag, and to hunt the long-eared hare;
then to strike down the fallow-deer with

{p. 303}

the whirling stroke of the hempen Balearic sling, while snow lies deep,
while ice blocks the rivers.

Why tell of autumnal storms and stars, and when now the day is briefer
and the summer softer, what watches men must keep? or when showerful
spring pours down, when the spiky harvest even now ripples on the
plains, and when the green blade swells with her milky grain? Often have
I seen, when the husbandman was marching in his reapers to the golden
fields and just cutting the slim-stalked barley, how all the winds,
clashing in battle, would tear right from the roots and fling high whole
breadths of heavy corn; in so black a gust would the storm sweep light
blade and flying straw away. Often likewise the waters of heaven descend
in infinite armies, and clouds charged from the deep thicken into foul
weather black with thundershowers: the sky pours sheer down and washes
away the glad crops and labours of the oxen with flooding rain; ditches
fill, and river channels swell roaring, and the narrow seas seethe and
smoke. Our Lord himself in the midnight of the storm-clouds wields the
flashing bolts in his right hand: at their shock ancient Earth trembles,
wild beasts slink away, and mortal hearts throughout the nations bow low
in terror: he hurls down his flaming shaft on Athos or Rhodope or the
Ceraunian heights; the south winds blow fiercer and the rain streams
drenching down, and the rushing wind wails over forest and shore.

Fearing this, regard thou heaven in his months and seasons, whither the
chill star of Saturn withdraws, to what circles in the sky the Cyllenian
wanderer turns his fire. Above all, worship thou the gods, and bring
great Ceres her yearly offerings, doing sacrifice on the springing grass
close on the verge of dying winter, when now spring skies are clear.
Then lambs are fat, and then wines mellowest, then sleep is sweet where
the shade thickens on the hill. To Ceres let all thy rustic folk do
service; to her wash thou the honeycomb with milk and soft wine, and for
luck let the victim thrice encircle the springing crops and all the band
of thy fellows keep it joyful company, and loudly call Ceres into the
homestead: neither

{p. 304}

let any lay sickle to the ripe ears till in Ceres' praise, his brows
wreathed with twisted oak, he move in rude dances and chant her hymn.

And these things that we might avail to learn by sure tokens, the heats
and the rains and the winds that bring cold weather, our Lord himself
hath ordained what the moon in her month should foreshadow, at what sign
the south wind should drop, what husbandmen should often mark and keep
their cattle nearer the farmyard. Straightway when gales are gathering,
either the seaways begin to shudder and heave, and a dry roaring to be
heard on the mountain heights, or the far-echoing beaches to stir, and a
rustling swell through the woodland. Even in that hour the rude surge
spares not the curving bull, when gulls fly swiftly back from mid ocean
and press screaming shoreward, or when sea-coot play on dry land, and
the heron leaves his home in the marshes and soars high above the mist.
Often likewise when a gale is toward wilt thou see shooting stars glide
down the sky, and through the darkness of night long trails of flame
glimmer in their track: often light chaff and fallen leaves flutter in
air, or floating feathers dance on the water's surface. But when it
lightens from the fierce northern regions, and when Eurus and Zephyrus
thunder through their hall, the whole countryside is afloat with
brimming ditches, and every mariner at sea furls his soaking sails.
Never is rain on us unwarned: either as it gathers in the valley bottoms
the crane soars high in flight before it; or the heifer gazing up into
the sky snuffs the breeze with wide-opened nostril, or the shrill
swallow darts circling about the pond, and the frogs in the mire intone
their old complaint. Often likewise the ant carries forth her eggs from
her secret chambers along her narrow trodden path, and a vast rainbow
drinks, and leaving their feeding-ground in long column armies of rooks
crowd with flapping wings. Then seafowl many in sort, and birds that
search the fresh pools round the Asian meadows of Cayster, eagerly
splash showers of spray over their shoulders, and thou mayest see them
now ducking in the channels, now running up into the waves, and
wantoning

{p. 305}

in their bath with vain desire. Then the villain raven calls full-voiced
for rain, and stalks along the dry sand in solitary state. Nor even to
girls who ply their spinning nightlong is the storm unknown, while they
see the oil sputter, and spongy mould gather on the blazing lamp.

And even thus sunlight after rain and cloudless clearness mayest thou
foresee and know by sure tokens. For then neither is the keen edge of
the starlight dulled to view, nor does the moon rise flushed by her
brother's rays, nor are thin woolly fleeces borne across the sky;
neither do kingfishers beloved of Thetis spread their plumage to the
sun's warmth upon the shore, nor unclean swine remember to shake out
their litter and toss it with their snout. But the mists gather lower
down and settle on the flats, and, constant to sunset, the night-owl
from the roof-top keeps vainly calling through the dark. Aloft in the
liquid sky Nisus is in sight and Scylla pays the debt of that purple
hair: wheresoever her pinions cleave the thin air in flight, lo,
hostile, fierce, loud-swooping down the wind, Nisus is upon her; where
Nisus mounts into the wind, her hurrying pinions cleave the thin air in
flight. There, withal rooks repeat three or four times a clear
thin-throated cry, and often where they sit aloft, happy in some strange
unwonted delight, chatter together among the leaves, glad when rains are
over to look to their little brood and darling nests once again; not, to
my thinking, that their instinct is divine or their dower of fate a
larger foresight into nature: but when the weather veers about and the
saturated air shifts, and under dripping skies of the south what was
rare but now condenses and what was dense expands, their temper changes
its fashion, and other motions stir within their breasts than stirred
while the clouds drove on before the wind; hence the birds make such
chorus in the fields, and the cattle are glad, and the rooks caw in
exultation.

If indeed thou wilt regard the hastening sun and the moon's ordered
sequences, never will an hour of the morrow deceive thee, nor wilt thou
be taken in the wiles of a cloudless night. When the moon first gathers
her returning fires, if she clasp

{p. 306}

a dark mist in her dim crescent, drenching rain will be in store for
husbandman and seafarer; but if a maiden flush suffuse her face, wind is
coming: wind always flushes the gold of the moon: while if at her fourth
rising (for that is surest of warrant) she travel through the sky with
clear sharp-cut horns, both that whole day and those that shall dawn
after it till the month be done will be rainless and windless, and
sailors preserved will pay their vows on the shore to Glaucus and Panope
and Melicertes son of Ino.

The sun likewise, both in his arising and when he sinks into the waves,
will issue signs; most sure are the signs that attend the sun, yielded
with morning or at the ascending of the stars. When at dayspring he is
dappled with spots and sunk in a mist, and his orbed centre retires,
mistrust thou of showers; for a gale is bearing hard from seaward,
ill-ominous for trees and crops and herds. Either when towards daybreak
spreading shafts struggle out between thick clouds, or when Dawn springs
pale from Tithonus' saffron bed, alas! weak defence will the
vine-tendril be then to the mellow cluster, so heavily the rough hail
dances rattling on the roofs. This likewise, when he has run his race
and is now sinking from the sky, will be of yet more service to
remember; for often we see shifting colours fluctuate on his face; green
presages rain, flame-colour east winds; but if spots begin to mingle
with fiery red, then wilt thou see all a single riot of wind and
storm-clouds; not on such a night at any persuasion would I voyage
through the deep or part moorings from land. But if his circle be bright
alike when he brings the day and buries the day he brought, vain will be
thy terror of rain-clouds, and thou shalt discern the forests weaving in
a clear wind from the north.

Lastly, what burden evenfall carries, whence the wind chases clear the
clouds, what the dripping South broods over, the sun will signify to
thee; who shall dare to call the sun untrue? He likewise often warns of
the imminence of dim alarms, of treachery and the gathering of hidden
wars; he likewise had pity on Rome at Caesar's decease, when he veiled
his shining face in dim rusty red, and an evil age dreaded eternal

{p. 307}

night. Yet at that season earth too and the plains of sea, and unclean
dogs and ominous birds gave presage. How often did we see Etna flooding
the Cyclopean fields with the torrent bursting from her furnaces, and
rolling forth balls of flame and molten rocks! Germany heard the clash
of armour fill the sky; the Alps quaked with unwonted shocks. Moreover a
voice was heard of many among silent groves, crying aloud, and phantoms
pallid in wonderful wise were seen when night was dim; and cattle spoke,
a monstrous thing: rivers stop and earth yawns; and ivory sheds tears of
mourning and bronzes sweat in the temples. Eridanus, king of rivers,
whirled whole forests away in the wash of his raging eddies, and swept
herds and stalls together all across the plains. Neither at that same
time did boding filaments ever cease to show themselves in disastrous
victims, or blood to ooze from wells, and high cities to echo night-long
with howling of wolves. Never elsewhere did more lightnings fall from
clear skies, or ghastly comets so often blaze. Therefore a second time
Philippi saw Roman lines meet in shock of equal arms, and our lords
forbade not that Emathia and the broad plains of Haemus should twice be
fattened with our blood. Surely a time too shall come when in those
borders the husbandman, as his crooked plough labours the soil, will
find spears eaten away with scaling rust, or strike on empty helms with
his heavy mattock, and marvel at mighty bones dug up from their tombs.
Gods of our fathers, of our country, and thou Romulus, and Vesta, mother
who keepest Tuscan Tiber and the Roman Palatine, forbid not at least
that this our prince may succour a ruined world! Long enough already has
our life-blood recompensed Laomedon's perjury at Troy; long already the
heavenly palace, O Caesar, grudges thee to us, and murmurs that thou
shouldst care for human triumphs, where right and wrong are confounded,
where all these wars cover the world, where wickedness is so manifold
and the plough's meed of honour is gone; the fields thicken with weeds,
for the tillers are marched away, and bent sickles are forged into the
stiff swordblade: here the Euphrates, there Germany heaves with war;
neighbouring cities rush into arms

{p. 308}

one against another over broken laws: the merciless War-God rages
through all the world: even as when chariots bursting from their
barriers swerve out on the course, and, vainly tugging at the curb, the
driver is swept on by his horses, and the car hearkens not to the rein.

{p. 309}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Book](geo02.md)
