[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](ycgp12) [Next](ycgp14)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XIII <span class="small">THE VANITY OF REPUTATION</span>

Y<span class="small">ANG</span> C<span class="small">HU</span> said:

   "The world praises Shun-Yu, Duke Chow, and Confucius, and condemns
Chieh and Chow. Now Shun had to plough in Ho-yang and to burn tiles in
Lei-tse. His four limbs had no <span id="page_55">p. 55</span> rest, and
rich food and warm clothing were unknown to him.

   "His parents and his kinsfolk did not love him, and his brothers and
sisters did not bear him affection.

   "In his thirtieth year he was obliged to marry without telling his
parents.

   "When he received the empire from Yao he was already an old man and
his mental powers were declining. His son Shang-Chun having no talents,
he left the imperial dignity to Yü. Still he had to toil and slave till
he died.

   "Of all mortals he was the most pitiable and miserable.

   "Kun's services in regulating the water and earthworks being
impracticable, he was put to death on Mount Yu Shan.

   "Yü, his son, continued his task, served his enemy, and spent all his
energy on the earthworks. When a son was born to him he could not take
him in his arms, nor in passing his door did he enter. His whole body
became withered, his hands and feet hardened by toil. When Shun yielded
the empire to him he still lived in a small house and wore only an
elegant sash and a coronet. He also had to toil and slave till he died.
Of all mortals he was the most overworked and fatigued.

   "When King Yü died Cheng was still of tender age, and Duke Chow
became Prince Regent.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

   "The Duke of Chow was dissatisfied, and spread evil rumours about
Chow throughout the empire. Chow stayed three years in the east, caused
his elder brother to be beheaded and his younger to be banished, and
nearly lost his own life. Till he died he had to toil and slave.

   "Of all mortals, he was the most menaced and terrorised.

   "Confucius was well acquainted with the principles of the old
emperors. He accepted the invitations of the princes of his time. But a
tree was felled over him in Sung and his footprints were wiped out in
Wei. In Shang and Chow he came to distress, was assaulted in Chen and
Tsai, humiliated by Chi and insulted by Yang-hu.

   "Till he died he had to toil and slave.

   "Of all mortals he was the most harassed and worried.

   "All these four sages, while alive, had not one day's pleasure, and
after their death a reputation lasting many years.

   "Yet reputation cannot bring back reality.

   "You praise them and they do not know it, and you honour them and
they are not aware of it. There is now no distinction between them and a
clod of earth.

   "Chieh availed himself of the wealth of many generations, and
attained to the honour of facing south as king. His wisdom was
sufficient to <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> restrain his many
subjects, and his power great enough to shake the land within the four
seas. He indulged in what was agreeable to his eyes and ears, and
fulfilled his heart's desires. He was gay and merry till death.

   "Of all mortals he was the most reckless and dissipated.

   "Chow also availed himself of the wealth of many generations, and
became King.

   "Everything yielded to his will.

   "Abandoning himself to his desires through the long night, he
indulged in debauchery in his seraglio. Nor did he embitter his life
with propriety and righteousness.

   "He was merry and gay till he was put to death.

   "Of all mortals he was the most licentious and extravagant.

   "These two villains while alive took delight in following their own
inclination and desires, and after death were called fools and tyrants.
Yet reality is nothing that can be given by reputation.

   "Ignorant of censure and unconscious of praise, they differed in no
respect from the stump of a tree or a clod of earth.

   "The four sages, though objects of admiration, were troubled up to
their very end, and were equally and alike doomed to die.

   "The two villains, though detested and hated by many, remained in
high spirits up to the very end, and they too were equally doomed to
die."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](ycgp14)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
