<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](num036)  [Next](deu001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Treasury of Scriptural Knowledge*, by R.A. Torrey, \[ca. 1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 0:0</span></span>

The book of Deuteronomy marks the end of the Pentateuch, commonly called
the Law of Moses; a work every way worthy of God its author, and only
less than the New Testament, the Law and Gospel of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ. Its antiquity places it at the head of all the writings in
the world; and the various subjects it embraces render it of the utmost
importance to every part of the civilized world. Its philosophy,
history, geography, and chronology entitle it to the respect of the
whole human race; while its system of theology and religion demonstrably
proves it to be a revelation from God. The Law of Moses is more properly
the Law of Jehovah, יהוה \[Strong's H3068\] תורה \[Strong's H8451\],
torah yehowah, the grand title of the Pentateuch. Could we conceive
Moses to have been the author of this system, we must consider him more
than mortal - no wisdom of man has ever yet invented such a Code of
Laws. His merit, however, has been disputed, and his laws severely
criticised, by persons whose interest it was to prove religion a cheat,
because they had none themselves. To some, whose mental taste and
feeling are strangely perverted, everything in heathenism wears not only
the most fascinating aspect, but appears to lay claim to and possess
every excellence; and hence they have called up Confucius, Menu,
Zoraster, and Mohammed himself, to dispute the palm with Moses! On this
subject in general, it may be just necessary to add, that the utmost
that can be said of all laws, merely human, is, that they restrain
vices, through the terror of punishment. God's law not only restrains
vice, but it infuses virtue. It alone brings man to the footstool of his
Maker; and keeps him dependent on the strong for strength, on the wise
for wisdom, and on the merciful for grace. It abounds with promises of
support, and salvation for the present life, which no false system dared
ever to propose. every where, Moses, in the most confident manner,
pledges his God for the fulfilment of all the exceeding great and
precious promises, with which his laws are so plentifully interspersed;
and while they were obedient they could say, "Not one word hath failed
us, of all the good things which the Lord our God spake concerning us."
Who that dispassionately reads the Pentateuch, that considers it in
itself and in its reference to that glorious Gospel which it was
intended to introduce, can for a moment deny it the palm of infinite
superiority over all the systems ever framed or imagined by man? Well
might the Israelitish people triumphantly exclaim, "There is none like
the God of Jeshurun!" and with what striking propriety does the glorious
legislator add, "Happy art thou, O Israel! who is like unto thee? O
people, saved of the Lord!" Finally, the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, which are amassed in these five books, have enriched the
whole civilized earth, and, indeed, greatly promoted that very
civilization. They have been a kind of text-book to almost every writer
on geology, geography, chronology, astronomy, natural history, ethics,
jurisprudence, political economy, theology, poetry, and criticism, from
the time of Moses to the present day - books to which the choicest
writers and philosophers in Pagan antiquity, have been deeply indebted;
and which were the text-books to all the prophets - books from which the
flimsy writers against Divine Revelation have derived their natural
religion, and all their moral excellence - books written in all the
energy, and purity, of the incomparable language in which they are
composed; and lastly, books, which for importance of matter, variety of
information, dignity of sentiment, accuracy of facts, impartiality,
simplicity, and sublimity of narration, tending to improve and ennoble
the intellect and ameliorate the physical and moral condition of man,
have never been equalled, and can only be paralleled by the Gospel of
the Son of God! Fountain of endless mercy, justice, truth, and
beneficence! How much are thy gifts and bounties neglected by those who
do not read this law; and by those who having read it, are not morally
improved by it, and made wise unto salvation!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 1](deu001.md)

</div>
