<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](neh013)  [Next](est001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Treasury of Scriptural Knowledge*, by R.A. Torrey, \[ca. 1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 0:0</span></span>

This Book, which derives its name from the person whose history it
chiefly relates, is termed in Hebrew, מגלה \[Strong's H4039\] אסתר
\[Strong's H635\], megillath Esther, "the volume of Esther." Concerning
its author there are various opinions: some attribute it to Ezra; some
to Joachim, the son of Joshua the high priest; others to the men of the
great synagogue; and others to Mordecai, which seems the most probable
opinion. The events here related probably refer to the time of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, who, according to Prideaux, was the Ahasuerus of
Esther, agreeably to Josephus (Ant. 1 xi. c. 6), the Septuagint version,
and the apocryphal additions to this book. The history, therefore, comes
in between the sixth and seventh chapters of [Ezr
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#022), commencing about am 3540, and
continuing through a period of twelve years. it relates the royal feast
of Ahasuerus; the disgrace of Vashti (Esther 1); the elevation of Esther
to the Persian throne; the essential service rendered to the king by
Mordecai, in detecting a plot against his life (Esther 2); the promotion
of Haman, and his purposed destruction of the Jews ([Est
3:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001)); the consequent affliction of
the Jews, and the measures pursued by them (Esther 4); the defeat of
Haman's plot, through the instrumentality of Esther, against Mordecai
(Esther 5-7); and also the defeat of his general plot against the Jews
(Esther 8, [Est 9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#001)); the
institution of the feast of Purim to commemorate this deliverance
(Esther 9:16-32); and the advancement of Mordecai ([Est
10:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001)); and though some Christians
have hesitated to receive this book into the sacred canon, yet it has
always been received by the Jews, not only as perfectly authentic, but
also as one of the most excellent of their sacred books. That it is a
genuine and faithful description of a real fact, the observation of the
feast of Purim, to the present day, is a sufficient evidence; since it
is impossible, and in fact inconceivable, that a nation should
institute, and afterwards continue to celebrate without interruption,
through every generation of that people, in a long succession of ages,
in whatever places they may have sojourned, this solemn annual festival,
merely because one of their nation had written an agreeable fable or
romance. It has been remarked, as an objection to this book, that the
name of God no where occurs in it: His superintending providence,
however, is frequently illustrated. It is shewn, indeed, in every part
of the work; disconcerting evil designs, and producing great events, by
means seemingly inadequate. It also presents an interesting description
of mortified pride, and of malice baffled to the destruction of its
possessors; and exhibits a very lively representation of the vexations
and troubles, the anxieties, treachery, and dissimulation of a corrupt
court.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 1](est001)

</div>
