<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ch2036)  [Next](ezr001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Treasury of Scriptural Knowledge*, by R.A. Torrey, \[ca. 1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 0:0</span></span>

This book details the events of a very interesting period of the Sacred
History, when, according to the decree of Providence, the Jewish people
were to be delivered from their captivity, at the expiration of seventy
years, and restored to the land of their fathers. This book informs us
how the Divine goodness accomplished this most gracious design, and the
movers and agents He employed on the occasion. Ezra was undoubtedly the
chief agent under God in effecting this arduous work; and his zeal,
piety, knowledge, and discretion, appear here in a most conspicuous
point of view, and claim our utmost admiration. Descended from Seraiah,
in a direct line from Aaron, he seems to have united all the requisites
of a profound statesmen with the functions of the sacerdotal character.
He appears to have made the Sacred Scriptures, during the captivity, his
peculiar study; and, perhaps assisted by Nehemiah and the great
synagogue, he corrected the errors which had crept into the Sacred
Writings, through the negligence or mistake of transcribers; he
collected all the books of which the Sacred Scriptures then consisted,
disposed them in their proper order, and settled the canon of Scriptures
for his time; he occasionally added, under the dictation of the Holy
Spirit, whatever appeared necessary for the purpose of illustrating,
completing, or connecting them; he substituted the modern for the
ancient names of some places, which had now become obsolete; and
transcribed the whole of the Scriptures into the Chaldee character. He
is said to have lived to the age of 120 years, and, according to
Josephus, was buried in Jerusalem; but the Jews believe he died in
Persia, in a second journey to Artaxerxes, where his tomb is shown in
the city of Zamusa. Though not styled a prophet, he wrote under the
Divine Spirit; and the canonical authority of his book has never been
disputed. It is written with all the spirit and fidelity that could be
displayed by a writer of contemporary times; and those parts which
chiefly consist of letters, decrees, etc., are written in Chaldee,
because it seemed more suitable to the fidelity of a sacred historian to
give these official documents, as they may be termed, in the original
language, especially as the people, recently returned from the
captivity, were familiar, and perhaps more conversant with the Chaldee,
than with the Hebrew.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 1](ezr001)

</div>
