<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Galatians Index](gal.md)  
  [Previous](co2013)  [Next](gal001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Treasury of Scriptural Knowledge*, by R.A. Torrey, \[ca. 1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 0:0</span></span>

The Galatians, or Gallograecians, were the descendants of Gauls, who
migrated from their own country, and after a series of disasters, got
possession of a large district in Asia Minor, from them called Galatia
(Pausanias, Attic. c. iv). They are mentioned by historians as a tall
and valiant people, who went nearly naked, and used for arms only a
buckler and sword; and the impetuosity of their attack is said to have
been irresistible. Their religion, before their conversion was extremely
corrupt and superstitious; they are said to have worshipped the mother
of the gods, under the name of Adgistis; and to have offered human
sacrifices of the prisoners they took in war. Though they spoke the
Greek language in common with almost all the inhabitants of Asia Minor,
yet it appears from Jerome that they retained their original Gaulish
language even as late as the fifth century. Christianity appears to have
been first planted in these regions by St. Paul himself ([Gal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006.md); [Gal
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#013).md); who visited the churches at
least twice in that country ([Act
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006.md); [Act
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023).md). It is evident that this
epistle was written soon after their reception of the gospel, as he
complains of their speedy apostasy from his doctrine ([Gal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006).md); and as there is no notice of his
second journey into that country, it has been supposed, with much
probability, that it was written soon after his first, and consequently
about ad 52 or 53. It appears that soon after the Apostle had left them,
some Judaizing teachers intruded themselves into the churches; drawing
them off from the true gospel, to depend on ceremonial observances, and
to the vain endeavour of "establishing their own righteousness." It was
in order to oppose this false gospel that St. Paul addressed the
Galatians, and after saluting the churches of Galatia, and establishing
his apostolic commission against the attacks of the false teachers, he
reproves them for departing from that gospel which he had preached to
them, and confirmed by the gift of the Holy Ghost - proves that
justification is by faith alone, and not by the deeds of the law, from
the example of Abraham, the testimony of Scripture, the curse of the
law, the redemption of Christ, and the Abrahamic covenant, which the law
could not disannul - shows the use of the law in connection with the
covenant of grace; concludes that all believers are delivered from the
law, and made the spiritual seed of Abraham by faith in Christ;
illustrates his inference by God's treatment of the Jewish church, which
he put under the law, as a father puts a minor under a guardian; shows
the weakness and folly of the Galatians in subjecting themselves to the
law, and that by submitting themselves to circumcision they become
subject to the whole law, and would forfeit the benefits of the covenant
of grace; gives them various instructions and exhortations for their
Christian conduct, and particularly concerning the right use of their
Christian freedom; and concludes with a brief summary of the topics
discussed, and by commending them to the grace of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 1](gal001.md)

</div>
