<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](int000)  [Next](gen001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Treasury of Scriptural Knowledge*, by R.A. Torrey, \[ca. 1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 0:0</span></span>

The Book of Genesis is the most ancient record in the world; including
the History of two grand and stupendous subjects, Creation and
Providence; of each of which it presents a summary, but astonishingly
minute and detailed accounts. From this Book, almost all the ancient
philosophers, astronomers, chronologists, and historians have taken
their respective data; and all the modern improvements and accurate
discoveries in different arts and sciences, have only served to confirm
the facts detailed by Moses, and to shew, that all the ancient writers
on these subjects have approached, or receded from, truth and the
phenomena of Nature, in exactly the same proportion as they have
followed or receded from, the Mosaic history. The great fact of the
deluge is fully confirmed by the fossilised remains in every quarter of
the globe. Add to this, that general traditions of the deluge have been
traced among the Egyptians, Chinese, Japanese, Hindoos, Burmans, ancient
Goths and Druids, Mexicans, Peruvians, Brazilians, North American
Indians, Greenlanders, Otaheiteans, Sandwich Islanders, and almost every
nation under heaven; while the allegorical turgidity of these distorted
traditions sufficiently distinguishes them from the unadorned simplicity
of the Mosaic narrative. In fine, without this history the world would
be in comparative darkness, not knowing whence it came, nor whither it
goeth. In the first page, a child may learn more in an hour, than all
the philosophers in the world learned without it in a thousand years.
(The original publisher remembers these words addressed to him and other
boys in the year 1780, by his excellent tutor, the later Rev. John
Ryland, of Northampton.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 1](gen001)

</div>
