<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2.md)  
  [Previous](th1005)  [Next](th2001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Treasury of Scriptural Knowledge*, by R.A. Torrey, \[ca. 1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001.md)

[2 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th2 0:0</span></span>

The First Epistle to the Thessalonians, it is generally agreed, was the
earliest written of all St. Paul's epistles, whence we see the reason
and propriety of his anxiety that it should be read in all the Christian
churches of Macedonia. - "I charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle be
read unto all the holy brethren" ([Th1
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#027).md). "The existence of this clause,"
observes Dr. Paley, "is an evidence of its authenticity; because, to
produce a letter, purporting to have been publicly read in the church at
Thessalonica, when no such letter had been read or heard of in that
church, would be to produce an imposture destructive of itself. Either
the Epistle was publicly read in the church of Thessalonica, during St.
Paul's lifetime, or it was not. If it was, no publication could be more
authentic, no species of notoriety more unquestionable, no method of
preserving the integrity of the copy more secure. If it was not, the
clause would remain a standing condemnation of the forgery, and one
would suppose, an invincible impediment to its success." Its
genuineness, however, has never been disputed; and it has been
universally received in the Christian church, as the inspired production
of St. Paul, from the earliest period to the present day. The
circumstance of this injunction being given, in the first epistle which
the Apostle wrote, also implies a strong and avowed claim to the
character of an inspired writer; as in fact it placed his writings on
the same ground with those of Moses and the ancient prophets. The second
Epistle, besides those marks of genuineness and authority which it
possesses in common with the others, bears the highest evidence of its
divine inspiration, in the representation which it contains of the papal
power, under the characters of "the Man of sin," and the "Mystery of
iniquity." The true Christian worship is the worship of the one only
God, through the one only Mediator, the man Christ Jesus; and from this
worship the church of Rome has most notoriously departed, by
substituting other mediators, invocating and adoring saints and angels,
worshipping images, adoring the host, etc. It follows, therefore, that
"the Man of sin" is the Pope; not only on account of the disgraceful
lives of many of them, but by means of their scandalous doctrines and
principles; dispensing with the most necessary duties, selling pardons
and indulgences for the most abominable crimes, and perverting the
worship of God to the grossest superstition and idolatry. It was
evidently the chief design of the Apostle, in writing to the
Thessalonians, to confirm them in the faith, to animate them to a
courageous profession of the Gospel, and to the practice of all the
duties of Christianity; but to suppose, with Dr. Macknight, that he
intended to prove the divine authority of Christianity by a chain of
regular arguments, in which he answered the several objections which the
heathen philosophers are supposed to have advanced, seems quite foreign
to the nature of the epistles, and to be grounded on a mistaken notion,
that the philosophers designed at so early a period to enter on a
regular disputation with the Christians, when in fact they derided them
as enthusiasts, and branded their doctrines as "foolishness." In
pursuance of his grand object, "it is remarkable," says Dr. Doddridge,
"with how much address he improves all the influence which his zeal and
fidelity in their service must naturally give him, to inculcate upon
them the precepts of the gospel, and persuade them to act agreeably to
their sacred character. This was the grand point he always kept in view,
and to which every thing else was made subservient. Nothing appears, in
any part of his writings, like a design to establish his own reputation,
or to make use of his ascendancy over his Christian friends to answer
any secular purposes of his own. On the contrary, in this and in his
other epistles, he discovers a most generous, disinterested regard for
their welfare, expressly disclaiming any authority over their
consciences, and appealing to them, that he had chose to maintain
himself by the labour of this own hands, rather than prove burdensome to
the churches, or give the least colour of suspicion, that, under zeal
for the gospel, and concern for their improvement, he was carrying on
any private sinister view. The discovery of so excellent a temper must
be allowed to carry with it a strong presumptive argument in favour of
the doctrines he taught....And, indeed, whoever reads St. Paul's
epistles with attention, and enters into the spirit with which they were
written, will discern such intrinsic characters of their genuineness,
and the divine authority of the doctrines they contain, as will,
perhaps, produce in him a stronger conviction than all the external
evidence with which they are attended." These remarks are exceedingly
well grounded and highly important; and to no other Epistles can they
apply with greater force than the present most excellent productions of
the inspired Apostle. The last two chapters of the first epistle, in
particular, as Dr. A. Clarke justly observes, "are certainly among the
most important, and the most sublime in the New Testament. The general
judgment, the resurrection of the body, and the states of the quick and
the dead, the unrighteous and the just, are described, concisely indeed,
but they are exhibited in the most striking and affecting points of
view.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Chapter 1](th2001.md)

</div>
