<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotd31)  [Next](fotd33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SWBC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fifty-one Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f31"></span>

HOW THE ENEMY CAME TO THLUNRANA

It had been prophesied of old and foreseen from the ancient days that
its enemy would come upon Thlunrana. And the date of its doom was known
and the gate by which it would enter, yet none had prophesied of the
enemy who he was save that he was of the gods though he dwelt with men.
Meanwhile Thlunrana, that secret lamaserai, that chief cathedral of
wizardry, was the terror of the valley in which it stood and of all
lands round about it. So narrow and high were the windows and so strange
when lighted at night that they seemed to regard men with the demoniac
leer of something that had a secret in the dark. Who were the magicians
and the deputy-magicians and the great arch-wizard of that furtive place
nobody knew, for they went veiled and hooded and cloaked completely in
black.

Though her doom was close upon her and the enemy of prophecy should come
that very night through the open, southward door that was named the Gate
of the Doom, yet that rocky edifice Thlunrana remained mysterious still,
venerable, terrible, dark, and dreadfully crowned with her doom. It was
not often that anyone dared wander near to Thlunrana by night when the
moan of the magicians invoking we know not Whom rose faintly from inner
chambers, scaring the drifting bats: but on the last night of all the
man from the black-thatched cottage by the five pine-trees came, because
he would see Thlunrana once again before the enemy that was divine, but
that dwelt with men, should come against it and it should be no more. Up
the dark valley he went like a bold man, but his fears were thick upon
him; his bravery bore their weight but stooped a little beneath them. He
went in at the southward gate that is named the Gate of the Doom. He
came into a dark hall, and up a marble stairway passed to see the last
of Thlunrana. At the top a curtain of black velvet hung and he passed
into a chamber heavily hung with curtains, with a gloom in it that was
blacker than anything they could account for. In a sombre chamber
beyond, seen through a vacant archway, magicians with lighted tapers
plied their wizardry and whispered incantations. All the rats in the
place were passing away, going whimpering down the stairway. The man
from the black-thatched cottage passed through that second chamber: the
magicians did not look at him and did not cease to whisper. He passed
from them through heavy curtains still of black velvet and came into a
chamber of black marble where nothing stirred. Only one taper burned in
the third chamber; there were no windows. On the smooth floor and under
the smooth wall a silk pavilion stood with its curtains drawn close
together: this was the holy of holies of that ominous place, its inner
mystery. One on each side of it dark figures crouched, either of men or
women or cloaked stone, or of beasts trained to be silent. When the
awful stillness of the mystery was more than he could bear the man from
the black-thatched cottage by the five pine-trees went up to the silk
pavilion, and with a bold and nervous clutch of the hand drew one of the
curtains aside, and saw the inner mystery, and laughed. And the prophecy
was fulfilled, and Thlunrana was never more a terror to the valley, but
the magicians passed away from their terrific halls and fled through the
open fields wailing and beating their breasts, for laughter was the
enemy that was doomed to come against Thlunrana through her southward
gate (that was named the Gate of the Doom), and it is of the gods but
dwells with man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Losing Game](fotd33)

</div>
