<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fotd22)  [Next](fotd24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SWBC/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fifty-one Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f22"></span>

THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN EAR-RINGS

It may be that I dreamed this. So much at least is certain—that I turned
one day from the traffic of a city, and came to its docks and saw its
slimy wharves going down green and steep into the water, and saw the
huge grey river slipping by and the lost things that went with it
turning over and over, and I thought of the nations and unpitying Time,
and saw and marvelled at the queenly ships come newly from the sea.

It was then, if I mistake not, that I saw leaning against a wall, with
his face to the ships, a man with golden ear-rings. His skin had the
dark tint of the southern men: the deep black hairs of his moustache
were whitened a little with salt; he wore a dark blue jacket such as
sailors wear, and the long boots of seafarers, but the look in his eyes
was further afield than the ships, he seemed to be beholding the
farthest things.

Even when I spoke to him he did not call home that look, but answered me
dreamily with that same fixed stare as though his thoughts were heaving
on far and lonely seas. I asked him what ship he had come by, for there
were many there. The sailing ships were there with their sails all
furled and their masts straight and still like a wintry forest; the
steamers were there, and great liners, puffing up idle smoke into the
twilight. He answered he had come by none of them. I asked him what line
he worked on, for he was clearly a sailor; I mentioned well-known lines,
but he did not know them. Then I asked him where he worked and what he
was. And he said: "I work in the Sargasso Sea, and I am the last of the
pirates, the last left alive." And I shook him by the hand I do not know
how many times. I said: "We feared you were dead. We feared you were
dead." And he answered sadly: "No. No. I have sinned too deeply on the
Spanish seas: I am not allowed to die."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dream of King Karna-Vootra](fotd24.md)

</div>
