<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotd23)  [Next](fotd25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SWBC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fifty-one Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f23"></span>

THE DREAM OF KING KARNA-VOOTRA

King Karna-Vootra sitting on his throne commanding all things said: "I
very clearly saw last night the queenly Vava-Nyria. Though partly she
was hidden by great clouds that swept continually by her, rolling over
and over, yet her face was unhidden and shone, being full of moonlight.

"I said to her:

"'Walk with me by the great pools in many-gardened, beautiful Istrakhan
where the lilies float that give delectable dreams; or, drawing aside
the curtain of hanging orchids, pass with me thence from the pools by a
secret path through the else impassable jungle that fills the only way
between the mountains that shut in Istrakhan. They shut it in and look
on it with joy at morning and at evening when the pools are strange with
light, till in their gladness sometimes there melts the deadly snow that
kills upon lonely heights the mountaineer. They have valleys among them
older than the wrinkles in the moon.

"'Come with me thence or linger with me there and either we shall come
to romantic lands which the men of the caravans only speak of in song;
or else we shall listlessly walk in a land so lovely that even the
butterflies that float about it when they see their images flash in the
sacred pools are terrified by their beauty, and each night we shall hear
the myriad nightingales all in one chorus sing the stars to death. Do
this and I will send heralds far from here with tidings of thy beauty;
and they shall run and come to Séndara and men shall know it there who
herd brown sheep; and from Séndara the rumour shall spread on, down
either bank of the holy river of Zoth, till the people that make wattles
in the plains shall hear of it and sing; but the heralds shall go
northward along the hills until they come to Sooma. And in that golden
city they shall tell the kings, that sit in their lofty alabaster house,
of thy strange and sudden smiles. And often in distant markets shall thy
story be told by merchants out from Sooma as they sit telling careless
tales to lure men to their wares.

"'And the heralds passing thence shall come even to Ingra, to Ingra
where they dance. And there they shall tell of thee, so that thy name
long hence shall be sung in that joyous city. And there they shall
borrow camels and pass over the sands and go by desert ways to distant
Nirid to tell of thee to the lonely men in the mountain monasteries.

"'Come with me even now for it is Spring.'"

"And as I said this she faintly yet perceptibly shook her head. And it
was only then I remembered my youth was gone, and she dead forty years."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Storm](fotd25)

</div>
