<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotd42)  [Next](fotd44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SWBC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fifty-one Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f42"></span>

FURROW-MAKER

He was all in black, but his friend was dressed in brown, members of two
old families.

"Is there any change in the way you build your houses?" said he in
black.

"No change," said the other. "And you?"

"We change not," he said.

A man went by in the distance riding a bicycle.

"He is always changing," said the one in black, "of late almost every
century. He is uneasy. Always changing."

"He changes the way he builds his house, does he not?" said the brown
one.

"So my family say," said the other. "They say he has changed of late."

"They say he takes much to cities?" the brown one said.

"My cousin who lives in belfries tells me so," said the black one. "He
says he is much in cities."

"And there he grows lean?" said the brown one.

"Yes, he grows lean."

"Is it true what they say?" said the brown one.

"Caw," said the black one.

"Is it true that he cannot live many centuries?"

"No, no," said the black one. "Furrow-maker will not die. We must not
lose furrow-maker. He has been foolish of late, he has played with smoke
and is sick. His engines have wearied him and his cities are evil. Yes,
he is very sick. But in a few centuries he will forget his folly and we
shall not lose furrow-maker. Time out of mind he has delved and my
family have got their food from the raw earth behind him. He will not
die."

"But they say, do they not?" said the brown one, "his cities are
noisome, and that he grows sick in them and can run no longer, and that
it is with him as it is with us when we grow too many, and the grass has
the bitter taste in the rainy season, and our young grow bloated and
die."

"Who says it?" replied the black one.

"Pigeon," the brown one answered. "He came back all dirty. And Hare went
down to the edge of the cities once. He says it too. Man was too sick to
chase him. He thinks that Man will die, and his wicked friend Dog with
him. Dog, he will die. That nasty fellow Dog. He will die too, the dirty
fellow!"

"Pigeon and Hare!" said the black one. "We shall not lose furrow-maker."

"Who told you he will not die?" his brown friend said.

"Who told me!" the black one said. "My family and his have understood
each other times out of mind. We know what follies will kill each other
and what each may survive, and I say that furrow-maker will not die."

"He will die," said the brown one.

"Caw," said the other.

And Man said in his heart: "Just one invention more. There is something
I want to do with petrol yet, and then I will give it all up and go back
to the woods."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lobster Salad](fotd44)

</div>
