<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fotd43)  [Next](fotd45.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SWBC/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fifty-one Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f43"></span>

LOBSTER SALAD

I was climbing round the perilous outside of the Palace of
Colquonhombros. So far below me that in the tranquil twilight and clear
air of those lands I could only barely see them lay the craggy tops of
the mountains.

It was along no battlements or terrace edge I was climbing, but on the
sheer face of the wall itself, getting what foothold I could where the
boulders joined.

Had my feet been bare I was done, but though I was in my night-shirt I
had on stout leather boots, and their edges somehow held in those narrow
cracks. My fingers and wrists were aching.

Had it been possible to stop for a moment I might have been lured to
give a second look at the fearful peaks of the mountains down there in
the twilight, and this must have been fatal.  That the thing was all a
dream is beside the point. We have fallen in dreams before, but it is
well known that if in one of those falls you ever hit the ground—you
die: I had looked at those menacing mountaintops and knew well that such
a fall as the one I feared must have such a termination. Then I went on.

It is strange what different sensations there can be in different
boulders—every one gleaming with the same white light and every one
chosen to match the rest by minions of ancient kings—when your life
depends on the edges of every one you come to. Those edges seemed
strangely different. It was of no avail to overcome the terror of one,
for the next would give you a hold in quite a different way or hand you
over to death in a different manner. Some were too sharp to hold and
some too flush with the wall, those whose hold was the best crumbled the
soonest; each rock had its different terror: and then there were those
things that followed behind me.

And at last I came to a breach made long ago by earthquake, lightning or
war: I should have had to go down a thousand feet to get round it and
they would come up with me while I was doing that, for certain sable
apes that I have not mentioned as yet, things that had tigerish teeth
and were born and bred on that wall, had pursued me all the evening. In
any case I could have gone no farther, nor did I know what the king
would do along whose wall I was climbing. It was time to drop and be
done with it or stop and await those apes.

And then it was that I remembered a pin, thrown carelessly down out of
an evening-tie in another world to the one where grew that glittering
wall, and lying now if no evil chance had removed it on a chest of
drawers by my bed. The apes were very close, and hurrying, for they knew
my fingers were slipping, and the cruel peaks of those infernal
mountains seemed surer of me than the apes. I reached out with a
desperate effort of will towards where the pin lay on the chest of
drawers. I groped about. I found it! I ran it into my arm. Saved!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Return of the Exiles](fotd45.md)

</div>
