[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dpr02)  [Next](dpr04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877855056/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Divine Providence*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1764\], tr. by William
Frederic Wunsch \[1851\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE TRANSLATION

This volume has been translated afresh from the Latin; it is not a
revision of any earlier edition. Greater readableness has been striven
for. In the past, it is generally recognized, Latin sentence structure
and word order were clung to unnecessarily. "The defects in previous
translations of Swedenborg have arisen mainly from too close an
adherence to cognate words and to the Latin order of words and phrases."
So wrote the Rev. John C. Ager in 1899 in his translator's note in the
Library Edition of \_Divine Providence\_. Why, indeed, should English
not be allowed its own sentence structure and word order? In addition,
in this translation, long sentences, readily followed in an inflected
language like Latin, have been broken up into short ones. English also
uses fewer particles of logical relation than are at home in Latin.
There is more paragraphing, aiding the eye, which both British and
American translators have been doing for some years. Latin has neither a
definite article nor an indefinite article, and a translator into
English must decide when to use either or neither. The definite article,
the present translator thinks, has been overused, perhaps in a dogmatic
tendency to be as precise as can be. When, for instance, one is admitted
into "truths of faith" he is certainly not admitted into "the truths of
faith," as though he could comprehend them all. The very title of the
book changes the impression which it makes as the definite article is
inserted or omitted in it. "The divine providence" seems to single out a
theological concept; "divine providence" seems more likely to lead the
thought to God's actual care.

Swedenborg has his carefully chosen terms, of course, like "proprium,"
which are best kept, although in the present translation that term is
sometimes rendered by an explanatory word and one which, in the
particular context, is an equivalent. The verb "appropriate" presents a
difficulty, but has been kept, partly because of the noun "proprium."
One could translate rather wordily "make"--something good or
evil--"one's own." The English word now means "take exclusive possession
of," which one can hardly do of good or evil. Assimilation is the
thought and the act, and with that in mind the verb "appropriate" and
the noun "appropriation" can be retained. The unusual locution
"affection of truth" or "of good," which Mr. Ager abandoned, translating
"for truth" and "for good," has been returned to. Much is implied in
that phrase which is not to be found in the other wording, namely, that
we are affected by truth and by good, and that there is an influx of
these into the human spirit. Similarly meaningful is another unusual way
of speaking in English, of a person's being "in" faith or "in" charity,
where we say that he has faith or exercises charity. The thought is that
faith and charity, truth and goodness beckon to us, to be welcomed and
entered into.

Latin sometimes has a number of words for an idea or an entity, and the
English has not, but when English has the richer vocabulary, why not
avail oneself of the variety possible? The Latin word "finis," for
example, used in so many connections, can be rendered by one word in one
connection and by another in another connection. The "goal" or the
"object" of providence is plainer than the "end" of providence. The
"close" of life is common speech. "Meritorious" has been kept in our
translations, for in a restricted field of traditional theology it does
mean that virtue, for example, \_earns\_ a reward. To most readers the
word will be misleading, for they will understand it in its usual
meaning, that some act is well-deserving. The former is Swedenborg's
meaning, which is that an act is done to earn merit, or is considered to
have earned merit. We translate variously according to context to make
that meaning clear (nn. 321(11), 326(8), 90).

As it is what Swedenborg has written that is to be translated, the
Scripture passages which he quotes are translated without an effort to
follow the Authorized Version, which he did not know. This is also done
when he refers to the book which stands last in our Bibles; the name he
knew it by, the Apocalypse, is retained.

THE SUBJECT INDEX

The rewording in this translation would have necessitated revision of
the index long used in editions of \_Divine Providence\_, which goes
back to an index in French done by M. Le Boys des Guays. The opportunity
was seized to compile a subject instead of a word index. It is based on
an analysis of the contents of the book, and can serve as a reading
guide. It does not usually quote the text, but sends the reader to it.
Definitions of a number of terms are embodied in it.

The appearance that man thinks, wills, speaks and acts all of his own
doing is the subject of much of the book, and this the index shows. The
"life's love" deserves to be a separate entry, for little of a
psychological nature in the book becomes more prominent than the love
which forms in the way one actually lives, and which embodies one's
actual belief and thought. Single words which have been scattered
entries in the index long used--usually Scripture words of which the
correspondential meaning is given--are assembled alphabetically under
the entry "Correspondences."

A signal feature of Swedenborg's thought is the unities he perceives. Of
love and wisdom he says that they can only be perceived as one (4(5)).
So good and truth do not exist apart, nor charity and faith, nor
affection and thought. These and other pairs of terms are therefore
entered in the index; after references on the two together, references
follow on each term alone.

The index, it is hoped, will do more than introduce the reader to
statements made in the book, but will carry him into its stream of
thought.

WM. F. WUNSCH

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1-50](dpr04)
