[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dpr04)  [Next](dpr06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877855056/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Divine Providence*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1764\], tr. by William
Frederic Wunsch \[1851\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Divine Providence

<span class="margnote"><span id="51.">51.</span></span>

From these considerations it may now be plain that the infinite and
eternal, thus the Lord, are to be thought of apart from space and time
and can be so thought of; plain, likewise, that they are so thought of
by those who think interiorly and rationally; and plain that the
infinite and eternal are identical with the Divine. So think angels and
spirits. In thought withdrawn from space and time, divine omnipresence
is comprehended, and divine omnipotence, also the Divine from eternity,
but these are not at all grasped by thought to which an idea of space
and time adheres. Plain it is, then, that one can conceive of God from
eternity, but never of nature from eternity. So one can think of the
creation of the world by God, but never of its creation from nature, for
space and time are proper to nature, but the Divine is apart from them.
That the Divine is apart from space and time may be seen in the treatise
\_Divine Love and Wisdom\_ (nn. 7-10, 69-72, 73-76, and other places).

<span class="margnote"><span id="52.">52.</span></span>

\(ii\) \_What is infinite and eternal in itself cannot but look to what
is infinite and eternal from itself in finite things.\_ By what is
infinite and eternal in itself the Divine itself is meant, as was shown
in the preceding section. By finite things are meant all things created
by the Lord, especially men, spirits, and angels. By looking to the
infinite and eternal from itself is meant to look to the Divine, that is
to Himself, in these, as a person beholds his image in a mirror. This
was shown in several places in the treatise \_Divine Love and Wisdom,\_
particularly where it was demonstrated that in the created universe
there is an image of the human being and that this is an image of the
infinite and eternal (nn. 317, 318), that is, of God the Creator,
namely, the Lord from eternity. But be it known that the
Divine-in-itself is in the Lord; whereas the divine-from-itself is the
divine from the Lord in things created.

<span class="margnote"><span id="53.">53.</span></span>

But for better comprehension let this be illustrated. The Divine can
look only to the divine, and can do so only in what has been created by
it. This is evident from the fact that no one can regard another except
from what is his own in himself. One who loves another regards him from
his own love; a wise man regards another from his own wisdom. He can
note whether the other loves him or not, is wise or not; but this he
does from the love and wisdom in himself. Therefore he unites himself
with the other so far as the other loves him as he loves the other, or
so far as the other is wise as he is wise; for thus they make one.

\[2\] It is the same with the Divine-in-itself. For the Divine cannot
look to itself from another, that is, from man, spirit, or angel. For
there is nothing in them of the Divine-in-itself from which are all
things, and to look to the Divine from another in whom there is nothing
of the Divine would be to look to the Divine from what is not divine,
which is an impossibility. Hence the Lord is so conjoined to man,
spirit, or angel that all which is referable to the Divine is not from
them but from the Lord. For it is known that all good and truth which
anyone has are not from him but from the Lord; indeed that no one can
name the Lord or speak His names Jesus and Christ except from Him.

\[3\] Consequently the infinite and eternal, which is the same as the
Divine, looks to all things in finite beings infinitely and conjoins
itself with them in the degree in which they receive love and wisdom. In
a word, the Lord can have His abode and dwell with man and angel only in
His own, and not in what is solely theirs, for this is evil; if it is
good, it is still finite, which in and of itself is incapable of the
infinite. Plainly, the finite cannot possibly look to what is infinite,
but the infinite can look to the infinite-from-itself in finite beings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="54.">54.</span></span>

It seems as if the infinite could not be conjoined to the finite because
no ratio is possible between them and because the finite cannot compass
the infinite. Conjunction is possible, nevertheless, both because the
Infinite created all things from Himself (as was shown in the work
\_Divine Love and Wisdom,\_ nn. 282-284), and because the Infinite
cannot but look in things finite to what is infinite from Him, and this
infinite-from-Him in finite beings can appear as if it were in them.
Thereby a ratio is possible between finite and infinite, not from the
finite, indeed, but from the infinite in the finite. Thereby, too, the
finite is capable of the infinite, not the finite being in himself, but
as if in himself from the infinite-from-itself in him. But of this more
in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="55.">55.</span></span>

\(iii\) \_Divine providence looks to the infinite and eternal from
itself in all that it does, especially in saving mankind.\_ The infinite
and eternal in itself is the Divine itself, or the Lord in Himself; the
infinite and eternal \_from\_ itself is the proceeding Divine or the
Lord in others created by Him, thus in men and angels. This Divine is
identical with divine providence, for by the divine from Himself the
Lord provides that all things shall be held together in the order in
which and into which they were created. This the Divine in the act of
proceeding accomplishes and consequently all this is divine providence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="56.">56.</span></span>

That divine providence in all that it does looks to what is infinite and
eternal from itself is evident from the fact that every created thing
proceeds from a first, which is the infinite and eternal, to things
last, and from things last to the first whence it is (as was shown in
the work \_Divine Love and Wisdom,\_ in the part in which the creation
of the world is treated of). But the first whence anything is, is
inmostly in all the progression, and therefore the proceeding Divine or
divine providence in all that it does has in view some image of the
infinite and eternal. It does so in all things, in some obviously so
that it is perceptible, in others not. It makes that image evident to
perception in the variety, and in the fructification and multiplication,
of all things.

\[2\] \_An image of the infinite and eternal is apparent in the variety
of all things,\_ in that no one thing is the same as another nor can be
to eternity. The eye beholds this in the variety of human faces ever
since creation; in the variety of minds, of which faces are types; and
in the variety of affections, perceptions and thoughts, for of these the
mind consists. In all heaven, therefore, no two angels or spirits are
the same, nor can be to eternity. The same is true of every object to be
seen in either the natural or the spiritual world. Plainly, the variety
is infinite and eternal.

\[3\] \_An image of the infinite and eternal is manifest in the
fructification and multiplication of all things,\_ in the vegetable
kingdom in the capacity implanted in seeds, and in the animal kingdom in
reproduction, especially in the family of fishes. Were the seeds to bear
fruit and the animals to multiply in the measure of ability, they would
fill all the world, even the universe, in a generation. Obviously there
is latent in that ability an endeavor after self-propagation to
infinity. And as fructification and multiplication have not failed from
the beginning of creation and never will, plainly there is in that
ability an endeavor after self-propagation to eternity also.

<span class="margnote"><span id="57.">57.</span></span>

The like is true of human beings as to their affections, which are of
love, and their perceptions, which are of wisdom. The variety of either
is infinite and eternal; so, too, is their fructification and
multiplication, which is spiritual. No person enjoys an affection and
perception so like another's as to be identical with it, nor ever will.
Affections, moreover, may be fructified and perceptions multiplied
without end. Knowledge, it is well known, is inexhaustible. This
capacity of fructification and multiplication without end or to infinity
and eternity exists in natural things with men, in spiritual with the
spiritual angels, and in celestial with the celestial angels.
Affections, perceptions and knowledges have this endless capacity not
only in general, but in every least particular. They have it because
they exist from the infinite and eternal in itself through what is
infinite and eternal from itself. But as the finite has in it nothing of
the Divine, nothing of the kind, not the least, is in the human being as
his own. Man or angel is finite and only a receptacle, by itself dead.
Whatever is living in him is from the proceeding Divine, joined to him
by contact, and appearing in him as if it were his. The truth of this
will be seen in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="58.">58.</span></span>

Divine providence regards what is infinite and eternal from itself
especially in saving mankind because its object is a heaven from mankind
(as was shown, nn. 27-45), and therefore it is man's reformation and
regeneration or salvation to which it especially looks, since heaven
consists of the saved or regenerate. To regenerate man, moreover, is to
unite good and truth or love and wisdom in him, as they are united in
the Lord's proceeding Divine; to this especially, therefore, providence
looks in saving the race. The image of the infinite and eternal is not
to be found elsewhere in man than in the marriage of good and truth.
This marriage the proceeding Divine effects. Men filled by the
proceeding Divine, which is called the Holy Spirit, have prophesied, as
we know from the Word; men enlightened by it see divine truths in
heaven's light; above all, angels sensibly perceive the presence, influx
and conjunction, though they are aware that the conjunction is no more
than can be termed adjunction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="59.">59.</span></span>

It has not been known that divine providence in all its procedure with
man looks to his eternal state. It can look to nothing else because the
Divine is infinite and eternal, and the infinite and eternal or the
Divine is not in time; therefore all future things are present to it. It
follows that there is eternity in all that the Divine does. But those
who think from time and space perceive this with difficulty, not only
because they love temporal things, but also because they think from what
is on hand in the world and not from what is at hand in heaven; this is
as remote to them as the ends of the earth. Those, however, who are in
the Divine, inasmuch as they think from the Lord, think from what is
eternal as well as from what is at present, asking themselves, "What is
that which is not eternal? Is not the temporal relatively nothing and
does it not become nothing when it is past?" The eternal is not so; it
alone \_is;\_ its \_esse\_ has no end. To think thus is to think both
from the present and the eternal, and when a man not only thinks so but
lives so, the proceeding Divine with him or divine providence looks in
all its procedure to the state of his eternal life in heaven and guides
to it. In what follows it will be seen that the Divine looks to the
eternal in everybody, in an evil as well as in a good person.

<span class="margnote"><span id="60.">60.</span></span>

\(iv\) \_An image of the infinite and eternal offers in an angelic
heaven.\_ Among things we need to know about is the angelic heaven.
Everyone who has any religion thinks about heaven and wishes to go
there. Yet heaven is granted only to those who know the way to it and
walk in that way. We can know the way to an extent by knowing the
character of those who constitute heaven and by knowing that no one
becomes an angel or comes into heaven unless he brings with him from the
world what is angelic. In what is angelic there is a knowledge of the
way from walking in it, and a walking in the way through a knowledge of
it. In the spiritual world, moreover, there are actually ways leading to
every society of heaven or of hell. Each sees his own way as if for
himself. He does so because a way is there for every love; the love
discloses the way and takes a man to his fellows. No one sees other ways
than the way of his love. Plain it is from this that angels are nothing
but heavenly loves; otherwise they would not have seen the ways tending
to heaven. This will be plainer still when heaven is described.

<span class="margnote"><span id="61.">61.</span></span>

Every man's spirit is affection and thought therefrom. And as all
affection is of love, and thought is of the understanding, every spirit
is his own love and his own understanding therefrom. When a man is
thinking solely from his own spirit, therefore, as he does in private
meditation at home, he thinks from the affection belonging to his love.
It is clear, then, that when a man becomes a spirit, as he does after
death, he is the affection of his own love and has no other thought than
that of his affection. If his love has been one of evil, he is an evil
affection, which is a lust; if his love has been one of good, he is a
good affection. Everyone has a good affection so far as he has shunned
evils as sins, and an evil affection so far as he has not shunned evils
as sins. As all spirits and angels, then, are affections, the whole
angelic heaven is nothing but the love of all the affections of good and
the attendant wisdom of all the perceptions of truth. Since all good and
truth are from the Lord and He is love itself, the angelic heaven is an
image of Him. Furthermore, as divine love and wisdom are human in form,
it also follows that the angelic heaven must be in that form. Of this we
shall say more in the following section.

<span class="margnote"><span id="62.">62.</span></span>

The angelic heaven is an image of the infinite and eternal, then,
because it is an image of the Lord, who is infinite and eternal. The
image of His infinity and eternity is manifest in heaven's being
constituted of myriads and myriads of angels, and in its consisting of
as many societies as there are general affections of heavenly love;
manifest, again, in every angel's being distinctly his own affection;
manifest further in that the form of heaven--a unit in the divine sight
just as man is a unit--is assembled from so many affections, general and
particular; also manifest in that this form is perfected to eternity
with the increase in numbers, the greater the number of those entering
into the form of the divine love which is the form of forms, the more
perfect the resulting unity. It is plain from all this that the angelic
heaven presents an image of the infinite and eternal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="63.">63.</span></span>

From the knowledge of heaven to be had from this brief description it is
evident that it is an affection of the love of good that makes heaven in
a man. But who knows this today? Who knows even what an affection of the
love of good is, or that these affections are innumerable, in fact,
infinite? For, as was said, each angel is his own particular affection;
and the form of heaven is the form of all the affections of the divine
love there. Only one Being can combine all affections into this
form--only He who is love and wisdom itself and who is at once infinite
and eternal. For throughout that form is what is infinite and eternal;
the infinite is in its unity and the eternal in its perpetuity; were
they removed the form would instantly collapse. Who else can combine
affections into a form? Who else can bring about this unity? The unity
can be accomplished only in an idea of the total, and the total realized
only in thought for each single part. Myriads on myriads compose that
form; annually myriads enter it and will do so to eternity. All infants
enter it and all adults who are affections of the love of good. Again
from all this the image of the infinite and eternal in the angelic
heaven is to be seen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="64.">64.</span></span>

\(v\) \_The heart of divine providence is to look to what is infinite
and eternal by fashioning an angelic heaven for it to be like one human
being before the Lord, an image of Him.\_ See in the work \_Heaven and
Hell\_ (nn. 59-86) that heaven as a whole is like one man in the Lord's
sight; that each society of heaven also is; that as a result each angel
is a human being in perfect form; and that this is because God the
Creator, who is the Lord from eternity, is Man; also (nn. 87-102) that
as a result there is a correspondence of all things of heaven with all
things in the human being. The entire heaven as one man has not been
seen by me, for only the Lord can so behold it; but that an entire
society, whether large or small, can appear as one man, I have seen. I
was then told that the largest society of all, which is heaven in its
entirety, so appears, but to the Lord alone; and that this causes every
angel to be in full form a human being.

<span class="margnote"><span id="65.">65.</span></span>

As all heaven is like one man in the Lord's view, it is divided into as
many general societies as there are organs, viscera and members in man,
and each general society into as many less general or particular
societies as there are larger divisions in each of the viscera and
organs. This makes evident what heaven is. Because the Lord is very Man
and heaven is His image, to be in heaven is called "being in the Lord."
See in the work \_Divine Love and Wisdom\_ that the Lord is very Man
(nn. 11-13, 285-289).

<span class="margnote"><span id="66.">66.</span></span>

From all this the arcanum, well called angelic, can in a measure be
seen, that each affection of good and at the same time of truth is human
in form. For whatever proceeds from the Lord gets from His divine love
that it is an affection of good and from His divine wisdom that it is an
affection of truth. An affection of truth proceeding from the Lord
appears in angel and man as perception and consequent thought of truth.
For we are aware of perception and thought, but little aware of the
affection whence they are, although all come as one from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="67.">67.</span></span>

Man, then, is by creation a heaven in least form and hence an image of
the Lord; heaven consists of as many affections as there are angels; and
each affection in its form is man. It must then be the constant striving
of divine providence that a man may become a heaven in form and an image
of the Lord, and as this is effected by means of an affection of the
good and true, that he may become such an affection. This is therefore
the unceasing effort of divine providence. But its inmost aim is that a
man may be here or there in heaven or in the divine heavenly man, for so
he is in the Lord. But this is accomplished with those whom the Lord can
lead to heaven. As He foresees who can be led He also provides
continually that a man may become amenable; for thus everyone who
suffers himself to be led to heaven is prepared for his own place there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="68.">68.</span></span>

We have said that heaven is divided into as many societies as there are
organs, viscera and members in man; and in these no part can be in any
place but its own. As angels are the parts in the divine heavenly man,
and none become angels who were not men in the world, the man who
suffers himself to be led to heaven is continually prepared by the Lord
for his own place there. This is done by the affection of good and truth
which corresponds with that place. To this place every angel-man is also
assigned on his departure from the world. This is the inmost of divine
providence touching heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="69.">69.</span></span>

On the other hand, a man who does not permit himself to be led to heaven
and allotted a place there is prepared for his own place in hell. Of
himself a man tends constantly to the depths of hell but is continually
withheld by the Lord. He who cannot be withheld is prepared for a given
place in hell, to which he is assigned on departure from the world. This
place is opposite one in heaven; for hell is the opposite of heaven. So,
as the angel-man according to his affection of good and truth is
allotted his place in heaven, the devil-man according to his affection
of evil and falsity is allotted his in hell. The two opposites, set
exactly over against each other, are kept in connection. This is the
inmost of divine providence touching hell.

IV\. THERE ARE LAWS OF PROVIDENCE THAT ARE UNKNOWN TO MEN

<span class="margnote"><span id="70.">70.</span></span>

Men know there is divine providence, but not what its nature is. This is
not known because its laws are arcana, hitherto hidden in the wisdom of
angels. These laws are to be revealed now in order that what belongs to
the Lord may be ascribed to Him, and nothing ascribed to man that is not
man's. For very many in the world attribute everything to themselves and
their prudence, and what they cannot so attribute they call fortuitous
and accidental, not knowing that human prudence is nothing and that
"fortuitous" and "accidental" are idle words.

\[2\] We say that the laws of divine providence are arcana "hidden until
now in the wisdom of the angels." They have been hidden because the
understanding has been closed in Christendom in religion's name on
divine things, and has been rendered so dull and averse in these matters
that man has not been able because he has not been willing, or has not
been willing because he has not been able, to understand anything about
providence beyond the mere fact that it exists, or to do more than argue
whether it exists or not, also whether it is only general or also
detailed. Closed up on divine things in the name of religion,
understanding could advance no further.

\[3\] But it is acknowledged in the church that man cannot of himself do
good which is in itself good or of himself think truth which is in
itself truth. This acknowledgment is at one with divine providence;
these are interdependent beliefs. Lest therefore one be affirmed and the
other denied and both fail, what divine providence is must by all means
be revealed. It cannot be revealed unless the laws by which the Lord
oversees and governs the volitions and thoughts of the human being are
disclosed. The laws enable one to know the nature of providence, and
only one who knows its nature can acknowledge providence, for then he
beholds it. The laws of divine providence, hitherto hidden with angels
in their wisdom, are therefore to be revealed now.

V. IT IS A LAW OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE THAT MAN SHALL ACT FROM FREEDOM
ACCORDING TO REASON

<span class="margnote"><span id="71.">71.</span></span>

As is known, man is free to think and will as he wishes, but not to
speak whatever he thinks or to do whatever he wills. The freedom meant
here, therefore, is spiritual freedom and natural freedom only as they
make one; for thinking and willing are spiritual, and speaking and
acting are natural. The two are readily distinguishable in man, for he
can think what he does not utter and will what he does not do; plainly,
spiritual and natural are discriminated in him. He can pass from the
former to the latter therefore only on a decision to do so--a decision
which can be likened to a door that must first be unfastened and opened.
This door, it is true, stands open, as it were, in those who think and
will from reason in accord with the civil laws of the land and the moral
laws of society, for they speak what they think and do what they will to
do. But in those who think and will contrary to those laws, the door
stands shut, as it were. One who watches his volitions and subsequent
deeds knows that such a decision intervenes, sometimes more than once in
a single utterance or action. This we have premised for it to be
understood that by acting from freedom according to reason is meant to
think and will freely \_and\_ thence to speak and do freely what is
according to reason.

<span class="margnote"><span id="72.">72.</span></span>

Since few know, however, that the law above can be a law of divine
providence, principally because a man is also free then to think evil
and falsity (still divine providence is continually leading him to think
and will what is good and true), for clearer perception we must proceed
step by step and shall do so in this order:

i\. The human being has reason and freedom or rationality and liberty,
and has these two faculties from the Lord. ii. Whatever a man does in
freedom, whether with reason or not, provided it is according to his
reason, seems to him to be his. iii. Whatever a man does in freedom
according to his thought, is appropriated to him as his and remains. iv.
A man is reformed and regenerated by the Lord by means of the two
faculties and cannot be reformed and regenerated without them. v. A man
can be reformed and regenerated by means of the two faculties so far as
he can be led by them to acknowledge that all truth and good which he
thinks and does are from the Lord and not from himself. vi. The
conjunction of the Lord with man, and man's reciprocal conjunction with
the Lord, is effected by means of these two faculties. vii. In all the
procedure of His divine providence the Lord safeguards the two faculties
in man unimpaired and as sacred. viii. It is therefore of the divine
providence that man shall act in freedom according to reason.

<span class="margnote"><span id="73.">73.</span></span>

\(i\) \_The human being has reason and freedom or rationality and
liberty, and has these two faculties from the Lord.\_ Man has a faculty
of understanding, which is rationality, and a faculty of thinking,
willing, speaking and doing what he understands, which is liberty; and
he has these two faculties from the Lord (see the work \_Divine Love and
Wisdom,\_ nn. 264-270, 425, and above, nn. 43, 44). But many doubts may
arise about either of the two faculties when thought is given to them;
therefore I want to say something at this point just about man's freedom
to act according to reason.

\[2\] First, it should be known that all freedom is of love, so much so
that love and freedom are one. As love is man's life, freedom is of his
life, too. For man's every enjoyment is from some love of his and has no
other source, and to act from the enjoyment of one's love is to act in
freedom. Enjoyment leads a man as the current bears an object along on a
stream. But loves are many, some harmonious, others not; therefore
freedoms are many. In general there are three: natural, rational, and
spiritual freedom.

\[3\] \_Natural freedom\_ is man's by heredity. In it he loves only
himself and the world: his first life is nothing else. From these two
loves, moreover, all evils arise and thus attach to love. Hence to think
and will evil is man's natural freedom, and when he has also confirmed
evils in himself by reasonings, he does them in freedom according to his
reason. Doing them is from his faculty called liberty, and confirming
them from his faculty called rationality.

\[4\] For example, it is from the love into which he is born that he
desires to commit adultery, to defraud, to blaspheme, to take revenge.
Confirming these evils in himself and by this making them allowable, he
then, from his love's enjoyment in them, thinks and wills them freely
and as if according to reason, and so far as civil laws do not hinder,
speaks and does them. It is of the Lord's divine providence that man is
allowed to do so, for freedom or liberty is his. This natural freedom is
man's by nature because by heredity, and those are in this freedom who
have confirmed it in themselves by reasonings from enjoyment in
self-love and love of the world.

\[5\] \_Rational freedom\_ is from the love of good repute for the sake
of standing or gain. The delight of this love is to seem outwardly a
moral person. Loving this reputation, the man does not defraud, commit
adultery, take revenge, or blaspheme; and making this his reasoned
course, he also does in freedom according to reason what is sincere,
just, chaste, and friendly; indeed from reason can advocate such
conduct. But if his rational is only natural and not spiritual, his
freedom is only external and not internal. He does not love these goods
inwardly at all, but only outwardly for reputation's sake, as we said.
The good deeds he does are therefore not in themselves good. He can also
say that they should be done for the sake of the general welfare, but he
speaks out of no love for that welfare, but from love of his own
standing or gain. His freedom therefore derives nothing from love of the
public good, nor does his reason, which complies with his love. This
rational freedom, therefore, is inwardly natural freedom. The Lord's
divine providence leaves everyone this freedom too.

\[6\] \_Spiritual freedom\_ is from love of eternal life. Into this love
and its enjoyment only he comes who regards evils as sins and therefore
does not will them, and who also looks to the Lord. Once a man does this
he is in this freedom. One can refuse to will and do evils for the
reason that they are sins, only from an interior or higher freedom,
belonging to his interior or higher love. This freedom does not seem at
first to be freedom, yet it is. Later it does seem freedom, and the man
acts in real freedom according to true reason, thinking, willing,
speaking and doing the good and the true. This freedom grows as natural
freedom decreases and serves it; and it unites with rational freedom and
purifies it.

\[7\] Anyone can come into this freedom if he is willing to think that
there is a life eternal, and that the joy and bliss of life in time and
for a time is like a passing shadow to the joy and bliss of life in
eternity and for eternity. A man can think so if he will, for he has
rationality and liberty, and the Lord, from whom he has the two
faculties, constantly enables him to do so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="74.">74.</span></span>

\(ii\) \_Whatever a man does in freedom, whether with reason or not,
provided it is according to his reason, seems to him to be his.\_
Nothing makes so clear what rationality and liberty are, which are
proper to the human being, as to compare man and beast. Beasts do not
have any rationality or faculty of understanding, or any liberty or
faculty of willing freely. They do not have understanding or will,
therefore, but instead of understanding they have knowledge and instead
of will affection, both of these natural. Not having the two faculties,
animals do not have thought, but instead an internal sight which makes
one with their external sight by correspondence.

\[2\] Every affection has its mate, its consort, so to speak. An
affection of natural love has knowledge, one of spiritual love has
intelligence, and one of celestial love, wisdom. Without its mate or
consort an affection is nothing, but is like esse apart from existere or
substance without form, of which nothing can be predicated. Hence there
is in every created thing something referable to the marriage of good
and truth, as we have shown several times. In beasts it is a marriage of
affection and knowledge; the affection is one of natural good, and the
knowledge is knowledge of natural truth.

\[3\] Affection and knowledge in beasts act altogether as one. Their
affection cannot be raised above their knowledge, nor the knowledge
above the affection; if they are raised, they are raised together. Nor
have animals a spiritual mind into which, or into the heat and light of
which, they can be raised. Thus they have no faculty of understanding or
rationality, or faculty of freely willing or liberty, and nothing more
than natural affection with its knowledge. Their natural affection is
that of finding food and shelter, of propagating, of avoiding and
guarding against injury, together with the knowledge needed for this. As
this is their kind of existence, they cannot think, "I will this but not
that," or "I know this but not that," still less, "I understand this" or
"I love that." They are borne along by affection and its knowledge
without rationality and liberty. It is not from the natural world that
they are borne along so, but from the spiritual world. Nothing can exist
in the natural world that does not have its connection with the
spiritual world: thence is every cause that accomplishes an effect. On
this see also some things below (n. 96).

<span class="margnote"><span id="75.">75.</span></span>

It is otherwise with man, who has affections not only of natural love,
but also of spiritual and celestial loves. For man's mind is of three
degrees, as was shown in Part III of the treatise \_Divine Love and
Wisdom.\_ Man can be raised therefore from natural knowledge into
spiritual intelligence and on into celestial wisdom. From the two,
intelligence and wisdom, he can look to the Lord, be conjoined with Him,
and thereby live to eternity. This elevation as to affection would not
be possible did he not from rationality have the power to raise the
understanding, and from liberty the power to will this.

\[2\] By means of the two faculties man can think in himself about what
he perceives outside him through the senses, and can also think on high
about what he thinks below. Anyone can say, "I have thought and I think
so and so," "I have willed and I will so and so," "I understand that
this is a fact," "I love this for what it is," and so on. Obviously, man
thinks above his thought, and sees it, as it were, below him. This comes
to him from rationality and liberty; from rationality he can think on
high, and from liberty he can will so to think. Unless he had liberty to
think so, he would not have the will, nor the thought from it.

\[3\] Those, therefore, who will to understand only what is of the world
and nature and not what moral and spiritual good and truth are, cannot
be raised from knowledge into intelligence, still less into wisdom, for
they have stifled those faculties. They render themselves no longer men
except that they can understand if they wish, and can also will, by
virtue of the implanted rationality and liberty; from the two capacities
it is that one can think and from thought speak. In other respects, they
are not men but beasts, and some, in their abuse of those faculties, are
worse than beasts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="76.">76.</span></span>

From an unclouded rationality anyone can see or grasp that without the
appearance that it is his own a man cannot be in any affection to know
or to understand. Every joy and pleasure, thus everything of the will,
is from an affection of some love. Who can wish to know or to understand
anything except that an affection of his takes pleasure in it? Who can
feel this pleasure unless what he is affected by seems to be his? Were
it not his, but another's altogether, that is, if another from his
affection should infuse something into his mind when he himself felt no
affection for knowing or grasping it, would he receive it? Indeed, could
he receive it? Would he not be like one called a dullard or a clod?

\[2\] It should be manifest then that although everything that a man
perceives, thinks, knows and, according to perception, wills and does,
flows into him, nevertheless it is of the Lord's divine providence that
it seems to be the man's. Otherwise, as we said, a man would not receive
anything and so could be given no intelligence or wisdom. It is known
that all good and truth are the Lord's and not man's, and yet appear to
be man's. As good and truth so appear, so do all things of the church
and of heaven, and all things of love and wisdom, and all things of
charity and faith; yet none of them is man's. No one can receive them
from the Lord unless it seems to him that he perceives them for himself.
Plainly, the truth of the matter is that whatever a man does in freedom,
whether with reason or not, provided only that it accords with his
reason, seems to him to be his.

<span class="margnote"><span id="77.">77.</span></span>

Who cannot from his faculty called rationality understand that a given
good is serviceable to society, and a given evil harmful to society?
That, for example, justice, sincerity, the chastity of marriage are
serviceable to it, and injustice, insincerity, and misconduct with the
wives of others, harmful? Consequently that these evils are in
themselves injuries, and those goods in themselves benefits? Who then
cannot make this a matter of his reason if only he will? He has
rationality and he has liberty; the two faculties are bared, show, take
charge and enable him to perceive and do in the measure that he avoids
those evils because they are evils. So far as a man does this he looks
on those goods as a friend looks on friends.

\[2\] By his faculty called rationality a man can conclude from this
what goods are useful to society in the spiritual world and what evils
are hurtful there, if instead of evils he sees sins and instead of goods
works of charity. This he can also make a matter of his reason if he
will, since he has liberty and rationality. His rationality and liberty
emerge, become manifest, take charge and give him perception and power
so far as he shuns evils as sins. So far as he does this he regards the
goods of charity as neighbor regards neighbor in mutual love.

\[3\] For the sake of reception and union the Lord wills that whatever a
man does freely according to reason shall seem to him to be his; this
agrees with reason itself. It follows that a man can from his reason
will something on the ground that it means his eternal happiness and can
perform it by the Lord's divine power, implored by him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="78.">78.</span></span>

\(iii\) \_Whatever a man does in freedom according to his thought is
appropriated to him as his and remains.\_ The reason is that a man's own
and his freedom make one. His proprium is of his life, and what he does
from his life he does in freedom. His proprium is also of his love, for
love is one's life, and what he does from his life's love he does in
freedom. We speak of his acting in freedom "according to his thought"
because what is of his life or love he also thinks and confirms by
thought, and what is so confirmed he does in freedom then according to
thought. What a man does, he does from the will by the understanding;
freedom is of the will and thought is of the understanding.

\[2\] A man can also act freely contrary to reason, likewise not freely
in accord with reason: then nothing is appropriated to him--what he does
is only of the mouth and body, not of the spirit or heart; only what is
of the spirit and heart, when it is also of the mouth and body, is
appropriated. The truth of this can be illustrated by many things, but
this is not the place.

\[3\] By being appropriated to man is meant entering his life and
becoming part of it, consequently becoming his own. It will be seen in
what follows that there is nothing, however, which is man's very own; it
only seems to him as if it were. Only this now: all the good a man does
in freedom according to reason is appropriated to him as if it were his
because it seems to be his in that he thinks, wills, speaks and does it.
Good is not man's, however, but the Lord's with man (above, n. 76). How
evil is appropriated to man will appear in a section of its own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="79.">79.</span></span>

We said that what a man does in freedom in accord with his thought also
remains. For nothing that a man has appropriated to himself can be
eradicated; it has been made part of his love and at the same time of
his reason, or of his will and at the same time of his understanding,
and so of his life. It can be put aside indeed, but not cast out; put
aside, it is borne from center to periphery, where it stays; this is
what we mean by its remaining.

\[2\] If, for example, in boyhood or youth, a man appropriated an evil
to himself by doing it with enjoyment from love of it--a fraud,
blasphemy, revenge, or fornication--having done it freely with the
assent of thought, he made it his; but if later he repents, shuns it and
considers it a sin to be averse from, and so desists from it freely
according to reason, then the opposite good is appropriated to him. Good
then takes the center and removes evil to the periphery, farther
according to his aversion and abhorrence for it. Still the evil cannot
be so thrust out that one can say it is extirpated; it may indeed in
that removal seem extirpated. What occurs is that the man is withheld
from the evil by the Lord and held in good. This can happen with all
inherited evil and all a man's actual evil.

\[3\] I have seen this verified by the experience of some in heaven who
thought they were without evil, being held in good as they were by the
Lord. Lest they should believe that the good in which they were was
their own, they were let down from heaven and let into their evils until
they acknowledged that of themselves they were in evil, and in good only
from the Lord. Upon this acknowledgment they were returned to heaven.

\[4\] Be it known, therefore, that goods are appropriated to man only in
that they are constantly with him from the Lord, and that as a man
acknowledges this the Lord grants that good shall seem to be the man's,
that is, that it shall seem to him that he loves the neighbor or has
charity, believes or has faith, does good and understands truth, thus is
wise, of himself. From this an enlightened person may see the nature and
the strength of the appearance in which the Lord wills man to be. The
Lord wills it for salvation's sake, for without that appearance no one
can be saved. Also see what was shown above on the subject (nn. 42-45).

<span class="margnote"><span id="80.">80.</span></span>

Nothing that a person only thinks, not even what he thinks to will, is
appropriated to him unless he also wills it so that he does it when
opportunity offers. For when a man then does it, he does it from the
will by the understanding or from affection of the will by thought of
the understanding. If it is something thought only, it cannot be
appropriated, for the understanding does not conjoin itself to the will,
or the thought of the understanding to the affection of the will, but
the latter with the former, as we have shown many times in the treatise
\_Divine Love and Wisdom,\_ Part V. This is meant by the Lord's words,

Not that which enters the mouth renders a man unclean, but that which
goes forth from the heart by the mouth renders a man unclean ( Mt 15:11,
17, 18, 19).

In the spiritual sense thought is meant by "mouth," for thought is
spoken by it; affection which is of love is meant by "heart"; if the man
thinks and speaks from this he makes himself unclean. In Luke 6:45 also
by "heart" an affection of love or of the will is meant, and by "mouth"
the thought of the understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="81.">81.</span></span>

Evils which a man believes are allowable, though he does not do them,
are also appropriated to him, for the licitness in thought is from the
will, as there is assent. When a man deems an evil allowable he loosens
the internal bond on it and is kept from doing it only by external
bonds, which are fears. As his spirit favors the evil, he commits it
when external bonds are removed as allowable, and meanwhile is
committing it in spirit. But on this see \_Doctrine of Life for the New
Jerusalem,\_ nn. 108-113.

<span class="margnote"><span id="82.">82.</span></span>

\(iv\) \_A man is reformed and regenerated by the Lord by means of the
two faculties and cannot be reformed or regenerated without them.\_ The
Lord teaches that,

Unless one is born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of God (Jn 3:3,5,7).

Few know what it is to be born anew or regenerated. For most do not know
what love and charity are, therefore what faith is, either. One who does
not know what love and charity are cannot know what faith is because
charity and faith make one as good and truth do, and as affection which
is of the will, and thought which is of the understanding, do. On this
union see the treatise \_Divine Love and Wisdom,\_ nn. 427-431; also
\_Doctrine for the New Jerusalem,\_ nn. 13-24; and above, nn. 3-20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="83.">83.</span></span>

No one can enter the kingdom of God unless he has been born anew for the
reason that by heredity from his parents he is born into evils of every
kind, with the capacity of becoming spiritual through removal of the
evils; unless he becomes spiritual, then, he cannot enter heaven. To
become spiritual from being natural is to be born again or regenerated.
Three things need to be considered if one is to know how man is
regenerated: the nature of his first state, which is one of damnation;
the nature of his second state, which is one of reformation; and the
nature of his third state, which is one of regeneration.

\[2\] Man's first state, which is one of damnation, is every one's state
by heredity from his parents. For man is born thereby into self-love and
love of the world, and from these as fountains into evils of every kind.
By the enjoyments of those loves he is led, and they keep him from
knowing that he is in evil, for the enjoyment of any love is felt to be
good. Unless he is regenerated, therefore, a man knows no otherwise than
that to love himself and the world above all things is good itself, and
to rule over others and possess their riches is the supreme good. So
comes all evil. For only oneself is regarded with love. If another is
regarded with love it is as devil loves devil or thief thief when they
are in league.

\[3\] Those who confirm these loves with themselves and the evils
flowing from them, from enjoyment in them, remain natural and become
sensuous-corporeal, and in their own thinking, which is that of their
spirit, are insane. And yet, as long as they are in the world they can
speak and act rationally and wisely, for they are human beings and so
have rationality and liberty, though they still do this from self-love
and love of the world. After death and on becoming spirits, they can
enjoy nothing that they did not enjoy in the world. Their enjoyment is
that of an infernal love and is turned into the unpleasant, sorrowful
and dreadful, meant in the Word by torment and hell-fire. Plain it is,
then, that man's first state is one of damnation and that they are in it
who do not suffer themselves to be regenerated.

\[4\] Man's second state--of reformation--is his state when he begins to
think of heaven for the joy there, thus of God from whom he has heaven's
joy. But at first the thought comes from the enjoyment of self-love; to
him heaven's joy is that enjoyment. While the enjoyments of that love
and of the evils flowing from it rule, moreover, he cannot but think
that to gain heaven is to pour out prayers, hear sermons, observe the
Supper, give to the poor, help the needy, make offerings to churches,
contribute to hospitals, and the like. In this state a man is persuaded
that merely to think about what religion teaches, whether this is called
faith or called faith and charity, is to be saved. He is so minded
because he gives no thought to the evils in the enjoyments of which he
is. While those enjoyments remain, the evils do. The enjoyments of the
evils are from the lust for them which continually inspires them and,
when no fear restrains, brings them to pass.

\[5\] While evils remain in the lusts of love for them and so in one's
enjoyments, there is no faith, piety, charity or worship except in
externals, which seem real in the world's sight, but are not. They may
be likened to waters flowing from an impure fountain, which one cannot
drink. While a man is such that he thinks about heaven and God from
religion but gives no thought to evils as sins, he is still in the first
state. He comes into the second state, which is one of reformation, when
he begins to think that there is such a thing as sin and still more when
he thinks that a given evil is a sin, explores it somewhat in himself,
and does not will it.

\[6\] Man's third state, which is one of regeneration, sets in and
continues from the former. It begins when a man desists from evils as
sins, progresses as he shuns them, and is perfected as he battles
against them. Then as he conquers from the Lord he is regenerated. The
order of his life is changed; from natural he becomes spiritual; the
natural separated from the spiritual is in disorder and the spiritual is
in order. The regenerated man acts from charity and makes what is of his
faith a part of his charity. But he becomes spiritual only in the
measure in which he is in truths. Everyone is regenerated by means of
truths and of a life in accord with them; by truths he knows life and by
his life he does the truths. So he unites good and truth, which is the
spiritual marriage in which heaven is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="85.">85.</span></span>

Man is reformed and regenerated by means of the two faculties called
rationality and liberty, and cannot be reformed or regenerated without
them, because it is by means of rationality that he can understand and
know what is evil and what is good, and hence what is false and true,
and by means of liberty that he can will what he understands and knows.
But while the enjoyment of an evil love rules him he cannot will good
and truth freely or make them a matter of his reason, and therefore
cannot appropriate them to him. For, as was shown above, what a man does
in freedom from reason is appropriated to him as his, and unless it is
so appropriated, he is not reformed and regenerated. He acts from the
enjoyment of a love of good and truth for the first time when the
enjoyment of love for the evil and false has been removed. Two opposite
kinds of enjoyments of love at one and the same time are impossible. To
act from the enjoyment of love is to act freely and is also to act
according to reason, inasmuch as the reason favors the love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="86.">86.</span></span>

Because an evil man as well as a good man has rationality and liberty,
the evil man as well as the good can understand truth and do good. The
evil man cannot do this in freedom according to reason, while a good man
can; for the evil man is in the enjoyment of a love of evil, the good
man in the enjoyment of a love of good. The truth which an evil man
understands and the good he does are therefore not appropriated to him,
as they are to the good man, and aside from appropriation there is no
reformation or regeneration. With the evil man evils with their
falsities occupy the center, as it were, and goods with their truths the
circumference, but goods with their truths the center with the good man
and evils with their falsities the periphery. In each case what is at
the center is diffused to the circumference, as heat is from a fiery
center and cold from an icy one. Thus with the wicked the good at the
circumference is defiled by evils at the center, and with the good evils
at the circumference grow mild from the good at the center. For this
reason evils do not condemn a regenerating man, nor do goods save the
unregenerate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="87.">87.</span></span>

\(v\) \_A man can be reformed and regenerated by means of the two
faculties so far as he can be led by them to acknowledge that all truth
and good which he thinks and does are from the Lord and not from
himself.\_ What reformation and regeneration are has been told just
above, likewise that man is reformed and regenerated by means of the two
faculties of rationality and liberty. Because it is done by those
faculties, something more is to be said of them. From rationality a man
can understand and from liberty he can will, doing each as of himself.
Yet he does not have the ability to will good in freedom and to do it in
accord with reason unless he is regenerated. An evil man can will only
evil in freedom and do it according to his thinking, which by
confirmations he has made to be his reasoning. For evil can be confirmed
as well as good, but is confirmed by fallacies and appearances which
then become falsities; evil so confirmed seems to accord with reason.

<span class="margnote"><span id="88.">88.</span></span>

Anyone thinking from interior understanding can see that the power to
will and the power to understand are not from man, but from Him who has
power itself, that is, power in its essence. Only think whence power is.
Is it not from Him who has it in its full might, that is, who possesses
it in and from Himself? Power in itself, therefore, is divine. All power
must have a supply on which to draw and direction from an interior or
higher self. Of itself the eye cannot see, nor the ear hear, nor the
mouth speak, nor the hand do; there must be supply and direction from
the mind. Nor can the mind of itself think or will this or that unless
something more interior or higher determines the mind to it. The same is
true of the power to understand and the power to will. These are
possible only from Him who has in Himself the power of willing and
understanding.

\[2\] It is plain, then, that the two faculties called rationality and
liberty are from the Lord and not from man. Man can therefore will or
understand something only as if of himself, and not of himself. Anyone
can confirm the truth of this for himself who knows and believes that
the will to good and the understanding of truth are wholly from the
Lord, and not from man. The Word teaches that man can take nothing of
himself and do nothing of himself (Jn 3:27; 15:5).

<span class="margnote"><span id="89.">89.</span></span>

As all willing is from love and all understanding is from wisdom, the
ability to will is from divine love, and the ability to understand is
from divine wisdom; thus both are from the Lord who is divine love
itself and divine wisdom itself. Hence to act in freedom according to
reason has no other source. Everyone acts in freedom because, like love,
freedom cannot be separated from willing. But there is interior and
exterior willing, and a man can act upon the exterior without acting at
the same time on the interior willing; so hypocrite and flatterer act.
Exterior willing, however, is still from freedom, being from a love of
appearing other than one is, or from love of an evil which the person
intends in the love of his inner will. An evil man, however, as has been
said, cannot in freedom according to reason do anything but evil; he
cannot do good in freedom according to reason; he can do good, to be
sure, but not in the inner freedom which is his own, from which the
outer freedom has its character of not being good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="90.">90.</span></span>

A person can be reformed and regenerated, we have said, in the measure
in which he is led by the two faculties to acknowledge that all good and
truth which he thinks and does are from the Lord and not from himself. A
man can make this acknowledgment only by means of the two faculties,
because they are from the Lord and are the Lord's in him, as is plain
from what has been said. Man can make this acknowledgment, therefore,
only from the Lord and not from himself; he can make it as if of
himself; this the Lord gives everyone to do. He may believe that it is
of himself, but when wiser acknowledge that it is not of himself.
Otherwise the truth he thinks and the good he does are not in themselves
truth and good, for the man and not the Lord is in them. Good in which
the man is and which is done by him for salvation's sake is
self-righteous, but not that in which the Lord is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="91.">91.</span></span>

Few can grasp with understanding that acknowledgment of the Lord, and
acknowledgment that all good and truth are from Him, cause one to be
reformed and regenerated. For a person may think, "What does the
acknowledgment effect when the Lord is omnipotent and wills the
salvation of all? This He wills and can accomplish if only He is moved
to mercy." One is not thinking then from the Lord, nor from the interior
sight of the understanding, that is, from enlightenment. Let me say
briefly what the acknowledgment accomplishes.

\[2\] In the spiritual world where space is appearance only, wisdom
brings about presence and love union, or the contrary happens. One can
acknowledge the Lord from wisdom, and one can acknowledge Him from love.
The acknowledgment of Him from wisdom (viewed in itself this is only
knowledge) is made by doctrine; acknowledgment from love is made in a
life according to doctrine. This effects union, the other, presence.
Those, therefore, who reject instruction about the Lord remove
themselves from Him, and as they also refuse life they part from Him.
Those who do not reject instruction, but do refuse life, are present but
still separated--like friends who converse but do not love each other,
or like two one of whom speaks as a friend with the other, although as
his enemy he hates him.

\[3\] The truth of this is commonly recognized in the idea that one who
teaches and lives well is saved but not one who teaches well but lives
wickedly, and in the idea that one who does not acknowledge God cannot
be saved. This makes plain what kind of religion it is only to think
about the Lord from faith, so called, and not to do something from
charity. Therefore the Lord says,

Why do you call Me Lord, Lord, and do not do what I say? Everyone who
comes to Me and hears my words and does them .. . is like a
house-builder who has placed the foundation on a rock, but the man who
hears and does not do, is like a man building a house on the ground
without a foundation (Lu 6:46-49).

<span class="margnote"><span id="92.">92.</span></span>

\(vi\) \_The conjunction of the Lord with man and man's reciprocal
conjunction with the Lord is effected by these two faculties.\_
Conjunction with the Lord and regeneration are one and the same thing,
for a man is regenerated in the measure that he is conjoined with the
Lord. All that we have said above about regeneration can be said
therefore of the conjunction, and all we said about conjunction can be
said about regeneration. The Lord Himself teaches in John that there is
a conjunction of the Lord with man and a reciprocal conjunction of man
with the Lord.

Abide in Me, and I in you. . . . He that abides in Me and I in him,
brings forth much fruit (15:4, 5).

In that day you will know that you are in Me and I in you (14:20).

\[2\] From reason alone anyone can see that there is no conjunction of
minds unless it is reciprocal, and that what is reciprocal conjoins. If
one loves another without being loved in return, then as he approaches,
the other withdraws; but if he is loved in return, as he approaches, the
other does also, and there is conjunction. Love also wills to be loved;
this is implanted in it; and so far as it is loved in return it is in
itself and in its delight. Thence it is plain that if the Lord loves man
and is not in turn loved by man, the Lord advances but man withdraws;
thus the Lord would be constantly willing to meet with man and enter
him, but man would be turning back and departing. So it is with those in
hell, but with those in heaven there is mutual conjunction.

\[3\] Since the Lord wills conjunction with man for salvation's sake, He
also provides something reciprocal with man. This consists in the fact
that the good a man wills and does in freedom and the truth he thinks
and speaks from the will according to reason seem to be from himself,
and that the good in his will and the truth in his understanding seem to
be his--indeed they seem to the man to be from himself and to be as
completely his as though they really were; there is no difference; does
anyone perceive otherwise by any sense? See above (nn. 74-77) on the
appearance as of self, and (nn. 78-81) on appropriation as of oneself.
The only difference is the acknowledgment which a man ought to make,
that he does good and thinks truth not of himself but from the Lord, and
hence that the good he does and the truth he thinks are not his. So to
think from some love of the will because it is the truth makes
conjunction; for then a man looks to the Lord and the Lord looks on the
man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="93.">93.</span></span>

I have been granted both to hear and see in the spiritual world what the
difference is between those who believe that all good is from the Lord
and those who believe that good is from themselves. Those who believe
that good is from the Lord turn their faces to Him and receive the
enjoyment and blessedness of good. Those who think that good is from
themselves look to themselves and think they have merit. Looking to
themselves, they perceive only the enjoyment of their own good which is
the enjoyment not of good but of evil, for man's own is evil, and
enjoyment of evil perceived as good is hell. Those who have done good
but believed it was of themselves, and who after death do not receive
the truth that all good is from the Lord, mingle with infernal spirits
and finally join them. Those who receive that truth, however, are
reformed, though no others receive it than those who have looked to God
in their life. To look to God in one's life is nothing else than to shun
evils as sins.

<span class="margnote"><span id="94.">94.</span></span>

The Lord's conjunction with man and man's reciprocal conjunction with
the Lord is effected by loving the neighbor as one's self and the Lord
above all. To love the neighbor as one's self consists simply in not
acting insincerely or unjustly with him, not hating him or avenging
one's self on him, not cursing and defaming him, not committing adultery
with his wife, and not doing other like things to him. Who cannot see
that those who do such things do not love the neighbor as themselves?
Those, however, who do not do such things because they are evils to the
neighbor and at the same time sins against the Lord, deal sincerely,
justly, amicably and faithfully by the neighbor; as the Lord does
likewise, reciprocal conjunction takes place. And when conjunction is
reciprocal, whatever a man does to the neighbor he does from the Lord,
and what he does from the Lord is good. The neighbor to him then is not
the person, but the good in the person. To love the Lord above all is to
do no evil to the Word, for the Lord is in the Word, or to the holy
things of the church, for He is in these, too, and to do no evil to the
soul of another, for everyone's soul is in the Lord's hand. Those who
shun these evils as monstrous sins against the Lord love Him above all
else. None can do this except those who love the neighbor as themselves,
for the two loves are conjoined.

<span class="margnote"><span id="95.">95.</span></span>

In view of the fact that there is a conjunction of the Lord with man and
of man with the Lord, there are two tables of the Law, one for the Lord
and the other for man. So far as man as of himself keeps the laws of his
table, the Lord enables him to observe the laws of the Lord's table. A
man, however, who does not keep the laws of his table, which are all
referable to love for the neighbor, cannot do the laws of the Lord's
table, which are all referable to love for the Lord. How can a murderer,
thief, adulterer, or false witness love God? Does reason not insist that
to be any of these and to love God is a contradiction? Is not the devil
such? Must he not hate God? But a man can love God when he abhors
murder, adultery, theft and false witness, for then he turns his face
away from the devil to the Lord; turning his face to the Lord he is
given love and wisdom--these enter him by the face, and not by the back
of the neck. As conjunction is accomplished only so, the two tables are
called a covenant, and a covenant exists between two.

<span class="margnote"><span id="96.">96.</span></span>

\(vii\) \_In all the procedure of His divine providence the Lord
safeguards the two faculties in man unimpaired and as sacred.\_ The
reasons are that without those two faculties man would not have
understanding and will and thus would not be human; likewise that
without them he could not be conjoined to the Lord and so be reformed
and regenerated; and because without them he would not have immortality
and eternal life. The truth of this can be seen from what has been said
about the two faculties, liberty and rationality, but not clearly seen
unless the reasons just given are brought forward as conclusions. They
are, therefore to be clarified.

\[2\] \_Without those two faculties man would not have understanding and
will and thus would not be human.\_ Man has will only in that he can
will freely as of himself, and to will freely as of oneself is from the
faculty called liberty, steadily imparted by the Lord. Man has
understanding only in that he can understand as of himself whether a
thing is of reason or not, and so to understand is from the other
faculty, called rationality, steadily imparted to him by the Lord. These
faculties unite in man as will and understanding do, for because a man
can will, he can also understand; willing is impossible without
understanding; understanding is its partner and mate apart from which it
cannot exist. With the faculty called liberty there is therefore given
the faculty called rationality. If, too, you take willing away from
understanding, you understand nothing.

\[3\] In the measure that you will, you can understand provided the
helps, called knowledges, are present or available, for these are like
tools to a workman. We say, in the measure you will you can understand,
meaning, so far as you love to understand, for will and love act as one.
This seems like a paradox, but it appears so to those who do not love or
hence will to understand. They say they cannot understand, but in the
following section we shall tell who cannot understand, and who can
hardly understand.

\[4\] It is plain without confirmation that unless man had will from the
faculty called liberty, and understanding from the faculty called
rationality, he would not be human. Beasts do not have these faculties.
Beasts seem to be able to will and to understand, but cannot do so. They
are led and moved to do what they do solely by a natural affection, in
itself desire, which has knowledge for its mate. Something civil and
moral there is in their knowledge, but it does not transcend the
knowledge, for they have nothing spiritual enabling them to perceive or
to think analytically of what is moral. They can indeed be taught to do
something, but this is natural only, is assimilated to their knowledge
and at the same time to their affection, and reproduced through sight or
hearing, but never becomes with them anything of thought, still less of
reason. On this see some things above, n. 74.

\[5\] \_Without those two faculties man could not be con-joined to the
Lord or reformed and regenerated.\_ This has been shown above. The Lord
resides with men, whether evil or good, in these two faculties and
conjoins Himself by them to every man. Hence an evil man as well as a
good man can understand and has the will of good and the understanding
of truth potentially--that he does not possess them actually is owing to
abuse of those faculties. The Lord resides in those faculties in
everyone by the influx of His will, namely, to be received by man and to
have an abode with him, and to give him the felicities of eternal life;
all this is of the Lord's will, being of His divine love. It is this
will of the Lord which causes what a man thinks, speaks, wills and does,
to seem to be his own.

\[6\] That the influx of the Lord's will effects this can be confirmed
by much in the spiritual world. Sometimes the Lord fills an angel with
His divine so that the angel does not know but that he is the Lord. Thus
inspired were the angels who appeared to Abraham, Hagar, and Gideon, and
who therefore spoke of themselves as Jehovah; of whom the Word tells. So
also one spirit may be filled by another so that he does not know but
that he is the other; I have seen this often. In heaven it is general
knowledge that the Lord operates all things by willing, and that what He
wills takes place.

From all this it is plain that it is by those two faculties that the
Lord conjoins Himself to man and causes the man to be reciprocally
conjoined. We told above and shall say more below about how man is
reciprocally conjoined by the two faculties and how, consequently, he is
reformed and regenerated by means of them.

\[7\] \_Without those two faculties man would not have immortality or
eternal life.\_ This follows from what has been said: that by the two
faculties there is conjunction with the Lord and also reformation and
regeneration. By conjunction man has immortality, and through
reformation and regeneration he has eternal life. As every man, evil as
well as good, is conjoined to the Lord by the two faculties every man
has immortality. Eternal life, or the life of heaven, however, only that
man has with whom there is reciprocal conjunction from inmosts to
outmosts.

The reasons may now be clear why the Lord, in all the procedure of His
divine providence, safeguards the two faculties in man unimpaired and as
sacred.

<span class="margnote"><span id="97.">97.</span></span>

( viii) \_It is therefore \[a law\] of divine providence that man shall
act in freedom from reason.\_ To act in freedom according to reason, to
act from liberty and rationality, and to act from will and
understanding, are the same. But it is one thing to act in freedom
according to reason, or from liberty and rationality, and another thing
to act from freedom itself according to reason itself or from liberty
and rationality themselves. The man who does evil from love of evil and
confirms it in himself acts indeed from freedom according to reason, but
his freedom is not in itself freedom or very freedom, but an infernal
freedom which in itself is bondage, and his reason is not in itself
reason, but is either spurious or false or plausible through
confirmations. Still, either is of divine providence. For if freedom to
will evil and do it as of the reason through confirmation of it were
taken from the natural man, liberty and rationality and at the same time
will and understanding would perish, and he could not be withdrawn any
longer from evils, be reformed or united with the Lord, and live to
eternity. The Lord therefore guards man's freedom as a man does the
apple of his eye. Through that freedom the Lord steadily withdraws man
from evils and so far as He can do this implants goods, thus gradually
putting heavenly freedom in place of infernal freedom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="98.">98.</span></span>

We said above that every man has the faculty of volition called liberty
and the faculty of understanding called rationality. Those faculties,
moreover, it should be known, are as it were inherent in man, for
humanness itself is in them. But as was just said, it is one thing to
act from freedom in accord with reason, and another thing to act from
freedom itself and according to reason itself. Only those do the latter
who have suffered themselves to be regenerated by the Lord; others act
in freedom according to thought which they make seem like reason. Unless
he was born foolish or supremely stupid, every person can attain to
reason itself and by it to liberty itself. Many reasons why all do not
do so will be disclosed in what follows. Here we shall only tell to whom
freedom itself or liberty itself, and at the same time reason itself or
rationality itself cannot be given and to whom they can hardly be given.

\[2\] True liberty and rationality cannot be given to those foolish from
birth or to those who become foolish later, while they remain so. Nor
can they be given to those born stupid and dull or to any made so by the
torpor of idleness, or by a disease which perverts or entirely closes
the interiors of the mind, or by love of a bestial life.

\[3\] Genuine liberty and rationality cannot be given to those in
Christendom who utterly deny the Divine of the Lord and the holiness of
the Word, and have kept that denial confirmed to life's close. For this
is meant by the sin against the Holy Spirit which is not forgiven in
this world or in the world to come (Mt 12:31, 32).

\[4\] Liberty itself and rationality itself cannot be given to those who
ascribe all things to nature and nothing to the Divine, and have made
this a conviction by reasonings from visible things; for these are
atheists.

\[5\] True liberty and rationality can hardly be given to those who have
confirmed themselves much in falsities of religion; for a confirmer of
falsity is a denier of truth. But they can be given to those, in
whatever religion, who have not so confirmed themselves. On this see
what is adduced in \_Doctrine for the New Jerusalem about Sacred
Scripture,\_ nn. 91-97.

\[6\] Infants and children cannot attain to essential liberty and
rationality before they grow up. For the interiors of the mind of man
are opened gradually, and meanwhile are like seeds in unripe fruit,
without ground in which to sprout.

<span class="margnote"><span id="99.">99.</span></span>

We have said that true liberty and rationality cannot be given to those
who have denied the Divine of the Lord and the holiness of the Word; to
those who have confirmed themselves in favor of nature and against the
Divine; and hardly to those who have strongly confirmed themselves in
falsities of religion; still none of these have destroyed the faculties
themselves. I have heard atheists, who had become devils and satans,
understand arcana of wisdom quite as well as angels, but only while they
heard them from others; on returning into their own thought, they did
not understand them, for the reason that they did not will to do so.
They were shown that they could also will this, did not the love and
enjoyment of evil turn them away. This they understood, too, when they
heard it. Indeed they asserted that they could but did not will to be
able to do so, for then they could not will what they did will, namely,
evil from enjoyment in the lust of it. I have often heard such
astonishing things in the spiritual world. I am fully persuaded
therefore that every man has liberty and rationality, and that every man
can attain true liberty and rationality if he shuns evils as sins. But
the adult who has not come into true liberty and rationality in the
world can never do so after death, for the state of his life remains to
eternity what it was in the world.

VI\. IT IS A LAW OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE THAT MAN SHALL REMOVE EVILS AS
SINS IN THE EXTERNAL MAN OF HIMSELF, AND ONLY SO CAN THE LORD REMOVE THE
EVILS IN THE INTERNAL MAN AND AT THE SAME TIME IN THE EXTERNAL

<span class="margnote"><span id="100.">100.</span></span>

Anyone can see from reason alone that the Lord who is good itself and
truth itself cannot enter man unless the evils and falsities in him are
removed. For evil is opposed to good, and falsity to truth, and two
opposites cannot mingle, but as one approaches the other, combat arises
which lasts until one gives way to the other; what gives way departs and
the other takes its place. Heaven and hell, or the Lord and the devil,
are in such opposition. Can anyone reasonably think that the Lord can
enter where the devil reigns, or heaven be where hell is? By the
rationality with which every sane person is endowed, who cannot see that
for the Lord to enter, the devil must be cast out, or for heaven to
enter, hell must be removed?

\[2\] This opposition is meant by Abraham's words from heaven to the
rich man in hell:

Between us and you a great gulf is fixed, so that those who would cross
from us to you cannot, nor those over there cross to us (Lu 16:26).

Evil is itself hell, and good is itself heaven, or what is the same,
evil is itself the devil, and good itself the Lord. A person in whom
evil reigns is a hell in least form, and one in whom good reigns is a
heaven in least form. How, then, can heaven enter hell when a gulf is
fixed between them so great that there is no crossing from one to the
other? It follows that hell must by all means be removed for the Lord to
enter with heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 101-150](dpr06)
