[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dpr03)  [Next](dpr05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877855056/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Divine Providence*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1764\], tr. by William
Frederic Wunsch \[1851\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Divine Providence

Angelic Wisdom about DIVINE PROVIDENCE

DIVINE PROVIDENCE

I. DIVINE PROVIDENCE IS GOVERNMENT BY THE LORD'S DIVINE LOVE AND WISDOM

<span class="margnote"><span id="1.">1.</span></span>

To understand what divine providence is--namely, government by the
Lord's divine love and wisdom--one needs to know what was said and shown
earlier about divine love and wisdom in the treatise about them: "In the
Lord divine love is of divine wisdom, and divine wisdom of divine love"
(nn. 34-39); "Divine love and wisdom cannot but be in, and be manifested
in, all else, created by them" (nn. 47-51); "All things in the universe
were created by them" (nn. 52, 53, 151-156); "All are recipients of that
love and wisdom" (nn. 55-60); "The Lord appears before the angels as a
sun, the heat proceeding from it being love, and the light wisdom" (nn.
83-88, 89-92, 93-98, 296-301); "Divine love and wisdom, proceeding from
the Lord, make one" (nn. 99-102); "The Lord from eternity, who is
Jehovah, created the universe and everything in it from Himself, and not
from nothing" (nn. 282-284, 290-295). This is to be found in the
treatise entitled \_Angelic Wisdom about Divine Love and Wisdom.\_

<span class="margnote"><span id="2.">2.</span></span>

Putting with these propositions the description of creation in that
treatise, one may indeed see that what is called divine providence is
government by the Lord's divine love and wisdom. In that treatise,
however, creation was the subject, and not the preservation of the state
of things after creation--yet this is the Lord's government. We now
treat of this, therefore, and in the present chapter, of the
preservation of the union of divine love and wisdom or of divine good
and truth in what was created, which will be done in the following
order:

i\. The universe, with each and all things in it, was created from
divine love by divine wisdom. ii Divine love and wisdom proceed as one
from the Lord. iii. This one is in some image in every created thing.
iv. It is of the divine providence that every created thing, as a whole
and in part, should be such a one, and if it is not, should become such
a one. v. Good of love is good only so far as it is united to truth of
wisdom, and truth of wisdom truth only so far as it is united to good of
love. vi. Good of love not united to truth of wisdom is not good in
itself but seeming good, and truth of wisdom not united to good of love
is not truth in itself but seeming truth. vii. The Lord does not suffer
anything to be divided; therefore it must be either in good and at the
same time in truth, or in evil and at the same time in falsity. viii.
That which is in good and at the same time in truth is something; that
which is in evil and at the same time in falsity is not anything. ix.
The Lord's divine providence causes evil and the attendant falsity to
serve for equilibrium, contrast, and purification, and so for the
conjunction of good and truth in others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3.">3.</span></span>

\(i\) \_The universe, with each and all things in it, was created from
divine love by divine wisdom.\_ In the work \_Divine Love and Wisdom\_
we showed that the Lord from eternity, who is Jehovah, is in essence
divine love and wisdom, and that He created the universe and all things
in it from Himself. It follows that the universe, with each and all
things in it, was created from divine love by means of divine wisdom. We
also showed in that treatise that love can do nothing without wisdom,
and wisdom nothing without love. For love apart from wisdom, or the will
apart from understanding, cannot think anything, indeed cannot see, feel
or say anything, so cannot do anything. Likewise, wisdom apart from
love, or understanding apart from will, cannot think, see, feel, or
speak, therefore cannot do, anything. For if love is removed from wisdom
or understanding, there is no willing and thus no doing. If this is true
of man, for him to do anything, it was much more true of God--who is
love itself and wisdom itself--when He created and made the world and
all that it contains.

\[2\] That the universe, with each and all things in it, was created
from divine love by divine wisdom may also be established from objects
to be seen in the world. Take a particular object, examine it with some
wisdom, and you will be convinced. Take the seed, fruit, flower or leaf
of a tree, muster your wisdom, examine the object with a strong
microscope, and you will see marvels. Even more wonderful are the more
interior things which you do not see. Note the unfolding order in the
growth of a tree from seed to new seed; reflect on the continuous effort
in all stages after self-propagation--the end to which it moves is seed
in which its reproductive power arises anew. If then you will think
spiritually, as you can if you will, will you not see wisdom in all
this? Furthermore, if you can think spiritually enough, you will see
that this energy does not come from the seed, nor from the sun of the
world, which is only fire, but is in the seed from God the Creator whose
wisdom is infinite, and is from Him not only at the moment of creation
but ever after, too. For maintenance is perpetual creation, as
continuance is perpetual coming to be. Else it is quite as work ceases
when you withdraw will from action, or as utterance fails when you
remove thought from speech, or as motion ceases when you remove impetus;
in a word, as an effect perishes when you remove the cause.

\[3\] Every created thing is endowed with energy, indeed, but this does
nothing of itself but from Him who implanted it. Examine any other
earthly object, like a silkworm, bee or other small creature. View it
first naturally, then rationally, and at length spiritually, and if you
can think deeply, you will be astounded at all you see. Let wisdom speak
in you, and you will exclaim in astonishment, "Who does not see the
divine in such things? They are all of divine wisdom." Still more will
you exclaim, if you note the uses of all created things, how they mount
in regular order even to the human being, and from man to the Creator
whence they are, and that the connection, and if you will acknowledge
it, the preservation also of them all, depend on the conjunction of the
Creator with man. That divine love created all things, but nothing apart
from the divine wisdom, will be seen in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4.">4.</span></span>

\(ii\) \_Divine love and wisdom proceed as one from the Lord.\_ This,
too, is plain from what was shown in the work \_Divine Love and
Wisdom,\_ especially in the propositions: "Esse and existere are
distinguishably one in the Lord" (nn. 14-17); "Infinite things are
distinguishably one in Him" (nn. 17-22); "Divine love is of divine
wisdom, and divine wisdom of divine love" (nn. 34-39); "Love not married
to wisdom cannot effect anything" (nn. 401-403); "Love does nothing
except in union with wisdom" (nn. 409, 410); "Spiritual heat and light,
proceeding from the Lord as a sun, make one as divine love and wisdom
make one in Him" (nn. 99-102). The truth of the present proposition is
plain from these propositions, demonstrated in that treatise. But as it
is not known how two distinct things can act as one, I wish now to show
that there is no "one" apart from form, and that the form itself makes
it a unit; then, that a form makes a "one" the more perfectly as the
elements entering into it are distinctly different and yet united.

\[2\] \_There is no "one" apart from form, and the form itself makes it
a unit.\_ Everyone who brings his mind to bear on the matter can see
clearly that there is no "one" apart from form, and if a thing exists at
all, it is a form. For what exists at all derives from form what is
known as its character and its predicates, its changes of state, also
its relevance, and so on. A thing without form has no way of affecting
us, and what has no power of affecting, has no reality. It is form which
enables to all this. And as all things have a form, then if the form is
perfect, all things in it regard each other mutually, as link does link
in a chain. It follows that it is form which makes a thing a unit and
thus an entity of which character, state, affection or anything else can
be predicated; each is predicated of it according to the perfection of
the form.

\[3\] Such a unit is every object which meets the eye in the world.
Such, too, is everything not seen with the eye, whether in interior
nature or in the spiritual world. The human being is such a unit, human
society is, likewise the church, and in the Lord's view the whole
angelic heaven, too; in short, all creation in general and in every
particular. For each and all things to be forms, He who created all
things must be form itself, and all things made must be from that form.
This, therefore, was also demonstrated in the work \_Divine Love and
Wisdom,\_ as that "Divine love and wisdom are substance and form" (nn.
40-43); "Divine love and wisdom are form itself, thus the one Self and
the single independent existence" (nn. 44-46); "Divine love and wisdom
are one in the Lord" (nn. 14-17, 18-22), "and proceed as one from Him"
(nn. 99-102, and elsewhere).

\[4\] \_A form makes a one the more perfectly as the elements entering
into it are distinctly different and yet united.\_ This hardly falls
into a comprehension not elevated, for the appearance is that a form
cannot make a one except as its elements are quite alike. I have spoken
with angels often on the subject. They said that this is a secret
perceived clearly by their wiser men, obscurely by the less wise. They
said it is the truth that a form is the more perfect as its constituents
are distinctly different and yet severally united. They established the
fact from the societies which in the aggregate constitute the form of
heaven, and from the angels of a society, for as these are different and
free and love their associates from themselves and from their own
affection, the form of the society is more perfect. They also
illustrated the fact from the marriage of good and truth, in that the
more distinguishably two these are, the more perfectly do they make a
one; similarly, of love and wisdom. The indistinguishable is confusion,
they said, whence comes imperfection of form.

\[5\] In various ways they went on to establish the manner in which
perfectly distinct things are united and thus make a one, especially by
what is in the human body, in which are innumerable things quite
distinct and yet united, held distinct by coverings and united by
ligaments. It is so with love, they said, and all its things, and wisdom
and all its things, for love and wisdom are not perceived except as one.
See further on the subject in \_Divine Love and Wisdom\_ (nn. 14-22) and
in the work \_Heaven and Hell\_ (nn. 56 and 489). This has been adduced
as part of angelic wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5.">5.</span></span>

\(iii\) \_This "one" is in some image in every created thing.\_ It can
be seen from what was demonstrated throughout the treatise \_Divine Love
and Wisdom\_ and especially at nn. 47-51, 55-60, 282-284, 290-295,
313-318, 319-326, 349-357, that divine love and wisdom which are one in
the Lord and proceed as one from Him, are in some image in each created
thing. It was shown that the divine is in every created thing because
God the Creator, who is the Lord from eternity, produced the sun of the
spiritual world from Himself, and all things of the universe through
that sun. That sun, which is from Him and in which He is, is therefore
not only the first but the sole substance from which are all things. As
this is the one substance, it is in everything made, but with endless
variety in accord with uses.

\[2\] In the Lord, then, are divine love and wisdom, and in the sun from
Him divine fire and radiance, and from the sun spiritual heat and light;
and in each instance the two make one. It follows that this oneness is
in every created thing. All things in the world are referable,
therefore, to good and truth, in fact to the conjunction of them. Or,
what is the same, they are referable to love and wisdom and to the union
of these; for good is of love and truth of wisdom, love calling all its
own, "good," and wisdom calling all its own, "truth." It will be seen in
what follows that there is a conjunction of these in each created thing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6.">6.</span></span>

Many avow that there is a single substance which is also the first, from
which are all things, but what that substance is, is not known. The
belief is that it is so simple nothing is more so, and that it can be
likened to a point without dimensions, and that dimensional forms arose
out of an infinite number of such points. But this is a fallacy,
springing from an idea of space. To such an idea there seems to be such
a least thing. The truth is that the simpler and purer a thing is, the
more replete it is and the more complete. This is why the more
interiorly a thing is examined, the more wonderful, perfect, and well
formed are the things seen in it, and in the first substance the most
wonderful, perfect and fully formed of all. For the first substance is
from the spiritual sun, which, as we said, is from the Lord and in which
He is. That sun is therefore the sole substance and, not being in space,
is all in all, and is in the greatest and least things of the created
universe.

\[2\] As that sun is the first and sole substance from which all things
are, it follows that in it are infinitely more things than can possibly
appear in substances arising from it, called substantial and lastly
material. This infinity cannot appear in derivative substances because
these descend from that sun by degrees of two kinds in accord with which
perfections decline. For that reason, as we said above, the more
interiorly a thing is regarded, the more wonderful, perfect and well
formed are the things seen. This has been said to establish the fact
that the divine is in some image in every created thing, but is less and
less manifest with the descent over degrees, and still less when a lower
degree, parted from the higher by being closed, is also choked with
earthy matter. These concepts cannot but seem obscure unless one has
read and understood what was shown in the treatise \_Divine Love and
Wisdom\_ about the spiritual sun (nn. 83-172), about degrees (nn.
173-281) and about the creation of the world (nn. 282-357).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7.">7.</span></span>

\(iv\) \_It is of the divine providence that every created thing as a
whole and in part should be such a one or should become such a one,\_ or
that there be in it something of the divine love and wisdom, or what is
the same, that there be good and truth in it, or a union of them.
(Inasmuch as good is of love and truth is of wisdom, as was said above
(n. 5), in what follows we shall at times say good and truth instead of
love and wisdom, and marriage of good and truth instead of union of love
and wisdom.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="8.">8.</span></span>

It is evident from the preceding proposition that divine love and
wisdom, which are one in the Lord and proceed as one from Him, are in
some image in everything created by Him. Something shall be said now
specifically of the "one" or the union called the marriage of good and
truth. 1. This marriage is in the Lord Himself--for, as we said, divine
love and wisdom in Him are one. 2. This marriage is from Him, for in all
that proceeds from Him love and wisdom are fully united. The two proceed
from Him as a sun, divine love as heat, and divine wisdom as light. 3.
These are received as two, indeed, by angels, likewise by men of the
church, but are made one in them by the Lord. 4. In view of this influx
of love and wisdom as one from the Lord with angels of heaven and men of
the church, and in view of their reception of it, the Lord is spoken of
in the Word as bridegroom and husband, and heaven and the church are
called bride and wife. 5. An image and a likeness of the Lord are
therefore to be found in heaven and in the church in general, and in an
angel of heaven and a man of the church in particular, so far as they
are in that union or in the marriage of good and truth. For good and
truth in the Lord are one, indeed are the Lord. 6. Love and wisdom in
heaven and in the church as a whole, and in an angel of heaven and a man
of the church, are one when will and understanding, thus when good and
truth, make one; or what is still the same, when doctrine from the Word
and life according to doctrine make one. 7. How the two make one in man
and in all that pertains to him was shown, moreover, in Part V of the
treatise \_Divine Love and Wisdom,\_ where the creation of man, and
especially the correspondence of will and understanding with heart and
lungs, were treated of (nn. 358-432).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9.">9.</span></span>

How good and truth, however, make one in what is below or outside man,
in both the animal and the vegetable kingdom, shall be told from time to
time in what follows. Three points are premised. \_First,\_ in the
universe and in each and all things of it as created by the Lord, there
was a marriage of good and truth. \_Second,\_ after creation this
marriage was severed in man. \_Third,\_ it is the work of divine
providence to unite what was severed, and so to restore the marriage of
good and truth. As all three points were established by many things in
the work \_Divine Love and Wisdom,\_ there is no need to substantiate
them further. Anyone can see from reason, moreover, that if there was a
marriage of good and truth in each created thing and later it was
severed, the Lord must be working constantly to restore it, and that the
restoration of it, and hence the conjunction of the created world with
the Lord through man, are of divine providence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10.">10.</span></span>

\(v\) \_Good of love is good only so far as it is united to truth of
wisdom, and truth of wisdom is truth only so far as it is united to good
of love.\_ Good and truth have this from their origin, the one and the
other originating in the Lord, who is good itself and truth itself and
in whom the two are one. Hence in angels in heaven and men on earth,
good is not good basically except so far as it is joined to truth, and
truth is not truth basically except so far as it is joined to good.
Granted that all good and truth are from the Lord, then inasmuch as good
makes one with truth and truth with good in Him, good to be good in
itself and truth to be truth in itself must make one in the recipient,
that is, the angel in heaven or the man on earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11.">11.</span></span>

It is indeed known that all things in the world are referable to good
and truth. For by good is meant what universally embraces and involves
all things of love; and by truth what universally embraces and involves
all things of wisdom. Still it is not known that good is nothing except
when it is joined to truth, and truth nothing unless it is joined to
good. Good apart from truth and truth apart from good still seem to be
something; yet they are not. For love (to which all that is called good
pertains) is the \_esse\_ of a thing, and wisdom (to which all things
called truths pertain) is a thing's \_existere\_ from that \_esse\_ (as
was shown in the treatise \_Divine Love and Wisdom,\_ nn. 14-16).
Therefore, as \_esse\_ is nothing apart from \_existere,\_ or
\_existere\_ apart from \_esse,\_ good is nothing apart from truth or
truth from good. What, again, is good which has no relation to anything?
Can it be called good if it is without affection and perception?

\[2\] That which is associated with good, permitting it to affect and to
be perceived and felt, is referable to truth, since it has relation to
what is in the understanding. Tell someone, not that a given thing is
good, but simply say "good"--is good anything? It becomes something from
what is perceived along with it. This is united with good only in the
understanding, and all understanding has relation to truth. It is the
same with willing. Apart from knowing, perceiving and thinking what one
wills, to will is nothing actual; together with them it becomes
something. All volition is of love and is referable to good; and all
knowing, perceiving and thinking is of the understanding, and is
referable to truth. It is clear, then, that to will is nothing actual,
but to will this or that means something.

\[3\] So also with a use, inasmuch as a use is a good. Unless a use is
addressed to something which makes one with it, it is not a use, and
thus not anything. A use derives its something from the understanding,
and what is thence conjoined or adjoined to it, has relation to truth.
So a use gets its character.

\[4\] From these few things it is plain that good is nothing apart from
truth, nor truth anything apart from good. But if good together with
truth and truth together with good are something, evil with falsity and
falsity with evil are not, for the latter are opposite to the former and
the opposition destroys--that is, destroys the something. But of this in
what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12.">12.</span></span>

Marriage of good and truth may, however, be found either in a cause or
from the cause in an effect. In a cause the marriage of good and truth
is one of will and understanding, or of love and wisdom. Such a marriage
is in all that a man wills and thinks and in all his ensuing
determinations and purposes. This marriage enters into and in fact
produces the effect. But in producing the effect, good and truth seem
distinct, for then the simultaneous turns successive. When, for example,
a man wills and thinks about food, clothing, shelter, business or
employment, or about his relationship to others, first he wills and
thinks or comes to his conclusions and intentions all at the same time;
but when these are determined to effects, truth follows on good, though
in will and thought they continue to make one. In the effects the uses
pertain to love or good, and the ways of performing the uses pertain to
understanding or truth. Anyone can confirm these general truths by
particular instances provided he perceives what is referable
respectively to good of love and to truth of wisdom, and also how
differently it is referable in cause and in effect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="13.">13.</span></span>

We have said often that love constitutes man's life. This does not mean,
however, love separate from wisdom or good from truth in the cause, for
love separate or good separate is not an actuality. The love which makes
man's inmost life--the life he has from the Lord--is therefore love and
wisdom together; neither is the love which makes his life as a recipient
being separate in the cause, but only in the effect. For love cannot be
understood except from its quality, which is wisdom; and the quality or
wisdom can exist only from its own \_esse,\_ which is love; thence it is
that they are one; it is the same with good and truth. Since truth is
from good as wisdom is from love, it is the two taken together that are
called good or love. For love has wisdom for its form, and good for its
form truth, and form is the source, and the one source, of quality. It
is plain from all this that good is good only so far as it has become
one with its truth, and truth truth only so far as it has become one
with its good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="14.">14.</span></span>

\(vi\) \_Good of love not united to truth of wisdom is not good in
itself but seeming good; and truth of wisdom not conjoined with good of
love is not truth in itself but seeming truth.\_ The fact is that no
good, in itself good, can exist unless joined with its truth, and no
truth, in itself truth, can exist unless it has become joined with its
good. And yet good separate from truth is possible, and truth separate
from good. They are found in hypocrites and flatterers, in evil persons
of every sort, and in such as are in natural but not spiritual good.
These can all do well by church, country, society, fellow-citizens, the
needy, the poor, and widows and orphans. They can also comprehend
truths, from understanding think them, and from thought speak and teach
them. But the goods and truths are not interiorly such, that is,
basically goods and truths, but only outwardly and seemingly such. For
such good and truth look to self and the world, not to good itself and
truth itself; they are not from good and truth; they are of the mouth
and body only, therefore, and not of the heart.

\[2\] They may be likened to gold or silver which is spread on dross,
rotten wood or mire. When uttered the truths may be likened to a breath
exhaled and gone, or to a delusive light which dies away, though they
appear outwardly like genuine truths. They are seeming truths in those
who utter them; to those hearing and assenting, and unaware of this,
they may be altogether different. For everyone is affected by what is
external according to his internal. A truth, by whomsoever uttered,
enters another's hearing and is taken up by his mind in keeping with the
state or character of his mind.

Of those in natural good by inheritance, but in no spiritual good,
nearly the same is true as of those described above. The internal of
every good or truth is spiritual. The spiritual dispels falsities and
evils, but the natural left to itself favors them. To favor evil and
falsity does not accord with doing good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="15.">15.</span></span>

Good can be separated from truth, and truth from good, and then still
appear as good or truth, for the reason that the human being has a
capacity to act which is called liberty, and a capacity of understanding
called rationality. By abuse of these powers a man can appear in
externals other than he is in internals; an evil man can do good and
speak truth, and a devil feign himself an angel of light. But on this
see the following propositions in the treatise \_Divine Love and
Wisdom:\_ "The origin of evil is in the abuse of faculties proper to
man, called liberty and rationality" (nn. 246-270); "These two faculties
are to be found with the evil as well as with the good" (n. 425); "Love
not married to wisdom, and good not married to truth, can effect
nothing" (n. 401); "Love does nothing except in conjunction with wisdom
or understanding, and it brings wisdom or the understanding reciprocally
into conjunction with itself" (nn. 410-412); "From power given it by
love, wisdom or understanding can be elevated and can perceive and
receive the things of light from heaven" (n. 413); "Love can be raised
similarly to receive the things of heat from heaven if it loves its
mate, wisdom, in that degree" (nn. 414, 415); "Else love pulls wisdom or
the understanding down from its elevation to act at one with itself"
(nn. 416-418); "If the two are elevated, love is purified in the
understanding" (nn. 419-421); "Purified by wisdom in the understanding,
love becomes spiritual and celestial, but defiled in the understanding
it become sensuous and corporeal" (nn. 422-424); "What is true of love
and wisdom and their union is true of charity and faith and their
conjunction" (nn. 427-430). What charity in heaven is, see n. 431.

<span class="margnote"><span id="16.">16.</span></span>

\(vii\) \_The Lord does not suffer anything to be divided; it must be
either in good and at the same time in truth, or in evil and at the same
time in falsity.\_ The Lord's divine providence has for its goal, and to
this end it labors, that man shall be in good and at the same time in
truth. For then he is his own good and love and his own truth and
wisdom; thereby the human being is human, for he is then an image of the
Lord. But while he lives in the world he can be in good and at the same
time in falsity, likewise in evil and at the same time in truth, indeed
in evil and at the same time in good, and thus be double. As the
cleavage destroys the Lord's image in him and thus the man, the Lord's
divine providence takes care in every least act that this division shall
not be. And as it is better for man to be in evil and at the same time
in falsity than to be in good and at the same time in evil, the Lord
permits it, not as one willing it, but as one unable to resist because
of the end sought, which is salvation.

\[2\] A man can be simultaneously in evil and in truth and the Lord be
unable to prevent it in view of the end, which is salvation, for the
reason that man's understanding can be raised into the light of wisdom
and see truths, or acknowledge them when he hears them, while his love
remains below. Thus a man can be in heaven as to understanding, while as
to his love he is in hell. This is not denied him, because the two
faculties of liberty and rationality, by virtue of which he is a human
being and distinguished from beasts and by which alone he can be
regenerated and thus saved, cannot be taken away. By means of them, he
can act according to wisdom and at the same time according to an unwise
love. From wisdom above he can view the love below and also the
thoughts, intentions and affections, therefore the evils and falsities
as well as the goods and truths of his life and doctrine, without a
knowledge and recognition of which he cannot be reformed. We spoke of
the two faculties before and shall say more in what follows. What has
been said explains how man can be simultaneously in good and truth, or
in evil and falsity, or in mixtures of them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="17.">17.</span></span>

In this world a man can hardly come into one or the other conjunction or
union, that is, of good and truth or of evil and falsity, for during his
life in the world he is kept in a state of reformation or regeneration.
After death, however, every man comes into the one union or the other,
because he can then no longer be reformed or regenerated. He remains
such as his life was in the world, that is, such as his reigning love
was. If therefore his was a life of an evil love, all the truth acquired
by him in the world from teacher, pulpit or Word is taken away. On the
removal of it, he absorbs the falsity agreeing with his evil as a sponge
does water. On the other hand, if his was the life of a good love, all
the falsity is removed which he may have picked up in the world by
hearing or from reading but did not confirm in himself, and in its place
truth congruous with his good is given him. This is meant by the Lord's
words:

Take . . . the talent from him, and give it to him that has ten talents.
For to everyone who has, shall be given until he abounds but from him
who has not, even what he has shall be taken away (Mt 25:28, 29; 13:12;
Mk 4:25; Lu 8:18; 19:24-26).

<span class="margnote"><span id="18.">18.</span></span>

After death everyone must be either in good and at the same time in
truth or in evil and at the same time in falsity, for the reason that
good and evil cannot be united, nor can good and the falsity of evil,
nor evil and the truth of good. For these are opposites, and opposites
contend until one destroys the other. Those who are at the same time in
evil and in good are meant in the Apocalypse in these words of the Lord
to the church of the Laodiceans:

I know your works, that you are neither cold nor hot; would that you
were cold or hot; but because you are lukewarm, I will spue you out of
my mouth (3:15, 16):

also in these words of the Lord:

No man can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love
the other, or cleave to the one and not heed the other (Mt 6:24).

<span class="margnote"><span id="19.">19.</span></span>

( viii) \_That which is in good and at the same time in truth is
something; that which is in evil and at the same time in falsity is not
anything.\_ See above (n. 11) that what is in good and at the same time
in truth is something. It follows that what is at once evil and false is
not anything. By not being anything is meant that it is without power
and without spiritual life. Those at once in evil and in falsity (all of
whom are in hell) have power indeed among themselves, for an evil man
can do evil and does so in a thousand ways. Yet he can do evil to the
evil only by reason of their evil; he cannot harm the good at all; if,
as sometimes happens, he does, it is by conjunction with their evil.

\[2\] In this way temptations arise; they are infestations by evil
spirits who are with a man; so combats ensue by which the good are freed
from their evils. Since the wicked have no power, all hell in the Lord's
sight is not only nothing, but nothing at all in point of power, as I
have seen proved by much experience. But it is remarkable that the evil
all deem themselves powerful, and the good all think themselves
powerless. This is because the evil ascribe everything to their own
power or shrewdness and malice, and nothing to the Lord; whereas the
good ascribe nothing to their own prudence, but all to the Lord who is
almighty. Evil and falsity together are not anything for the further
reason that they have no spiritual life. The life of the infernals is
therefore called death, not life. Since life holds everything, death has
nothing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="20.">20.</span></span>

Men in evil and at the same time in truths may be likened to eagles
flying aloft which, deprived of their wings, fall. For after death, on
becoming spirits, men do the like who have understood and spoken and
taught truths and yet have not looked to God in their lives. By means of
things of the understanding they raise themselves aloft and even enter
heaven at times and feign themselves angels of light. But when they are
deprived of truths and are cast out, they fall down to hell. Eagles also
signify rapacious men with intellectual acumen, and wings signify
spiritual truths. Such, we said, are those who have not looked to God in
their lives. To look to God in life means simply to think that a given
evil is a sin against God, and for that reason not to commit it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="21.">21.</span></span>

\(ix\) \_The Lord's divine providence causes evil and its falsity to
serve for equilibrium, contrast, and purification, and so for the
conjunction of good and truth in others.\_ It is obvious from the
preceding that the Lord's divine providence continually operates in
order that truth may be united in man with good and good with truth,
because that union is the church and heaven. For that union is in the
Lord and in all that proceeds from Him. From that union, heaven and the
church are called a marriage, and the kingdom of God is likened in the
Word to a marriage. Again, the Sabbath signified that union and was the
holiest observance in the worship of the Israelitish Church. From that
union also there is a marriage of good and truth in the Word and in each
and all things of it (on this see \_Doctrine of the New Jerusalem about
Sacred Scripture,\_ nn. 80-90). The marriage of good and truth is from
the marriage of the Lord with the church, and this in turn from the
marriage of love and wisdom in Him, for good is of love, and truth of
wisdom. It is plain, then, that it is the constant aim of divine
providence to unite good to truth and truth to good in a man, for so he
is united to the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="22.">22.</span></span>

But many have severed and do sever this marriage, especially by
separating faith from charity (for faith is of truth and truth is of
faith, and charity is of good and good is of charity), and in so doing
they conjoin evil and falsity in themselves and thus come into and
continue in the opposite to good and truth. The Lord therefore provides
that they shall nevertheless serve for uniting good and truth in others,
through equilibrium, contrast and purification.

<span class="margnote"><span id="23.">23.</span></span>

Conjunction of good and truth in others is provided by the Lord through
\_equilibrium\_ between heaven and hell. From hell evil and at the same
time falsity constantly exhale, and from heaven good and at the same
time truth. In equilibrium between them, and so in freedom to think,
will, speak and act in which he can be reformed, every man is kept while
he lives in the world. On the spiritual equilibrium from which the human
being has freedom, see the work \_Heaven and Hell,\_ nn. 589-596,
597-603.

<span class="margnote"><span id="24.">24.</span></span>

Conjunction of good and truth is provided by the Lord through
\_contrast.\_ For the nature of good is not known except by contrast
with what is less good and by its contrariety to evil. All
perceptiveness and sensitivity arise so; their quality is thence. All
pleasantness is perceived and felt over against the less pleasant and
the unpleasant; all the beautiful by reference to the less beautiful and
the unbeautiful; similarly all good of love by reference to lesser good
and to evil; all truth of wisdom by a sense of lesser truth and of
falsity. Everything inevitably varies from greatest to least, and with
the same variation in its opposite and with equilibrium between them,
there is contrast degree by degree, and the perception and sensation of
a thing increase or diminish. But be it known that an opposite may
either lower or exalt perceptions and sensitivities. It lowers them when
it mingles in and exalts them when it does not mingle in, for which
reason the Lord separates good and evil with man that they shall not
mingle, as exquisitely as He does heaven and hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="25.">25.</span></span>

Conjunction of good and truth in others is provided by the Lord through
\_purification\_ in two ways; one through temptations, and the other
through fermentations. \_Spiritual temptations\_ are nothing else than
combats against the evils and falsities exhaled from hell and affecting
man. By these combats a man is purified from evils and falsities, and
good and truth are united in him. \_Spiritual fermentations\_ take place
in many ways, and in heaven as well as on earth; but in the world it is
not known what they are or how they come about. For evils and their
falsities, let into societies, act as ferments do in meal or in must,
separating the heterogeneous and conjoining the homogeneous until there
is clarity and purity. Such fermentations are meant in the Lord's words:

The kingdom of heaven is like leaven which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal until the whole was leavened (Mt 13:33; Lu 12:21).

<span class="margnote"><span id="26.">26.</span></span>

The Lord provides these uses through the united evil and falsity of
those in hell. The Lord's kingdom, which extends over hell as well as
over heaven, is a kingdom of uses. It is the Lord's providence that
there shall be no creature and no thing whereby a use is not performed.

II\. THE LORD'S DIVINE PROVIDENCE HAS FOR ITS OBJECT A HEAVEN FROM THE
HUMAN RACE

<span class="margnote"><span id="27.">27.</span></span>

Heaven does not consist of angels created such to begin with, nor does
hell come from any devil created an angel of light and cast down from
heaven. Both heaven and hell are from mankind, heaven consisting of
those in the love of good and consequent understanding of truth, and
hell of those in the love of evil and consequent understanding of
falsity. This has been made known and sure to me by long-continued
intercourse with angels and spirits. See what was said on the subject in
the work \_Heaven and Hell\_ (nn. 311-316); also in the little work
\_The Last Judgment\_ (nn. 14-27), and in \_Continuation about the Last
Judgment and the Spiritual World\_ (throughout).

\[2\] As heaven is from mankind and is an abiding with the Lord to
eternity, it must have been the Lord's purpose in creation; being the
purpose in creation, it is the purpose of His providence. The Lord
created the world not for His own sake but for the sake of those with
whom He would be in heaven. Spiritual love by nature desires to give its
own to another, and so far as it can do so is in its \_esse,\_ peace,
and blessedness. Spiritual love derives this from the Lord's divine love
which is such infinitely. It follows that the divine love and hence
divine providence has for its object a heaven consisting of human beings
who have become or are becoming angels, on whom the Lord can bestow all
the blessings and felicities of love and wisdom and do so from Himself
in men. It must be in this way, for the Lord's image and likeness are in
men from creation, the image in them wisdom and the likeness love.
Furthermore, the Lord in them is love united to wisdom and wisdom united
to love or (what is the same) is good united to truth and truth united
to good (this union was treated of in the preceding chapter).

\[3\] What heaven is in general or with a number, and in particular or
with an individual, is not known. Nor is it known what heaven is in the
spiritual world and what it is in the natural world. Yet this knowledge
is important, for heaven is the purpose of providence. I therefore
desire to set the subject in some light in this order:

i\. Heaven is conjunction with the Lord. ii. By creation the human being
is such that he can be conjoined more and more closely to the Lord. iii.
The more closely one is conjoined to the Lord the wiser one becomes. iv.
The more closely one is conjoined to the Lord the happier one becomes.
v. The more closely one is conjoined to the Lord the more distinctly
does he seem to himself to be his own, and the more plainly does he
recognize that he is the Lord's.

<span class="margnote"><span id="28.">28.</span></span>

\(i\) \_Heaven is conjunction with the Lord.\_ Heaven is heaven, not
from the angels but from the Lord. For the love and wisdom in which
angels are and which make heaven are not theirs, but the Lord's, indeed
are the Lord in them. And as love and wisdom are the Lord's, and are the
Lord in heaven, and make the life of angels, it is plain that their life
is the Lord's, indeed is the Lord. The angels themselves avow that they
live from the Lord. Hence it is evident that heaven is conjunction with
the Lord. But conjunction with Him is various and one man's heaven is
not another's; therefore heaven is also according to the conjunction
with the Lord. In the following proposition it will be seen that
conjunction is more and more close or more and more remote.

\[2\] Here let something be said about how the conjunction takes place
and what the nature of it is. It is a conjunction of the Lord with the
angels and of the angels with Him, therefore is reciprocal. The Lord
flows into the life's love of the angels, and they receive Him in
wisdom, thus in turn conjoining themselves with Him. It must be said,
however, that it seems to the angels that they conjoin themselves to the
Lord by wisdom; actually the Lord conjoins them to Himself by their
wisdom, for the wisdom is also from the Lord. It is the same thing if we
say that the Lord conjoins Himself to the angels by good and they in
turn conjoin themselves to the Lord by truth, for all good is of love,
and truth, of wisdom.

\[3\] This reciprocal conjunction is an arcanum, however, which few can
understand unless it is explained. I want therefore to unfold it so far
as it can be done by things within one's grasp. We showed in the
treatise \_Divine Love and Wisdom\_ (nn. 404, 405) how love unites
itself with wisdom, namely, through affection for knowing from which
comes an affection for truth, through affection for understanding from
which comes perception of truth, and through affection for seeing what
is known and understood, from which comes thought. Into all these
affections the Lord flows, for they are all derivatives of one's life's
love, and the angels receive the influx in perception of truth and in
thought, for in these the influx becomes apparent to them, but not in
the affections.

\[4\] As the perceptions and thoughts appear to the angels to be their
own, although they arise from affections which are from the Lord, the
appearance is that the angels reciprocally conjoin themselves to the
Lord, when nevertheless the Lord conjoins them to Himself. The affection
itself produces the perceptions and thoughts, for the affection, which
is of love, is their soul. Apart from affection no one can perceive or
think anything, and every one perceives and thinks according to his
affection. It is evident that the reciprocal conjunction of the angels
with the Lord is not from them, but as it were from them. Such, too, is
the conjunction of the Lord with the church and of the church with Him,
a union called celestial and spiritual marriage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="29.">29.</span></span>

All conjunction in the spiritual world is effected by intent regard.
When anyone there thinks of another with a desire to speak with him, the
other is at once present, and the two come face to face. Likewise, when
one thinks of another from an affection of love; by this affection,
however, there is conjunction, but by the other only presence. This is
peculiar to the spiritual world; for there all are spiritual beings. It
is otherwise in the natural world where all are physical beings. In the
natural world something similar takes place in the affections and
thoughts of the spirit; but as there is space here, while in the
spiritual world space is appearance only, what takes place here in one's
spirit occurs outwardly there.

\[2\] We have said so much to make known how conjunction of the Lord
with angels and their seemingly reciprocal conjunction with Him is
effected. All angels turn the face to the Lord; He regards them in the
forehead, and they regard Him with the eyes. The reason is that the
forehead corresponds to love and its affections, and the eyes correspond
to wisdom and its perceptions. Still the angels do not of themselves
turn the face to the Lord, but He faces them toward Himself, doing so by
influx into their life's love, by this entering the perceptions and
thoughts, and so turning the angels to Him.

\[3\] There is such a circuit from love to thoughts and under love's
impulse from thoughts to love in all the mind's activity. It may be
called the circling of life. On these subjects see some things also in
the treatise \_Divine Love and Wisdom:\_ as that "Angels constantly turn
the face to the Lord as a sun" (nn. 129-134); "All the interiors of both
the mind and the bodies of the angels are likewise turned to the Lord as
a sun" (nn. 135-139); "Every spirit, whatever his character, turns
himself likewise to his ruling love" (nn. 140-145); "Love conjoins
itself to wisdom and causes wisdom to be conjoined reciprocally with it"
(nn. 410-412); "Angels are in the Lord and He in them; and as the angels
are only recipients, the Lord alone is heaven" (nn. 113-118).

<span class="margnote"><span id="30.">30.</span></span>

The Lord's heaven in the natural world is called the church; an angel of
this heaven is a man of the church who is conjoined to the Lord; on
departure from this world he also becomes an angel of the spiritual
heaven. What was said of the angelic heaven is evidently to be
understood, then, of the human heaven also which is called the church.
The reciprocal conjunction with the Lord which makes heaven in the human
being is revealed by the Lord in these words in John:

Abide in Me, and I in you; ... he who abides in Me, and I in him, bears
much fruit; for without Me ye can do nothing (15:4, 5, 7).

<span class="margnote"><span id="31.">31.</span></span>

It is plain from this that the Lord is heaven not only in general with
all in heaven, but in particular with each one there. For each angel is
a heaven in least form; of as many heavens as there are angels, does
heaven in general consist. In substantiation see \_Heaven and Hell\_
(nn. 51-58). Since this is so, let no one cherish the mistaken idea,
which first visits the thought of so many, that the Lord dwells in
heaven among the angels or is among them like a king in his kingdom. To
the sight He is above them in the sun there; He is in them in their life
of love and wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="32.">32.</span></span>

\(ii\) \_By creation the human being is such that he can be conjoined
more and more closely to the Lord.\_ This becomes evident from what was
shown about degrees in the treatise \_Divine Love and Wisdom,\_ Part
III, especially in the propositions: "By creation there are three
discrete degrees or degrees of height in the human being" (nn. 230-235);
"These three degrees are in man from birth, and as they are opened, the
man is in the Lord, and the Lord in him" (nn. 236-241); "All perfection
increases and mounts with and according to the degrees" (nn. 199-204).
Evidently, then, man is such by creation that he can be conjoined with
the Lord more and more closely according to these degrees.

\[2\] But one must know well what degrees are and that there are two
kinds --discrete degrees or degrees of height, and continuous degrees or
degrees of breadth; also how they differ. It must be known, too, that
every human being has by creation and hence from birth three discrete
degrees or degrees of height, and that he comes at birth into the first
degree, called natural, and can grow in this degree continuously until
he becomes rational. He comes into the second degree, called spiritual,
if he lives according to spiritual laws of order, which are divine
truths. He can also come into the third degree, called celestial, if he
lives according to the celestial laws of order, which are divine goods.

\[3\] These degrees are opened in a person by the Lord according to his
life and actually opened in the world, but not perceptibly and sensibly
until after his departure from the world. As they are opened and later
perfected a man is conjoined to the Lord more and more closely. This
conjunction can grow to eternity in nearness to God and does so with the
angels. And yet no angel can attain or touch the first degree of the
Lord's love and wisdom, for the Lord is infinite and an angel is finite,
and between infinite and finite no ratio obtains. Man's state and the
state of his elevation and nearness to the Lord cannot be understood
without a knowledge of these degrees; they have been specifically
treated of, therefore, in the treatise Divine \_Love and Wisdom,\_ nn.
173-281, which see.

<span class="margnote"><span id="33.">33.</span></span>

We shall say briefly how man can be more and more closely conjoined to
the Lord, and then how the conjunction seems closer and closer. \_How
man is more and more closely conjoined to the Lord:\_ this is effected
not by knowledge alone, nor by intelligence alone, nor even by wisdom
alone, but by a life conjoined to them. A man's life is his love, and
love is manifold. In general there are love of good and love of evil.
Love of evil is love of committing adultery, taking revenge, defrauding,
blaspheming, depriving others of their possessions. In thinking and
doing such things the love of evil finds its pleasure and joy. Of this
love there are as many derivatives, which are affections, as there are
evils in which it can find expression. And there are as many perceptions
and thoughts of this love as there are falsities favoring and confirming
such evils. The falsities make one with the evils as understanding makes
one with will; they are mutually inseparable; the one is of the other.

\[2\] Inasmuch as the Lord flows into one's life's love and by its
affections into the perceptions and thoughts, and not the other way
about, as we said above, it follows that the Lord can conjoin Himself
more closely to a man only as the love of evil is removed along with its
affections, which are lusts. These lusts reside in the natural man. What
a man does from the natural man he feels that he does of himself. For
his part, therefore, a man should remove the evils of that love; so far
as he does, the Lord comes nearer and conjoins Himself to him. Anyone
can see from reason that lusts with their pleasures block and close the
door to the Lord and cannot be cast out by the Lord as long as the man
himself keeps the door shut and presses and pushes from outside to keep
it from being opened. It is plain from the Lord's words in the
Apocalypse that a man must himself open the door:

Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if anyone hears My voice and
opens the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with Me
(3:20).

\[3\] Plainly, then, so far as one shuns evils as diabolical and as
obstacles to the Lord's entrance, he is more and more closely conjoined
to the Lord, and he the most closely who abhors them as so many dusky
and fiery devils. For evil and the devil are one and the same, and the
falsity of evil and satan are one and the same. As the Lord's influx is
into the love of good and into its affections and by these into the
perceptions and thoughts, which have it from the good in which a man is
that they are truths, so the influx of the devil, that is of hell, is
into the love of evil and its affections, which are lusts, and by these
into the perceptions and thoughts, which have it from the evil in which
the man is that they are falsities.

\[4\] \_How the conjunction seems closer and closer.\_ The more the
evils in the natural man are removed by shunning and turning away from
them, the more closely a man is conjoined to the Lord. Love and wisdom,
which are the Lord Himself, are not in space, as affection which is of
love, and thought which is of wisdom, have nothing in common with space.
In the measure of the conjunction by love and wisdom, therefore, the
Lord seems nearer; and, contrariwise, in the measure of the rejection of
love and wisdom, more distant. There is no space in the spiritual world;
distance and presence there are appearances according to similarity or
dissimilarity of the affections. For, as we said, affections which are
of love, and thoughts which are of wisdom, in themselves spiritual, are
not in space (on this see what was shown in the treatise \_Divine Love
and Wisdom,\_ nn. 7-10, 69-72, and elsewhere).

\[5\] The Lord's conjunction with a man in whom evils have been put away
is meant by the Lord's words:

The pure in heart shall see God (Mt 5:8);

and by the words:

He who has my commandments and does them . . . with him will I make an
abode (Jn 14:21, 23).

"To have the commandments" is to know and "to do them" is to love, for
it is also said: "he who does my commandments, he it is that loves Me."

<span class="margnote"><span id="34.">34.</span></span>

\(iii\) \_The more closely one is conjoined to the Lord the wiser one
becomes.\_ As there are three degrees of life in man by creation and so
from birth (see just above, n. 32), there are specifically three degrees
of wisdom in him. These degrees it is that are opened in man according
to conjunction, that is, according to love, for love is conjunction
itself. Love's ascent by degrees, however, is only obscurely perceived
by man; but wisdom's ascent is clearly perceived by those who know and
see what wisdom is. The degrees of wisdom are perceived because love by
its affections enters the perceptions and thoughts, and these present
themselves to the internal mental sight, which corresponds to the
external bodily sight. Thus wisdom appears, but not the affection of
love which produces it. It is the same with all a man's deeds; he is
aware how the body does them, but not how the soul does them. So he
perceives how he meditates, perceives and thinks, but not how the soul
of these mental activities, which is an affection of good and truth,
produces them.

\[2\] There are three degrees of wisdom: natural, spiritual, and
celestial. Man is in the natural degree of wisdom during his life in the
world. This degree can be perfected in him to its height, but even so
cannot pass into the spiritual degree, for the latter is not continuous
with it, but conjoined to it by correspondences. After death man is in
the spiritual degree of wisdom. This degree also is such that it can be
perfected to its height, and yet cannot pass into the celestial degree
of wisdom, because neither is this continuous with the spiritual but
conjoined to it by correspondences. Plainly, then, wisdom can be raised
threefold, and in each degree can be perfected but only to its peak.

\[3\] One who understands the elevation and perfecting of these degrees
can see to an extent why angelic wisdom is said to be ineffable. So
ineffable, indeed, is it, that a thousand ideas in the thought of angels
in their wisdom can present only a single idea in the thought of men in
their wisdom, the other nine hundred and ninety-nine ideas being
unutterable, because they are supernatural. Many a time have I been
given to know this by living experience. But, as was said, no one can
enter into the ineffable wisdom of the angels except by and according to
conjunction with the Lord, for He alone opens spiritual and celestial
degrees, and only in those who are wise from Him. Those are wise from
the Lord who cast the devil, that is, evil, out of themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="35.">35.</span></span>

But let no one believe that he has wisdom because he knows many things,
perceives them in some light, and is able to talk intelligently about
them, unless his wisdom is conjoined to love. For it is love that
through its affections produces wisdom. Not conjoined to love, wisdom is
like a meteor vanishing in the air and like a falling star. Wisdom
united to love is like the abiding light of the sun and like a fixed
star. A man has the love of wisdom when he is averse to the diabolical
crew, that is, to the lusts of evil and falsity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="36.">36.</span></span>

Wisdom that comes to perception is perception of truth from being
affected by it, especially perception of spiritual truth. For there is
civil, moral, and spiritual truth. Those who have some perception of
spiritual truth from affection by it also have perceptions of moral and
civil truth, for the affection of spiritual truth is the soul of those
perceptions. I have spoken with angels at times about wisdom who said
that wisdom is conjunction with the Lord because He is wisdom itself,
and that the man who rejects hell comes into this conjunction and comes
into it so far as he rejects hell. They said that they picture wisdom to
themselves as a magnificent and highly ornate palace into which one
mounts by twelve steps. No one arrives at even the first step, they
said, except from the Lord by conjunction with Him; and according to the
measure of conjunction one ascends; also as one ascends, one perceives
that no man is wise from himself but from the Lord. Furthermore, they
said that the things in which one is wise are to those in which one is
not wise like a few drops of water to a large lake. By the twelve steps
into the palace of wisdom are meant goods united to truths and truths
united to goods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="37.">37.</span></span>

\(iv\) \_The more closely one is conjoined to the Lord the happier one
becomes.\_ The like can be said of degrees of happiness as was said (nn.
32 and 34) of degrees of life and of wisdom according to conjunction
with the Lord. Happiness, that is, blessedness and joy, also are
heightened as the higher degrees of the mind, called spiritual and
celestial, are opened with man. After his life in the world these
degrees grow to eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="38.">38.</span></span>

No one who is in the pleasures of the lusts of evil can know anything of
the joys of the affections of good in which the angelic heaven is. These
pleasures and joys are opposites in internals and hence inwardly in
externals, though superficially they may differ little. Every love has
its enjoyments; the love of evil with those in lusts also has, such as
the love of committing adultery, of taking revenge, of defrauding, of
stealing, of acting cruelly, indeed, in the worst men, of blaspheming
the holy things of the church and of inveighing against God. The
fountainhead of those enjoyments is the love of ruling from self-love.
They come of lusts which obsess the interiors of the mind, from these
flow into the body, and excite uncleannesses there which titillate the
fibers. The physical pleasure springs from the pleasure which the mind
takes in lusts.

\[2\] After death everyone comes to know in the spiritual world what the
uncleannesses are which titillate the body's fibers in such persons and
comes to know the nature of them. In general they are things cadaverous,
excrementitious, filthy, malodorous, and urinous; for their hells teem
with such uncleannesses. These are correspondences, as may be seen in
the treatise \_Divine Love and Wisdom\_ (nn. 422-424). After one has
entered hell, however, these filthy delights are turned into
wretchedness. This has been told in order that it may be understood what
heaven's felicity is and its nature, of which we are now to speak; for a
thing is known from its opposite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="39.">39.</span></span>

It is impossible to describe in words the blessedness, satisfaction, joy
and pleasure, in short, the felicity of heaven, so sensibly perceived
there. What is perceived solely by feeling, cannot be described, for it
does not fall into ideas of thought nor, therefore, into words. For the
understanding sees only and sees what is of wisdom or truth, but not
what is of love or good. Those felicities are therefore inexpressible,
but still they ascend in like degree with wisdom. They are infinitely
various, and each is ineffable. I have heard this, also perceived it.

\[2\] These felicities enter when a man, of himself and yet from the
Lord, casts out the lusts of the love of evil and falsity. For these
felicities are the happinesses of the affections of good and truth, the
opposites of the lusts of the love of evil and falsity. Those
happinesses begin from the Lord, thus from the inmost, diffuse
themselves thence into things lower even to lowermost things, and thus
fill the angel, making him a body of delight. Such happinesses are to be
found in infinite variety in every affection of good and truth, and
eminently in the affection of wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="40.">40.</span></span>

There is no comparing the joys of the lusts of evil and the joys of the
affections of good. Inwardly in the former is the devil, in the latter
the Lord. If comparisons are to be ventured, the pleasures of the lusts
of evil can only be compared to the lewd pleasures of frogs in stagnant
ponds or to those of snakes in filth, while the pleasures of the
affections of good must be likened to the delights which the mind takes
in gardens and flower beds. For things like those which affect frogs and
snakes affect those in the hells who are in lusts of evil; and things
like those which affect the mind in gardens and flower beds affect those
in the heavens who are in affections of good. For, as was said above,
corresponding uncleannesses affect the evil, and corresponding
cleannesses the good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="41.">41.</span></span>

Plainly, then, the more closely one is conjoined with the Lord the
happier one is. This happiness rarely shows itself in the world,
however; for man is then in a natural state, and the natural does not
communicate with the spiritual by continuity, but by correspondence. The
communication is felt only in a certain repose and peace of mind,
especially after struggles against evil. But when a person puts off the
natural state and enters the spiritual state, as he does on leaving the
world, the happiness described above gradually manifests itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="42.">42.</span></span>

\(v\) \_The more closely one is conjoined to the Lord the more
distinctly does he seem to himself to be his own, and the more plainly
does he recognize that he is the Lord's.\_ The appearance is that the
more closely one is conjoined to the Lord the less one is one's own.
This appearance prevails with all the evil. It also prevails with those
who from religion believe that they are not under the yoke of the law
and that no one can of himself do good. All these inevitably think that
to be free only to do good and not to think and will evil is not to be
one's own. Inasmuch as a man who is conjoined to the Lord does not will
and cannot think or will evil, they conclude from the look that this is
not to be one's own. Yet that is the opposite of the truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="43.">43.</span></span>

There is infernal freedom, and there is heavenly freedom. Thinking and
willing evil and also speaking and doing it so far as civil and moral
laws do not prevent, is from infernal freedom. But thinking and willing
good and speaking and doing it so far as opportunity offers, is from
heavenly freedom. A man perceives as his own what he thinks, wills,
speaks and does in freedom. The freedom anyone has always comes from his
love. The man in an evil love cannot but deem infernal freedom to be
real freedom, and a man in love of the good perceives that heavenly
freedom is real freedom; consequently each regards the opposite of his
freedom as bondage. No one can deny that one or the other must be
freedom, for two kinds of freedom opposed to each other cannot both be
freedom. Furthermore it cannot be denied that to be led by good is
freedom and to be led by evil is bondage. For to be led by good is to be
led by the Lord, but to be led by evil is to be led by the devil.

\[2\] Inasmuch as all he does in freedom appears to a man to be his own,
coming as it does from what he loves, and to act from one's love, as was
said, is to act freely, it follows that conjunction with the Lord causes
a man to seem free and also his own, and the more closely he is
conjoined to the Lord, to seem so much freer and so much more his own.
He seems the more distinctly his own because it is the nature of the
divine love to want its own to be another's, that is, to be the angel's
or the man's. All spiritual love is such, preeminently the Lord's. The
Lord, moreover, never coerces anyone. For nothing to which one is
coerced seems one's own, and what seems not one's own cannot be done
from one's love or be appropriated to one as one's own. Man is always
led in freedom by the Lord, therefore, and reformed and regenerated in
freedom. On this much more will be said in what follows; also see some
things above, n. 4.

<span class="margnote"><span id="44.">44.</span></span>

The reason why the more distinctly a man seems to be his own the more
plainly he sees that he is the Lord's, is that the more closely he is
conjoined to the Lord the wiser he becomes (as was shown, nn. 34-36),
and wisdom teaches and recognizes this. The angels of the third heaven,
as the wisest angels, perceive this and call it freedom itself; but to
be led by themselves they call bondage. They give as the reason for this
that the Lord does not flow immediately into the perceptions and
thoughts of wisdom, but into the affections of the love of good and by
these into the former, and this influx they perceive in the affection by
which they have wisdom. Hence, they say, all that they think from wisdom
seems to be from themselves, thus seemingly their own, and this gives
reciprocal conjunction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="45.">45.</span></span>

As the Lord's divine providence has for its object a heaven from
mankind, it has for its object the conjunction of the human race with
Him (see nn. 28-31). It also has for its object that man should be more
and more closely conjoined to Him (nn. 32, 33); for thus man possesses a
more interior heaven. Further, it has for its object that by the
conjunction man should become wiser (nn. 34-36) and happier (nn. 37-41),
for he has heaven by and according to wisdom, and happiness by wisdom,
too. Finally, providence has for its object that man shall seem more
distinctly his own, yet recognize the more clearly that he is the Lord's
(nn. 42-44). All these are of the Lord's divine providence, for all are
heaven and heaven is its object.

III\. IN ALL THAT IT DOES THE LORD'S DIVINE PROVIDENCE LOOKS TO WHAT IS
INFINITE AND ETERNAL

<span class="margnote"><span id="46.">46.</span></span>

Christendom knows that God is infinite and eternal. The doctrine of the
Trinity which is named for Athanasius says that God the Father is
infinite, eternal and omnipotent, so also God the Son, and God the Holy
Spirit, and that nevertheless there are not three who are infinite,
eternal and omnipotent, but One. As God is infinite and eternal, only
what is infinite and eternal can be predicated of Him. What infinite and
eternal are, finite man cannot comprehend and yet can comprehend. He
cannot comprehend them because the finite is incapable of what is
infinite; he can comprehend them because there are abstract ideas by
which one can see \_that\_ things are, though not \_what\_ they are. Of
the infinite such ideas are possible as that God or the Divine, being
infinite, is \_esse\_ itself, is essence and substance itself, wisdom
and love themselves or good and truth themselves, thus is the one Self,
indeed is veritable Man; there is such an idea, too, in speaking of the
infinite as "all," as that infinite wisdom is \_omniscience\_ and
infinite power \_omnipotence.\_

\[2\] Still these ideas turn obscure to thought and may meet denial for
not being comprehended, unless what one's thought gets from nature is
removed from the idea, especially what it gets from the two properties
of nature, space and time. For these are bound to restrict the ideas and
to make abstract ideas seem to be nothing. But if such things can be
removed in a man, as they are in an angel, what is infinite can be
comprehended by the means just mentioned. Then also it will be grasped
that the human being is something because he was created by infinite God
who is all; also that he is a finite substance, having been created by
infinite God who is substance itself; further that man is wisdom
inasmuch as he was created by infinite God who is wisdom itself; and so
on. For were infinite God not all, and were He not substance and wisdom
themselves, man would not be anything actual, thus would either be
nothing or exist only in idea, as those visionaries think who are called
idealists.

\[3\] It is plain from what was shown in the treatise \_Divine Love and
Wisdom\_ that the divine essence is love and wisdom (nn. 28-39); that
divine love and wisdom are substance itself and form itself, the one
Self and the sole underived being (nn. 40-46); and that God created the
universe and its contents from Himself, and not from nothing (nn.
282-284 ). It follows that every creature and above all the human being
and the love and wisdom in him, are real, and do not exist only in idea.
For were God not infinite, the finite would not be; were the infinite
not all, no particular thing would be; and had not God created all
things from Himself, nothing whatever would be. In a word, we are
because God is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="47.">47.</span></span>

We are considering divine providence and at this point how it regards
what is infinite and eternal in all that it does. This can be clearly
told only in some order. Let this be the order:

i\. The infinite and eternal in itself is the same as the Divine. ii.
What is infinite and eternal in itself cannot but look to what is
infinite and eternal from itself in finite things. iii. Divine
providence looks to the infinite and eternal from itself in all that it
does, especially in saving mankind. iv. An image of the infinite and
eternal offers in an angelic heaven formed from a redeemed mankind. v.
The heart of divine providence is to look to what is infinite and
eternal by fashioning an angelic heaven, for it to be like one human
being before the Lord, an image of Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="48.">48.</span></span>

\(i\) \_The infinite and eternal in itself is the same as the Divine.\_
This is plain from what was shown in many places in the work \_Divine
Love and Wisdom.\_ The concept comes from the angelic idea. By the
infinite, angels understand nothing else than the divine \_esse\_ and by
the eternal the divine \_existere.\_ But men can see and cannot see that
what is infinite and eternal in itself is the Divine. Those can see this
who do not think of the infinite from space and of the eternal from
time; those cannot see it who think of infinite and eternal in terms of
space and time. Those, therefore, can see it who think at some
elevation, that is, inwardly in the rational mind; those cannot who
think in a lower, that is, more external way.

\[2\] Those by whom it can be seen reflect that a spatial infinite is an
impossibility, so likewise a temporal eternity or an eternity from which
the world has been. The infinite has no first or final limit or
boundaries. They also reflect that there cannot be another infinite from
it, for "from it" implies a boundary or beginning, or a prior source.
They therefore think that it is meaningless to speak of an infinite and
eternal from itself, for that is like talking of an \_esse\_ from
itself, which is a contradiction. An infinite from itself could only be
an infinite from an infinite, and \_esse\_ from itself only \_esse\_
from \_esse.\_ Such an infinite or \_esse\_ would either be the same
with the infinite or be finite. From these and like considerations,
inwardly seen in the rational mind, it is plain that there is what is
infinite in itself and eternal in itself, and that they are the Divine
whence are all things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="49.">49.</span></span>

I know that many will say to themselves, "How can anybody grasp anything
inwardly and rationally apart from space and time, and think that it not
only exists, but is also the all and the self from which are all
things?" But think deeply whether love or any affection of love, or
wisdom or any perception of wisdom, yes, whether thought is in space and
time, and you will grasp the fact that they are not. The Divine,
therefore, being love itself and wisdom itself, cannot be conceived of
in space and time; neither, then, can the infinite. To see this more
clearly ponder whether thought is in time and space. Suppose thought is
sustained for ten or twelve hours; may not the length of time seem like
one or two hours? May it not seem like one or two days? The seeming
duration is according to the state of affection from which the thought
springs. If the affection is a joyous one, in which time is not noticed,
thought over ten or twelve hours seems as though it were one or two
hours. The contrary is true if the affection is a sorrowful one, in
which one watches the passage of time. It is evident from this that time
is only an appearance according to the state of affection from which the
thought springs. The same is true of one's thought of the distance on a
walk or a journey.

<span class="margnote"><span id="50.">50.</span></span>

Since angels and spirits are affections of love and thoughts thence they
are not in space or time, either, but only in an appearance of them.
Space and time appear to them in keeping with the states of their
affections and their thoughts thence. When one of them, therefore,
thinks with affection of another, intently desiring to see or speak with
him, the other is at once present.

\[2\] Hence, too, present with every man are spirits who are in an
affection like his--evil spirits with a man in an affection of similar
evil, and good spirits with the man in an affection of similar good.
They are as fully present as though he was one of their society. Space
and time have nothing to do with their presence, for affection and
thought therefrom are not in space and time, and spirits and angels are
affections and thoughts therefrom.

\[3\] I have been given to know this by living experience over many
years. For I have spoken with many on their death, some in different
kingdoms of Europe, and some in different kingdoms of Asia and Africa,
and all were near me. If space and time existed for them, a journey and
time to make it would have intervened.

\[4\] Indeed, every man knows this by some instinct in him or in his
mind, as has been verified to me by the fact that nobody has thought of
distances when I have reported that I had spoken with some person who
died in Asia, Africa or Europe, for example with Calvin, Luther, or
Melancthon, or with some king, governor or priest in a far region. The
thought occurred to no one, "How could he speak with those who had lived
there, and how could they come and be present with him, when lands and
seas lay between?" So it was plain to me that in thinking of those in
the spiritual world a man does not think of space and time. For those
there, however, there is an appearance of time and space; see the work
\_Heaven and Hell,\_ nn. 162-169, 191-199.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 51-100](dpr05)
