[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dpr05)  [Next](dpr07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877855056/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Divine Providence*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1764\], tr. by William
Frederic Wunsch \[1851\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Divine Providence

<span class="margnote"><span id="101.">101.</span></span>

But many, especially those who have confirmed themselves in faith
severed from charity, do not know that they are in hell when they are in
evils. In fact, they do not know what evils are, giving them no thought.
They say that they are not under the yoke of the law and so the law does
not condemn them; likewise, that as they cannot contribute to their
salvation, they cannot remove any evil of themselves and furthermore
cannot do any good of themselves. It is these who neglect to give some
thought to evil and therefore keep on in evil. They are meant by the
Lord under "goats" in Matthew 25:32, 33; 41-46, as may be seen in
\_Doctrine of the New Jerusalem on Faith,\_ nn. 61-68; to them it is
said in verse 41, "Depart from Me, you accursed, into everlasting fire
prepared for the devil and his angels."

\[2\] Persons who give no thought to the evils in them, and who do not
examine themselves and then desist from the evils, cannot but be
ignorant what evil is, and cannot but love it then from delighting in
it. For one who is ignorant of it loves it, and one who fails to give it
thought, goes on in it, blind to it. Thought sees good and evil as the
eye sees beauty and ugliness. One who thinks and wills evil is in evil,
and so is a person who thinks that it does not come to God's sight, or
if it does is forgiven by Him; he supposes then that he is without evil.
If such persons refrain from doing evil, they do so not because it is a
sin against God, but for fear of the law and for their reputation's
sake. In spirit they still do evil, for it is man's spirit that thinks
and wills. As a result, what a man thinks in his spirit in the world, he
commits when he becomes a spirit on his departure from the world.

\[3\] In the spiritual world, into which everyone comes after death, the
question is not asked what your belief has been or your doctrine, but
what your life has been. Was it such or such? For, as is known, such as
one's life is, such is one's belief, yes, one's doctrine. For life
fashions a doctrine and a belief for itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="102.">102.</span></span>

From all this it is plain that it is a law of divine providence that
evils be removed by man, for without the removal of them the Lord cannot
be conjoined to man and from Himself lead man to heaven. But it is not
known that man ought to remove evils in the external man as of himself
and that unless he does so the Lord cannot remove the evils in his
internal man. This is to be presented, therefore, to the reason in light
of its own in this order:

i\. Every man has an external and an internal of thought. ii. His
external of thought is in itself such as his internal is. iii. The
internal cannot be purified from the lusts of evil as long as the evils
in the external man have not been removed, for these impede. iv. Only
with the man's participation can evils in the external man be removed by
the Lord. v. Therefore a man ought to remove evils from the external man
as of himself. vi. The Lord then purifies him from the lusts of evil in
the internal man and from the evils themselves in the external. vii. The
continuous effort of the Lord in His divine providence is to unite man
to Himself and Himself to man, in order to be able to bestow the
felicities of eternal life on him, which can be done only so far as
evils, along with their lusts, are removed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="103.">103.</span></span>

\(i\) \_Every man has an external and an internal of thought.\_ By
external and internal of thought the same is meant here as by external
and internal man, and by this nothing else is meant than external and
internal of will and understanding, for will and understanding
constitute man, and as they both manifest themselves in thoughts, we
speak of external and internal of thought. And as it is man's spirit and
not his body which wills and understands and consequently thinks,
external and internal are external and internal of his spirit. The
body's activity in speech or deed is only an effect from the external
and internal of man's spirit, for the body is so much obedience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="104.">104.</span></span>

As he grows older, every person has an external and an internal of
thought, or an external and an internal of will and understanding or of
his spirit, identical with external and internal man. This is evident to
anyone who observes another's thoughts and intentions as they are
revealed in speech or deed, or who observes his own when he is in
company and when he is by himself. For from the external thought one can
talk amicably with another and yet in internal thought be hostile. From
external thought and from its affection, too, a man can talk about love
for the neighbor and for God when in his internal thought he cares
nothing for the neighbor and does not fear God. From external thought
together with its affection he can talk about the justice of civil laws,
the virtues of the moral life, and matters of doctrine and the spiritual
life, and yet in private and from his internal thought and its affection
speak against the civil laws, the moral virtues, and matters of doctrine
and spiritual life. So those do who are in lusts of evil but want to
appear to the world not to be in them.

\[2\] Many also, as they listen to others, think to themselves, "Do
those speaking think inwardly in themselves as they think in utterance?
Are they to be believed or not? What do they intend?" Flatterers and
hypocrites notoriously possess a twofold thought. They can be
self-restrained and guard against the interior thought's being
disclosed, and some can hide it more and more deeply and bar the door
against its appearing. That a man possesses external and internal
thought is also plain in that from his interior thought he can behold
the exterior thought, can reflect on it, too, and judge whether or not
it is evil. The human mind is such because of the two faculties, called
liberty and rationality, which one has from the Lord. Unless he
possessed internal and external of thought from these faculties, a man
could not perceive and see an evil in himself and be reformed. In fact,
he could not speak but only make sounds like a beast.

<span class="margnote"><span id="105.">105.</span></span>

The internal of thought comes out of the life's love, its affections and
the perceptions from them. The external of thought is from what is in
the memory, serving the life's love for confirmation and as means to its
end. From childhood to early manhood a person is in the external of
thought from an affection for knowledge, which is then his internal;
from the life's love born in one from parents something of lust and
hence of disposition issues, too. Later, however, his life's love is as
he lives, and its affections and the perceptions from them make the
internal of his thought. From his life's love comes a love of means; the
enjoyments of these means and the information drawn thereby from the
memory make his external of thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="106.">106.</span></span>

\(ii\) \_Man's external of thought is in itself such as his internal
is.\_ We showed earlier that from head to foot a man is what his life's
love is. Something must be said about his life's love, for until this is
done nothing can be said about the affections which together with
perceptions make the internal of man, or about the enjoyments of the
affections together with thoughts which make his external. Loves are
many, but two--heavenly love and infernal love--are like lords or kings.
Heavenly love is love to the Lord and the neighbor; infernal love is
love of self and the world. These are opposite to each other as heaven
and hell are. For a man in love of self and the world wishes well only
to himself; a man in love to the Lord and the neighbor wishes well to
all. These two are the loves of man's life, though with much variety.
Heavenly love is the life's love of those whom the Lord leads, and
infernal love the life's love of those whom the devil leads.

\[2\] No one's life's love can be without derivatives, called
affections. The derivatives of infernal love are affections of evil and
falsity --lusts, properly speaking; and those of heavenly love are
affections of good and truth--loves, strictly. Affections, or strictly
lusts, of infernal love are as numerous as evils are, and affections, or
properly loves, of heavenly love are as many as there are goods. Love
dwells in its affections like a lord in his domain and a king in his
realm; its domain or realm is over the things of the mind, that is, of
the will and understanding and thence of the body. By its affections and
the perceptions from them and by its enjoyments and the thoughts
therefrom, the life's love of man rules him completely, the internal of
the mind by the affections and perceptions from them, and the external
by the enjoyments of the affections and of the thoughts from them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="107.">107.</span></span>

The manner of this rule may be seen to some extent from comparisons.
Heavenly love with its affections of good and truth and the perceptions
from them, together with the enjoyments of such affections and the
thoughts from these, may be compared to a tree, notable for its
branches, leaves and fruit. The life's love is the tree; the branches
with their leaves are the affections of good and truth with their
perceptions; and the fruits are the enjoyments of the affections with
their thoughts. Infernal love, however, with its affections or lusts of
evil and falsity, together with the enjoyments of the lusts and the
thinking from those enjoyments, may be compared to a spider and the web
spun about it. The love itself is the spider; the lusts of evil and
falsity together with their subtle cunning are the net of threads
nearest the spider's post; and the enjoyments of the lusts together with
their crafty schemes are the more remote threads where flies are snared
on the wing, enveloped and eaten.

<span class="margnote"><span id="108.">108.</span></span>

These comparisons may help one to see the connection of all things of
the will and understanding or of man's mind with his life's love, and
yet not to see it rationally. Rationally it may be seen in this way.
Everywhere there are three which make one, called end, cause and effect.
Here the life's love is end; the affections with their perceptions are
cause; and the enjoyments of the affections and consequent thoughts are
effect. For as an end passes into effect through a cause, love passes by
its affections to its enjoyments and by its perceptions to its thoughts.
The effects are in the enjoyments of the mind and the thoughts thence
when the enjoyments are from the will and the thoughts from the
attendant understanding, that is, when all fully agree. The effects are
then part of man's spirit and although they do not come into bodily act
are still a deed there when there is this agreement. At the same time
they are in the body, dwelling there with man's life's love and longing
for the deed, which occurs when nothing hinders. The same is true of
lusts of evil and evil deeds with those who make evils allowable in
spirit.

\[2\] As an end unites itself with a cause and by the cause with an
effect, the life's love unites itself with the internal of thought and
by this with its external. It is plain then that man's external of
thought is in itself what his internal is, for an end imparts all of
itself to the cause and through the cause to the effect. Nothing
essential is present in an effect which is not in the cause and through
the cause in the end, and as the end is what essentially enters cause
and effect, these are called "mediate end" and "final end" respectively.

<span class="margnote"><span id="109.">109.</span></span>

Sometimes the external of thought seems to be different in itself from
the internal. This is because the life's love with its internals about
it sets a vicar under it called the love of means, and directs it to
watch and guard against anything of its lusts appearing. This vicar,
with the cunning of its chief, the life's love, therefore speaks and
acts in accordance with the laws of a kingdom, the ethical demands of
reason, and the spiritual requirements of the church, so cunningly, too,
and cleverly that no one sees that persons are other than they say and
act, and finally the persons themselves, so disguised, scarcely know
otherwise. Such are all hypocrites. Such are priests, also, who at heart
care nothing for the neighbor and do not fear God, yet preach about love
of the neighbor and of God. Such are judges who judge by gifts and
friendships while affecting zeal for justice and speaking with reason
about judgment. Such are traders who at heart are insincere and
fraudulent while dealing honestly for the sake of profit. Such are
adulterers when, from the rationality every man possesses, they talk
about the chastity of marriage; and so on.

\[2\] The same persons, when they strip the love of means, the vicar of
their life's love, of the purple and linen which they have thrown around
it and put its house dress on it, then think exactly the contrary, and
exchanging thought with their best friends who are in a similar life's
love, they speak so. It may be believed that when they have spoken so
justly, honestly and piously from the love of means, the character of
the internal of thought was not in the external of their thought; yet it
was; hypocrisy is in them, and love of self and the world is in them,
the cunning of which aims to capture a reputation for the sake of
standing or gain through just the outward appearance. This, the nature
of the internal, is in the external of their thought when they speak and
act so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="110.">110.</span></span>

With those in a heavenly love, however, internal and external of thought
or internal and external man make one when they speak, and they are
aware of no difference. Their life's love, with its affections of good
and the perceptions of truth from these, is like a soul in what they
think and then say and do. If they are priests, they preach out of love
to the neighbor and to the Lord; if judges, they judge from justice
itself; if tradesmen, they deal with honesty; if they are husbands, they
love the partner with true chastity; and so on. Their life's love also
has a love of the means for vicar, which it teaches and leads to act
with prudence and clothes with garments of a zeal for both truths of
doctrine and goods of life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="111.">111.</span></span>

( iii) \_The internal cannot be purified from the lusts of evil as long
as evils in the external man are not removed, for these impede.\_ This
follows from what has been said above, that the external of man's
thought is in itself what the internal of his thought is and that they
cohere as what is not only in the other but also from the other; one
cannot be removed, therefore, unless the other is at the same time. This
is true of any external which is from an internal, and of anything
subsequent from what is prior, and of every effect from a cause.

\[2\] As lusts together with slynesses make the internal of thought with
evil persons, and the enjoyments of the lusts together with scheming
make the external of thought in them, and the two are joined into one,
it follows that the internal cannot be purified from the lusts as long
as the evils in the external man are not removed. It should be known
that man's internal will is in the lusts; his internal understanding in
the slynesses; his external will in the enjoyments of the lusts; and his
external understanding in the sly scheming. Anyone can see that lusts
and their enjoyments make one, that slynesses and scheming also do, and
that the four are one series and as it were make a single bundle. From
this again it is evident that the internal, consisting of lusts, cannot
be cast out except on the removal of the external, consisting of evils.
Lusts produce evils by their enjoyments, and when evils are deemed
allowable, as they are when will and understanding agree on it, the
enjoyments and the evils make one. It is well known that assent is deed;
this is also what the Lord said:

If anyone looks on the woman of another to lust after her, he has
already committed adultery with her in his heart (Mt 5:28). <span
id="fr_0"></span>[111-1](#fn_0.md)

The same is true of all other evils.

<span class="margnote"><span id="112.">112.</span></span>

From this it may now be evident that for a person to be purified from
the lusts of evil, evils must by all means be removed from the external
man, for the lusts have no way out before. If no outlet exists, they
remain within and breathe out enjoyments and so incite man to consent,
thus to deed. Lusts enter the body by the external of thought; when
there is consent, therefore, in the external of thought they are
instantly in the body; the enjoyment felt is bodily. See in the treatise
\_Divine Love and Wisdom\_ (nn. 362-370) that the body, thus the whole
man, is what the mind is. This can be illustrated by comparisons, and by
examples.

\[2\] By \_comparisons:\_ lusts with their enjoyments can be compared to
a fire which blazes the more, the more it is nursed; the freer its way
the more widely it spreads until in a city it consumes houses and in a
woods the trees. In the Word, moreover, lusts are compared to fire, and
the evils from them to a conflagration. The lusts of evil with their
enjoyments also appear as fires in the spiritual world; hellfire is
nothing else. Lusts may also be compared to floods and inundations as
dikes or dams give way. They may also be likened to gangrene and
abscesses which bring death to the body as they run their course or are
not healed.

\[3\] By \_examples:\_ it is obvious that when evils are not removed in
the external man, the lusts with their enjoyments grow and flourish. The
more he steals the more a thief lusts to steal until he cannot stop; so
with a defrauder, the more he defrauds; it is the same with hatred and
vengeance, luxury and intemperance, whoredom and blasphemy. It is
notorious that the love of ruling from the love of self increases when
left unbridled; so also the love of possessing things from love of the
world; they seem to have no limit or end. Plain it is then that so far
as evils are not removed in the external man, lusts for them intensify;
also that in the degree that evils are given free rein, the lusts
increase.

<span class="margnote"><span id="113.">113.</span></span>

A person does not see the lusts of his evil; he sees their enjoyments,
to be sure, but still he reflects little on them, for they divert
thought and drive off reflection. Unless he learned from elsewhere that
they are evils he would call them goods and give them expression freely
according to his thought's reasoning; doing so, he appropriates them to
himself. So far as he confirms them as allowable he enlarges the court
of his ruling love, which is his life's love. Lusts constitute its
court, being its ministers and retinue, as it were, by which it governs
the exteriors of its realm. But such as is the king, such are the
ministers and retinue, and such is the kingdom. If the king is diabolic,
his ministers and the retinue are insanities, and the people of his
realm are falsities of every kind. The ministers (who are called wise
although they are insane) cause these falsities to appear as truths by
reasonings from fallacies and by fantasies and cause them to be
acknowledged as truths. Can such a state in a man be changed except by
the evils being removed in the external man? Then the lusts which cling
to the evils are also removed. Otherwise no outlet offers for the lusts;
they are shut in like a besieged city or like an indurated ulcer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="114.">114.</span></span>

\(iv\) \_Only with man's participation can evils in the external man be
removed by the Lord.\_ In all Christian churches it is an accepted point
of doctrine that before coming to the Holy Communion a person should
examine himself, see and confess his sins, and do penitence, desisting
from his sins and rejecting them because they are from the devil; and
that otherwise the sins are not forgiven him and he is damned. The
English, despite the fact that they are in the doctrine of faith alone,
nevertheless in the exhortation to the Holy Communion openly teach
self-examination, acknowledgment, confession of sins, penitence and
renewal of life, and warn those who do not do these things with the
words that otherwise the devil will enter into them as he did into
Judas, fill them with all iniquity, and destroy both body and soul.
Germans, Swedes and Danes, who are also in the doctrine of faith alone,
teach the same in the exhortation to the Holy Communion, also warning
that otherwise the communicants will make themselves liable to infernal
punishments and eternal damnation for mixing sacred and profane
together. These words are read out by the priest in a deep voice to all
who are about to observe the Holy Supper, and are listened to by them in
full acknowledgment that they are true.

\[2\] Nevertheless, after hearing a sermon on the same day about faith
alone and to the effect that the law does not condemn them because the
Lord has fulfilled it for them, and that of themselves they cannot do
any good which is not self-righteous and thus that one's works have
nothing saving in them, only faith alone has, these same persons return
home completely forgetting their earlier confession and rejecting it so
far as they think along the lines of the sermon. But which is true, the
latter or the former? Contrary to each other, both cannot be true. Which
is? That there can be no forgiveness of sins, thus no salvation but only
eternal damnation, apart from self-examination, the knowledge and
acknowledgment, confession and breaking off of sins, that is, apart from
repentance? Or that such things effect nothing towards salvation
inasmuch as full satisfaction for all the sins of men has been made by
the Lord through the passion of the cross for those who have faith, and
that those in faith alone with trust that it is so and with confidence
in the imputation of the Lord's merit, are sinless and appear before God
like men with shining faces for having washed?

\[3\] It is plain from this that the religion common to all churches in
Christendom is that one shall examine himself, see and acknowledge his
sins and then desist from them, and that otherwise there is no
salvation, but damnation. This, moreover, is divine truth itself, as is
plain from passages in the Word in which man is bidden to do penitence,
as from the following:

John said, Do . . . fruits worthy of repentance . . . this moment the
axe is at the root of the tree; every tree not giving good fruit will be
cut down and cast into the fire (Lu 3:8, 9).

Jesus said, Unless you do repentance, you shall all . . . perish (Lu
13:3,5).

Jesus preached the gospel of the kingdom of God; . . . do repentance,
and believe the gospel (Mk 1:14, 15).

Jesus sent out the disciples who on going out were to preach that men
should repent (Mk 6:12).

Jesus told the apostles that they were to preach repentance and the
remission of sins to all peoples (Lu 24:27).

John preached the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins (Mk
1:4; Lu 3:3).

Think about this also with some degree of understanding; if you have
religion, you will see that repentance of one's sins is the way to
heaven, that faith apart from repentance is not faith, and that those in
no faith for lack of repenting are in the way to hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="115.">115.</span></span>

Those in faith severed from charity who have confirmed themselves in it
by Paul's saying to the Romans that a man is justified by faith without
the works of the law (3:28) worship that saying quite like men who
worship the sun. They become like those who fix their gaze steadily on
the sun with the result that the blurred vision sees nothing in normal
light. For they fail to see what is meant in the passage by "works of
the law," namely, the rituals described by Moses in his books, called
"law" in them everywhere, and not the precepts of the Decalog. Lest it
be thought these are meant, Paul explains, saying at that point,

Do we not then make the law void through faith? Far from it, rather we
establish the law (verse 31 of the same chapter).

Those who have confirmed themselves by that saying in faith severed from
charity, looking on it as on the sun, do not see the passages in which
Paul lists the laws of faith and that these are the very works of
charity. What indeed is faith without its laws? Nor do they see the
passages in which he lists evil works, declaring that those who do them
cannot enter heaven. What blindness has been brought about by this one
passage badly understood!

<span class="margnote"><span id="116.">116.</span></span>

Evils in the external man cannot be removed without man's cooperation
for the reason that it is by divine providence that whatever a man
hears, sees, thinks, wills, speaks and does shall seem to him to be his
own doing. Apart from that appearance (as was shown above, nn. 71-95
ff.) there would be no reception of divine truth on man's part, nor
determination to do what is good, nor any appropriation of love and
wisdom or of charity and faith, hence no conjunction with the Lord, no
reformation therefore or regeneration, and thus no salvation. Without
that appearance, repentance for sins would clearly be impossible and in
fact faith would; without that appearance, likewise, man is not man but
is devoid of rational life like the beasts. Let him who will, consult
his reason whether it appears otherwise than that man thinks from
himself about good and truth, spiritual as well as moral and civil; then
accept the doctrine that all good and truth are from the Lord and none
from man. Must he not then acknowledge as a consequence that man is to
do good and think truth of himself, yet always acknowledge that these
are from the Lord? And acknowledge further that man is to remove evils
of himself, but still acknowledge that he does so from the Lord?

<span class="margnote"><span id="117.">117.</span></span>

Many are unaware that they are in evils since they do not do them
outwardly, fearing the civil law and the loss of reputation. Thus by
custom and habit they practice to avoid evils as detrimental to their
standing and interests. But if they do not shun evils on religious
principle, because they are sins and against God, the lusts of evil with
their enjoyments remain in them like impure waters stopped up or
stagnant. Let them probe their thoughts and intentions and they will
come on the lusts provided they know what sins are.

\[2\] Many such, who have confirmed themselves in faith separated from
charity and who believe that the law does not condemn, pay no attention
to sins. Some doubt there are sins, or if so, that they exist in God's
sight, having been pardoned. Such also are natural moralists, who
believe that civil and moral life with its prudence accomplishes all
things and divine providence nothing. Such are those, also, who strive
with great care after a reputation and a name for honesty and sincerity
for the sake of standing and preferment. But those who are such and who
at the same time have spurned religion become lustful spirits after
death, appearing to themselves like men indeed, but to others at a
distance like \_priapi;\_ and they see in the dark and not at all in the
light, like night-owls.

<span class="margnote"><span id="118.">118.</span></span>

Proposition v, that \_a man ought to remove evils from the external man
of himself,\_ is substantiated then. Further explanation may be seen in
\_Doctrine of Life for the New Jerusalem\_ under three propositions: 1.
No one can flee evils as sins so as to be averse to them inwardly except
by combats against them (nn. 92-100); 2. A man ought to shun evils as
sins and fight against them as of himself (nn. 101-107); and 3. If he
shuns evils for any other reason than that they are sins, he does not
shun them, but only keeps them from appearing to the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="119.">119.</span></span>

\(vi\) \_The Lord then purifies man from the lusts of evil in the
internal man and from the evils themselves in the external.\_ The Lord
purifies man from the lusts of evil only when man as of himself removes
the evils because He cannot do so before. For the evils are in the
external man and the lusts in the internal man, and they cling together
like roots and a trunk. Unless the evils are removed, therefore, no
outlet offers; they block the way and shut the door, which the Lord can
open only with a man's participation, as was shown just above. When the
man as of himself opens the door, the Lord then roots out the lusts.

\[2\] A second reason why the Lord cannot do so sooner is that He acts
upon man's inmost and by that on all that follows even to outmosts where
man himself is. While outmosts, therefore, are kept closed by man, no
purification can take place, but only that activity of the Lord in
interiors which is His activity in hell, of which the man who is in
lusts and at the same time in evils is a form--an activity which is
solely provision lest one thing destroy another and lest good and truth
be violated. It is plain from words of the Lord in the Apocalypse that
He constantly urges and prompts man to open the door to Him:

Behold, I stand at the door, and knock; if anyone hears my voice and
opens the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with Me
(3:20).

<span class="margnote"><span id="120.">120.</span></span>

Man knows nothing at all of the interior state of his mind or internal
man, yet infinite things are there, not one of which comes to his
knowledge. His internal of thought or internal man is his very spirit,
and in it are things as infinite and innumerable as there are in his
body, in fact, more numerous. For his spirit is man in its form, and all
things in it correspond to all things of his body. Now, just as man
knows nothing by any sensation about how his mind or soul operates on
all things of the body as a whole or severally, so he does not know,
either, how the Lord works on all things of his mind or soul, that is,
of his spirit. The divine activity is unceasing; man has no part in it;
still the Lord cannot purify a man from any lust of evil in his spirit
or internal man as long as the man keeps the external closed. Man keeps
his external closed by evils, each of which seems to him to be a single
entity, although in each are infinite things. When a man removes what
seems a single thing, the Lord removes infinite things in it. So much is
implied in the Lord's purifying man from the lusts of evil in the
internal man and from the evils themselves in the external.

<span class="margnote"><span id="121.">121.</span></span>

Many believe that a person is purified from evils merely by believing
what the church teaches; some, by doing good; others by knowing,
speaking and teaching what is of the church; others by reading the Word
and books of devotion; others by going to church, hearing sermons and
especially by observing the Holy Supper; still others, by renouncing the
world and devoting oneself to piety; others still by confessing oneself
guilty of all sins; and so on. And yet none of these things purifies man
at all unless he examines himself, sees his sins, acknowledges them,
condemns himself on account of them, and repents by desisting from them,
and does all this as of himself, yet with the acknowledgment in heart
that he does so from the Lord.

\[2\] Until this is done, the things mentioned above do not avail, being
either self-righteous or hypocritical. Such persons appear to the angels
in heaven either like pretty courtesans smelling badly of their
corruption, or like unsightly women painted to appear handsome, or like
masked clowns and mimics in the theater, or like apes in men's clothes.
But when evils have been removed, then all that has just been mentioned
becomes the expression of love in such persons, and they appear as
beautiful human beings to the sight of the angels in heaven and as
partners and companions of theirs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="122.">122.</span></span>

But it should be rightly known that in repenting a man ought to look to
the Lord alone. He cannot be purified if he looks to God the Father
alone, or to the Father for the sake of the Son, or to the Son as a man
only. For there is one God and the Lord is He, for His Divine and Human
is one Person, as we have shown in \_Doctrine of the New Jerusalem about
the Lord.\_ In order that the intending penitent may look to Him alone,
the Lord instituted the Holy Supper, which confirms the remission of
sins in those who repent, and does so because everyone is kept looking
to the Lord alone in it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="123.">123.</span></span>

\(vii\) \_The perpetual effort of the Lord in His divine providence is
to conjoin man with Himself and Himself with man, in order to be able to
bestow the felicities of eternal life on him, which can be done only so
far as evils with their lusts have been removed.\_ It was shown above
(nn. 27-45) that it is the unceasing effort of the Lord in His divine
providence to conjoin man to Himself and Himself to man; that this
conjunction is what is called reformation and regeneration; and that by
it man has salvation. Who does not see that conjunction with God is life
eternal and salvation? Everyone sees this who believes that men by
creation are images and likenesses of God (Ge 1:26, 27) and who knows
what an image and likeness of God is. \[2\] What man of sound reason,
thinking from his rationality and wanting to think in freedom, can
believe that there are three Gods equal in essence and that divine being
or essence can be divided? One can conceive and comprehend a Trine in
the one God, however, just as soul, body and outgoing life in angel and
man are comprehensible. As this Trine in One exists only in the Lord,
conjunction must be with Him. Use your power of reason together with
your liberty of thought, and you will see this truth in its own light;
but admit first that God is, and heaven, and eternal life.

\[3\] As, then, God is one, and the human being was made by creation an
image and likeness of Him, and inasmuch as by infernal love and its
lusts and enjoyments man has come into a love of all evils and thus
destroyed the image and likeness of God in him, it follows that it is
the continuous effort of the Lord's divine providence to conjoin man to
Himself and Himself to man and thus make him an image of Himself. It
also follows that this is to the end that the Lord may be able to bestow
on him the felicities of eternal life, for such is divine love.

\[4\] He cannot bestow them, however, nor make man an image of Himself,
unless man removes sins in the external man as of himself, because the
Lord is not only divine love but also divine wisdom, and divine love
does nothing except by its divine wisdom and in consonance with it. It
is according to divine wisdom that man cannot be conjoined to the Lord
and thus reformed, regenerated and saved unless he is allowed to act in
freedom according to reason, for so man is man. Whatever is according to
the Lord's divine wisdom is also of His divine providence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="124.">124.</span></span>

To this let me append two arcana of angelic wisdom showing further what
divine providence is like. One is that the Lord never acts on one thing
by itself in man, but on all things at the same time, and the other is
that He acts at once from inmosts and outmosts. He never acts on some
one thing by itself but on all things together because all things in man
are in such connection and from this in such form that they act not as a
number but as one. We know that there is such connectedness and by it
such organization in man's body. The human mind is in similar form as a
result of the connection of all things, for the mind is the spiritual
man and truly the man. Hence man's spirit or the mind in the body in its
entire form is man. Consequently man is man after death equally as he
was in the world with the sole difference that he has thrown off the
clothing which made up his body in the world.

\[2\] As the human form, then, is such that all its parts form a
community which acts as a whole, some one thing cannot be moved out of
place or altered in state except with adaptation of the rest, for if it
were, the form which acts as a whole would suffer. Hence it is plain
that the Lord never acts on any one thing without acting on all. So He
acts on the total angelic heaven since in His view it is like one man;
so He acts on each angel, for each angel is heaven in least form; so He
acts also on each man, most nearly on all things of man's mind and by
these on all things of his body; for man's mind is his spirit and in the
measure of conjunction with the Lord is an angel, and the body is
obedience.

\[3\] It is to be well noted, however, that the Lord does act on each
particular thing in man singly, singularly so, when acting on all things
in man's organization; even so He does not alter the state of any part
or of any one thing except suitably to the whole form. But more will be
said of this in following numbers where we shall show that divine
providence is general because it extends to particulars, and particular
because it is general.

\[4\] The Lord acts from inmosts and outmosts at the same time because
only in this way are all things held in connection, for the intermediate
things depend one upon another from inmosts to outmosts and are
assembled in outmosts (it was shown in Part III of the treatise \_Divine
Love and Wisdom\_ that all things from the inmost onward are present
simultaneously in what is outmost ). For this reason the Lord from
eternity or Jehovah came into the world and assumed and bore human
nature in outmosts. He could thus be at once from firsts in lasts, and
from firsts by lasts govern the whole world and so save whom He could
save according to the laws of His divine providence, which are also the
laws of His divine wisdom. For it is true, as Christendom knows, that no
mortal could have been saved had the Lord not come into the world (see
\_Doctrine for the New Jerusalem on Faith,\_ n. 35). For the same reason
the Lord is called "The First and the Last."

<span class="margnote"><span id="125.">125.</span></span>

These angelic arcana have been premised in order that it may be
comprehended how the Lord's divine providence operates to unite man to
Him and Himself to man. It does not act upon a particular thing by
itself in man, but on all things together and from man's inmost and
outmosts simultaneously. Man's inmost is his life's love; the outmosts
are in the external of thought; what is intermediate is in the internal
of thought (what external and internal are like with the wicked was
shown earlier); from which it is plain again that the Lord cannot act by
inmosts and outmosts simultaneously except together with man, for in the
outmosts man and the Lord are together. Wherefore, as the man acts in
outmosts, which are in his determination, being within the range of his
freedom, so the Lord acts from man's inmosts and in what follows from
them to the outmosts. Man does not know at all what is in the inmosts
and in what follows to the outmosts, therefore is unaware of how the
Lord acts there or what He effects there. But as all these things cohere
as one with the outmosts, man does not need to know more than that he
should shun evils as sins and look to the Lord. Only so can his life's
love, which by birth is infernal, be removed by the Lord and a heavenly
life's love be implanted in its place.

<span class="margnote"><span id="126.">126.</span></span>

When a heavenly life's love has been implanted by the Lord in place of
an infernal life's love, affections of good and truth are implanted in
place of lusts of evil and falsity; enjoyments of affections of good are
implanted instead of enjoyments of lusts of evil and falsity, and goods
of heavenly love in place of evils of infernal love; prudence is
implanted in place of cunning, wise thinking in place of malevolent. So
a man is born again and becomes a new man. What goods replace evils you
may see in \_Doctrine of Life for the New Jerusalem,\_ nn. 67-73, 74-79,
80-86, 87-91; likewise that so far as man shuns and is averse to evils
as sins so far he loves truths of wisdom, nn. 32-41, and has faith and
is spiritual, nn. 42-52.

<span class="margnote"><span id="127.">127.</span></span>

From the exhortations read aloud in all Christian churches before Holy
Communion we showed that it is the common religion of all Christendom
that a man should examine himself, see his sins, avow them, confess them
before God, and desist from them; and that this is repentance, remission
of sins and hence salvation. This is also evident from the Creed named
after Athanasius and received throughout Christendom which concludes
with the words:

The Lord will come to judge the living and the dead; at whose coming
those who have done good will enter into life eternal, and those who
have done evil, into everlasting fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="128.">128.</span></span>

Who does not know from the Word that everyone is allotted a life after
death according to his deeds? Open the Word, read it, and you will see
this clearly, but the while remove the thoughts from faith and
justification by faith alone. The few passages following are testimony
that the Lord teaches so everywhere in His Word:

Every tree which does not yield good fruit shall be cut down and cast
into the fire. By their fruits therefore shall you know them (Mt 7:19,
20).

Many will say to Me in that day, Lord . . . have we not prophesied in
your name, . . . and in your name done many mighty things? But I shall
confess to them then, I know you not, depart from Me, you who work
iniquity (Mt 7:22, 23).

Everyone who hears my words and does them I shall liken to a prudent man
who built a house on a rock: . . . but everyone who hears my words but
does not do them shall be likened to a foolish man who built his house
on the ground without a foundation (Mt 7:24, 26; Lu 6:46-49).

\[2\] The Son of man will come in the glory of His Father .. . and
render then to everyone according to his deeds (Mt 16:27).

The kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and given to a people
bringing forth its fruits (Mt 21:43).

Jesus said, These are My mother and brothers who hear the Word of God
and do it (Lu 8:21).

Then shall you begin to stand . . . and knock at the door, saying, Lord,
. . . open to us, but replying He will say to them, I know not whence
you are; depart from Me, all you workers of iniquity (Lu 13:25-27).

Those who have done good shall go out into the resurrection of life, but
those who have done evil into the resurrection of judgment (Jn 5:29).

\[3\] We know . . . that God does not hear sinners, but if a man
worships God and does His will, him He hears (Jn 9:31).

If you know these things, blessed are you if you do them (13:17).

He who has My commandments and does them, he it is who loves Me, ... and
I will love him, . . . and I will come to him, and make an abode with
him (14:15, 21-24).

You are My friends, if you do whatsoever I command you... . I have
chosen you . . . that you may bear fruit and that your fruit may remain
(15:14, 16).

\[4\] The Lord said to John, Write to the angel of the Ephesian church,
I know your works: . . . I have against you that you have left an
earlier charity; . . . repent, and do the former works; else . . . I
shall remove your candlestick from its place (Apoc 2:1, 2, 4, 5).

To the angel of the church of the Smyrneans write, I know your works
(2:8, 9).

To the angel of the church in Pergamos write, . . . I know your works,
repent (2:12, 13, 16).

To the angel of the church in Thyatira write, . . . I know your works
and charity, . . . and your later works are more than the first (2:18,
19).

To the angel of the church in Sardis write, . . . I know your works,
that you have a name that you are alive, but you are dead; . . . I have
not found your works perfect before God; . . . repent (3:1-3).

To the angel of the church in Philadelphia write, I know your works
(3:7, 8).

To the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write, I know your works; .
. . repent (3:14, 15, 19).

I heard a voice from heaven saying, Write, blessed are the dead who die
in the Lord from now on; ... their works follow them (14:13).

A book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead were judged,
... all according to their works (20:12, 13).

Lo, I come quickly, and My reward is with Me, to give to everyone
according to his work (22:12).

These are passages in the New Testament;

\[5\] there are still more in the Old, from which I shall quote only
this one:

Stand in the gate . . . of Jehovah, and proclaim this word there: Thus
says Jehovah Zebaoth the God of Israel, Make your ways good, and your
works; . . . put not your trust in lying words, saying, The temple, the
temple, the temple of Jehovah is this. . . . Thieving and killing and
committing adultery and swearing falsely . . . will you then come to
stand before Me in this house which is called by My name and say, We are
delivered? When you do those abominable things? Has not this house been
made a den of robbers? Even I, lo, I have seen it, is the word of
Jehovah (Je 7:2-4, 9-11).

VII\. IT IS A LAW OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE THAT MAN SHALL NOT BE COMPELLED
BY EXTERNAL MEANS TO THINK AND WILL, THUS TO BELIEVE AND LOVE WHAT
PERTAINS TO RELIGION, BUT BRING HIMSELF AND AT TIMES COMPEL HIMSELF TO
DO SO

<span class="margnote"><span id="129.">129.</span></span>

This law of divine providence follows from the preceding two, namely:
man is to act in freedom according to reason (nn. 71-99); and is to do
this of himself and yet from the Lord, thus as of himself (nn. 100-128).
Inasmuch as being compelled is not to act in freedom according to reason
and also not to act of oneself, but to act from what is not freedom and
from someone else, this law of divine providence follows in due order on
the first two. Everyone knows that no one can be forced to think what he
is unwilling to think or to will what he decides not to will, thus to
believe what he does not believe, least of all what he wills not to
believe, or to love what he does not love and still less what he wills
not to love. For the spirit or mind of man enjoys complete freedom in
thinking, willing, believing and loving. It does so by influx which is
not coercive from the spiritual world (for the human spirit or mind is
in that world); and not by influx from the natural world, received only
when the two agree.

\[2\] A man can be driven to say that he thinks and wills, believes and
loves what is religious, but if this is not a matter of his affection
and reasoning or does not become so, he does not think, will, believe or
love it. A man may also be compelled to speak in favor of religion and
to act according to it, but he cannot be compelled to think in its favor
from any faith or to will in its favor out of love for it. In countries
in which justice and judgment are guarded, one is indeed compelled not
to speak or act against religion, but still no one can be compelled to
think and will in its favor. For everyone has freedom to think and to
will along with, and in favor of, hell or along with, and in favor of,
heaven. Reason, however, teaches what either course is like and what lot
awaits it, and by reason the will has the choice and decision.

\[3\] Plainly, then, what is external cannot coerce what is internal;
nevertheless it happens sometimes, but that it works harm will be shown
in this order:

i\. No one is reformed by miracles and signs, for they coerce. ii. No
one is reformed by visions and communication with the dead, for they
coerce. iii. No one is reformed by threats and penalties, as these
coerce. iv. No one is reformed in states of no rationality or no
freedom. v. Self-compulsion is not contrary to rationality and freedom.
vi. The external man is to be reformed through the internal, and not the
other way about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="130.">130.</span></span>

\(i\) \_No one is reformed by miracles and signs, for they coerce.\_ We
have shown above that man has an internal and an external of thought,
and that the Lord acts into the external by the internal in man and so
teaches and leads him; also that it is of the Lord's divine providence
that man is to act in freedom according to reason. Either action would
perish in man if miracles were done and he were driven by them to
believe. That this is so can be seen rationally in this way: undeniably
miracles induce belief and powerfully persuade a person that what the
miracle-doer says and teaches is true, and at first this engages man's
external of thought, virtually holding it spellbound. But one is
deprived by this of the two faculties called rationality and liberty,
thus cannot act in freedom according to reason, nor can the Lord then
inflow into the external of man's thought through the internal save only
to leave man to confirm from his rationality what has been made a matter
of his belief by the miracle.

\[2\] The state of man's thought is such that from the internal of
thought he can see a piece in the external of his thought as in a
mirror--for as was said above, one can behold one's own thought, which
is possible only from more interior thought. Beholding the item as in a
mirror he can turn it this way and that and shape it to look attractive
to him. If there is truth in it, it may be likened to an attractive and
animated maiden or youth. But if a man cannot turn it this way and that
and shape it, but only believe it persuaded of it by a miracle, then if
there is truth in it, it may be likened to a maiden or youth carved in
stone or wood, in which is nothing alive. It may also be compared to an
object which is constantly in view and looked at alone, keeps one from
seeing what is to either side and behind it. It can also be compared to
a continual sound in the ear, which does away with perceiving the
harmony of many sounds. Such are the blindness and deafness induced on
the mind by miracles. It is the same with anything confirmed but not
regarded from rationality before it is confirmed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="131.">131.</span></span>

Plain it is from this that a faith induced by miracles is not faith, but
persuasion. For it has nothing rational in it, still less anything
spiritual, as it is only external without an internal. This is true of
everything a man does from such persuasive faith, whether he is
acknowledging God, worshiping Him at home or in church, or doing good
deeds. When only a miracle leads a person to acknowledgment of God and
to adoration and piety, he acts from the natural and not the spiritual
man. For a miracle infuses belief by an external and not an internal
way, thus from the world and not from heaven. The Lord enters man by an
internal way, by the Word and by doctrine and preaching from it. As
miracles close this way, no miracles are done today.

<span class="margnote"><span id="132.">132.</span></span>

That miracles are of this nature can be clearly established from those
performed in the presence of the people of Judah and Israel. Although
they beheld many miracles in the land of Egypt and later at the Red Sea
and others in the Wilderness and particularly on Mt. Sinai when the Law
was promulgated, nevertheless, in a month's time while Moses tarried on
that mountain, they made themselves a golden calf and hailed it as
Jehovah who had led them out of the land of Egypt (Ex 32:4-6). Again, it
is plain from the miracles done later in the land of Canaan;
nevertheless the people fell away time and again from the prescribed
worship. It is equally plain from the miracles which the Lord did before
their eyes when He was in the world; yet they crucified Him.

\[2\] Miracles were done among the Jews and Israelites because they were
altogether external men and had been brought into the land of Canaan
merely to represent a church and its eternal verities by the
externalities of worship--something a bad man as well as a good man can
do. For the externals are rituals which with that people signified
spiritual and celestial things. Indeed Aaron, although he made the
golden calf and ordered worship of it (Ex 32:2-5, 35 ), could still
represent the Lord and His work of salvation. As the people could not be
brought by the internal things of worship to represent them, they were
brought to do so by miracles--in fact, were driven and forced to it.

\[3\] They could not be led by internals of worship because they did not
acknowledge the Lord although the entire Word which they had treats of
Him alone. One who does not acknowledge the Lord cannot receive anything
internal in worship. But miracles ceased after the Lord had manifested
Himself and was received and acknowledged as eternal God in the
churches.

<span class="margnote"><span id="133.">133.</span></span>

The effect of miracles on the good and on the evil differs, however. The
good do not desire miracles, but believe those in the Word. If they hear
of some miracle, they regard it only as a slight indication confirming
their faith; for they draw their thought from the Word and thus from the
Lord, and not from a miracle. It is different with the evil. They can be
driven and compelled, of course, to belief, to worship, too, and to
piety, but only for a little while. For their evils are enclosed, and
the lusts of those evils and the enjoyments of the lusts continually
press against the outward worship and piety; and in order that the evils
may come out of their confinement and burst forth, the wicked ponder the
miracle, finally call it ridiculous and a ruse or a natural phenomenon,
and so return to their evils. One who returns to his evils after having
worshiped profanes the truths and goods of worship, and the lot of
profaners after death is the worst of all fates. They are meant by the
Lord's words in Matthew (12:43-45) about those whose last state is worse
than the first. Besides, if miracles were to be done for those who have
no faith from the miracles in the Word, they would have to be done
constantly and before their eyes. It may be plain from all this why
miracles are not done at this day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="134.">134.</span></span>

\(ii\) No one is reformed by visions or by communication with the dead,
for they coerce. Visions are of two kinds, divine and diabolic. Divine
visions are effected by representations in heaven; diabolic by magic in
hell. There are also phantasmal visions, which are illusions of an
estranged mind. Divine visions, produced as we said by representative
things in heaven, are such as the prophets had who at the time were not
in the body but in the spirit, for visions cannot appear to anyone in
bodily wakefulness. When these came to the prophets, therefore, it is
remarked that they were "in the spirit," as is plain from the following:

Ezekiel said, The Spirit picked me up and carried me to Chaldea to the
captivity in a vision of God, in the spirit of God; so the vision rose
over me which I saw (11:1, 24).

Again that the Spirit bore him between earth and heaven and brought him
to Jerusalem in visions of God (8:3, 4).

He was likewise in visions of God or in the spirit when he saw four
beasts which were cherubim (1 and 10).

So, too, when he saw a new temple and a new earth, and an angel
measuring them (40-48 ).

That he was in "visions of God" then, he says at 40:2, 26, and that he
was "in the spirit" at 43:5.

\[2\] Zechariah was in a similar state when he saw

a horseman among myrtle trees (1:8 ff)

four horns (1:18) and a man with a measuring line in his hand (2:1-3 ff
)

a candlestick and two olive trees (4:1 ff)

a flying roll and an ephah (5:1, 6)

four chariots coming out between two mountains, and horses (8:1 ff).

In a like state was Daniel when he saw

four beasts coming up from the sea (7:1 ff )

a combat between a ram and a he-goat (8:1 ff).

That he saw these things "in the vision of his spirit" is stated at 7:1,
2, 7, 13; 8:2; 10:1, 7, 8, and that the angel Gabriel was seen by him in
a "vision" at 9:21.

\[3\] John was also in the vision of the spirit when he beheld what he
has described in the Apocalypse, as when he saw

seven candlesticks and the Son of man in the midst of them (1:12-16)

a throne in heaven, and One sitting on the throne, and around it four
beasts, which were cherubim (4)

the book of life taken by the Lamb (5)

horses coming out from the book (6)

seven angels with trumpets (8)

the pit of the abyss opened, and locusts coming out a dragon, and its
battle with Michael (12)

two beasts, rising, one from the sea and the other from the land (13)

a woman seated on a scarlet beast (17)

Babylon destroyed (18)

a white horse, and One seated on it (19)

a new heaven and a new earth, and the holy Jerusalem descending from
heaven (21)

the river of the water of life (22).

That he saw these "in the vision of the spirit" is said 1:10; 4:2; 5:1;
6:1; 21:1, 2.

\[4\] Such were the visions which appeared from heaven to the sight of
the spirit of these men, but not to their bodily sight. Such visions do
not occur at this day because if they did, they would not be understood
inasmuch as they are produced by representations the details of which
signify internal things of the church and arcana of heaven. Daniel also
foretold (9:24) that they would cease when the Lord came into the world.

Diabolic visions, however, have occurred at times, incited by fanatical
and visionary spirits who in their delirium called themselves the Holy
Spirit. But those spirits have now been gathered together by the Lord
and cast into a hell separate from the hells of others. There are also
phantasmal visions which are merely the illusions of an estranged mind.

All this makes clear that no one can be reformed by any visions other
than those in the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="134r.">134r.</span></span>The fact that
no one is reformed by communication with the dead is plain from the
Lord's words about the rich man in hell and Lazarus in Abraham's bosom.

For the rich man said, I ask you, father Abraham, to send Lazarus to my
father's house, for I have five brothers, to testify to them lest they
also come into this place of torment. Abraham said to him, They have
Moses and the prophets; let them hear them. But he said, No, father
Abraham, but if some one will go to them from the dead, they will
repent. He replied, If they do not hear Moses and the prophets, they
will not be persuaded either if one should arise from the dead (Lu
16:27-31).

Communication with the dead would have the same result as miracles (of
which just above), namely, that a man would be influenced and driven
into worship for a short time. But as this deprives a man of rationality
and at the same time shuts his evils in, as was said above, the
captivation or the inward bond is undone, and the imprisoned evils break
out, with blasphemy and profanation; this last occurs, however, only
when spirits introduce something dogmatic from religion, which is never
done by a good spirit, still less by an angel of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="135.">135.</span></span>

Nevertheless, speech with spirits--rarely with angels of heaven--is
possible and has been granted to many for ages. When it is granted,
spirits speak with a man in his native tongue and briefly. And those who
speak with the Lord's permission never say anything that takes away the
freedom of the reason, nor do they instruct, for the Lord alone teaches
man, doing so by means of the Word to the man's enlightenment (of this
in numbers to come). I have been given to know this in my own
experience. I have spoken with spirits and angels for many years now. No
spirit has dared and no angel has wished to tell me, still less to
instruct me, about things in the Word or about any of its doctrine. The
Lord alone has taught me, who revealed Himself to me and afterwards
continued to appear to me as He does now, as the Sun in which He is, as
He appears to the angels, and He has enlightened me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="136.">136.</span></span>

\(iii\) \_No one is reformed by threats or penalties, as these coerce.\_
It is known that the external cannot compel the internal, but the
internal can compel the external; also that the internal refuses to be
coerced by the external and turns away. It is likewise known that
external enjoyments entice the assent and love of the internal; and it
may also be known that there is a forced internal and a free internal.
But all this, though known, needs to be lighted up, for much on being
heard is perceived at once to be so, because it is truth and hence is
affirmed, but if it is not confirmed by reasons, it can be weakened by
arguments from fallacies and finally denied. What we have said is known,
is therefore to be taken up afresh and established rationally.

\[2\] First: \_The external cannot compel the internal, but the internal
can compel the external.\_ Who can be forced to believe or love? One can
no more be compelled to believe than he can be compelled to think that
something is so when he thinks it is not so, or to love than to will
something that he does not will; belief attaches to thought, and love to
the will. The internal can be compelled, however, by what is external
not to speak improperly against the laws of a kingdom, the morals of
life or the sanctities of the church. The internal can be compelled to
this by threats and penalties and is compelled and should be. But this
is not the specifically human internal, but one which the human being
shares with beasts; they can also be compelled. The human internal
resides above this animal internal. Here the human internal which cannot
be coerced is meant.

\[3\] Second: \_The internal refuses to be coerced by the external and
turns away.\_ The reason is that the internal wills to be in freedom and
loves freedom. For, as was shown, freedom attaches to man's love and
life. When the internal feels it is being subjected to compulsion,
therefore, it withdraws as it were into itself, averts itself, and
regards the compulsion as its enemy. For the love which makes man's life
is irritated and causes him to think that he is then not himself and has
no life of his own. The internal of the human being is of this nature by
the law of the Lord's divine providence that he shall act from freedom
in accord with reason.

\[4\] Plainly, then, it does harm to compel men to divine worship by
threats and penalties. Some permit themselves to be forced to religion,
some do not. Many who do are adherents of Catholicism; but this is the
case with those in whom there is nothing internal in worship, but all is
external. Among those who do not allow themselves to be coerced are many
of the English nation, and as a result there is what is internal in
their worship and what is external is from the internal. Their interiors
in respect to religion appear in the light of the spiritual world like
bright clouds, but those of the former like dark clouds. The one and the
other appearance is to be seen in that world, and one who wishes may see
it when he enters that world on death. Furthermore, enforced worship
shuts one's evils in, which are hidden then like fire in wood under
ashes which keeps stirring and spreading until it bursts into flame. But
worship, not enforced but spontaneous, does not shut evils in; these are
therefore like a fire that flares up and goes out. Thence it is plain
that the internal refuses to be forced by the external and turns away.
The internal can compel the external because it is like a master and the
external like a servant.

\[5\] Third: \_External enjoyments entice assent and love from the
internal.\_ Enjoyments are of two kinds, of the understanding or of the
will. Enjoyments of the understanding are also enjoyments of wisdom, and
those of the will also enjoyments of love; for wisdom belongs to the
understanding and love to the will. Enjoyments of the body or of the
senses, which are external pleasures, act as one with the internal
enjoyments, which are enjoyments of the understanding and the will.
Therefore, just as the internal is so averse to compulsion by the
external as to turn away, it looks so kindly on enjoyment in the
external that it turns to it. Assent follows on the part of the
understanding, and love on the part of the will.

\[6\] In the spiritual world all children are introduced by the Lord
into angelic wisdom and through this into heavenly love by delightful
and charming means, first by pretty things in the home and the charms of
a garden; then by representations of spiritual things affecting the
interiors of their minds with pleasure; and finally by truths of wisdom
and goods of love. Thus they are steadily led by enjoyments in due
order, first by the enjoyments of a love of the understanding and of its
wisdom, and then by the enjoyments of the love of the will which is
their life's love, to which all else that has entered through enjoyment
is kept subordinate.

\[7\] This is done because the will and understanding must all be formed
by what is external before they are formed by what is internal, for they
are formed first by what enters by the physical senses, chiefly the
sight and the hearing; then when a first will and understanding have
been formed, the internal of thought regards them as the externals of
its thinking, and either joins itself to them or separates itself from
them, as they are or are not enjoyable to it.

\[8\] It should be well understood, however, that the internal of the
understanding does not unite itself to the internal of the will, but it
is the latter that unites itself to the former and causes reciprocal
union. This is done by the internal of the will, not at all by the
internal of the understanding. Hence it is that man cannot be reformed
by faith alone, but by the love of the will which makes a faith for
itself.

\[9\] Fourth: \_There is a forced internal and a free one.\_ A forced
internal is found in those who are in external worship only and in none
that is internal. Their internal consists of thinking and willing what
the external is coerced to. Such are persons who worship living or dead
men or idols, or who rest their faith on miracles. No internal is
possible with them which is not at the same time external. And yet a
forced internal is possible with persons in internal worship; it may be
forced by fear or compelled by love. That forced by fear is found in
those who worship for fear of the torment and fire of hell. This
internal is not the internal of thought of which we have treated,
however, but an external of thought called internal here because it
partakes of thought. The internal of thought of which we have treated
cannot be forced by any fear; it can be compelled by love and by fear of
failing to love. In the true sense fear of God is nothing else. To be
compelled by love and by the fear of failing in it is self-compulsion,
and self-compulsion, it will be seen in what follows, is not contrary to
freedom and rationality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="137.">137.</span></span>

It is plain then what forced worship and unforced worship are like.
Forced worship is corporeal, inanimate, obscure and sad--corporeal
because it is of the body and not of the mind; inanimate because it has
no life in it; obscure for lack of understanding in it; and sad because
it does not have the joy of heaven in it. But worship not forced and
real is spiritual, living, seeing and joyful--spiritual, because spirit
from the Lord is in it; living, because life from Him is in it; seeing
because wisdom from Him is in it; and joyful because heaven from Him is
in it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="138.">138.</span></span>

\(iv\) \_No one is reformed in states of no liberty or rationality.\_ We
showed above that only what a man does in freedom according to reason is
made his. This is because freedom belongs to the will and reason to the
understanding; acting in freedom in accord with reason a man acts from
the will by the understanding and what is done in the union of the two
is appropriated. Now, since the Lord wills that a man be reformed and
regenerated in order that eternal life or the life of heaven may be his,
and none can be reformed or regenerated unless good is appropriated to
his will and truth to his understanding as if they were his, and only
that can be appropriated which is done in freedom of the will and in
accord with the reason of the understanding, no one is reformed in
states of no freedom or rationality. There are many such states, but
they may be summarized as states of fear, misfortune, mental illness,
physical disease, ignorance, and intellectual blindness. Something will
be said of each.

<span class="margnote"><span id="139.">139.</span></span>

No one is reformed in a \_state of fear\_ because fear takes away
freedom and reason or liberty and rationality. Love opens the mind's
interiors but fear closes them, and when they are closed man thinks
little and only what comes to the lower mind or to the senses. All fears
that assail the lower mind have this effect.

\[2\] We showed above that man has an internal and an external of
thought. Fear can never invade the internal of thought; this is always
in freedom, being in a man's life-love. But it can invade the external
of thought. When it does, the internal of thought is closed and
thereupon man can no longer act in freedom in accord with his reason,
nor be reformed.

\[3\] The fear which invades the external of thought and closes the
internal is chiefly fear of losing standing or profit. Fear of civil
penalties or of outward ecclesiastical penalties does not close the
internal, for the laws respecting them pronounce penalties only on those
who speak and act contrary to the civil requirements of the kingdom and
the spiritual of the church, but not on those who think contrary to
them.

\[4\] Fear of infernal punishment invades the external of thought, to be
sure, but only for some moments, hours or days; it is soon restored to
its freedom by the internal of thought, which is man's spirit and
life-love and is called thought of the heart.

\[5\] Fear of losing one's standing or wealth, however, does invade
man's external of thought, and when it does, closes the internal of
thought above to influx from heaven and makes it impossible for man to
be reformed. This is because everyone's life-love from birth is love of
self and the world, and self-love is at one with the love of position,
and love of the world with the love of wealth. When a man has position
or wealth, therefore, for fear of losing them he strengthens the means
at hand--whether civil or churchly and in either case means to
power--which serve him for position and wealth. The man who does not yet
have standing or wealth but aspires to them, does the same, but for fear
he will lose the reputation they give.

\[6\] It was said that this fear seizes on the external of thought and
closes the internal above to heaven's inflowing. The internal is said to
be closed when it makes one completely with the external, as it is then
not in itself but in the external.

\[7\] But as the loves of self and the world are infernal loves and the
fountain-heads of all evils, it is plain what the internal of thought in
itself is like with men in whom those loves reign and are their life's
loves, namely, that it is full of lusts of evils of every kind.

\[8\] This men do not know who fear loss of place and opulence and are
strongly persuaded of their special religion, most particularly if this
promises that they may be worshiped as holy and also as governors of
hell; they can blaze, as it were, with zeal for the salvation of souls
and yet this is from infernal fire. As this fear especially takes away
rationality itself and liberty itself, which have a heavenly origin,
plainly it makes against the possibility that a man may be reformed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="140.">140.</span></span>

No one is reformed in a \_state of misfortune\_ if he thinks about God
and implores help only then, for it is a coerced state; wherefore, on
coming into a free state he returns to his former state when he thought
little if at all about God. It is different with those who feared God in
a state of freedom previously. For by "fearing God" is meant fearing to
offend Him, and by "offending Him" to sin, and this comes not from fear
but from love. Does not one who loves another fear to hurt him? And the
more he loves him, the more he fears hurting him? Lacking this fear,
love is insipid and superficial, of the mind only and not of the will.
By states of misfortune states of despair in danger are meant, in
battles, for example, duels, shipwreck, falls, fires, threatening or
unexpected loss of property, also of office or standing, and similar
mishaps. To think about God only then is not to think from God but from
self. For then the mind is as it were imprisoned in the body, so is not
in freedom nor possessed then of rationality, and without these
reformation is impossible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="141.">141.</span></span>

No one is reformed in \_a state of mental illness\_ because such illness
takes away rationality and thus the liberty of acting in accord with
reason. The whole mind is sick and not sane; the sane mind is rational,
but not a sick one. Such disorders are melancholy, a spurious or a false
conscience, fantasies of different kinds, mental grief over misfortune,
anxiety and anguish of the mind over a bodily defect. Sometimes these
are regarded as temptations, but they are not. Genuine temptations have
spiritual objects in view and in them the mind is wise, but these states
are concerned with natural objects and in them the mind is disordered.

<span class="margnote"><span id="142.">142.</span></span>

No one is reformed in \_a state of bodily sickness\_ because his reason
is not then in a state of freedom; the state of the mind depends on that
of the body. When the body is sick, the mind is also, if for no other
reason because it is withdrawn from the world. Withdrawn from the world
it thinks indeed about God but not from Him, for it is not possessed of
freedom of the reason. Man has this freedom in being midway between
heaven and the world, thus can think from heaven and from the world,
likewise from heaven about the world and from the world about heaven. So
when he is ill and thinks about death and the state of his soul after
death, he is not in the world but is withdrawn in spirit. In this state
by itself no one can be reformed, but he can be strengthened in it if he
was reforming before he fell ill.

\[2\] It is similar with those who renounce the world and all occupation
in it and give themselves only to thoughts about God, heaven and
salvation; on this further elsewhere. If those of whom we were speaking
have not been reformed before their illness, then if they die they
become such as they were before their illness. It is vain, therefore, to
suppose that one can repent or receive some faith in illness; for no
deed accompanies the repentance, and there is no charity in the faith;
each is oral only and not at all from the heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="143.">143.</span></span>

No one is reformed in \_a state of ignorance,\_ for all reformation is
by truths and a life according to them. Therefore those who do not know
truths cannot be reformed, but if they long for them with affection for
them, after they die they undergo reformation in the spiritual world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="144.">144.</span></span>

Nor can one be reformed in \_a state of blindness of the
understanding.\_ These also have no knowledge of truths or consequently
of life, for the understanding must teach truths and the will must do
them; when the will does what the understanding teaches, a man has life
in accord with truths. When the understanding is blind, however, the
will also is indifferent and acts in freedom according to one's reason
only to do the evil confirmed in the understanding, and the confirmation
is falsity. Besides ignorance, a religion which teaches a blind faith
also blinds the understanding; so does a false doctrine. For just as
truths open the understanding, falsities close it. They close it above
and open it below, and opened only below, the understanding cannot see
truths but only confirm what a man wills, falsity especially. The
understanding is also blinded by lusts of evil. As long as the will is
in these, it moves the understanding to confirm them, and so far as they
are confirmed, the will cannot be in affections of good, from these see
truths, and so be reformed.

\[2\] Take, for instance, one who is in the lust of adultery: his will,
which is in the enjoyment of his love, moves his understanding to
confirm it, saying, "What is adultery? Is there any evil in it? Does not
the like occur between husband and wife? Cannot offspring be born of it,
too? Cannot a woman receive more than one without harm? How does
anything spiritual enter into this?" So thinks the understanding which
is then the courtesan of the will. So stupid is it made by debauchery
with the will that it is unable to see that marital love is spiritual
and heavenly love itself, a reflection of the love between the Lord and
the church from which it is derived; is in itself sacred and chastity
itself, purity and innocence; causes men to be forms of love, since
partners can love each other from inmosts and so form themselves into
loves; nor can it see that adultery destroys this form and with it the
Lord's image; and what is abhorrent, that the adulterer mingles his life
with that of the husband in the wife, for a man's life is in the seed.

\[3\] Because this is profane, hell is called adultery, and heaven on
the other hand is called marriage. Furthermore, the love of adultery
communicates with the lowest hell, but true marital love with the inmost
heaven; the reproductive organs of both sexes also correspond to
societies of the inmost heaven. These things are adduced so that it may
be known how blinded the understanding is when the will is in the lust
of evil, and that no one can be reformed in a state of blindness of the
understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="145.">145.</span></span>

\(v\) \_Self-compulsion is not contrary to rationality and liberty.\_ We
have shown that man has an internal and an external of thought; that
they are distinguishable as prior and subsequent or higher and lower;
and that being so distinct they can act separately and also jointly.
They act separately when a man speaks and acts from the external of his
thought otherwise than he thinks and wills inwardly; they act jointly
when he speaks and acts as he thinks and wills. The latter is common
with the sincere, the former with the insincere.

\[2\] Inasmuch as the internal and the external of the mind are so
distinct, the internal can even fight with the external and by combat
drive it to compliance. Conflict arises when the man deems evils to be
sins and resolves to desist from them. When he desists, a door is opened
and the lusts of evil which have occupied the internal of thought are
cast out by the Lord and affections of good are implanted in their
place. This occurs in the internal of thought. But the enjoyments of
evil lust which occupy the external of thought cannot be cast out at the
same time; conflict arises therefore between the internal and the
external of thought. The internal wants to cast out those enjoyments
because they are enjoyments of evil and do not agree with the affections
of good in which the internal now is, and wants to introduce in their
place enjoyments of good which do agree. These are what are called goods
of charity. From the disagreement comes the conflict which, if it grows
severe, is called temptation.

\[3\] Now as man is man by virtue of the internal of his thought, for
this is his very spirit, obviously he compels himself when he compels
the external of his thought to comply or to receive the enjoyments of
his affections or the goods of charity. Plainly this is not contrary to
rationality and liberty but in accord with them; rationality starts the
combat and liberty follows it up; liberty itself resides with
rationality in the internal man and from that in the external.

\[4\] Accordingly, when the internal conquers, which it does when it has
reduced the external to compliance and obedience, man is given liberty
itself and rationality itself by the Lord, for he is delivered by the
Lord then from infernal freedom which in itself is enslavement, is
brought into heavenly freedom which is freedom in itself, and is given
association with angels. The Lord Himself teaches ( John 8:31-36) that
those who are in sins are enslaved and that He delivers those who
receive truth from Him through the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="146.">146.</span></span>

Let an example serve for illustration. A man who has taken pleasure in
defrauding and deceiving sees and inwardly acknowledges it to be sin and
resolves to desist from it; with this a battle begins of his internal
with the external. The internal man is in an affection for honesty, but
the external still in the enjoyment of defrauding. This enjoyment,
utterly opposed to enjoyment in honesty, does not give way unless forced
to do so and can be forced to do so only by combat with it. When the
fight is won, the external man comes into the enjoyment of a love of
honesty, which is charity. Then the pleasure of defrauding gradually
turns unpleasant to him. It is the same with all other sins, with
adultery and whoredom, revenge and hatred, blasphemy and lying. The most
difficult battle of all is with the love of ruling from self-love. A
person who subdues this love, easily subdues all other evil loves, for
this is their summit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="147.">147.</span></span>

Let it be told briefly how the Lord casts out lusts of evil occupying
the internal man from birth and in their place bestows affections of
good when a man on his part removes the evils as sins. It was shown
earlier that man possesses a natural, a spiritual and a celestial mind,
that he is only in the natural mind as long as he is in lusts of evil
and their enjoyments, and that during this time the spiritual mind is
closed. But as soon as a man on self-examination confesses evils to be
sins against God because they are contrary to divine laws and
accordingly resolves to desist from them, the Lord opens the spiritual
mind, enters the natural by affections of truth and good, enters the
reason, and by the reason puts into order what is disordered below in
the natural. It is this that strikes the man as a battle, and strikes
those who have indulged much in enjoyments of evil as temptation, for
when the order of its thinking is inverted the lower mind suffers pain.

Inasmuch as the battle is against what is in the man himself and what he
feels to be his, and no one can fight against himself except from a more
interior self and from freedom in it, it follows that the internal man
fights against the external and does so from freedom, and compels the
external to obey. This, then, is compelling oneself, and, clearly, it is
not contrary to liberty and rationality, but in accord with them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="148.">148.</span></span>

Everyone desires to be free, moreover, and to be rid of the unfree or
servitude. The boy under a master wishes to be his own master and thus
free; so every man-servant under his master or maid under her mistress.
Every girl wishes to leave the paternal home and marry, to do freely in
a home of her own; and every boy who desires to work, enter business, or
hold some position wishes to be released from his subordination to
others and to be at his own disposal. All of these who serve willingly
in order to be free compel themselves, and in doing so act from freedom
according to reason but from an inner freedom, by which outward freedom
is regarded as servant. We add this to confirm the fact that
self-compulsion is not contrary to rationality and liberty.

<span class="margnote"><span id="149.">149.</span></span>

One reason why man does not wish in like manner to come out of spiritual
servitude into spiritual freedom is that he does not know what either
is; he does not have the truths to teach this, and without them
spiritual servitude is believed to be freedom and spiritual freedom to
be servitude. A second reason is that the religion of Christendom has
closed the understanding, and "faith alone" has sealed it shut. Each has
built an iron wall around itself in the dogma that theological matters
transcend and cannot be approached by the reason, but are for the blind
and not the seeing. So truths that would teach what spiritual liberty is
have been hidden. A third reason is that few examine themselves and see
their sins, and one who does not see and quit them is in the freedom
that sins have, which is infernal freedom, in itself enslavement. To
view heavenly freedom, which is genuine freedom, from that freedom is
like trying to see daylight in pitch darkness or sunshine from under a
black cloud. So it happens that it is not known what heavenly freedom
is, or that the difference between it and infernal freedom is like the
difference between what is living and what is dead.

<span class="margnote"><span id="150.">150.</span></span>

\(vi\) The external man is to be reformed by the internal, and not the
other way about. By internal and external man the same is meant as by
external and internal of thought, of which frequently before. The
external must be reformed by the internal because the internal flows
into the external and not the reverse. The learned world knows that what
is spiritual flows into what is natural and not the reverse, for reason
dictates it; the church knows that the internal man must first be
cleansed and made new and the external by it then, because the Lord
teaches it. He does so in the words:

Woe to you . . . hypocrites, for you make the outside of the cup and
platter clean, but the inside is full of extortion and excess. Blind
Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup and platter that the
outside may also be made clean (Mt 23:25, 26).

We have shown in a number of places in the treatise \_Divine Love and
Wisdom\_ that reason dictates this. For what the Lord teaches He grants
man to see rationally. This a man does in two ways: in one, he sees in
himself that something is so upon hearing it; in the other, he grasps it
by reasons for it. Seeing in oneself takes place in the internal man,
and understanding through reasoning in the external man. Who does not
perceive it within himself when he hears that the internal man is to be
purified first and the external by it? But one who does not receive the
general idea of this by influx from heaven may go astray when he
consults the external of this thought; from it alone no one sees but
that outward works of charity and piety are saving apart from the
internal. It is so in other things, as that sight and hearing flow into
thought, and smell and taste into perception, that is, that the external
flows into the internal, when the contrary is true. The appearance that
what is seen and heard flows into the thought is a fallacy, for the
understanding does the seeing in the eye and the hearing in the ear, and
not the other way about. So it is in all else.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[111-1](dpr06.htm#fr_0.md) The Greek is simply "on a
woman" and does not have the word here rendered "of another." Though
Swedenborg quotes the verse several times in his works he seems not to
have checked as he usually did beyond the rendering of the Schmidius
Latin Bible which he used.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 151-200](dpr07.md)
