[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf02002) 
[Next](daf02004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE66/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 2*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To Constantine. Part III.

The answer of Trajan, to which the Christians of the succeeding age have
frequently appealed, discovers as much regard for justice and humanity
as could be reconciled with his mistaken notions of religious policy.
 <span id="fr_64"></span>[59](#fn_64) Instead of displaying the
implacable zeal of an inquisitor, anxious to discover the most minute
particles of heresy, and exulting in the number of his victims, the
emperor expresses much more solicitude to protect the security of the
innocent, than to prevent the escape of the guilty. He acknowledged the
difficulty of fixing any general plan; but he lays down two salutary
rules, which often afforded relief and support to the distressed
Christians. Though he directs the magistrates to punish such persons as
are legally convicted, he prohibits them, with a very humane
inconsistency, from making any inquiries concerning the supposed
criminals. Nor was the magistrate allowed to proceed on every kind of
information. Anonymous charges the emperor rejects, as too repugnant to
the equity of his government; and he strictly requires, for the
conviction of those to whom the guilt of Christianity is imputed, the
positive evidence of a fair and open accuser. It is likewise probable,
that the persons who assumed so invidiuous an office, were obliged to
declare the grounds of their suspicions, to specify (both in respect to
time and place) the secret assemblies, which their Christian adversary
had frequented, and to disclose a great number of circumstances, which
were concealed with the most vigilant jealousy from the eye of the
profane. If they succeeded in their prosecution, they were exposed to
the resentment of a considerable and active party, to the censure of the
more liberal portion of mankind, and to the ignominy which, in every age
and country, has attended the character of an informer. If, on the
contrary, they failed in their proofs, they incurred the severe and
perhaps capital penalty, which, according to a law published by the
emperor Hadrian, was inflicted on those who falsely attributed to their
fellow-citizens the crime of Christianity. The violence of personal or
superstitious animosity might sometimes prevail over the most natural
apprehensions of disgrace and danger but it cannot surely be imagined,
that accusations of so unpromising an appearance were either lightly or
frequently undertaken by the Pagan subjects of the Roman empire.  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[60](#fn_65)  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[\*\_0006](#fn_66)

The expedient which was employed to elude the prudence of the laws,
affords a sufficient proof how effectually they disappointed the
mischievous designs of private malice or superstitious zeal. In a large
and tumultuous assembly, the restraints of fear and shame, so forcible
on the minds of individuals, are deprived of the greatest part of their
influence. The pious Christian, as he was desirous to obtain, or to
escape, the glory of martyrdom, expected, either with impatience or with
terror, the stated returns of the public games and festivals. On those
occasions the inhabitants of the great cities of the empire were
collected in the circus or the theatre, where every circumstance of the
place, as well as of the ceremony, contributed to kindle their devotion,
and to extinguish their humanity. Whilst the numerous spectators,
crowned with garlands, perfumed with incense, purified with the blood of
victims, and surrounded with the altars and statues of their tutelar
deities, resigned themselves to the enjoyment of pleasures, which they
considered as an essential part of their religious worship, they
recollected, that the Christians alone abhorred the gods of mankind, and
by their absence and melancholy on these solemn festivals, seemed to
insult or to lament the public felicity. If the empire had been
afflicted by any recent calamity, by a plague, a famine, or an
unsuccessful war; if the Tyber had, or if the Nile had not, risen beyond
its banks; if the earth had shaken, or if the temperate order of the
seasons had been interrupted, the superstitious Pagans were convinced
that the crimes and the impiety of the Christians, who were spared by
the excessive lenity of the government, had at length provoked the
divine justice. It was not among a licentious and exasperated populace,
that the forms of legal proceedings could be observed; it was not in an
amphitheatre, stained with the blood of wild beasts and gladiators, that
the voice of compassion could be heard. The impatient clamors of the
multitude denounced the Christians as the enemies of gods and men,
doomed them to the severest tortures, and venturing to accuse by name
some of the most distinguished of the new sectaries, required with
irresistible vehemence that they should be instantly apprehended and
cast to the lions.  <span id="fr_67"></span>[61](#fn_67) The provincial
governors and magistrates who presided in the public spectacles were
usually inclined to gratify the inclinations, and to appease the rage,
of the people, by the sacrifice of a few obnoxious victims. But the
wisdom of the emperors protected the church from the danger of these
tumultuous clamors and irregular accusations, which they justly censured
as repugnant both to the firmness and to the equity of their
administration. The edicts of Hadrian and of Antoninus Pius expressly
declared, that the voice of the multitude should never be admitted as
legal evidence to convict or to punish those unfortunate persons who had
embraced the enthusiasm of the Christians.  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[62](#fn_68)

III\. Punishment was not the inevitable consequence of conviction, and
the Christians, whose guilt was the most clearly proved by the testimony
of witnesses, or even by their voluntary confession, still retained in
their own power the alternative of life or death. It was not so much the
past offence, as the actual resistance, which excited the indignation of
the magistrate. He was persuaded that he offered them an easy pardon,
since, if they consented to cast a few grains of incense upon the altar,
they were dismissed from the tribunal in safety and with applause. It
was esteemed the duty of a humane judge to endeavor to reclaim, rather
than to punish, those deluded enthusiasts. Varying his tone according to
the age, the sex, or the situation of the prisoners, he frequently
condescended to set before their eyes every circumstance which could
render life more pleasing, or death more terrible; and to solicit, nay,
to entreat, them, that they would show some compassion to themselves, to
their families, and to their friends.  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[63](#fn_69) If threats and persuasions proved
ineffectual, he had often recourse to violence; the scourge and the rack
were called in to supply the deficiency of argument, and every art of
cruelty was employed to subdue such inflexible, and, as it appeared to
the Pagans, such criminal, obstinacy. The ancient apologists of
Christianity have censured, with equal truth and severity, the irregular
conduct of their persecutors who, contrary to every principle of
judicial proceeding, admitted the use of torture, in order to obtain,
not a confession, but a denial, of the crime which was the object of
their inquiry.  <span id="fr_70"></span>[64](#fn_70) The monks of
succeeding ages, who, in their peaceful solitudes, entertained
themselves with diversifying the deaths and sufferings of the primitive
martyrs, have frequently invented torments of a much more refined and
ingenious nature. In particular, it has pleased them to suppose, that
the zeal of the Roman magistrates, disdaining every consideration of
moral virtue or public decency, endeavored to seduce those whom they
were unable to vanquish, and that by their orders the most brutal
violence was offered to those whom they found it impossible to seduce.
It is related, that females, who were prepared to despise death, were
sometimes condemned to a more severe trial,  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[!\_0007](#fn_71) and called upon to determine whether
they set a higher value on their religion or on their chastity. The
youths to whose licentious embraces they were abandoned, received a
solemn exhortation from the judge, to exert their most strenuous efforts
to maintain the honor of Venus against the impious virgin who refused to
burn incense on her altars. Their violence, however, was commonly
disappointed, and the seasonable interposition of some miraculous power
preserved the chaste spouses of Christ from the dishonor even of an
involuntary defeat. We should not indeed neglect to remark, that the
more ancient as well as authentic memorials of the church are seldom
polluted with these extravagant and indecent fictions.  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[65](#fn_72)

The total disregard of truth and probability in the representation of
these primitive martyrdoms was occasioned by a very natural mistake. The
ecclesiastical writers of the fourth or fifth centuries ascribed to the
magistrates of Rome the same degree of implacable and unrelenting zeal
which filled their own breasts against the heretics or the idolaters of
their own times. It is not improbable that some of those persons who
were raised to the dignities of the empire, might have imbibed the
prejudices of the populace, and that the cruel disposition of others
might occasionally be stimulated by motives of avarice or of personal
resentment.  <span id="fr_73"></span>[66](#fn_73) But it is certain, and
we may appeal to the grateful confessions of the first Christians, that
the greatest part of those magistrates who exercised in the provinces
the authority of the emperor, or of the senate, and to whose hands alone
the jurisdiction of life and death was intrusted, behaved like men of
polished manners and liberal education, who respected the rules of
justice, and who were conversant with the precepts of philosophy. They
frequently declined the odious task of persecution, dismissed the charge
with contempt, or suggested to the accused Christian some legal evasion,
by which he might elude the severity of the laws.  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[67](#fn_74) Whenever they were invested with a
discretionary power,  <span id="fr_75"></span>[68](#fn_75) they used it
much less for the oppression, than for the relief and benefit of the
afflicted church. They were far from condemning all the Christians who
were accused before their tribunal, and very far from punishing with
death all those who were convicted of an obstinate adherence to the new
superstition. Contenting themselves, for the most part, with the milder
chastisements of imprisonment, exile, or slavery in the mines,  <span
id="fr_76"></span>[69](#fn_76) they left the unhappy victims of their
justice some reason to hope, that a prosperous event, the accession, the
marriage, or the triumph of an emperor, might speedily restore them, by
a general pardon, to their former state. The martyrs, devoted to
immediate execution by the Roman magistrates, appear to have been
selected from the most opposite extremes. They were either bishops and
presbyters, the persons the most distinguished among the Christians by
their rank and influence, and whose example might strike terror into the
whole sect;  <span id="fr_77"></span>[70](#fn_77) or else they were the
meanest and most abject among them, particularly those of the servile
condition, whose lives were esteemed of little value, and whose
sufferings were viewed by the ancients with too careless an
indifference.  <span id="fr_78"></span>[71](#fn_78) The learned Origen,
who, from his experience as well as reading, was intimately acquainted
with the history of the Christians, declares, in the most express terms,
that the number of martyrs was very inconsiderable.  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[72](#fn_79) His authority would alone be sufficient
to annihilate that formidable army of martyrs, whose relics, drawn for
the most part from the catacombs of Rome, have replenished so many
churches,  <span id="fr_80"></span>[73](#fn_80) and whose marvellous
achievements have been the subject of so many volumes of Holy Romance.
 <span id="fr_81"></span>[74](#fn_81) But the general assertion of
Origen may be explained and confirmed by the particular testimony of his
friend Dionysius, who, in the immense city of Alexandria, and under the
rigorous persecution of Decius, reckons only ten men and seven women who
suffered for the profession of the Christian name.  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[75](#fn_82)

During the same period of persecution, the zealous, the eloquent, the
ambitious Cyprian governed the church, not only of Carthage, but even of
Africa. He possessed every quality which could engage the reverence of
the faithful, or provoke the suspicions and resentment of the Pagan
magistrates. His character as well as his station seemed to mark out
that holy prelate as the most distinguished object of envy and danger.
 <span id="fr_83"></span>[76](#fn_83) The experience, however, of the
life of Cyprian, is sufficient to prove that our fancy has exaggerated
the perilous situation of a Christian bishop; and the dangers to which
he was exposed were less imminent than those which temporal ambition is
always prepared to encounter in the pursuit of honors. Four Roman
emperors, with their families, their favorites, and their adherents,
perished by the sword in the space of ten years, during which the bishop
of Carthage guided by his authority and eloquence the councils of the
African church. It was only in the third year of his administration,
that he had reason, during a few months, to apprehend the severe edicts
of Decius, the vigilance of the magistrate and the clamors of the
multitude, who loudly demanded, that Cyprian, the leader of the
Christians, should be thrown to the lions. Prudence suggested the
necessity of a temporary retreat, and the voice of prudence was obeyed.
He withdrew himself into an obscure solitude, from whence he could
maintain a constant correspondence with the clergy and people of
Carthage; and, concealing himself till the tempest was past, he
preserved his life, without relinquishing either his power or his
reputation. His extreme caution did not, however, escape the censure of
the more rigid Christians, who lamented, or the reproaches of his
personal enemies, who insulted, a conduct which they considered as a
pusillanimous and criminal desertion of the most sacred duty.  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[77](#fn_84) The propriety of reserving himself for
the future exigencies of the church, the example of several holy
bishops,  <span id="fr_85"></span>[78](#fn_85) and the divine
admonitions, which, as he declares himself, he frequently received in
visions and ecstacies, were the reasons alleged in his justification.
 <span id="fr_86"></span>[79](#fn_86) But his best apology may be found
in the cheerful resolution, with which, about eight years afterwards, he
suffered death in the cause of religion. The authentic history of his
martyrdom has been recorded with unusual candor and impartiality. A
short abstract, therefore, of its most important circumstances, will
convey the clearest information of the spirit, and of the forms, of the
Roman persecutions.  <span id="fr_87"></span>[80](#fn_87)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[59](daf02003.htm#fr_64) Plin. Epist. x. 98.
Tertullian (Apolog. c. 5) considers this rescript as a relaxation of the
ancient penal laws, "quas Trajanus exparte frustratus est: " and yet
Tertullian, in another part of his Apology, exposes the inconsistency of
prohibiting inquiries, and enjoining punishments.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[60](daf02003.htm#fr_65) Eusebius (Hist.
Ecclesiast. l. iv. c. 9) has preserved the edict of Hadrian. He has
likewise (c. 13) given us one still more favorable, under the name of
Antoninus; the authenticity of which is not so universally allowed. The
second Apology of Justin contains some curious particulars relative to
the accusations of Christians.

Note: Professor Hegelmayer has proved the authenticity of the edict of
Antoninus, in his Comm. Hist. Theol. in Edict. Imp. Antonini. Tubing.
1777, in 4to. - G.

Neander doubts its authenticity, (vol. i. p. 152.) In my opinion, the
internal evidence is decisive against it. - M

<span id="fn_66"></span>[\*\_0006](daf02003.htm#fr_66) The enactment of
this law affords strong presumption, that accusations of the "crime of
Christianity," were by no means so uncommon, nor received with so much
mistrust and caution by the ruling authorities, as Gibbon would
insinuate. - M.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[61](daf02003.htm#fr_67) See Tertullian,
(Apolog. c. 40.) The acts of the martyrdom of Polycarp exhibit a lively
picture of these tumults, which were usually fomented by the malice of
the Jews.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[62](daf02003.htm#fr_68) These regulations are
inserted in the above mentioned document of Hadrian and Pius. See the
apology of Melito, (apud Euseb. l iv 26)

<span id="fn_69"></span>[63](daf02003.htm#fr_69) See the rescript of
Trajan, and the conduct of Pliny. The most authentic acts of the martyrs
abound in these exhortations. Note: Pliny's test was the worship of the
gods, offerings to the statue of the emperor, and blaspheming Christ -
praeterea maledicerent Christo. - M.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[64](daf02003.htm#fr_70) In particular, see
Tertullian, (Apolog. c. 2, 3,) and Lactantius, (Institut. Divin. v. 9.)
Their reasonings are almost the same; but we may discover, that one of
these apologists had been a lawyer, and the other a rhetorician.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[!\_0007](daf02003.htm#fr_71) The more ancient
as well as authentic memorials of the church, relate many examples of
the fact, (of these severe trials,) which there is nothing to
contradict. Tertullian, among others, says, Nam proxime ad lenonem
damnando Christianam, potius quam ad leonem, confessi estis labem
pudicitiae apud nos atrociorem omni poena et omni morte reputari, Apol.
cap. ult. Eusebius likewise says, "Other virgins, dragged to brothels,
have lost their life rather than defile their virtue." Euseb. Hist. Ecc.
viii. 14. - G. The miraculous interpositions were the offspring of the
coarse imaginations of the monks. - M.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[65](daf02003.htm#fr_72) See two instances of
this kind of torture in the Acta Sincere Martyrum, published by Ruinart,
p. 160, 399. Jerome, in his Legend of Paul the Hermit, tells a strange
story of a young man, who was chained naked on a bed of flowers, and
assaulted by a beautiful and wanton courtesan. He quelled the rising
temptation by biting off his tongue.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[66](daf02003.htm#fr_73) The conversion of his
wife provoked Claudius Herminianus, governor of Cappadocia, to treat the
Christians with uncommon severity. Tertullian ad Scapulam, c. 3.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[67](daf02003.htm#fr_74) Tertullian, in his
epistle to the governor of Africa, mentions several remarkable instances
of lenity and forbearance, which had happened within his knowledge.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[68](daf02003.htm#fr_75) Neque enim in universum
aliquid quod quasi certam formam habeat, constitui potest; an expression
of Trajan, which gave a very great latitude to the governors of
provinces.

Note: Gibbon altogether forgets that Trajan fully approved of the course
pursued by Pliny. That course was, to order all who persevered in their
faith to be led to execution: perseverantes duci jussi. - M.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[69](daf02003.htm#fr_76) In Metalla damnamur, in
insulas relegamur. Tertullian, Apolog. c. 12. The mines of Numidia
contained nine bishops, with a proportionable number of their clergy and
people, to whom Cyprian addressed a pious epistle of praise and comfort.
See Cyprian. Epistol. 76, 77.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[70](daf02003.htm#fr_77) Though we cannot
receive with entire confidence either the epistles, or the acts, of
Ignatius, (they may be found in the 2d volume of the Apostolic Fathers,)
yet we may quote that bishop of Antioch as one of these exemplary
martyrs. He was sent in chains to Rome as a public spectacle, and when
he arrived at Troas, he received the pleasing intelligence, that the
persecution of Antioch was already at an end.

Note: The acts of Ignatius are generally received as authentic, as are
seven of his letters. Eusebius and St. Jerome mention them: there are
two editions; in one, the letters are longer, and many passages appear
to have been interpolated; the other edition is that which contains the
real letters of St. Ignatius; such at least is the opinion of the wisest
and most enlightened critics. (See Lardner. Cred. of Gospel Hist.) Less,
uber dis Religion, v. i. p. 529. Usser. Diss. de Ign. Epist. Pearson,
Vindic, Ignatianae. It should be remarked, that it was under the reign
of Trajan that the bishop Ignatius was carried from Antioch to Rome, to
be exposed to the lions in the amphitheatre, the year of J. C. 107,
according to some; of 116, according to others. - G.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[71](daf02003.htm#fr_78) Among the martyrs of
Lyons, (Euseb. l. v. c. 1,) the slave Blandina was distinguished by more
exquisite tortures. Of the five martyrs so much celebrated in the acts
of Felicitas and Perpetua, two were of a servile, and two others of a
very mean, condition.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[72](daf02003.htm#fr_79) Origen. advers. Celsum,
l. iii. p. 116. His words deserve to be transcribed.

Note: The words that follow should be quoted. "God not permitting that
all his class of men should be exterminated: " which appears to indicate
that Origen thought the number put to death inconsiderable only when
compared to the numbers who had survived. Besides this, he is speaking
of the state of the religion under Caracalla, Elagabalus, Alexander
Severus, and Philip, who had not persecuted the Christians. It was
during the reign of the latter that Origen wrote his books against
Celsus. - G.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[73](daf02003.htm#fr_80) If we recollect that
all the Plebeians of Rome were not Christians, and that all the
Christians were not saints and martyrs, we may judge with how much
safety religious honors can be ascribed to bones or urns,
indiscriminately taken from the public burial-place. After ten centuries
of a very free and open trade, some suspicions have arisen among the
more learned Catholics. They now require as a proof of sanctity and
martyrdom, the letters B.M., a vial full of red liquor supposed to be
blood, or the figure of a palm-tree. But the two former signs are of
little weight, and with regard to the last, it is observed by the
critics, 1. That the figure, as it is called, of a palm, is perhaps a
cypress, and perhaps only a stop, the flourish of a comma used in the
monumental inscriptions. 2. That the palm was the symbol of victory
among the Pagans. 3. That among the Christians it served as the emblem,
not only of martyrdom, but in general of a joyful resurrection. See the
epistle of P. Mabillon, on the worship of unknown saints, and Muratori
sopra le Antichita Italiane, Dissertat. lviii.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[74](daf02003.htm#fr_81) As a specimen of these
legends, we may be satisfied with 10,000 Christian soldiers crucified in
one day, either by Trajan or Hadrian on Mount Ararat. See Baronius ad
Martyrologium Romanum; Tille mont, Mem. Ecclesiast. tom. ii. part ii. p.
438; and Geddes's Miscellanies, vol. ii. p. 203. The abbreviation of
Mil., which may signify either soldiers or thousands, is said to have
occasioned some extraordinary mistakes.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[75](daf02003.htm#fr_82) Dionysius ap. Euseb l.
vi. c. 41 One of the seventeen was likewise accused of robbery.

Note: Gibbon ought to have said, was falsely accused of robbery, for so
it is in the Greek text. This Christian, named Nemesion, falsely accused
of robbery before the centurion, was acquitted of a crime altogether
foreign to his character, but he was led before the governor as guilty
of being a Christian, and the governor inflicted upon him a double
torture. (Euseb. loc. cit.) It must be added, that Saint Dionysius only
makes particular mention of the principal martyrs, \[this is very
doubtful. - M.\] and that he says, in general, that the fury of the
Pagans against the Christians gave to Alexandria the appearance of a
city taken by storm. \[This refers to plunder and ill usage, not to
actual slaughter. - M.\] Finally it should be observed that Origen wrote
before the persecution of the emperor Decius. - G.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[76](daf02003.htm#fr_83) The letters of Cyprian
exhibit a very curious and original picture both of the man and of the
times. See likewise the two lives of Cyprian, composed with equal
accuracy, though with very different views; the one by Le Clerc
(Bibliotheque Universelle, tom. xii. p. 208-378,) the other by
Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. iv part i. p. 76-459.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[77](daf02003.htm#fr_84) See the polite but
severe epistle of the clergy of Rome to the bishop of Carthage.
(Cyprian. Epist. 8, 9.) Pontius labors with the greatest care and
diligence to justify his master against the general censure.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[78](daf02003.htm#fr_85) In particular those of
Dionysius of Alexandria, and Gregory Thaumaturgus, of Neo-Caesarea. See
Euseb. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. vi. c. 40; and Memoires de Tillemont, tom.
iv. part ii. p. 685.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[79](daf02003.htm#fr_86) See Cyprian. Epist. 16,
and his life by Pontius.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[80](daf02003.htm#fr_87) We have an original
life of Cyprian by the deacon Pontius, the companion of his exile, and
the spectator of his death; and we likewise possess the ancient
proconsular acts of his martyrdom. These two relations are consistent
with each other, and with probability; and what is somewhat remarkable,
they are both unsullied by any miraculous circumstances.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
Constantine. Part IV.](daf02004)
