[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf02001) 
[Next](daf02003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE66/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 2*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To Constantine. Part II.

History, which undertakes to record the transactions of the past, for
the instruction of future ages, would ill deserve that honorable office,
if she condescended to plead the cause of tyrants, or to justify the
maxims of persecution. It must, however, be acknowledged, that the
conduct of the emperors who appeared the least favorable to the
primitive church, is by no means so criminal as that of modern
sovereigns, who have employed the arm of violence and terror against the
religious opinions of any part of their subjects. From their
reflections, or even from their own feelings, a Charles V. or a Lewis
XIV. might have acquired a just knowledge of the rights of conscience,
of the obligation of faith, and of the innocence of error. But the
princes and magistrates of ancient Rome were strangers to those
principles which inspired and authorized the inflexible obstinacy of the
Christians in the cause of truth, nor could they themselves discover in
their own breasts any motive which would have prompted them to refuse a
legal, and as it were a natural, submission to the sacred institutions
of their country. The same reason which contributes to alleviate the
guilt, must have tended to abate the vigor, of their persecutions. As
they were actuated, not by the furious zeal of bigots, but by the
temperate policy of legislators, contempt must often have relaxed, and
humanity must frequently have suspended, the execution of those laws
which they enacted against the humble and obscure followers of Christ.
From the general view of their character and motives we might naturally
conclude: I. That a considerable time elapsed before they considered the
new sectaries as an object deserving of the attention of government. II.
That in the conviction of any of their subjects who were accused of so
very singular a crime, they proceeded with caution and reluctance. III.
That they were moderate in the use of punishments; and, IV. That the
afflicted church enjoyed many intervals of peace and tranquility.
Notwithstanding the careless indifference which the most copious and the
most minute of the Pagan writers have shown to the affairs of the
Christians,  <span id="fr_25"></span>[24](#fn_25) it may still be in our
power to confirm each of these probable suppositions, by the evidence of
authentic facts.

1\. By the wise dispensation of Providence, a mysterious veil was cast
over the infancy of the church, which, till the faith of the Christians
was matured, and their numbers were multiplied, served to protect them
not only from the malice but even from the knowledge of the Pagan world.
The slow and gradual abolition of the Mosaic ceremonies afforded a safe
and innocent disguise to the more early proselytes of the gospel. As
they were, for the greater part, of the race of Abraham, they were
distinguished by the peculiar mark of circumcision, offered up their
devotions in the Temple of Jerusalem till its final destruction, and
received both the Law and the Prophets as the genuine inspirations of
the Deity. The Gentile converts, who by a spiritual adoption had been
associated to the hope of Israel, were likewise confounded under the
garb and appearance of Jews,  <span id="fr_26"></span>[25](#fn_26) and
as the Polytheists paid less regard to articles of faith than to the
external worship, the new sect, which carefully concealed, or faintly
announced, its future greatness and ambition, was permitted to shelter
itself under the general toleration which was granted to an ancient and
celebrated people in the Roman empire. It was not long, perhaps, before
the Jews themselves, animated with a fiercer zeal and a more jealous
faith, perceived the gradual separation of their Nazarene brethren from
the doctrine of the synagogue; and they would gladly have extinguished
the dangerous heresy in the blood of its adherents. But the decrees of
Heaven had already disarmed their malice; and though they might
sometimes exert the licentious privilege of sedition, they no longer
possessed the administration of criminal justice; nor did they find it
easy to infuse into the calm breast of a Roman magistrate the rancor of
their own zeal and prejudice. The provincial governors declared
themselves ready to listen to any accusation that might affect the
public safety; but as soon as they were informed that it was a question
not of facts but of words, a dispute relating only to the interpretation
of the Jewish laws and prophecies, they deemed it unworthy of the
majesty of Rome seriously to discuss the obscure differences which might
arise among a barbarous and superstitious people. The innocence of the
first Christians was protected by ignorance and contempt; and the
tribunal of the Pagan magistrate often proved their most assured refuge
against the fury of the synagogue.  <span id="fr_27"></span>[26](#fn_27)
If indeed we were disposed to adopt the traditions of a too credulous
antiquity, we might relate the distant peregrinations, the wonderful
achievements, and the various deaths of the twelve apostles: but a more
accurate inquiry will induce us to doubt, whether any of those persons
who had been witnesses to the miracles of Christ were permitted, beyond
the limits of Palestine, to seal with their blood the truth of their
testimony.  <span id="fr_28"></span>[27](#fn_28) From the ordinary term
of human life, it may very naturally be presumed that most of them were
deceased before the discontent of the Jews broke out into that furious
war, which was terminated only by the ruin of Jerusalem. During a long
period, from the death of Christ to that memorable rebellion, we cannot
discover any traces of Roman intolerance, unless they are to be found in
the sudden, the transient, but the cruel persecution, which was
exercised by Nero against the Christians of the capital, thirty-five
years after the former, and only two years before the latter, of those
great events. The character of the philosophic historian, to whom we are
principally indebted for the knowledge of this singular transaction,
would alone be sufficient to recommend it to our most attentive
consideration.

In the tenth year of the reign of Nero, the capital of the empire was
afflicted by a fire which raged beyond the memory or example of former
ages.  <span id="fr_29"></span>[28](#fn_29) The monuments of Grecian art
and of Roman virtue, the trophies of the Punic and Gallic wars, the most
holy temples, and the most splendid palaces, were involved in one common
destruction. Of the fourteen regions or quarters into which Rome was
divided, four only subsisted entire, three were levelled with the
ground, and the remaining seven, which had experienced the fury of the
flames, displayed a melancholy prospect of ruin and desolation. The
vigilance of government appears not to have neglected any of the
precautions which might alleviate the sense of so dreadful a calamity.
The Imperial gardens were thrown open to the distressed multitude,
temporary buildings were erected for their accommodation, and a
plentiful supply of corn and provisions was distributed at a very
moderate price.  <span id="fr_30"></span>[29](#fn_30) The most generous
policy seemed to have dictated the edicts which regulated the
disposition of the streets and the construction of private houses; and
as it usually happens, in an age of prosperity, the conflagration of
Rome, in the course of a few years, produced a new city, more regular
and more beautiful than the former. But all the prudence and humanity
affected by Nero on this occasion were insufficient to preserve him from
the popular suspicion. Every crime might be imputed to the assassin of
his wife and mother; nor could the prince who prostituted his person and
dignity on the theatre be deemed incapable of the most extravagant
folly. The voice of rumor accused the emperor as the incendiary of his
own capital; and as the most incredible stories are the best adapted to
the genius of an enraged people, it was gravely reported, and firmly
believed, that Nero, enjoying the calamity which he had occasioned,
amused himself with singing to his lyre the destruction of ancient Troy.
 <span id="fr_31"></span>[30](#fn_31) To divert a suspicion, which the
power of despotism was unable to suppress, the emperor resolved to
substitute in his own place some fictitious criminals. "With this view,"
continues Tacitus, "he inflicted the most exquisite tortures on those
men, who, under the vulgar appellation of Christians, were already
branded with deserved infamy. They derived their name and origin from
Christ, who in the reign of Tiberius had suffered death by the sentence
of the procurator Pontius Pilate.  <span id="fr_32"></span>[31](#fn_32)
For a while this dire superstition was checked; but it again burst
forth;  <span id="fr_33"></span>[\*\_0003](#fn_33) and not only spread
itself over Judaea, the first seat of this mischievous sect, but was
even introduced into Rome, the common asylum which receives and protects
whatever is impure, whatever is atrocious. The confessions of those who
were seized discovered a great multitude of their accomplices, and they
were all convicted, not so much for the crime of setting fire to the
city, as for their hatred of human kind.  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[32](#fn_34) They died in torments, and their torments
were imbittered by insult and derision. Some were nailed on crosses;
others sewn up in the skins of wild beasts, and exposed to the fury of
dogs; others again, smeared over with combustible materials, were used
as torches to illuminate the darkness of the night. The gardens of Nero
were destined for the melancholy spectacle, which was accompanied with a
horse-race and honored with the presence of the emperor, who mingled
with the populace in the dress and attitude of a charioteer. The guilt
of the Christians deserved indeed the most exemplary punishment, but the
public abhorrence was changed into commiseration, from the opinion that
those unhappy wretches were sacrificed, not so much to the public
welfare, as to the cruelty of a jealous tyrant."  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[33](#fn_35) Those who survey with a curious eye the
revolutions of mankind, may observe, that the gardens and circus of Nero
on the Vatican, which were polluted with the blood of the first
Christians, have been rendered still more famous by the triumph and by
the abuse of the persecuted religion. On the same spot,  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[34](#fn_36) a temple, which far surpasses the ancient
glories of the Capitol, has been since erected by the Christian
Pontiffs, who, deriving their claim of universal dominion from an humble
fisherman of Galilee, have succeeded to the throne of the Caesars, given
laws to the barbarian conquerors of Rome, and extended their spiritual
jurisdiction from the coast of the Baltic to the shores of the Pacific
Ocean.

But it would be improper to dismiss this account of Nero's persecution,
till we have made some observations that may serve to remove the
difficulties with which it is perplexed, and to throw some light on the
subsequent history of the church.

1\. The most sceptical criticism is obliged to respect the truth of this
extraordinary fact, and the integrity of this celebrated passage of
Tacitus. The former is confirmed by the diligent and accurate Suetonius,
who mentions the punishment which Nero inflicted on the Christians, a
sect of men who had embraced a new and criminal superstition.  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[35](#fn_37) The latter may be proved by the consent
of the most ancient manuscripts; by the inimitable character of the
style of Tacitus by his reputation, which guarded his text from the
interpolations of pious fraud; and by the purport of his narration,
which accused the first Christians of the most atrocious crimes, without
insinuating that they possessed any miraculous or even magical powers
above the rest of mankind.  <span id="fr_38"></span>[36](#fn_38) 2.
Notwithstanding it is probable that Tacitus was born some years before
the fire of Rome,  <span id="fr_39"></span>[37](#fn_39) he could derive
only from reading and conversation the knowledge of an event which
happened during his infancy. Before he gave himself to the public, he
calmly waited till his genius had attained its full maturity, and he was
more than forty years of age, when a grateful regard for the memory of
the virtuous Agricola extorted from him the most early of those
historical compositions which will delight and instruct the most distant
posterity. After making a trial of his strength in the life of Agricola
and the description of Germany, he conceived, and at length executed, a
more arduous work; the history of Rome, in thirty books, from the fall
of Nero to the accession of Nerva. The administration of Nerva
introduced an age of justice and propriety, which Tacitus had destined
for the occupation of his old age;  <span id="fr_40"></span>[38](#fn_40)
but when he took a nearer view of his subject, judging, perhaps, that it
was a more honorable or a less invidious office to record the vices of
past tyrants, than to celebrate the virtues of a reigning monarch, he
chose rather to relate, under the form of annals, the actions of the
four immediate successors of Augustus. To collect, to dispose, and to
adorn a series of fourscore years, in an immortal work, every sentence
of which is pregnant with the deepest observations and the most lively
images, was an undertaking sufficient to exercise the genius of Tacitus
himself during the greatest part of his life. In the last years of the
reign of Trajan, whilst the victorious monarch extended the power of
Rome beyond its ancient limits, the historian was describing, in the
second and fourth books of his annals, the tyranny of Tiberius;  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[39](#fn_41) and the emperor Hadrian must have
succeeded to the throne, before Tacitus, in the regular prosecution of
his work, could relate the fire of the capital, and the cruelty of Nero
towards the unfortunate Christians. At the distance of sixty years, it
was the duty of the annalist to adopt the narratives of contemporaries;
but it was natural for the philosopher to indulge himself in the
description of the origin, the progress, and the character of the new
sect, not so much according to the knowledge or prejudices of the age of
Nero, as according to those of the time of Hadrian. 3 Tacitus very
frequently trusts to the curiosity or reflection of his readers to
supply those intermediate circumstances and ideas, which, in his extreme
conciseness, he has thought proper to suppress. We may therefore presume
to imagine some probable cause which could direct the cruelty of Nero
against the Christians of Rome, whose obscurity, as well as innocence,
should have shielded them from his indignation, and even from his
notice. The Jews, who were numerous in the capital, and oppressed in
their own country, were a much fitter object for the suspicions of the
emperor and of the people: nor did it seem unlikely that a vanquished
nation, who already discovered their abhorrence of the Roman yoke, might
have recourse to the most atrocious means of gratifying their implacable
revenge. But the Jews possessed very powerful advocates in the palace,
and even in the heart of the tyrant; his wife and mistress, the
beautiful Poppaea, and a favorite player of the race of Abraham, who had
already employed their intercession in behalf of the obnoxious people.
 <span id="fr_42"></span>[40](#fn_42) In their room it was necessary to
offer some other victims, and it might easily be suggested that,
although the genuine followers of Moses were innocent of the fire of
Rome, there had arisen among them a new and pernicious sect of
Galilaeans, which was capable of the most horrid crimes. Under the
appellation of Galilaeans, two distinctions of men were confounded, the
most opposite to each other in their manners and principles; the
disciples who had embraced the faith of Jesus of Nazareth,  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[41](#fn_43) and the zealots who had followed the
standard of Judas the Gaulonite.  <span id="fr_44"></span>[42](#fn_44)
The former were the friends, the latter were the enemies, of human kind;
and the only resemblance between them consisted in the same inflexible
constancy, which, in the defence of their cause, rendered them
insensible of death and tortures. The followers of Judas, who impelled
their countrymen into rebellion, were soon buried under the ruins of
Jerusalem; whilst those of Jesus, known by the more celebrated name of
Christians, diffused themselves over the Roman empire. How natural was
it for Tacitus, in the time of Hadrian, to appropriate to the Christians
the guilt and the sufferings,  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[\*\_0004](#fn_45) which he might, with far greater
truth and justice, have attributed to a sect whose odious memory was
almost extinguished! 4. Whatever opinion may be entertained of this
conjecture, (for it is no more than a conjecture,) it is evident that
the effect, as well as the cause, of Nero's persecution, was confined to
the walls of Rome,  <span id="fr_46"></span>[43](#fn_46)  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[!\_0004](#fn_47) that the religious tenets of the
Galilaeans or Christians, were never made a subject of punishment, or
even of inquiry; and that, as the idea of their sufferings was for a
long time connected with the idea of cruelty and injustice, the
moderation of succeeding princes inclined them to spare a sect,
oppressed by a tyrant, whose rage had been usually directed against
virtue and innocence.

It is somewhat remarkable that the flames of war consumed, almost at the
same time, the temple of Jerusalem and the Capitol of Rome;  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[44](#fn_48) and it appears no less singular, that the
tribute which devotion had destined to the former, should have been
converted by the power of an assaulting victor to restore and adorn the
splendor of the latter.  <span id="fr_49"></span>[45](#fn_49) The
emperors levied a general capitation tax on the Jewish people; and
although the sum assessed on the head of each individual was
inconsiderable, the use for which it was designed, and the severity with
which it was exacted, were considered as an intolerable grievance.
 <span id="fr_50"></span>[46](#fn_50) Since the officers of the revenue
extended their unjust claim to many persons who were strangers to the
blood or religion of the Jews, it was impossible that the Christians,
who had so often sheltered themselves under the shade of the synagogue,
should now escape this rapacious persecution. Anxious as they were to
avoid the slightest infection of idolatry, their conscience forbade them
to contribute to the honor of that daemon who had assumed the character
of the Capitoline Jupiter. As a very numerous though declining party
among the Christians still adhered to the law of Moses, their efforts to
dissemble their Jewish origin were detected by the decisive test of
circumcision;  <span id="fr_51"></span>[47](#fn_51) nor were the Roman
magistrates at leisure to inquire into the difference of their religious
tenets. Among the Christians who were brought before the tribunal of the
emperor, or, as it seems more probable, before that of the procurator of
Judaea, two persons are said to have appeared, distinguished by their
extraction, which was more truly noble than that of the greatest
monarchs. These were the grandsons of St. Jude the apostle, who himself
was the brother of Jesus Christ.  <span id="fr_52"></span>[48](#fn_52)
Their natural pretensions to the throne of David might perhaps attract
the respect of the people, and excite the jealousy of the governor; but
the meanness of their garb, and the simplicity of their answers, soon
convinced him that they were neither desirous nor capable of disturbing
the peace of the Roman empire. They frankly confessed their royal
origin, and their near relation to the Messiah; but they disclaimed any
temporal views, and professed that his kingdom, which they devoutly
expected, was purely of a spiritual and angelic nature. When they were
examined concerning their fortune and occupation, they showed their
hands, hardened with daily labor, and declared that they derived their
whole subsistence from the cultivation of a farm near the village of
Cocaba, of the extent of about twenty-four English acres,  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[49](#fn_53) and of the value of nine thousand
drachms, or three hundred pounds sterling. The grandsons of St. Jude
were dismissed with compassion and contempt.  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[50](#fn_54)

But although the obscurity of the house of David might protect them from
the suspicions of a tyrant, the present greatness of his own family
alarmed the pusillanimous temper of Domitian, which could only be
appeased by the blood of those Romans whom he either feared, or hated,
or esteemed. Of the two sons of his uncle Flavius Sabinus,  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[51](#fn_55) the elder was soon convicted of
treasonable intentions, and the younger, who bore the name of Flavius
Clemens, was indebted for his safety to his want of courage and ability.
 <span id="fr_56"></span>[52](#fn_56) The emperor for a long time,
distinguished so harmless a kinsman by his favor and protection,
bestowed on him his own niece Domitilla, adopted the children of that
marriage to the hope of the succession, and invested their father with
the honors of the consulship.

But he had scarcely finished the term of his annual magistracy, when, on
a slight pretence, he was condemned and executed; Domitilla was banished
to a desolate island on the coast of Campania;  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[53](#fn_57) and sentences either of death or of
confiscation were pronounced against a great number of who were involved
in the same accusation. The guilt imputed to their charge was that of
Atheism and Jewish manners;  <span id="fr_58"></span>[54](#fn_58) a
singular association of ideas, which cannot with any propriety be
applied except to the Christians, as they were obscurely and imperfectly
viewed by the magistrates and by the writers of that period. On the
strength of so probable an interpretation, and too eagerly admitting the
suspicions of a tyrant as an evidence of their honorable crime, the
church has placed both Clemens and Domitilla among its first martyrs,
and has branded the cruelty of Domitian with the name of the second
persecution. But this persecution (if it deserves that epithet) was of
no long duration. A few months after the death of Clemens, and the
banishment of Domitilla, Stephen, a freedman belonging to the latter,
who had enjoyed the favor, but who had not surely embraced the faith, of
his mistress,  <span id="fr_59"></span>[\*\_0005](#fn_59) assassinated
the emperor in his palace.  <span id="fr_60"></span>[55](#fn_60) The
memory of Domitian was condemned by the senate; his acts were rescinded;
his exiles recalled; and under the gentle administration of Nerva, while
the innocent were restored to their rank and fortunes, even the most
guilty either obtained pardon or escaped punishment.  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[56](#fn_61)

II\. About ten years afterwards, under the reign of Trajan, the younger
Pliny was intrusted by his friend and master with the government of
Bithynia and Pontus. He soon found himself at a loss to determine by
what rule of justice or of law he should direct his conduct in the
execution of an office the most repugnant to his humanity. Pliny had
never assisted at any judicial proceedings against the Christians, with
whose lame alone he seems to be acquainted; and he was totally
uninformed with regard to the nature of their guilt, the method of their
conviction, and the degree of their punishment. In this perplexity he
had recourse to his usual expedient, of submitting to the wisdom of
Trajan an impartial, and, in some respects, a favorable account of the
new superstition, requesting the emperor, that he would condescend to
resolve his doubts, and to instruct his ignorance.  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[57](#fn_62) The life of Pliny had been employed in
the acquisition of learning, and in the business of the world. Since the
age of nineteen he had pleaded with distinction in the tribunals of
Rome,  <span id="fr_63"></span>[58](#fn_63) filled a place in the
senate, had been invested with the honors of the consulship, and had
formed very numerous connections with every order of men, both in Italy
and in the provinces. From his ignorance therefore we may derive some
useful information. We may assure ourselves, that when he accepted the
government of Bithynia, there were no general laws or decrees of the
senate in force against the Christians; that neither Trajan nor any of
his virtuous predecessors, whose edicts were received into the civil and
criminal jurisprudence, had publicly declared their intentions
concerning the new sect; and that whatever proceedings had been carried
on against the Christians, there were none of sufficient weight and
authority to establish a precedent for the conduct of a Roman
magistrate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[24](daf02002.htm#fr_25) In the various
compilation of the Augustan History, (a part of which was composed under
the reign of Constantine,) there are not six lines which relate to the
Christians; nor has the diligence of Xiphilin discovered their name in
the large history of Dion Cassius.

Note: The greater part of the Augustan History is dedicated to
Diocletian. This may account for the silence of its authors concerning
Christianity. The notices that occur are almost all in the lives
composed under the reign of Constantine. It may fairly be concluded,
from the language which he had into the mouth of Maecenas, that Dion was
an enemy to all innovations in religion. (See Gibbon, infra, note 105.)
In fact, when the silence of Pagan historians is noticed, it should be
remembered how meagre and mutilated are all the extant histories of the
period -M.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[25](daf02002.htm#fr_26) An obscure passage of
Suetonius (in Claud. c. 25) may seem to offer a proof how strangely the
Jews and Christians of Rome were confounded with each other.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[26](daf02002.htm#fr_27) See, in the xviiith and
xxvth chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, the behavior of Gallio,
proconsul of Achaia, and of Festus, procurator of Judea.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[27](daf02002.htm#fr_28) In the time of
Tertullian and Clemens of Alexandria, the glory of martyrdom was
confined to St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. James. It was gradually
bestowed on the rest of the apostles, by the more recent Greeks, who
prudently selected for the theatre of their preaching and sufferings
some remote country beyond the limits of the Roman empire. See Mosheim,
p. 81; and Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. i. part iii.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[28](daf02002.htm#fr_29) Tacit. Annal. xv. 38 -
44. Sueton in Neron. c. 38. Dion Cassius, l. lxii. p. 1014. Orosius,
vii. 7.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[29](daf02002.htm#fr_30) The price of wheat
(probably of the modius,) was reduced as low as terni Nummi; which would
be equivalent to about fifteen shillings the English quarter.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[30](daf02002.htm#fr_31) We may observe, that
the rumor is mentioned by Tacitus with a very becoming distrust and
hesitation, whilst it is greedily transcribed by Suetonius, and solemnly
confirmed by Dion.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[31](daf02002.htm#fr_32) This testimony is alone
sufficient to expose the anachronism of the Jews, who place the birth of
Christ near a century sooner. (Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, l. v. c. 14,
15.) We may learn from Josephus, (Antiquitat. xviii. 3,) that the
procuratorship of Pilate corresponded with the last ten years of
Tiberius, A. D. 27 - 37. As to the particular time of the death of
Christ, a very early tradition fixed it to the 25th of March, A. D. 29,
under the consulship of the two Gemini. (Tertullian adv. Judaeos, c. 8.)
This date, which is adopted by Pagi, Cardinal Norris, and Le Clerc,
seems at least as probable as the vulgar aera, which is placed (I know
not from what conjectures) four years later.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[\*\_0003](daf02002.htm#fr_33) This single
phrase, Repressa in praesens exitiabilis superstitio rursus erumpebat,
proves that the Christians had already attracted the attention of the
government; and that Nero was not the first to persecute them. I am
surprised that more stress has not been laid on the confirmation which
the Acts of the Apostles derive from these words of Tacitus, Repressa in
praesens, and rursus erumpebat. - G.

I have been unwilling to suppress this note, but surely the expression
of Tacitus refers to the expected extirpation of the religion by the
death of its founder, Christ. - M.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[32](daf02002.htm#fr_34) Odio humani generis
convicti. These words may either signify the hatred of mankind towards
the Christians, or the hatred of the Christians towards mankind. I have
preferred the latter sense, as the most agreeable to the style of
Tacitus, and to the popular error, of which a precept of the gospel (see
Luke xiv. 26) had been, perhaps, the innocent occasion. My
interpretation is justified by the authority of Lipsius; of the Italian,
the French, and the English translators of Tacitus; of Mosheim, (p.
102,) of Le Clerc, (Historia Ecclesiast. p. 427,) of Dr. Lardner,
(Testimonies, vol. i. p. 345,) and of the Bishop of Gloucester, (Divine
Legation, vol. iii. p. 38.) But as the word convicti does not unite very
happily with the rest of the sentence, James Gronovius has preferred the
reading of conjuncti, which is authorized by the valuable MS. of
Florence.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[33](daf02002.htm#fr_35) Tacit. Annal xv. 44.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[34](daf02002.htm#fr_36) Nardini Roma Antica, p.
487. Donatus de Roma Antiqua, l. iii. p. 449.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[35](daf02002.htm#fr_37) Sueton. in Nerone, c.
16. The epithet of malefica, which some sagacious commentators have
translated magical, is considered by the more rational Mosheim as only
synonymous to the exitiabilis of Tacitus.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[36](daf02002.htm#fr_38) The passage concerning
Jesus Christ, which was inserted into the text of Josephus, between the
time of Origen and that of Eusebius, may furnish an example of no vulgar
forgery. The accomplishment of the prophecies, the virtues, miracles,
and resurrection of Jesus, are distinctly related. Josephus acknowledges
that he was the Messiah, and hesitates whether he should call him a man.
If any doubt can still remain concerning this celebrated passage, the
reader may examine the pointed objections of Le Fevre, (Havercamp.
Joseph. tom. ii. p. 267-273, the labored answers of Daubuz, (p. 187-232,
and the masterly reply (Bibliotheque Ancienne et Moderne, tom. vii. p.
237-288) of an anonymous critic, whom I believe to have been the learned
Abbe de Longuerue.

Note: The modern editor of Eusebius, Heinichen, has adopted, and ably
supported, a notion, which had before suggested itself to the editor,
that this passage is not altogether a forgery, but interpolated with
many additional clauses. Heinichen has endeavored to disengage the
original text from the foreign and more recent matter. - M.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[37](daf02002.htm#fr_39) See the lives of
Tacitus by Lipsius and the Abbe de la Bleterie, Dictionnaire de Bayle a
l'article Particle Tacite, and Fabricius, Biblioth. Latin tem. Latin.
tom. ii. p. 386, edit. Ernest. Ernst.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[38](daf02002.htm#fr_40) Principatum Divi
Nervae, et imperium Trajani, uberiorem, securioremque materiam senectuti
seposui. Tacit. Hist. i.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[39](daf02002.htm#fr_41) See Tacit. Annal. ii.
61, iv. 4.

Note: The perusal of this passage of Tacitus alone is sufficient, as I
have already said, to show that the Christian sect was not so obscure as
not already to have been repressed, (repressa,) and that it did not pass
for innocent in the eyes of the Romans. - G.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[40](daf02002.htm#fr_42) The player's name was
Aliturus. Through the same channel, Josephus, (de vita sua, c. 2,) about
two years before, had obtained the pardon and release of some Jewish
priests, who were prisoners at Rome.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[41](daf02002.htm#fr_43) The learned Dr. Lardner
(Jewish and Heathen Testimonies, vol ii. p. 102, 103) has proved that
the name of Galilaeans was a very ancient, and perhaps the primitive
appellation of the Christians.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[42](daf02002.htm#fr_44) Joseph. Antiquitat.
xviii. 1, 2. Tillemont, Ruine des Juifs, p. 742 The sons of Judas were
crucified in the time of Claudius. His grandson Eleazar, after Jerusalem
was taken, defended a strong fortress with 960 of his most desperate
followers. When the battering ram had made a breach, they turned their
swords against their wives their children, and at length against their
own breasts. They died to the last man.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[\*\_0004](daf02002.htm#fr_45) This conjecture
is entirely devoid, not merely of verisimilitude, but even of
possibility. Tacitus could not be deceived in appropriating to the
Christians of Rome the guilt and the sufferings which he might have
attributed with far greater truth to the followers of Judas the
Gaulonite, for the latter never went to Rome. Their revolt, their
attempts, their opinions, their wars, their punishment, had no other
theatre but Judaea (Basn. Hist. des. Juifs, t. i. p. 491.) Moreover the
name of Christians had long been given in Rome to the disciples of
Jesus; and Tacitus affirms too positively, refers too distinctly to its
etymology, to allow us to suspect any mistake on his part. - G.

M. Guizot's expressions are not in the least too strong against this
strange imagination of Gibbon; it may be doubted whether the followers
of Judas were known as a sect under the name of Galilaeans. - M.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[43](daf02002.htm#fr_46) See Dodwell. Paucitat.
Mart. l. xiii. The Spanish Inscription in Gruter. p. 238, No. 9, is a
manifest and acknowledged forgery contrived by that noted imposter.
Cyriacus of Ancona, to flatter the pride and prejudices of the
Spaniards. See Ferreras, Histoire D'Espagne, tom. i. p. 192.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[!\_0004](daf02002.htm#fr_47) M. Guizot, on the
authority of Sulpicius Severus, ii. 37, and of Orosius, viii. 5,
inclines to the opinion of those who extend the persecution to the
provinces. Mosheim rather leans to that side on this much disputed
question, (c. xxxv.) Neander takes the view of Gibbon, which is in
general that of the most learned writers. There is indeed no evidence,
which I can discover, of its reaching the provinces; and the apparent
security, at least as regards his life, with which St. Paul pursued his
travels during this period, affords at least a strong inference against
a rigid and general inquisition against the Christians in other parts of
the empire. - M.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[44](daf02002.htm#fr_48) The Capitol was burnt
during the civil war between Vitellius and Vespasian, the 19th of
December, A. D. 69. On the 10th of August, A. D. 70, the temple of
Jerusalem was destroyed by the hands of the Jews themselves, rather than
by those of the Romans.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[45](daf02002.htm#fr_49) The new Capitol was
dedicated by Domitian. Sueton. in Domitian. c. 5. Plutarch in Poplicola,
tom. i. p. 230, edit. Bryant. The gilding alone cost 12,000 talents
(above two millions and a half.) It was the opinion of Martial, (l. ix.
Epigram 3,) that if the emperor had called in his debts, Jupiter
himself, even though he had made a general auction of Olympus, would
have been unable to pay two shillings in the pound.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[46](daf02002.htm#fr_50) With regard to the
tribute, see Dion Cassius, l. lxvi. p. 1082, with Reimarus's notes.
Spanheim, de Usu Numismatum, tom. ii. p. 571; and Basnage, Histoire des
Juifs, l. vii. c. 2.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[47](daf02002.htm#fr_51) Suetonius (in Domitian.
c. 12) had seen an old man of ninety publicly examined before the
procurator's tribunal. This is what Martial calls, Mentula tributis
damnata.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[48](daf02002.htm#fr_52) This appellation was at
first understood in the most obvious sense, and it was supposed, that
the brothers of Jesus were the lawful issue of Joseph and Mary. A devout
respect for the virginity of the mother of God suggested to the
Gnostics, and afterwards to the orthodox Greeks, the expedient of
bestowing a second wife on Joseph. The Latins (from the time of Jerome)
improved on that hint, asserted the perpetual celibacy of Joseph, and
justified by many similar examples the new interpretation that Jude, as
well as Simon and James, who were styled the brothers of Jesus Christ,
were only his first cousins. See Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiat. tom. i. part
iii.: and Beausobre, Hist. Critique du Manicheisme, l. ii. c. 2.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[49](daf02002.htm#fr_53) Thirty-nine, squares of
a hundred feet each, which, if strictly computed, would scarcely amount
to nine acres.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[50](daf02002.htm#fr_54) Eusebius, iii. 20. The
story is taken from Hegesippus.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[51](daf02002.htm#fr_55) See the death and
character of Sabinus in Tacitus, (Hist. iii. 74 ) Sabinus was the elder
brother, and, till the accession of Vespasian, had been considered as
the principal support of the Flavium family

<span id="fn_56"></span>[52](daf02002.htm#fr_56) Flavium Clementem
patruelem suum contemptissimoe inertice . . ex tenuissima suspicione
interemit. Sueton. in Domitian. c. 15.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[53](daf02002.htm#fr_57) The Isle of Pandataria,
according to Dion. Bruttius Praesens (apud Euseb. iii. 18) banishes her
to that of Pontia, which was not far distant from the other. That
difference, and a mistake, either of Eusebius or of his transcribers,
have given occasion to suppose two Domitillas, the wife and the niece of
Clemens. See Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. ii. p. 224.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[54](daf02002.htm#fr_58) Dion. l. lxvii. p.
1112. If the Bruttius Praesens, from whom it is probable that he
collected this account, was the correspondent of Pliny, (Epistol. vii.
3,) we may consider him as a contemporary writer.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[\*\_0005](daf02002.htm#fr_59) This is an
uncandid sarcasm. There is nothing to connect Stephen with the religion
of Domitilla. He was a knave detected in the malversation of money -
interceptarum pecuniaram reus. - M.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[55](daf02002.htm#fr_60) Suet. in Domit. c. 17.
Philostratus in Vit. Apollon. l. viii.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[56](daf02002.htm#fr_61) Dion. l. lxviii. p.
1118. Plin. Epistol. iv. 22.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[57](daf02002.htm#fr_62) Plin. Epistol. x. 97.
The learned Mosheim expresses himself (p. 147, 232) with the highest
approbation of Pliny's moderate and candid temper. Notwithstanding Dr.
Lardner's suspicions (see Jewish and Heathen Testimonies, vol. ii. p.
46,) I am unable to discover any bigotry in his language or proceedings.

Note: Yet the humane Pliny put two female attendants, probably
deaconesses to the torture, in order to ascertain the real nature of
these suspicious meetings: necessarium credidi, ex duabus ancillis, quae
ministrae dicebantor quid asset veri et per tormenta quaerere. - M.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[58](daf02002.htm#fr_63) Plin. Epist. v. 8. He
pleaded his first cause A. D. 81; the year after the famous eruptions of
Mount Vesuvius, in which his uncle lost his life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
Constantine. Part III.](daf02003)
