[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf02053) 
[Next](daf02055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE66/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 2*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXV: Reigns Of Jovian And Valentinian, Division Of The Empire. Part VII.

The mind of Valentinian, who then resided at Treves, was deeply affected
by the calamities of Illyricum; but the lateness of the season suspended
the execution of his designs till the ensuing spring. He marched in
person, with a considerable part of the forces of Gaul, from the banks
of the Moselle: and to the suppliant ambassadors of the Sarmatians, who
met him on the way, he returned a doubtful answer, that, as soon as he
reached the scene of action, he should examine, and pronounce. When he
arrived at Sirmium, he gave audience to the deputies of the Illyrian
provinces; who loudly congratulated their own felicity under the
auspicious government of Probus, his Praetorian praefect.  <span
id="fr_1501"></span>[151](#fn_1500) Valentinian, who was flattered by
these demonstrations of their loyalty and gratitude, imprudently asked
the deputy of Epirus, a Cynic philosopher of intrepid sincerity,  <span
id="fr_1502"></span>[152](#fn_1501) whether he was freely sent by the
wishes of the province. "With tears and groans am I sent," replied
Iphicles, "by a reluctant people." The emperor paused: but the impunity
of his ministers established the pernicious maxim, that they might
oppress his subjects, without injuring his service. A strict inquiry
into their conduct would have relieved the public discontent. The severe
condemnation of the murder of Gabinius, was the only measure which could
restore the confidence of the Germans, and vindicate the honor of the
Roman name. But the haughty monarch was incapable of the magnanimity
which dares to acknowledge a fault. He forgot the provocation,
remembered only the injury, and advanced into the country of the Quadi
with an insatiate thirst of blood and revenge. The extreme devastation,
and promiscuous massacre, of a savage war, were justified, in the eyes
of the emperor, and perhaps in those of the world, by the cruel equity
of retaliation:  <span id="fr_1503"></span>[153](#fn_1502) and such was
the discipline of the Romans, and the consternation of the enemy, that
Valentinian repassed the Danube without the loss of a single man. As he
had resolved to complete the destruction of the Quadi by a second
campaign, he fixed his winter quarters at Bregetio, on the Danube, near
the Hungarian city of Presburg. While the operations of war were
suspended by the severity of the weather, the Quadi made an humble
attempt to deprecate the wrath of their conqueror; and, at the earnest
persuasion of Equitius, their ambassadors were introduced into the
Imperial council. They approached the throne with bended bodies and
dejected countenances; and without daring to complain of the murder of
their king, they affirmed, with solemn oaths, that the late invasion was
the crime of some irregular robbers, which the public council of the
nation condemned and abhorred. The answer of the emperor left them but
little to hope from his clemency or compassion. He reviled, in the most
intemperate language, their baseness, their ingratitude, their
insolence. His eyes, his voice, his color, his gestures, expressed the
violence of his ungoverned fury; and while his whole frame was agitated
with convulsive passion, a large blood vessel suddenly burst in his
body; and Valentinian fell speechless into the arms of his attendants.
Their pious care immediately concealed his situation from the crowd;
but, in a few minutes, the emperor of the West expired in an agony of
pain, retaining his senses till the last; and struggling, without
success, to declare his intentions to the generals and ministers, who
surrounded the royal couch. Valentinian was about fifty-four years of
age; and he wanted only one hundred days to accomplish the twelve years
of his reign.  <span id="fr_1504"></span>[154](#fn_1503)

The polygamy of Valentinian is seriously attested by an ecclesiastical
historian.  <span id="fr_1505"></span>[155](#fn_1504) "The empress
Severa (I relate the fable) admitted into her familiar society the
lovely Justina, the daughter of an Italian governor: her admiration of
those naked charms, which she had often seen in the bath, was expressed
with such lavish and imprudent praise, that the emperor was tempted to
introduce a second wife into his bed; and his public edict extended to
all the subjects of the empire the same domestic privilege which he had
assumed for himself." But we may be assured, from the evidence of reason
as well as history, that the two marriages of Valentinian, with Severa,
and with Justina, were successively contracted; and that he used the
ancient permission of divorce, which was still allowed by the laws,
though it was condemned by the church Severa was the mother of Gratian,
who seemed to unite every claim which could entitle him to the undoubted
succession of the Western empire. He was the eldest son of a monarch
whose glorious reign had confirmed the free and honorable choice of his
fellow- soldiers. Before he had attained the ninth year of his age, the
royal youth received from the hands of his indulgent father the purple
robe and diadem, with the title of Augustus; the election was solemnly
ratified by the consent and applause of the armies of Gaul;  <span
id="fr_1506"></span>[156](#fn_1505) and the name of Gratian was added to
the names of Valentinian and Valens, in all the legal transactions of
the Roman government. By his marriage with the granddaughter of
Constantine, the son of Valentinian acquired all the hereditary rights
of the Flavian family; which, in a series of three Imperial generations,
were sanctified by time, religion, and the reverence of the people. At
the death of his father, the royal youth was in the seventeenth year of
his age; and his virtues already justified the favorable opinion of the
army and the people. But Gratian resided, without apprehension, in the
palace of Treves; whilst, at the distance of many hundred miles,
Valentinian suddenly expired in the camp of Bregetio. The passions,
which had been so long suppressed by the presence of a master,
immediately revived in the Imperial council; and the ambitious design of
reigning in the name of an infant, was artfully executed by Mellobaudes
and Equitius, who commanded the attachment of the Illyrian and Italian
bands. They contrived the most honorable pretences to remove the popular
leaders, and the troops of Gaul, who might have asserted the claims of
the lawful successor; they suggested the necessity of extinguishing the
hopes of foreign and domestic enemies, by a bold and decisive measure.
The empress Justina, who had been left in a palace about one hundred
miles from Bregetio, was respectively invited to appear in the camp,
with the son of the deceased emperor. On the sixth day after the death
of Valentinian, the infant prince of the same name, who was only four
years old, was shown, in the arms of his mother, to the legions; and
solemnly invested, by military acclamation, with the titles and ensigns
of supreme power. The impending dangers of a civil war were seasonably
prevented by the wise and moderate conduct of the emperor Gratian. He
cheerfully accepted the choice of the army; declared that he should
always consider the son of Justina as a brother, not as a rival; and
advised the empress, with her son Valentinian to fix their residence at
Milan, in the fair and peaceful province of Italy; while he assumed the
more arduous command of the countries beyond the Alps. Gratian
dissembled his resentment till he could safely punish, or disgrace, the
authors of the conspiracy; and though he uniformly behaved with
tenderness and regard to his infant colleague, he gradually confounded,
in the administration of the Western empire, the office of a guardian
with the authority of a sovereign. The government of the Roman world was
exercised in the united names of Valens and his two nephews; but the
feeble emperor of the East, who succeeded to the rank of his elder
brother, never obtained any weight or influence in the councils of the
West.  <span id="fr_1507"></span>[157](#fn_1506)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[151](daf02054.htm#fr_1501) Ammianus, (xxx.
5,) who acknowledges the merit, has censured, with becoming asperity,
the oppressive administration of Petronius Probus. When Jerom translated
and continued the Chronicle of Eusebius, (A. D. 380; see Tillemont, Mem.
Eccles. tom. xii. p. 53, 626,) he expressed the truth, or at least the
public opinion of his country, in the following words: "Probus P. P.
Illyrici inquissimus tributorum exactionibus, ante provincias quas
regebat, quam a Barbaris vastarentur, erasit." (Chron. edit. Scaliger,
p. 187. Animadvers p. 259.) The Saint afterwards formed an intimate and
tender friendship with the widow of Probus; and the name of Count
Equitius with less propriety, but without much injustice, has been
substituted in the text.

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[152](daf02054.htm#fr_1502) Julian (Orat. vi.
p. 198) represents his friend Iphicles, as a man of virtue and merit,
who had made himself ridiculous and unhappy by adopting the extravagant
dress and manners of the Cynics.

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[153](daf02054.htm#fr_1503) Ammian. xxx. v.
Jerom, who exaggerates the misfortune of Valentinian, refuses him even
this last consolation of revenge. Genitali vastato solo et inultam
patriam derelinquens, (tom. i. p. 26.)

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[154](daf02054.htm#fr_1504) See, on the death
of Valentinian, Ammianus, (xxx. 6,) Zosimus, (l. iv. p. 221,) Victor,
(in Epitom.,) Socrates, (l. iv. c. 31,) and Jerom, (in Chron. p. 187,
and tom. i. p. 26, ad Heliodor.) There is much variety of circumstances
among them; and Ammianus is so eloquent, that he writes nonsense.

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[155](daf02054.htm#fr_1505) Socrates (l. iv.
c. 31) is the only original witness of this foolish story, so repugnant
to the laws and manners of the Romans, that it scarcely deserved the
formal and elaborate dissertation of M. Bonamy, (Mem. de l'Academie,
tom. xxx. p. 394-405.) Yet I would preserve the natural circumstance of
the bath; instead of following Zosimus who represents Justina as an old
woman, the widow of Magnentius.

<span id="fn_1505"></span>[156](daf02054.htm#fr_1506) Ammianus (xxvii.
6) describes the form of this military election, and august investiture.
Valentinian does not appear to have consulted, or even informed, the
senate of Rome.

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[157](daf02054.htm#fr_1507) Ammianus, xxx. 10.
Zosimus, l. iv. p. 222, 223. Tillemont has proved (Hist. des Empereurs,
tom. v. p. 707-709) that Gratian reignea in Italy, Africa, and
Illyricum. I have endeavored to express his authority over his brother's
dominions, as he used it, in an ambiguous style.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI: Progress of The Huns. Part I.](daf02055)
