[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf02051) 
[Next](daf02053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE66/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 2*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXV: Reigns Of Jovian And Valentinian, Division Of The Empire. Part V.

Six years after the death of Constantine, the destructive inroads of the
Scots and Picts required the presence of his youngest son, who reigned
in the Western empire. Constans visited his British dominions: but we
may form some estimate of the importance of his achievements, by the
language of panegyric, which celebrates only his triumph over the
elements or, in other words, the good fortune of a safe and easy passage
from the port of Boulogne to the harbor of Sandwich.  <span
id="fr_1454"></span>[112](#fn_1453) The calamities which the afflicted
provincials continued to experience, from foreign war and domestic
tyranny, were aggravated by the feeble and corrupt administration of the
eunuchs of Constantius; and the transient relief which they might obtain
from the virtues of Julian, was soon lost by the absence and death of
their benefactor. The sums of gold and silver, which had been painfully
collected, or liberally transmitted, for the payment of the troops, were
intercepted by the avarice of the commanders; discharges, or, at least,
exemptions, from the military service, were publicly sold; the distress
of the soldiers, who were injuriously deprived of their legal and scanty
subsistence, provoked them to frequent desertion; the nerves of
discipline were relaxed, and the highways were infested with robbers.
 <span id="fr_1455"></span>[113](#fn_1454) The oppression of the good,
and the impunity of the wicked, equally contributed to diffuse through
the island a spirit of discontent and revolt; and every ambitious
subject, every desperate exile, might entertain a reasonable hope of
subverting the weak and distracted government of Britain. The hostile
tribes of the North, who detested the pride and power of the King of the
World, suspended their domestic feuds; and the Barbarians of the land
and sea, the Scots, the Picts, and the Saxons, spread themselves with
rapid and irresistible fury, from the wall of Antoninus to the shores of
Kent. Every production of art and nature, every object of convenience
and luxury, which they were incapable of creating by labor or procuring
by trade, was accumulated in the rich and fruitful province of Britain.
 <span id="fr_1456"></span>[114](#fn_1455) A philosopher may deplore the
eternal discords of the human race, but he will confess, that the desire
of spoil is a more rational provocation than the vanity of conquest.
From the age of Constantine to the Plantagenets, this rapacious spirit
continued to instigate the poor and hardy Caledonians; but the same
people, whose generous humanity seems to inspire the songs of Ossian,
was disgraced by a savage ignorance of the virtues of peace, and of the
laws of war. Their southern neighbors have felt, and perhaps
exaggerated, the cruel depredations of the Scots and Picts;  <span
id="fr_1457"></span>[115](#fn_1456) and a valiant tribe of Caledonia,
the Attacotti,  <span id="fr_1458"></span>[116](#fn_1457) the enemies,
and afterwards the soldiers, of Valentinian, are accused, by an
eye-witness, of delighting in the taste of human flesh. When they hunted
the woods for prey, it is said, that they attacked the shepherd rather
than his flock; and that they curiously selected the most delicate and
brawny parts, both of males and females, which they prepared for their
horrid repasts.  <span id="fr_1459"></span>[117](#fn_1458) If, in the
neighborhood of the commercial and literary town of Glasgow, a race of
cannibals has really existed, we may contemplate, in the period of the
Scottish history, the opposite extremes of savage and civilized life.
Such reflections tend to enlarge the circle of our ideas; and to
encourage the pleasing hope, that New Zealand may produce, in some
future age, the Hume of the Southern Hemisphere.

Every messenger who escaped across the British Channel, conveyed the
most melancholy and alarming tidings to the ears of Valentinian; and the
emperor was soon informed that the two military commanders of the
province had been surprised and cut off by the Barbarians. Severus,
count of the domestics, was hastily despatched, and as suddenly
recalled, by the court of Treves. The representations of Jovinus served
only to indicate the greatness of the evil; and, after a long and
serious consultation, the defence, or rather the recovery, of Britain
was intrusted to the abilities of the brave Theodosius. The exploits of
that general, the father of a line of emperors, have been celebrated,
with peculiar complacency, by the writers of the age: but his real merit
deserved their applause; and his nomination was received, by the army
and province, as a sure presage of approaching victory. He seized the
favorable moment of navigation, and securely landed the numerous and
veteran bands of the Heruli and Batavians, the Jovians and the Victors.
In his march from Sandwich to London, Theodosius defeated several
parties of the Barbarians, released a multitude of captives, and, after
distributing to his soldiers a small portion of the spoil, established
the fame of disinterested justice, by the restitution of the remainder
to the rightful proprietors. The citizens of London, who had almost
despaired of their safety, threw open their gates; and as soon as
Theodosius had obtained from the court of Treves the important aid of a
military lieutenant, and a civil governor, he executed, with wisdom and
vigor, the laborious task of the deliverance of Britain. The vagrant
soldiers were recalled to their standard; an edict of amnesty dispelled
the public apprehensions; and his cheerful example alleviated the rigor
of martial discipline. The scattered and desultory warfare of the
Barbarians, who infested the land and sea, deprived him of the glory of
a signal victory; but the prudent spirit, and consummate art, of the
Roman general, were displayed in the operations of two campaigns, which
successively rescued every part of the province from the hands of a
cruel and rapacious enemy. The splendor of the cities, and the security
of the fortifications, were diligently restored, by the paternal care of
Theodosius; who with a strong hand confined the trembling Caledonians to
the northern angle of the island; and perpetuated, by the name and
settlement of the new province of Valentia, the glories of the reign of
Valentinian.  <span id="fr_1460"></span>[118](#fn_1459) The voice of
poetry and panegyric may add, perhaps with some degree of truth, that
the unknown regions of Thule were stained with the blood of the Picts;
that the oars of Theodosius dashed the waves of the Hyperborean ocean;
and that the distant Orkneys were the scene of his naval victory over
the Saxon pirates.  <span id="fr_1461"></span>[119](#fn_1460) He left
the province with a fair, as well as splendid, reputation; and was
immediately promoted to the rank of master-general of the cavalry, by a
prince who could applaud, without envy, the merit of his servants. In
the important station of the Upper Danube, the conqueror of Britain
checked and defeated the armies of the Alemanni, before he was chosen to
suppress the revolt of Africa.

III\. The prince who refuses to be the judge, instructs the people to
consider him as the accomplice, of his ministers. The military command
of Africa had been long exercised by Count Romanus, and his abilities
were not inadequate to his station; but, as sordid interest was the sole
motive of his conduct, he acted, on most occasions, as if he had been
the enemy of the province, and the friend of the Barbarians of the
desert. The three flourishing cities of Oea, Leptis, and Sobrata, which,
under the name of Tripoli, had long constituted a federal union,  <span
id="fr_1462"></span>[120](#fn_1461) were obliged, for the first time, to
shut their gates against a hostile invasion; several of their most
honorable citizens were surprised and massacred; the villages, and even
the suburbs, were pillaged; and the vines and fruit trees of that rich
territory were extirpated by the malicious savages of Getulia. The
unhappy provincials implored the protection of Romanus; but they soon
found that their military governor was not less cruel and rapacious than
the Barbarians. As they were incapable of furnishing the four thousand
camels, and the exorbitant present, which he required, before he would
march to the assistance of Tripoli; his demand was equivalent to a
refusal, and he might justly be accused as the author of the public
calamity. In the annual assembly of the three cities, they nominated two
deputies, to lay at the feet of Valentinian the customary offering of a
gold victory; and to accompany this tribute of duty, rather than of
gratitude, with their humble complaint, that they were ruined by the
enemy, and betrayed by their governor. If the severity of Valentinian
had been rightly directed, it would have fallen on the guilty head of
Romanus. But the count, long exercised in the arts of corruption, had
despatched a swift and trusty messenger to secure the venal friendship
of Remigius, master of the offices. The wisdom of the Imperial council
was deceived by artifice; and their honest indignation was cooled by
delay. At length, when the repetition of complaint had been justified by
the repetition of public misfortunes, the notary Palladius was sent from
the court of Treves, to examine the state of Africa, and the conduct of
Romanus. The rigid impartiality of Palladius was easily disarmed: he was
tempted to reserve for himself a part of the public treasure, which he
brought with him for the payment of the troops; and from the moment that
he was conscious of his own guilt, he could no longer refuse to attest
the innocence and merit of the count. The charge of the Tripolitans was
declared to be false and frivolous; and Palladius himself was sent back
from Treves to Africa, with a special commission to discover and
prosecute the authors of this impious conspiracy against the
representatives of the sovereign. His inquiries were managed with so
much dexterity and success, that he compelled the citizens of Leptis,
who had sustained a recent siege of eight days, to contradict the truth
of their own decrees, and to censure the behavior of their own deputies.
A bloody sentence was pronounced, without hesitation, by the rash and
headstrong cruelty of Valentinian. The president of Tripoli, who had
presumed to pity the distress of the province, was publicly executed at
Utica; four distinguished citizens were put to death, as the accomplices
of the imaginary fraud; and the tongues of two others were cut out, by
the express order of the emperor. Romanus, elated by impunity, and
irritated by resistance, was still continued in the military command;
till the Africans were provoked, by his avarice, to join the rebellious
standard of Firmus, the Moor.  <span id="fr_1463"></span>[121](#fn_1462)

His father Nabal was one of the richest and most powerful of the Moorish
princes, who acknowledged the supremacy of Rome. But as he left, either
by his wives or concubines, a very numerous posterity, the wealthy
inheritance was eagerly disputed; and Zamma, one of his sons, was slain
in a domestic quarrel by his brother Firmus. The implacable zeal, with
which Romanus prosecuted the legal revenge of this murder, could be
ascribed only to a motive of avarice, or personal hatred; but, on this
occasion, his claims were just; his influence was weighty; and Firmus
clearly understood, that he must either present his neck to the
executioner, or appeal from the sentence of the Imperial consistory, to
his sword, and to the people.  <span id="fr_1464"></span>[122](#fn_1463)
He was received as the deliverer of his country; and, as soon as it
appeared that Romanus was formidable only to a submissive province, the
tyrant of Africa became the object of universal contempt. The ruin of
Caesarea, which was plundered and burnt by the licentious Barbarians,
convinced the refractory cities of the danger of resistance; the power
of Firmus was established, at least in the provinces of Mauritania and
Numidia; and it seemed to be his only doubt whether he should assume the
diadem of a Moorish king, or the purple of a Roman emperor. But the
imprudent and unhappy Africans soon discovered, that, in this rash
insurrection, they had not sufficiently consulted their own strength, or
the abilities of their leader. Before he could procure any certain
intelligence, that the emperor of the West had fixed the choice of a
general, or that a fleet of transports was collected at the mouth of the
Rhone, he was suddenly informed that the great Theodosius, with a small
band of veterans, had landed near Igilgilis, or Gigeri, on the African
coast; and the timid usurper sunk under the ascendant of virtue and
military genius. Though Firmus possessed arms and treasures, his despair
of victory immediately reduced him to the use of those arts, which, in
the same country, and in a similar situation, had formerly been
practised by the crafty Jugurtha. He attempted to deceive, by an
apparent submission, the vigilance of the Roman general; to seduce the
fidelity of his troops; and to protract the duration of the war, by
successively engaging the independent tribes of Africa to espouse his
quarrel, or to protect his flight. Theodosius imitated the example, and
obtained the success, of his predecessor Metellus. When Firmus, in the
character of a suppliant, accused his own rashness, and humbly solicited
the clemency of the emperor, the lieutenant of Valentinian received and
dismissed him with a friendly embrace: but he diligently required the
useful and substantial pledges of a sincere repentance; nor could he be
persuaded, by the assurances of peace, to suspend, for an instant, the
operations of an active war. A dark conspiracy was detected by the
penetration of Theodosius; and he satisfied, without much reluctance,
the public indignation, which he had secretly excited. Several of the
guilty accomplices of Firmus were abandoned, according to ancient
custom, to the tumult of a military execution; many more, by the
amputation of both their hands, continued to exhibit an instructive
spectacle of horror; the hatred of the rebels was accompanied with fear;
and the fear of the Roman soldiers was mingled with respectful
admiration. Amidst the boundless plains of Getulia, and the innumerable
valleys of Mount Atlas, it was impossible to prevent the escape of
Firmus; and if the usurper could have tired the patience of his
antagonist, he would have secured his person in the depth of some remote
solitude, and expected the hopes of a future revolution. He was subdued
by the perseverance of Theodosius; who had formed an inflexible
determination, that the war should end only by the death of the tyrant;
and that every nation of Africa, which presumed to support his cause,
should be involved in his ruin. At the head of a small body of troops,
which seldom exceeded three thousand five hundred men, the Roman general
advanced, with a steady prudence, devoid of rashness or of fear, into
the heart of a country, where he was sometimes attacked by armies of
twenty thousand Moors. The boldness of his charge dismayed the irregular
Barbarians; they were disconcerted by his seasonable and orderly
retreats; they were continually baffled by the unknown resources of the
military art; and they felt and confessed the just superiority which was
assumed by the leader of a civilized nation. When Theodosius entered the
extensive dominions of Igmazen, king of the Isaflenses, the haughty
savage required, in words of defiance, his name, and the object of his
expedition. "I am," replied the stern and disdainful count, "I am the
general of Valentinian, the lord of the world; who has sent me hither to
pursue and punish a desperate robber. Deliver him instantly into my
hands; and be assured, that if thou dost not obey the commands of my
invincible sovereign, thou, and the people over whom thou reignest,
shall be utterly extirpated."  <span
id="fr_1465"></span>[\*\_0082](#fn_1464) As soon as Igmazen was
satisfied, that his enemy had strength and resolution to execute the
fatal menace, he consented to purchase a necessary peace by the
sacrifice of a guilty fugitive. The guards that were placed to secure
the person of Firmus deprived him of the hopes of escape; and the
Moorish tyrant, after wine had extinguished the sense of danger,
disappointed the insulting triumph of the Romans, by strangling himself
in the night. His dead body, the only present which Igmazen could offer
to the conqueror, was carelessly thrown upon a camel; and Theodosius,
leading back his victorious troops to Sitifi, was saluted by the warmest
acclamations of joy and loyalty.  <span
id="fr_1466"></span>[123](#fn_1465)

Africa had been lost by the vices of Romanus; it was restored by the
virtues of Theodosius; and our curiosity may be usefully directed to the
inquiry of the respective treatment which the two generals received from
the Imperial court. The authority of Count Romanus had been suspended by
the master-general of the cavalry; and he was committed to safe and
honorable custody till the end of the war. His crimes were proved by the
most authentic evidence; and the public expected, with some impatience,
the decree of severe justice. But the partial and powerful favor of
Mellobaudes encouraged him to challenge his legal judges, to obtain
repeated delays for the purpose of procuring a crowd of friendly
witnesses, and, finally, to cover his guilty conduct, by the additional
guilt of fraud and forgery. About the same time, the restorer of Britain
and Africa, on a vague suspicion that his name and services were
superior to the rank of a subject, was ignominiously beheaded at
Carthage. Valentinian no longer reigned; and the death of Theodosius, as
well as the impunity of Romanus, may justly be imputed to the arts of
the ministers, who abused the confidence, and deceived the inexperienced
youth, of his sons.  <span id="fr_1467"></span>[124](#fn_1466)

If the geographical accuracy of Ammianus had been fortunately bestowed
on the British exploits of Theodosius, we should have traced, with eager
curiosity, the distinct and domestic footsteps of his march. But the
tedious enumeration of the unknown and uninteresting tribes of Africa
may be reduced to the general remark, that they were all of the swarthy
race of the Moors; that they inhabited the back settlements of the
Mauritanian and Numidian province, the country, as they have since been
termed by the Arabs, of dates and of locusts;  <span
id="fr_1468"></span>[125](#fn_1467) and that, as the Roman power
declined in Africa, the boundary of civilized manners and cultivated
land was insensibly contracted. Beyond the utmost limits of the Moors,
the vast and inhospitable desert of the South extends above a thousand
miles to the banks of the Niger. The ancients, who had a very faint and
imperfect knowledge of the great peninsula of Africa, were sometimes
tempted to believe, that the torrid zone must ever remain destitute of
inhabitants;  <span id="fr_1469"></span>[126](#fn_1468) and they
sometimes amused their fancy by filling the vacant space with headless
men, or rather monsters;  <span id="fr_1470"></span>[127](#fn_1469) with
horned and cloven-footed satyrs;  <span
id="fr_1471"></span>[128](#fn_1470) with fabulous centaurs;  <span
id="fr_1472"></span>[129](#fn_1471) and with human pygmies, who waged a
bold and doubtful warfare against the cranes.  <span
id="fr_1473"></span>[130](#fn_1472) Carthage would have trembled at the
strange intelligence that the countries on either side of the equator
were filled with innumerable nations, who differed only in their color
from the ordinary appearance of the human species: and the subjects of
the Roman empire might have anxiously expected, that the swarms of
Barbarians, which issued from the North, would soon be encountered from
the South by new swarms of Barbarians, equally fierce and equally
formidable. These gloomy terrors would indeed have been dispelled by a
more intimate acquaintance with the character of their African enemies.
The inaction of the negroes does not seem to be the effect either of
their virtue or of their pusillanimity. They indulge, like the rest of
mankind, their passions and appetites; and the adjacent tribes are
engaged in frequent acts of hostility.  <span
id="fr_1474"></span>[131](#fn_1473) But their rude ignorance has never
invented any effectual weapons of defence, or of destruction; they
appear incapable of forming any extensive plans of government, or
conquest; and the obvious inferiority of their mental faculties has been
discovered and abused by the nations of the temperate zone. Sixty
thousand blacks are annually embarked from the coast of Guinea, never to
return to their native country; but they are embarked in chains;  <span
id="fr_1475"></span>[132](#fn_1474) and this constant emigration, which,
in the space of two centuries, might have furnished armies to overrun
the globe, accuses the guilt of Europe, and the weakness of Africa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1453"></span>[112](daf02052.htm#fr_1454) Hyeme tumentes ac
saevientes undas calcastis Oceani sub remis vestris; . . . insperatam
imperatoris faciem Britannus expavit. Julius Fermicus Maternus de Errore
Profan. Relig. p. 464. edit. Gronov. ad calcem Minuc. Fael. See
Tillemont, (Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iv. p. 336.)

<span id="fn_1454"></span>[113](daf02052.htm#fr_1455) Libanius, Orat.
Parent. c. xxxix. p. 264. This curious passage has escaped the diligence
of our British antiquaries.

<span id="fn_1455"></span>[114](daf02052.htm#fr_1456) The Caledonians
praised and coveted the gold, the steeds, the lights, &c., of the
stranger. See Dr. Blair's Dissertation on Ossian, vol ii. p. 343; and
Mr. Macpherson's Introduction, p. 242-286.

<span id="fn_1456"></span>[115](daf02052.htm#fr_1457) Lord Lyttelton has
circumstantially related, (History of Henry II. vol. i. p. 182,) and Sir
David Dalrymple has slightly mentioned, (Annals of Scotland, vol. i. p.
69,) a barbarous inroad of the Scots, at a time (A.D. 1137) when law,
religion, and society must have softened their primitive manners.

<span id="fn_1457"></span>[116](daf02052.htm#fr_1458) Attacotti
bellicosa hominum natio. Ammian. xxvii. 8. Camden (Introduct. p. clii.)
has restored their true name in the text of Jerom. The bands of
Attacotti, which Jerom had seen in Gaul, were afterwards stationed in
Italy and Illyricum, (Notitia, S. viii. xxxix. xl.)

<span id="fn_1458"></span>[117](daf02052.htm#fr_1459) Cum ipse
adolescentulus in Gallia viderim Attacottos (or Scotos) gentem
Britannicam humanis vesci carnibus; et cum per silvas porcorum greges,
et armentorum percudumque reperiant, pastorum nates et feminarum
papillas solere abscindere; et has solas ciborum delicias arbitrari.
Such is the evidence of Jerom, (tom. ii. p. 75,) whose veracity I find
no reason to question.

Note: See Dr. Parr's works, iii. 93, where he questions the propriety of
Gibbon's translation of this passage. The learned doctor approves of the
version proposed by a Mr. Gaches, who would make out that it was the
delicate parts of the swine and the cattle, which were eaten by these
ancestors of the Scotch nation. I confess that even to acquit them of
this charge. I cannot agree to the new version, which, in my opinion, is
directly contrary both to the meaning of the words, and the general
sense of the passage. But I would suggest, did Jerom, as a boy,
accompany these savages in any of their hunting expeditions? If he did
not, how could he be an eye-witness of this practice? The Attacotti in
Gaul must have been in the service of Rome. Were they permitted to
indulge these cannibal propensities at the expense, not of the flocks,
but of the shepherds of the provinces? These sanguinary trophies of
plunder would scarce'y have been publicly exhibited in a Roman city or a
Roman camp. I must leave the hereditary pride of our northern neighbors
at issue with the veracity of St. Jerom.

<span id="fn_1459"></span>[118](daf02052.htm#fr_1460) Ammianus has
concisely represented (xx. l. xxvi. 4, xxvii. 8 xxviii. 3) the whole
series of the British war.

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[119](daf02052.htm#fr_1461) Horrescit . . . .
ratibus . . . . impervia Thule. Ille . . . . nec falso nomine Pictos
Edomuit. Scotumque vago mucrone secutus, Fregit Hyperboreas remis
audacibus undas. Claudian, in iii. Cons. Honorii, ver. 53, &c - Madurunt
Saxone fuso Orcades: incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule, Scotorum cumulos
flevit glacialis Ierne. In iv. Cons. Hon. ver. 31, &c.

See likewise Pacatus, (in Panegyr. Vet. xii. 5.) But it is not easy to
appreciate the intrinsic value of flattery and metaphor. Compare the
British victories of Bolanus (Statius, Silv. v. 2) with his real
character, (Tacit. in Vit. Agricol. c. 16.)

<span id="fn_1461"></span>[120](daf02052.htm#fr_1462) Ammianus
frequently mentions their concilium annuum, legitimum, &c. Leptis and
Sabrata are long since ruined; but the city of Oea, the native country
of Apuleius, still flourishes under the provincial denomination of
Tripoli. See Cellarius (Geograph. Antiqua, tom. ii. part ii. p. 81,)
D'Anville, (Geographie Ancienne, tom. iii. p. 71, 72,) and Marmol,
(Arrique, tom. ii. p. 562.)

<span id="fn_1462"></span>[121](daf02052.htm#fr_1463) Ammian. xviii. 6.
Tillemont (Hist. des Empereurs, tom. v. p 25, 676) has discussed the
chronological difficulties of the history of Count Romanus.

<span id="fn_1463"></span>[122](daf02052.htm#fr_1464) The Chronology of
Ammianus is loose and obscure; and Orosius (i. vii. c. 33, p. 551, edit.
Havercamp) seems to place the revolt of Firmus after the deaths of
Valentinian and Valens. Tillemont (Hist. des. Emp. tom. v. p. 691)
endeavors to pick his way. The patient and sure-foot mule of the Alps
may be trusted in the most slippery paths.

<span id="fn_1464"></span>[\*\_0082](daf02052.htm#fr_1465) The war was
longer protracted than this sentence would lead us to suppose: it was
not till defeated more than once that Igmazen yielded Amm. xxix. 5. - M

<span id="fn_1465"></span>[123](daf02052.htm#fr_1466) Ammian xxix. 5.
The text of this long chapter (fifteen quarto pages) is broken and
corrupted; and the narrative is perplexed by the want of chronological
and geographical landmarks.

<span id="fn_1466"></span>[124](daf02052.htm#fr_1467) Ammian xxviii. 4.
Orosius, l. vii. c. 33, p. 551, 552. Jerom. in Chron. p. 187.

<span id="fn_1467"></span>[125](daf02052.htm#fr_1468) Leo Africanus (in
the Viaggi di Ramusio, tom. i. fol. 78-83) has traced a curious picture
of the people and the country; which are more minutely described in the
Afrique de Marmol, tom. iii. p. 1-54.

<span id="fn_1468"></span>[126](daf02052.htm#fr_1469) This uninhabitable
zone was gradually reduced by the improvements of ancient geography,
from forty-five to twenty-four, or even sixteen degrees of latitude. See
a learned and judicious note of Dr. Robertson, Hist. of America, vol. i.
p. 426.

<span id="fn_1469"></span>[127](daf02052.htm#fr_1470) Intra, si credere
libet, vix jam homines et magis semiferi ... Blemmyes, Satyri, &c.
Pomponius Mela, i. 4, p. 26, edit. Voss. in 8vo. Pliny philosophically
explains (vi. 35) the irregularities of nature, which he had credulously
admitted, (v. 8.)

<span id="fn_1470"></span>[128](daf02052.htm#fr_1471) If the satyr was
the Orang-outang, the great human ape, (Buffon, Hist. Nat. tom. xiv. p.
43, &c.,) one of that species might actually be shown alive at
Alexandria, in the reign of Constantine. Yet some difficulty will still
remain about the conversation which St. Anthony held with one of these
pious savages, in the desert of Thebais. (Jerom. in Vit. Paul. Eremit.
tom. i. p. 238.)

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[129](daf02052.htm#fr_1472) St. Anthony
likewise met one of these monsters; whose existence was seriously
asserted by the emperor Claudius. The public laughed; but his praefect
of Egypt had the address to send an artful preparation, the embalmed
corpse of a Hippocentaur, which was preserved almost a century
afterwards in the Imperial palace. See Pliny, (Hist. Natur. vii. 3,) and
the judicious observations of Freret. (Memoires de l'Acad. tom. vii. p.
321, &c.)

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[130](daf02052.htm#fr_1473) The fable of the
pygmies is as old as Homer, (Iliad. iii. 6) The pygmies of India and
Aethiopia were (trispithami) twenty-seven inches high. Every spring
their cavalry (mounted on rams and goats) marched, in battle array, to
destroy the cranes' eggs, aliter (says Pliny) futuris gregibus non
resisti. Their houses were built of mud, feathers, and egg- shells. See
Pliny, (vi. 35, vii. 2,) and Strabo, (l. ii. p. 121.)

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[131](daf02052.htm#fr_1474) The third and
fourth volumes of the valuable Histoire des Voyages describe the present
state of the Negroes. The nations of the sea- coast have been polished
by European commerce; and those of the inland country have been improved
by Moorish colonies.

Note: The martial tribes in chain armor, discovered by Denham, are
Mahometan; the great question of the inferiority of the African tribes
in their mental faculties will probably be experimentally resolved
before the close of the century; but the Slave Trade still continues,
and will, it is to be feared, till the spirit of gain is subdued by the
spirit of Christian humanity. - M.

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[132](daf02052.htm#fr_1475) Histoire
Philosophique et Politique, &c., tom. iv. p. 192.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV: Reigns Of Jovian And Valentinian, Division Of The
Empire. Part VI.](daf02053)
