[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf02003) 
[Next](daf02005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE66/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 2*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To Constantine. Part IV.

When Valerian was consul for the third, and Gallienus for the fourth
time, Paternus, proconsul of Africa, summoned Cyprian to appear in his
private council-chamber. He there acquainted him with the Imperial
mandate which he had just received,  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[81](#fn_88) that those who had abandoned the Roman
religion should immediately return to the practice of the ceremonies of
their ancestors. Cyprian replied without hesitation, that he was a
Christian and a bishop, devoted to the worship of the true and only
Deity, to whom he offered up his daily supplications for the safety and
prosperity of the two emperors, his lawful sovereigns. With modest
confidence he pleaded the privilege of a citizen, in refusing to give
any answer to some invidious and indeed illegal questions which the
proconsul had proposed. A sentence of banishment was pronounced as the
penalty of Cyprian's disobedience; and he was conducted without delay to
Curubis, a free and maritime city of Zeugitania, in a pleasant
situation, a fertile territory, and at the distance of about forty miles
from Carthage.  <span id="fr_89"></span>[82](#fn_89) The exiled bishop
enjoyed the conveniences of life and the consciousness of virtue. His
reputation was diffused over Africa and Italy; an account of his
behavior was published for the edification of the Christian world;
 <span id="fr_90"></span>[83](#fn_90) and his solitude was frequently
interrupted by the letters, the visits, and the congratulations of the
faithful. On the arrival of a new proconsul in the province the fortune
of Cyprian appeared for some time to wear a still more favorable aspect.
He was recalled from banishment; and though not yet permitted to return
to Carthage, his own gardens in the neighborhood of the capital were
assigned for the place of his residence.  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[84](#fn_91)

At length, exactly one year  <span id="fr_92"></span>[85](#fn_92) after
Cyprian was first apprehended, Galerius Maximus, proconsul of Africa,
received the Imperial warrant for the execution of the Christian
teachers. The bishop of Carthage was sensible that he should be singled
out for one of the first victims; and the frailty of nature tempted him
to withdraw himself, by a secret flight, from the danger and the honor
of martyrdom;  <span id="fr_93"></span>[\*\_0008](#fn_93) but soon
recovering that fortitude which his character required, he returned to
his gardens, and patiently expected the ministers of death. Two officers
of rank, who were intrusted with that commission, placed Cyprian between
them in a chariot, and as the proconsul was not then at leisure, they
conducted him, not to a prison, but to a private house in Carthage,
which belonged to one of them. An elegant supper was provided for the
entertainment of the bishop, and his Christian friends were permitted
for the last time to enjoy his society, whilst the streets were filled
with a multitude of the faithful, anxious and alarmed at the approaching
fate of their spiritual father.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[86](#fn_94) In
the morning he appeared before the tribunal of the proconsul, who, after
informing himself of the name and situation of Cyprian, commanded him to
offer sacrifice, and pressed him to reflect on the consequences of his
disobedience. The refusal of Cyprian was firm and decisive; and the
magistrate, when he had taken the opinion of his council, pronounced
with some reluctance the sentence of death. It was conceived in the
following terms: "That Thascius Cyprianus should be immediately
beheaded, as the enemy of the gods of Rome, and as the chief and
ringleader of a criminal association, which he had seduced into an
impious resistance against the laws of the most holy emperors, Valerian
and Gallienus."  <span id="fr_95"></span>[87](#fn_95) The manner of his
execution was the mildest and least painful that could be inflicted on a
person convicted of any capital offence; nor was the use of torture
admitted to obtain from the bishop of Carthage either the recantation of
his principles or the discovery of his accomplices.

As soon as the sentence was proclaimed, a general cry of "We will die
with him," arose at once among the listening multitude of Christians who
waited before the palace gates. The generous effusions of their zeal and
their affection were neither serviceable to Cyprian nor dangerous to
themselves. He was led away under a guard of tribunes and centurions,
without resistance and without insult, to the place of his execution, a
spacious and level plain near the city, which was already filled with
great numbers of spectators. His faithful presbyters and deacons were
permitted to accompany their holy bishop.  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[\*\_0009](#fn_96) They assisted him in laying aside
his upper garment, spread linen on the ground to catch the precious
relics of his blood, and received his orders to bestow five-and-twenty
pieces of gold on the executioner. The martyr then covered his face with
his hands, and at one blow his head was separated from his body. His
corpse remained during some hours exposed to the curiosity of the
Gentiles: but in the night it was removed, and transported in a
triumphal procession, and with a splendid illumination, to the
burial-place of the Christians. The funeral of Cyprian was publicly
celebrated without receiving any interruption from the Roman
magistrates; and those among the faithful, who had performed the last
offices to his person and his memory, were secure from the danger of
inquiry or of punishment. It is remarkable, that of so great a multitude
of bishops in the province of Africa, Cyprian was the first who was
esteemed worthy to obtain the crown of martyrdom.  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[88](#fn_97)

It was in the choice of Cyprian, either to die a martyr, or to live an
apostate; but on the choice depended the alternative of honor or infamy.
Could we suppose that the bishop of Carthage had employed the profession
of the Christian faith only as the instrument of his avarice or
ambition, it was still incumbent on him to support the character he had
assumed;  <span id="fr_98"></span>[89](#fn_98) and if he possessed the
smallest degree of manly fortitude, rather to expose himself to the most
cruel tortures, than by a single act to exchange the reputation of a
whole life, for the abhorrence of his Christian brethren, and the
contempt of the Gentile world. But if the zeal of Cyprian was supported
by the sincere conviction of the truth of those doctrines which he
preached, the crown of martyrdom must have appeared to him as an object
of desire rather than of terror. It is not easy to extract any distinct
ideas from the vague though eloquent declamations of the Fathers, or to
ascertain the degree of immortal glory and happiness which they
confidently promised to those who were so fortunate as to shed their
blood in the cause of religion.  <span id="fr_99"></span>[90](#fn_99)
They inculcated with becoming diligence, that the fire of martyrdom
supplied every defect and expiated every sin; that while the souls of
ordinary Christians were obliged to pass through a slow and painful
purification, the triumphant sufferers entered into the immediate
fruition of eternal bliss, where, in the society of the patriarchs, the
apostles, and the prophets, they reigned with Christ, and acted as his
assessors in the universal judgment of mankind. The assurance of a
lasting reputation upon earth, a motive so congenial to the vanity of
human nature, often served to animate the courage of the martyrs. The
honors which Rome or Athens bestowed on those citizens who had fallen in
the cause of their country, were cold and unmeaning demonstrations of
respect, when compared with the ardent gratitude and devotion which the
primitive church expressed towards the victorious champions of the
faith. The annual commemoration of their virtues and sufferings was
observed as a sacred ceremony, and at length terminated in religious
worship. Among the Christians who had publicly confessed their religious
principles, those who (as it very frequently happened) had been
dismissed from the tribunal or the prisons of the Pagan magistrates,
obtained such honors as were justly due to their imperfect martyrdom and
their generous resolution. The most pious females courted the permission
of imprinting kisses on the fetters which they had worn, and on the
wounds which they had received. Their persons were esteemed holy, their
decisions were admitted with deference, and they too often abused, by
their spiritual pride and licentious manners, the preeminence which
their zeal and intrepidity had acquired.  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[91](#fn_100) Distinctions like these, whilst they
display the exalted merit, betray the inconsiderable number of those who
suffered, and of those who died, for the profession of Christianity.

The sober discretion of the present age will more readily censure than
admire, but can more easily admire than imitate, the fervor of the first
Christians, who, according to the lively expressions of Sulpicius
Severus, desired martyrdom with more eagerness than his own
contemporaries solicited a bishopric.  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[92](#fn_101) The epistles which Ignatius composed as
he was carried in chains through the cities of Asia, breathe sentiments
the most repugnant to the ordinary feelings of human nature. He
earnestly beseeches the Romans, that when he should be exposed in the
amphitheatre, they would not, by their kind but unseasonable
intercession, deprive him of the crown of glory; and he declares his
resolution to provoke and irritate the wild beasts which might be
employed as the instruments of his death.  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[93](#fn_102) Some stories are related of the courage
of martyrs, who actually performed what Ignatius had intended; who
exasperated the fury of the lions, pressed the executioner to hasten his
office, cheerfully leaped into the fires which were kindled to consume
them, and discovered a sensation of joy and pleasure in the midst of the
most exquisite tortures. Several examples have been preserved of a zeal
impatient of those restraints which the emperors had provided for the
security of the church. The Christians sometimes supplied by their
voluntary declaration the want of an accuser, rudely disturbed the
public service of paganism,  <span id="fr_103"></span>[94](#fn_103) and
rushing in crowds round the tribunal of the magistrates, called upon
them to pronounce and to inflict the sentence of the law. The behavior
of the Christians was too remarkable to escape the notice of the ancient
philosophers; but they seem to have considered it with much less
admiration than astonishment. Incapable of conceiving the motives which
sometimes transported the fortitude of believers beyond the bounds of
prudence or reason, they treated such an eagerness to die as the strange
result of obstinate despair, of stupid insensibility, or of
superstitious frenzy.  <span id="fr_104"></span>[95](#fn_104) "Unhappy
men!" exclaimed the proconsul Antoninus to the Christians of Asia;
"unhappy men! if you are thus weary of your lives, is it so difficult
for you to find ropes and precipices?"  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[96](#fn_105) He was extremely cautious (as it is
observed by a learned and picus historian) of punishing men who had
found no accusers but themselves, the Imperial laws not having made any
provision for so unexpected a case: condemning therefore a few as a
warning to their brethren, he dismissed the multitude with indignation
and contempt.  <span id="fr_106"></span>[97](#fn_106) Notwithstanding
this real or affected disdain, the intrepid constancy of the faithful
was productive of more salutary effects on those minds which nature or
grace had disposed for the easy reception of religious truth. On these
melancholy occasions, there were many among the Gentiles who pitied, who
admired, and who were converted. The generous enthusiasm was
communicated from the sufferer to the spectators; and the blood of
martyrs, according to a well-known observation, became the seed of the
church.

But although devotion had raised, and eloquence continued to inflame,
this fever of the mind, it insensibly gave way to the more natural hopes
and fears of the human heart, to the love of life, the apprehension of
pain, and the horror of dissolution. The more prudent rulers of the
church found themselves obliged to restrain the indiscreet ardor of
their followers, and to distrust a constancy which too often abandoned
them in the hour of trial.  <span id="fr_107"></span>[98](#fn_107) As
the lives of the faithful became less mortified and austere, they were
every day less ambitious of the honors of martyrdom; and the soldiers of
Christ, instead of distinguishing themselves by voluntary deeds of
heroism, frequently deserted their post, and fled in confusion before
the enemy whom it was their duty to resist. There were three methods,
however, of escaping the flames of persecution, which were not attended
with an equal degree of guilt: first, indeed, was generally allowed to
be innocent; the second was of a doubtful, or at least of a venial,
nature; but the third implied a direct and criminal apostasy from the
Christian faith.

I. A modern inquisitor would hear with surprise, that whenever an
information was given to a Roman magistrate of any person within his
jurisdiction who had embraced the sect of the Christians, the charge was
communicated to the party accused, and that a convenient time was
allowed him to settle his domestic concerns, and to prepare an answer to
the crime which was imputed to him.  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[99](#fn_108) If he entertained any doubt of his own
constancy, such a delay afforded him the opportunity of preserving his
life and honor by flight, of withdrawing himself into some obscure
retirement or some distant province, and of patiently expecting the
return of peace and security. A measure so consonant to reason was soon
authorized by the advice and example of the most holy prelates; and
seems to have been censured by few except by the Montanists, who
deviated into heresy by their strict and obstinate adherence to the
rigor of ancient discipline.  <span id="fr_109"></span>[100](#fn_109)
II. The provincial governors, whose zeal was less prevalent than their
avarice, had countenanced the practice of selling certificates, (or
libels, as they were called,) which attested, that the persons therein
mentioned had complied with the laws, and sacrificed to the Roman
deities. By producing these false declarations, the opulent and timid
Christians were enabled to silence the malice of an informer, and to
reconcile in some measure their safety with their religion. A slight
penance atoned for this profane dissimulation.  <span
id="fr_110"></span>[101](#fn_110)  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[\*\_0010](#fn_111) III. In every persecution there
were great numbers of unworthy Christians who publicly disowned or
renounced the faith which they had professed; and who confirmed the
sincerity of their abjuration, by the legal acts of burning incense or
of offering sacrifices. Some of these apostates had yielded on the first
menace or exhortation of the magistrate; whilst the patience of others
had been subdued by the length and repetition of tortures. The
affrighted countenances of some betrayed their inward remorse, while
others advanced with confidence and alacrity to the altars of the gods.
 <span id="fr_112"></span>[102](#fn_112) But the disguise which fear had
imposed, subsisted no longer than the present danger. As soon as the
severity of the persecution was abated, the doors of the churches were
assailed by the returning multitude of penitents who detested their
idolatrous submission, and who solicited with equal ardor, but with
various success, their readmission into the society of Christians.
 <span id="fr_113"></span>[103](#fn_113)  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[!\_0010](#fn_114)

IV\. Notwithstanding the general rules established for the conviction
and punishment of the Christians, the fate of those sectaries, in an
extensive and arbitrary government, must still in a great measure, have
depended on their own behavior, the circumstances of the times, and the
temper of their supreme as well as subordinate rulers. Zeal might
sometimes provoke, and prudence might sometimes avert or assuage, the
superstitious fury of the Pagans. A variety of motives might dispose the
provincial governors either to enforce or to relax the execution of the
laws; and of these motives the most forcible was their regard not only
for the public edicts, but for the secret intentions of the emperor, a
glance from whose eye was sufficient to kindle or to extinguish the
flames of persecution. As often as any occasional severities were
exercised in the different parts of the empire, the primitive Christians
lamented and perhaps magnified their own sufferings; but the celebrated
number of ten persecutions has been determined by the ecclesiastical
writers of the fifth century, who possessed a more distinct view of the
prosperous or adverse fortunes of the church, from the age of Nero to
that of Diocletian. The ingenious parallels of the ten plagues of Egypt,
and of the ten horns of the Apocalypse, first suggested this calculation
to their minds; and in their application of the faith of prophecy to the
truth of history, they were careful to select those reigns which were
indeed the most hostile to the Christian cause.  <span
id="fr_115"></span>[104](#fn_115) But these transient persecutions
served only to revive the zeal and to restore the discipline of the
faithful; and the moments of extraordinary rigor were compensated by
much longer intervals of peace and security. The indifference of some
princes, and the indulgence of others, permitted the Christians to
enjoy, though not perhaps a legal, yet an actual and public, toleration
of their religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[81](daf02004.htm#fr_88) It should seem that
these were circular orders, sent at the same time to all the governors.
Dionysius (ap. Euseb. l. vii. c. 11) relates the history of his own
banishment from Alexandria almost in the same manner. But as he escaped
and survived the persecution, we must account him either more or less
fortunate than Cyprian.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[82](daf02004.htm#fr_89) See Plin. Hist. Natur.
v. 3. Cellarius, Geograph. Antiq. part iii. p. 96. Shaw's Travels, p.
90; and for the adjacent country, (which is terminated by Cape Bona, or
the promontory of Mercury,) l'Afrique de Marmol. tom. ii. p. 494. There
are the remains of an aqueduct near Curubis, or Curbis, at present
altered into Gurbes; and Dr. Shaw read an inscription, which styles that
city Colonia Fulvia. The deacon Pontius (in Vit. Cyprian. c. 12) calls
it "Apricum et competentem locum, hospitium pro voluntate secretum, et
quicquid apponi eis ante promissum est, qui regnum et justitiam Dei
quaerunt."

<span id="fn_90"></span>[83](daf02004.htm#fr_90) See Cyprian. Epistol.
77, edit. Fell.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[84](daf02004.htm#fr_91) Upon his conversion, he
had sold those gardens for the benefit of the poor. The indulgence of
God (most probably the liberality of some Christian friend) restored
them to Cyprian. See Pontius, c. 15.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[85](daf02004.htm#fr_92) When Cyprian; a
twelvemonth before, was sent into exile, he dreamt that he should be put
to death the next day. The event made it necessary to explain that word,
as signifying a year. Pontius, c. 12.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[\*\_0008](daf02004.htm#fr_93) This was not, as
it appears, the motive which induced St. Cyprian to conceal himself for
a short time; he was threatened to be carried to Utica; he preferred
remaining at Carthage, in order to suffer martyrdom in the midst of his
flock, and in order that his death might conduce to the edification of
those whom he had guided during life. Such, at least, is his own
explanation of his conduct in one of his letters: Cum perlatum ad nos
fuisset, fratres carissimi, frumentarios esse missos qui me Uticam per
ducerent, consilioque carissimorum persuasum est, ut de hortis interim
recederemus, justa interveniente causa, consensi; eo quod congruat
episcopum in ea civitate, in qua Ecclesiae dominicae praeest, illie.
Dominum confiteri et plebem universam praepositi praesentis confessione
clarificari Ep. 83. - G

<span id="fn_94"></span>[86](daf02004.htm#fr_94) Pontius (c. 15)
acknowledges that Cyprian, with whom he supped, passed the night
custodia delicata. The bishop exercised a last and very proper act of
jurisdiction, by directing that the younger females, who watched in the
streets, should be removed from the dangers and temptations of a
nocturnal crowd. Act. Preconsularia, c. 2.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[87](daf02004.htm#fr_95) See the original
sentence in the Acts, c. 4; and in Pontius, c. 17 The latter expresses
it in a more rhetorical manner.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[\*\_0009](daf02004.htm#fr_96) There is nothing
in the life of St. Cyprian, by Pontius, nor in the ancient manuscripts,
which can make us suppose that the presbyters and deacons in their
clerical character, and known to be such, had the permission to attend
their holy bishop. Setting aside all religious considerations, it is
impossible not to be surprised at the kind of complaisance with which
the historian here insists, in favor of the persecutors, on some
mitigating circumstances allowed at the death of a man whose only crime
was maintaining his own opinions with frankness and courage. - G.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[88](daf02004.htm#fr_97) Pontius, c. 19. M. de
Tillemont (Memoires, tom. iv. part i. p. 450, note 50) is not pleased
with so positive an exclusion of any former martyr of the episcopal
rank.

Note: M. de. Tillemont, as an honest writer, explains the difficulties
which he felt about the text of Pontius, and concludes by distinctly
stating, that without doubt there is some mistake, and that Pontius must
have meant only Africa Minor or Carthage; for St. Cyprian, in his 58th
(69th) letter addressed to Pupianus, speaks expressly of many bishops
his colleagues, qui proscripti sunt, vel apprehensi in carcere et
catenis fuerunt; aut qui in exilium relegati, illustri itinere ed
Dominum profecti sunt; aut qui quibusdam locis animadversi, coeleses
coronas de Domini clarificatione sumpserunt. - G.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[89](daf02004.htm#fr_98) Whatever opinion we may
entertain of the character or principles of Thomas Becket, we must
acknowledge that he suffered death with a constancy not unworthy of the
primitive martyrs. See Lord Lyttleton's History of Henry II. vol. ii. p.
592, &c.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[90](daf02004.htm#fr_99) See in particular the
treatise of Cyprian de Lapsis, p. 87- 98, edit. Fell. The learning of
Dodwell (Dissertat. Cyprianic. xii. xiii.,) and the ingenuity of
Middleton, (Free Inquiry, p. 162, &c.,) have left scarcely any thing to
add concerning the merit, the honors, and the motives of the martyrs.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[91](daf02004.htm#fr_100) Cyprian. Epistol. 5,
6, 7, 22, 24; and de Unitat. Ecclesiae. The number of pretended martyrs
has been very much multiplied, by the custom which was introduced of
bestowing that honorable name on confessors. Note: M. Guizot denies that
the letters of Cyprian, to which he refers, bear out the statement in
the text. I cannot scruple to admit the accuracy of Gibbon's quotation.
To take only the fifth letter, we find this passage: Doleo enim quando
audio quosdam improbe et insolenter discurrere, et ad ineptian vel ad
discordias vacare, Christi membra et jam Christum confessa per
concubitus illicitos inquinari, nec a diaconis aut presbyteris regi
posse, sed id agere ut per paucorum pravos et malos mores, multorum et
bonorum confessorum gloria honesta maculetur. Gibbon's misrepresentation
lies in the ambiguous expression "too often." Were the epistles arranged
in a different manner in the edition consulted by M. Guizot? - M.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[92](daf02004.htm#fr_101) Certatim gloriosa in
certamina ruebatur; multique avidius tum martyria gloriosis mortibus
quaerebantur, quam nunc Episcopatus pravis ambitionibus appetuntur.
Sulpicius Severus, l. ii. He might have omitted the word nunc.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[93](daf02004.htm#fr_102) See Epist. ad Roman.
c. 4, 5, ap. Patres Apostol. tom. ii. p. 27. It suited the purpose of
Bishop Pearson (see Vindiciae Ignatianae, part ii. c. 9) to justify, by
a profusion of examples and authorities, the sentiments of Ignatius.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[94](daf02004.htm#fr_103) The story of
Polyeuctes, on which Corneille has founded a very beautiful tragedy, is
one of the most celebrated, though not perhaps the most authentic,
instances of this excessive zeal. We should observe, that the 60th canon
of the council of Illiberis refuses the title of martyrs to those who
exposed themselves to death, by publicly destroying the idols.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[95](daf02004.htm#fr_104) See Epictetus, l. iv.
c. 7, (though there is some doubt whether he alludes to the Christians.)
Marcus Antoninus de Rebus suis, l. xi. c. 3 Lucian in Peregrin.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[96](daf02004.htm#fr_105) Tertullian ad Scapul.
c. 5. The learned are divided between three persons of the same name,
who were all proconsuls of Asia. I am inclined to ascribe this story to
Antoninus Pius, who was afterwards emperor; and who may have governed
Asia under the reign of Trajan.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[97](daf02004.htm#fr_106) Mosheim, de Rebus
Christ, ante Constantin. p. 235.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[98](daf02004.htm#fr_107) See the Epistle of
the Church of Smyrna, ap. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. Liv. c. 15

Note: The 15th chapter of the 10th book of the Eccles. History of
Eusebius treats principally of the martyrdom of St. Polycarp, and
mentions some other martyrs. A single example of weakness is related; it
is that of a Phrygian named Quintus, who, appalled at the sight of the
wild beasts and the tortures, renounced his faith. This example proves
little against the mass of Christians, and this chapter of Eusebius
furnished much stronger evidence of their courage than of their
timidity. - G

This Quintus had, however, rashly and of his own accord appeared before
the tribunal; and the church of Smyrna condemn "his indiscreet ardor,"
coupled as it was with weakness in the hour of trial. - M.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[99](daf02004.htm#fr_108) In the second apology
of Justin, there is a particular and very curious instance of this legal
delay. The same indulgence was granted to accused Christians, in the
persecution of Decius: and Cyprian (de Lapsis) expressly mentions the
"Dies negantibus praestitutus."

Note: The examples drawn by the historian from Justin Martyr and Cyprian
relate altogether to particular cases, and prove nothing as to the
general practice adopted towards the accused; it is evident, on the
contrary, from the same apology of St. Justin, that they hardly ever
obtained delay. "A man named Lucius, himself a Christian, present at an
unjust sentence passed against a Christian by the judge Urbicus, asked
him why he thus punished a man who was neither adulterer nor robber, nor
guilty of any other crime but that of avowing himself a Christian."
Urbicus answered only in these words: "Thou also hast the appearance of
being a Christian." "Yes, without doubt," replied Lucius. The judge
ordered that he should be put to death on the instant. A third, who came
up, was condemned to be beaten with rods. Here, then, are three examples
where no delay was granted. \[Surely these acts of a single passionate
and irritated judge prove the general practice as little as those quoted
by Gibbon. - M.\] There exist a multitude of others, such as those of
Ptolemy, Marcellus, &c. Justin expressly charges the judges with
ordering the accused to be executed without hearing the cause. The words
of St. Cyprian are as particular, and simply say, that he had appointed
a day by which the Christians must have renounced their faith; those who
had not done it by that time were condemned. - G. This confirms the
statement in the text. - M.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[100](daf02004.htm#fr_109) Tertullian considers
flight from persecution as an imperfect, but very criminal, apostasy, as
an impious attempt to elude the will of God, &c., &c. He has written a
treatise on this subject, (see p. 536 - 544, edit. Rigalt.,) which is
filled with the wildest fanaticism and the most incoherent declamation.
It is, however, somewhat remarkable, that Tertullian did not suffer
martyrdom himself.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[101](daf02004.htm#fr_110) The libellatici, who
are chiefly known by the writings of Cyprian, are described with the
utmost precision, in the copious commentary of Mosheim, p. 483 - 489.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[\*\_0010](daf02004.htm#fr_111) The penance was
not so slight, for it was exactly the same with that of apostates who
had sacrificed to idols; it lasted several years. See Fleun Hist. Ecc.
v. ii. p. 171. - G.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[102](daf02004.htm#fr_112) Plin. Epist. x. 97.
Dionysius Alexandrin. ap. Euseb. l. vi. c. 41. Ad prima statim verba
minantis inimici maximus fratrum numerus fidem suam prodidit: nec
prostratus est persecutionis impetu, sed voluntario lapsu seipsum
prostravit. Cyprian. Opera, p. 89. Among these deserters were many
priests, and even bishops.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[103](daf02004.htm#fr_113) It was on this
occasion that Cyprian wrote his treatise De Lapsis, and many of his
epistles. The controversy concerning the treatment of penitent
apostates, does not occur among the Christians of the preceding century.
Shall we ascribe this to the superiority of their faith and courage, or
to our less intimate knowledge of their history!

<span id="fn_114"></span>[!\_0010](daf02004.htm#fr_114) Pliny says, that
the greater part of the Christians persisted in avowing themselves to be
so; the reason for his consulting Trajan was the periclitantium numerus.
Eusebius (l. vi. c. 41) does not permit us to doubt that the number of
those who renounced their faith was infinitely below the number of those
who boldly confessed it. The prefect, he says and his assessors present
at the council, were alarmed at seeing the crowd of Christians; the
judges themselves trembled. Lastly, St. Cyprian informs us, that the
greater part of those who had appeared weak brethren in the persecution
of Decius, signalized their courage in that of Gallius. Steterunt
fortes, et ipso dolore poenitentiae facti ad praelium fortiores Epist.
lx. p. 142. - G.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[104](daf02004.htm#fr_115) See Mosheim, p. 97.
Sulpicius Severus was the first author of this computation; though he
seemed desirous of reserving the tenth and greatest persecution for the
coming of the Antichrist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
Constantine. Part V.](daf02005)
