[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf02009) 
[Next](daf02011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE66/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 2*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVII: Foundation Of Constantinople. Part II.

The master of the Roman world, who aspired to erect an eternal monument
of the glories of his reign could employ in the prosecution of that
great work, the wealth, the labor, and all that yet remained of the
genius of obedient millions. Some estimate may be formed of the expense
bestowed with Imperial liberality on the foundation of Constantinople,
by the allowance of about two millions five hundred thousand pounds for
the construction of the walls, the porticos, and the aqueducts.  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[39](#fn_251) The forests that overshadowed the
shores of the Euxine, and the celebrated quarries of white marble in the
little island of Proconnesus, supplied an inexhaustible stock of
materials, ready to be conveyed, by the convenience of a short water
carriage, to the harbor of Byzantium.  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[40](#fn_252) A multitude of laborers and artificers
urged the conclusion of the work with incessant toil: but the impatience
of Constantine soon discovered, that, in the decline of the arts, the
skill as well as numbers of his architects bore a very unequal
proportion to the greatness of his designs. The magistrates of the most
distant provinces were therefore directed to institute schools, to
appoint professors, and by the hopes of rewards and privileges, to
engage in the study and practice of architecture a sufficient number of
ingenious youths, who had received a liberal education.  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[41](#fn_253) The buildings of the new city were
executed by such artificers as the reign of Constantine could afford;
but they were decorated by the hands of the most celebrated masters of
the age of Pericles and Alexander. To revive the genius of Phidias and
Lysippus, surpassed indeed the power of a Roman emperor; but the
immortal productions which they had bequeathed to posterity were exposed
without defence to the rapacious vanity of a despot. By his commands the
cities of Greece and Asia were despoiled of their most valuable
ornaments.  <span id="fr_254"></span>[42](#fn_254) The trophies of
memorable wars, the objects of religious veneration, the most finished
statues of the gods and heroes, of the sages and poets, of ancient
times, contributed to the splendid triumph of Constantinople; and gave
occasion to the remark of the historian Cedrenus,  <span
id="fr_255"></span>[43](#fn_255) who observes, with some enthusiasm,
that nothing seemed wanting except the souls of the illustrious men whom
these admirable monuments were intended to represent. But it is not in
the city of Constantine, nor in the declining period of an empire, when
the human mind was depressed by civil and religious slavery, that we
should seek for the souls of Homer and of Demosthenes.

During the siege of Byzantium, the conqueror had pitched his tent on the
commanding eminence of the second hill. To perpetuate the memory of his
success, he chose the same advantageous position for the principal
Forum;  <span id="fr_256"></span>[44](#fn_256) which appears to have
been of a circular, or rather elliptical form. The two opposite
entrances formed triumphal arches; the porticos, which enclosed it on
every side, were filled with statues; and the centre of the Forum was
occupied by a lofty column, of which a mutilated fragment is now
degraded by the appellation of the burnt pillar. This column was erected
on a pedestal of white marble twenty feet high; and was composed of ten
pieces of porphyry, each of which measured about ten feet in height, and
about thirty-three in circumference.  <span
id="fr_257"></span>[45](#fn_257) On the summit of the pillar, above one
hundred and twenty feet from the ground, stood the colossal statue of
Apollo. It was a bronze, had been transported either from Athens or from
a town of Phrygia, and was supposed to be the work of Phidias. The
artist had represented the god of day, or, as it was afterwards
interpreted, the emperor Constantine himself, with a sceptre in his
right hand, the globe of the world in his left, and a crown of rays
glittering on his head.  <span id="fr_258"></span>[46](#fn_258) The
Circus, or Hippodrome, was a stately building about four hundred paces
in length, and one hundred in breadth.  <span
id="fr_259"></span>[47](#fn_259) The space between the two metoe or
goals were filled with statues and obelisks; and we may still remark a
very singular fragment of antiquity; the bodies of three serpents,
twisted into one pillar of brass. Their triple heads had once supported
the golden tripod which, after the defeat of Xerxes, was consecrated in
the temple of Delphi by the victorious Greeks.  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[48](#fn_260) The beauty of the Hippodrome has been
long since defaced by the rude hands of the Turkish conquerors;  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[!\_0024](#fn_261) but, under the similar appellation
of Atmeidan, it still serves as a place of exercise for their horses.
From the throne, whence the emperor viewed the Circensian games, a
winding staircase  <span id="fr_262"></span>[49](#fn_262) descended to
the palace; a magnificent edifice, which scarcely yielded to the
residence of Rome itself, and which, together with the dependent courts,
gardens, and porticos, covered a considerable extent of ground upon the
banks of the Propontis between the Hippodrome and the church of St.
Sophia.  <span id="fr_263"></span>[50](#fn_263) We might likewise
celebrate the baths, which still retained the name of Zeuxippus, after
they had been enriched, by the munificence of Constantine, with lofty
columns, various marbles, and above threescore statues of bronze.  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[51](#fn_264) But we should deviate from the design
of this history, if we attempted minutely to describe the different
buildings or quarters of the city. It may be sufficient to observe, that
whatever could adorn the dignity of a great capital, or contribute to
the benefit or pleasure of its numerous inhabitants, was contained
within the walls of Constantinople. A particular description, composed
about a century after its foundation, enumerates a capitol or school of
learning, a circus, two theatres, eight public, and one hundred and
fifty-three private baths, fifty-two porticos, five granaries, eight
aqueducts or reservoirs of water, four spacious halls for the meetings
of the senate or courts of justice, fourteen churches, fourteen palaces,
and four thousand three hundred and eighty-eight houses, which, for
their size or beauty, deserved to be distinguished from the multitude of
plebeian inhabitants.  <span id="fr_265"></span>[52](#fn_265)

The populousness of his favored city was the next and most serious
object of the attention of its founder. In the dark ages which succeeded
the translation of the empire, the remote and the immediate consequences
of that memorable event were strangely confounded by the vanity of the
Greeks and the credulity of the Latins.  <span
id="fr_266"></span>[53](#fn_266) It was asserted, and believed, that all
the noble families of Rome, the senate, and the equestrian order, with
their innumerable attendants, had followed their emperor to the banks of
the Propontis; that a spurious race of strangers and plebeians was left
to possess the solitude of the ancient capital; and that the lands of
Italy, long since converted into gardens, were at once deprived of
cultivation and inhabitants.  <span id="fr_267"></span>[54](#fn_267) In
the course of this history, such exaggerations will be reduced to their
just value: yet, since the growth of Constantinople cannot be ascribed
to the general increase of mankind and of industry, it must be admitted
that this artificial colony was raised at the expense of the ancient
cities of the empire. Many opulent senators of Rome, and of the eastern
provinces, were probably invited by Constantine to adopt for their
country the fortunate spot, which he had chosen for his own residence.
The invitations of a master are scarcely to be distinguished from
commands; and the liberality of the emperor obtained a ready and
cheerful obedience. He bestowed on his favorites the palaces which he
had built in the several quarters of the city, assigned them lands and
pensions for the support of their dignity,  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[55](#fn_268) and alienated the demesnes of Pontus
and Asia to grant hereditary estates by the easy tenure of maintaining a
house in the capital.  <span id="fr_269"></span>[56](#fn_269) But these
encouragements and obligations soon became superfluous, and were
gradually abolished. Wherever the seat of government is fixed, a
considerable part of the public revenue will be expended by the prince
himself, by his ministers, by the officers of justice, and by the
domestics of the palace. The most wealthy of the provincials will be
attracted by the powerful motives of interest and duty, of amusement and
curiosity. A third and more numerous class of inhabitants will
insensibly be formed, of servants, of artificers, and of merchants, who
derive their subsistence from their own labor, and from the wants or
luxury of the superior ranks. In less than a century, Constantinople
disputed with Rome itself the preeminence of riches and numbers. New
piles of buildings, crowded together with too little regard to health or
convenience, scarcely allowed the intervals of narrow streets for the
perpetual throng of men, of horses, and of carriages. The allotted space
of ground was insufficient to contain the increasing people; and the
additional foundations, which, on either side, were advanced into the
sea, might alone have composed a very considerable city.  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[57](#fn_270)

The frequent and regular distributions of wine and oil, of corn or
bread, of money or provisions, had almost exempted the poorest citizens
of Rome from the necessity of labor. The magnificence of the first
Caesars was in some measure imitated by the founder of Constantinople:
 <span id="fr_271"></span>[58](#fn_271) but his liberality, however it
might excite the applause of the people, has in curred the censure of
posterity. A nation of legislators and conquerors might assert their
claim to the harvests of Africa, which had been purchased with their
blood; and it was artfully contrived by Augustus, that, in the enjoyment
of plenty, the Romans should lose the memory of freedom. But the
prodigality of Constantine could not be excused by any consideration
either of public or private interest; and the annual tribute of corn
imposed upon Egypt for the benefit of his new capital, was applied to
feed a lazy and insolent populace, at the expense of the husbandmen of
an industrious province.  <span id="fr_272"></span>[59](#fn_272)  <span
id="fr_273"></span>[\*\_0025](#fn_273) Some other regulations of this
emperor are less liable to blame, but they are less deserving of notice.
He divided Constantinople into fourteen regions or quarters,  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[60](#fn_274) dignified the public council with the
appellation of senate,  <span id="fr_275"></span>[61](#fn_275)
communicated to the citizens the privileges of Italy,  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[62](#fn_276) and bestowed on the rising city the
title of Colony, the first and most favored daughter of ancient Rome.
The venerable parent still maintained the legal and acknowledged
supremacy, which was due to her age, her dignity, and to the remembrance
of her former greatness.  <span id="fr_277"></span>[63](#fn_277)

As Constantine urged the progress of the work with the impatience of a
lover, the walls, the porticos, and the principal edifices were
completed in a few years, or, according to another account, in a few
months;  <span id="fr_278"></span>[64](#fn_278) but this extraordinary
diligence should excite the less admiration, since many of the buildings
were finished in so hasty and imperfect a manner, that under the
succeeding reign, they were preserved with difficulty from impending
ruin.  <span id="fr_279"></span>[65](#fn_279) But while they displayed
the vigor and freshness of youth, the founder prepared to celebrate the
dedication of his city.  <span id="fr_280"></span>[66](#fn_280) The
games and largesses which crowned the pomp of this memorable festival
may easily be supposed; but there is one circumstance of a more singular
and permanent nature, which ought not entirely to be overlooked. As
often as the birthday of the city returned, the statute of Constantine,
framed by his order, of gilt wood, and bearing in his right hand a small
image of the genius of the place, was erected on a triumphal car. The
guards, carrying white tapers, and clothed in their richest apparel,
accompanied the solemn procession as it moved through the Hippodrome.
When it was opposite to the throne of the reigning emperor, he rose from
his seat, and with grateful reverence adored the memory of his
predecessor.  <span id="fr_281"></span>[67](#fn_281) At the festival of
the dedication, an edict, engraved on a column of marble, bestowed the
title of Second or New Rome on the city of Constantine.  <span
id="fr_282"></span>[68](#fn_282) But the name of Constantinople  <span
id="fr_283"></span>[69](#fn_283) has prevailed over that honorable
epithet; and after the revolution of fourteen centuries, still
perpetuates the fame of its author.  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[70](#fn_284)

The foundation of a new capital is naturally connected with the
establishment of a new form of civil and military administration. The
distinct view of the complicated system of policy, introduced by
Diocletian, improved by Constantine, and completed by his immediate
successors, may not only amuse the fancy by the singular picture of a
great empire, but will tend to illustrate the secret and internal causes
of its rapid decay. In the pursuit of any remarkable institution, we may
be frequently led into the more early or the more recent times of the
Roman history; but the proper limits of this inquiry will be included
within a period of about one hundred and thirty years, from the
accession of Constantine to the publication of the Theodosian code;
 <span id="fr_285"></span>[71](#fn_285) from which, as well as from the
Notitia  <span id="fr_286"></span>[\*\_0026](#fn_286) of the East and
West,  <span id="fr_287"></span>[72](#fn_287) we derive the most copious
and authentic information of the state of the empire. This variety of
objects will suspend, for some time, the course of the narrative; but
the interruption will be censured only by those readers who are
insensible to the importance of laws and manners, while they peruse,
with eager curiosity, the transient intrigues of a court, or the
accidental event of a battle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_251"></span>[39](daf02010.htm#fr_251) Six hundred
centenaries, or sixty thousand pounds' weight of gold. This sum is taken
from Codinus, Antiquit. Const. p. 11; but unless that contemptible
author had derived his information from some purer sources, he would
probably have been unacquainted with so obsolete a mode of reckoning.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[40](daf02010.htm#fr_252) For the forests of
the Black Sea, consult Tournefort, Lettre XVI. for the marble quarries
of Proconnesus, see Strabo, l. xiii. p. 588, (881, edit. Casaub.) The
latter had already furnished the materials of the stately buildings of
Cyzicus.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[41](daf02010.htm#fr_253) See the Codex
Theodos. l. xiii. tit. iv. leg. 1. This law is dated in the year 334,
and was addressed to the praefect of Italy, whose jurisdiction extended
over Africa. The commentary of Godefroy on the whole title well deserves
to be consulted.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[42](daf02010.htm#fr_254) Constantinopolis
dedicatur poene omnium urbium nuditate. Hieronym. Chron. p. 181. See
Codinus, p. 8, 9. The author of the Antiquitat. Const. l. iii. (apud
Banduri Imp. Orient. tom. i. p. 41) enumerates Rome, Sicily, Antioch,
Athens, and a long list of other cities. The provinces of Greece and
Asia Minor may be supposed to have yielded the richest booty.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[43](daf02010.htm#fr_255) Hist. Compend. p.
369. He describes the statue, or rather bust, of Homer with a degree of
taste which plainly indicates that Cadrenus copied the style of a more
fortunate age.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[44](daf02010.htm#fr_256) Zosim. l. ii. p. 106.
Chron. Alexandrin. vel Paschal. p. 284, Ducange, Const. l. i. c. 24.
Even the last of those writers seems to confound the Forum of
Constantine with the Augusteum, or court of the palace. I am not
satisfied whether I have properly distinguished what belongs to the one
and the other.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[45](daf02010.htm#fr_257) The most tolerable
account of this column is given by Pocock. Description of the East, vol.
ii. part ii. p. 131. But it is still in many instances perplexed and
unsatisfactory.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[46](daf02010.htm#fr_258) Ducange, Const. l. i.
c. 24, p. 76, and his notes ad Alexiad. p. 382. The statue of
Constantine or Apollo was thrown down under the reign of Alexius
Comnenus.

Note: On this column (says M. von Hammer) Constantine, with singular
shamelessness, placed his own statue with the attributes of Apollo and
Christ. He substituted the nails of the Passion for the rays of the sun.
Such is the direct testimony of the author of the Antiquit.
Constantinop. apud Banduri. Constantine was replaced by the "great and
religious" Julian, Julian, by Theodosius. A. D. 1412, the key stone was
loosened by an earthquake. The statue fell in the reign of Alexius
Comnenus, and was replaced by the cross. The Palladium was said to be
buried under the pillar. Von Hammer, Constantinopolis und der Bosporos,
i. 162. - M.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[47](daf02010.htm#fr_259) Tournefort (Lettre
XII.) computes the Atmeidan at four hundred paces. If he means
geometrical paces of five feet each, it was three hundred toises in
length, about forty more than the great circus of Rome. See D'Anville,
Mesures Itineraires, p. 73.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[48](daf02010.htm#fr_260) The guardians of the
most holy relics would rejoice if they were able to produce such a chain
of evidence as may be alleged on this occasion. See Banduri ad
Antiquitat. Const. p. 668. Gyllius de Byzant. l. ii. c. 13. 1. The
original consecration of the tripod and pillar in the temple of Delphi
may be proved from Herodotus and Pausanias. 2. The Pagan Zosimus agrees
with the three ecclesiastical historians, Eusebius, Socrates, and
Sozomen, that the sacred ornaments of the temple of Delphi were removed
to Constantinople by the order of Constantine; and among these the
serpentine pillar of the Hippodrome is particularly mentioned. 3. All
the European travellers who have visited Constantinople, from
Buondelmonte to Pocock, describe it in the same place, and almost in the
same manner; the differences between them are occasioned only by the
injuries which it has sustained from the Turks. Mahomet the Second broke
the under jaw of one of the serpents with a stroke of his battle axe
Thevenot, l. i. c. 17.

Note: See note 75, ch. lxviii. for Dr. Clarke's rejection of Thevenot's
authority. Von Hammer, however, repeats the story of Thevenot without
questioning its authenticity. - M.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[!\_0024](daf02010.htm#fr_261) In 1808 the
Janizaries revolted against the vizier Mustapha Baisactar, who wished to
introduce a new system of military organization, besieged the quarter of
the Hippodrome, in which stood the palace of the viziers, and the
Hippodrome was consumed in the conflagration. - G.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[49](daf02010.htm#fr_262) The Latin name
Cochlea was adopted by the Greeks, and very frequently occurs in the
Byzantine history. Ducange, Const. i. c. l, p. 104.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[50](daf02010.htm#fr_263) There are three
topographical points which indicate the situation of the palace. 1. The
staircase which connected it with the Hippodrome or Atmeidan. 2. A small
artificial port on the Propontis, from whence there was an easy ascent,
by a flight of marble steps, to the gardens of the palace. 3. The
Augusteum was a spacious court, one side of which was occupied by the
front of the palace, and another by the church of St. Sophia.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[51](daf02010.htm#fr_264) Zeuxippus was an
epithet of Jupiter, and the baths were a part of old Byzantium. The
difficulty of assigning their true situation has not been felt by
Ducange. History seems to connect them with St. Sophia and the palace;
but the original plan inserted in Banduri places them on the other side
of the city, near the harbor. For their beauties, see Chron. Paschal. p.
285, and Gyllius de Byzant. l. ii. c. 7. Christodorus (see Antiquitat.
Const. l. vii.) composed inscriptions in verse for each of the statues.
He was a Theban poet in genius as well as in birth: -

Baeotum in crasso jurares aere natum.

Note: Yet, for his age, the description of the statues of Hecuba and of
Homer are by no means without merit. See Antholog. Palat. (edit. Jacobs)
i. 37 - M.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[52](daf02010.htm#fr_265) See the Notitia. Rome
only reckoned 1780 large houses, domus; but the word must have had a
more dignified signification. No insulae are mentioned at
Constantinople. The old capital consisted of 42 streets, the new of 322.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[53](daf02010.htm#fr_266) Liutprand, Legatio ad
Imp. Nicephornm, p. 153. The modern Greeks have strangely disfigured the
antiquities of Constantinople. We might excuse the errors of the Turkish
or Arabian writers; but it is somewhat astonishing, that the Greeks, who
had access to the authentic materials preserved in their own language,
should prefer fiction to truth, and loose tradition to genuine history.
In a single page of Codinus we may detect twelve unpardonable mistakes;
the reconciliation of Severus and Niger, the marriage of their son and
daughter, the siege of Byzantium by the Macedonians, the invasion of the
Gauls, which recalled Severus to Rome, the sixty years which elapsed
from his death to the foundation of Constantinople, &c.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[54](daf02010.htm#fr_267) Montesquieu, Grandeur
et Decadence des Romains, c. 17.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[55](daf02010.htm#fr_268) Themist. Orat. iii.
p. 48, edit. Hardouin. Sozomen, l. ii. c. 3. Zosim. l. ii. p. 107.
Anonym. Valesian. p. 715. If we could credit Codinus, (p. 10,)
Constantine built houses for the senators on the exact model of their
Roman palaces, and gratified them, as well as himself, with the pleasure
of an agreeable surprise; but the whole story is full of fictions and
inconsistencies.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[56](daf02010.htm#fr_269) The law by which the
younger Theodosius, in the year 438, abolished this tenure, may be found
among the Novellae of that emperor at the end of the Theodosian Code,
tom. vi. nov. 12. M. de Tillemont (Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iv. p. 371)
has evidently mistaken the nature of these estates. With a grant from
the Imperial demesnes, the same condition was accepted as a favor, which
would justly have been deemed a hardship, if it had been imposed upon
private property.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[57](daf02010.htm#fr_270) The passages of
Zosimus, of Eunapius, of Sozomen, and of Agathias, which relate to the
increase of buildings and inhabitants at Constantinople, are collected
and connected by Gyllius de Byzant. l. i. c. 3. Sidonius Apollinaris (in
Panegyr. Anthem. 56, p. 279, edit. Sirmond) describes the moles that
were pushed forwards into the sea, they consisted of the famous Puzzolan
sand, which hardens in the water.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[58](daf02010.htm#fr_271) Sozomen, l. ii. c. 3.
Philostorg. l. ii. c. 9. Codin. Antiquitat. Const. p. 8. It appears by
Socrates, l. ii. c. 13, that the daily allowance of the city consisted
of eight myriads of which we may either translate, with Valesius, by the
words modii of corn, or consider us expressive of the number of loaves
of bread.

Note: At Rome the poorer citizens who received these gratuities were
inscribed in a register; they had only a personal right. Constantine
attached the right to the houses in his new capital, to engage the lower
classes of the people to build their houses with expedition. Codex
Therodos. l. xiv. - G.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[59](daf02010.htm#fr_272) See Cod. Theodos. l.
xiii. and xiv., and Cod. Justinian. Edict. xii. tom. ii. p. 648, edit.
Genev. See the beautiful complaint of Rome in the poem of Claudian de
Bell. Gildonico, ver. 46-64.

Cum subiit par Roma mihi, divisaque sumsit Aequales aurora togas;
Aegyptia rura In partem cessere novam.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[\*\_0025](daf02010.htm#fr_273) This was also
at the expense of Rome. The emperor ordered that the fleet of Alexandria
should transport to Constantinople the grain of Egypt which it carried
before to Rome: this grain supplied Rome during four months of the year.
Claudian has described with force the famine occasioned by this measure:
-

Haec nobis, haec ante dabas; nunc pabula tantum Roma precor: miserere
tuae; pater optime, gentis: Extremam defende famem.

Claud. de Bell. Gildon. v. 34.

\- G.

It was scarcely this measure. Gildo had cut off the African as well as
the Egyptian supplies. - M.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[60](daf02010.htm#fr_274) The regions of
Constantinople are mentioned in the code of Justinian, and particularly
described in the Notitia of the younger Theodosius; but as the four last
of them are not included within the wall of Constantine, it may be
doubted whether this division of the city should be referred to the
founder.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[61](daf02010.htm#fr_275) Senatum constituit
secundi ordinis; Claros vocavit. Anonym Valesian. p. 715. The senators
of old Rome were styled Clarissimi. See a curious note of Valesius ad
Ammian. Marcellin. xxii. 9. From the eleventh epistle of Julian, it
should seem that the place of senator was considered as a burden, rather
than as an honor; but the Abbe de la Bleterie (Vie de Jovien, tom. ii.
p. 371) has shown that this epistle could not relate to Constantinople.
Might we not read, instead of the celebrated name of the obscure but
more probable word Bisanthe or Rhoedestus, now Rhodosto, was a small
maritime city of Thrace. See Stephan. Byz. de Urbibus, p. 225, and
Cellar. Geograph. tom. i. p. 849.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[62](daf02010.htm#fr_276) Cod. Theodos. l. xiv.
13. The commentary of Godefroy (tom. v. p. 220) is long, but perplexed;
nor indeed is it easy to ascertain in what the Jus Italicum could
consist, after the freedom of the city had been communicated to the
whole empire.

Note: "This right, (the Jus Italicum,) which by most writers is referred
with out foundation to the personal condition of the citizens, properly
related to the city as a whole, and contained two parts. First, the
Roman or quiritarian property in the soil, (commercium,) and its
capability of mancipation, usucaption, and vindication; moreover, as an
inseparable consequence of this, exemption from land-tax. Then,
secondly, a free constitution in the Italian form, with Duumvirs,
Quinquennales. and Aediles, and especially with Jurisdiction." Savigny,
Geschichte des Rom. Rechts i. p. 51 - M.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[63](daf02010.htm#fr_277) Julian (Orat. i. p.
8) celebrates Constantinople as not less superior to all other cities
than she was inferior to Rome itself. His learned commentator (Spanheim,
p. 75, 76) justifies this language by several parallel and contemporary
instances. Zosimus, as well as Socrates and Sozomen, flourished after
the division of the empire between the two sons of Theodosius, which
established a perfect equality between the old and the new capital.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[64](daf02010.htm#fr_278) Codinus (Antiquitat.
p. 8) affirms, that the foundations of Constantinople were laid in the
year of the world 5837, (A. D. 329,) on the 26th of September, and that
the city was dedicated the 11th of May, 5838, (A. D. 330.) He connects
those dates with several characteristic epochs, but they contradict each
other; the authority of Codinus is of little weight, and the space which
he assigns must appear insufficient. The term of ten years is given us
by Julian, (Orat. i. p. 8;) and Spanheim labors to establish the truth
of it, (p. 69-75,) by the help of two passages from Themistius, (Orat.
iv. p. 58,) and of Philostorgius, (l. ii. c. 9,) which form a period
from the year 324 to the year 334. Modern critics are divided concerning
this point of chronology and their different sentiments are very
accurately described by Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iv. p.
619-625.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[65](daf02010.htm#fr_279) Themistius. Orat.
iii. p. 47. Zosim. l. ii. p. 108. Constantine himself, in one of his
laws, (Cod. Theod. l. xv. tit. i.,) betrays his impatience.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[66](daf02010.htm#fr_280) Cedrenus and Zonaras,
faithful to the mode of superstition which prevailed in their own times,
assure us that Constantinople was consecrated to the virgin Mother of
God.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[67](daf02010.htm#fr_281) The earliest and most
complete account of this extraordinary ceremony may be found in the
Alexandrian Chronicle, p. 285. Tillemont, and the other friends of
Constantine, who are offended with the air of Paganism which seems
unworthy of a Christian prince, had a right to consider it as doubtful,
but they were not authorized to omit the mention of it.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[68](daf02010.htm#fr_282) Sozomen, l. ii. c. 2.
Ducange C. P. l. i. c. 6. Velut ipsius Romae filiam, is the expression
of Augustin. de Civitat. Dei, l. v. c. 25.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[69](daf02010.htm#fr_283) Eutropius, l. x. c.
8. Julian. Orat. i. p. 8. Ducange C. P. l. i. c. 5. The name of
Constantinople is extant on the medals of Constantine.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[70](daf02010.htm#fr_284) The lively Fontenelle
(Dialogues des Morts, xii.) affects to deride the vanity of human
ambition, and seems to triumph in the disappointment of Constantine,
whose immortal name is now lost in the vulgar appellation of Istambol, a
Turkish corruption of. Yet the original name is still preserved, 1. By
the nations of Europe. 2. By the modern Greeks. 3. By the Arabs, whose
writings are diffused over the wide extent of their conquests in Asia
and Africa. See D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, p. 275. 4. By the
more learned Turks, and by the emperor himself in his public mandates
Cantemir's History of the Othman Empire, p. 51.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[71](daf02010.htm#fr_285) The Theodosian code
was promulgated A. D. 438. See the Prolegomena of Godefroy, c. i. p.
185.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[\*\_0026](daf02010.htm#fr_286) The Notitia
Dignitatum Imperii is a description of all the offices in the court and
the state, of the legions, &c. It resembles our court almanacs, (Red
Books,) with this single difference, that our almanacs name the persons
in office, the Notitia only the offices. It is of the time of the
emperor Theodosius II., that is to say, of the fifth century, when the
empire was divided into the Eastern and Western. It is probable that it
was not made for the first time, and that descriptions of the same kind
existed before. - G.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[72](daf02010.htm#fr_287) Pancirolus, in his
elaborate Commentary, assigns to the Notitia a date almost similar to
that of the Theodosian Code; but his proofs, or rather conjectures, are
extremely feeble. I should be rather inclined to place this useful work
between the final division of the empire (A. D. 395) and the successful
invasion of Gaul by the barbarians, (A. D. 407.) See Histoire des
Anciens Peuples de l'Europe, tom. vii. p. 40.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII: Foundation Of Constantinople. Part III.](daf02011)
