[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf02025) 
[Next](daf02027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE66/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 2*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XX: Conversion Of Constantine. Part IV.

III\. The edict of Milan secured the revenue as well as the peace of the
church.  <span id="fr_736"></span>[101](#fn_735) The Christians not only
recovered the lands and houses of which they had been stripped by the
persecuting laws of Diocletian, but they acquired a perfect title to all
the possessions which they had hitherto enjoyed by the connivance of the
magistrate. As soon as Christianity became the religion of the emperor
and the empire, the national clergy might claim a decent and honorable
maintenance; and the payment of an annual tax might have delivered the
people from the more oppressive tribute, which superstition imposes on
her votaries. But as the wants and expenses of the church increased with
her prosperity, the ecclesiastical order was still supported and
enriched by the voluntary oblations of the faithful. Eight years after
the edict of Milan, Constantine granted to all his subjects the free and
universal permission of bequeathing their fortunes to the holy Catholic
church;  <span id="fr_737"></span>[102](#fn_736) and their devout
liberality, which during their lives was checked by luxury or avarice,
flowed with a profuse stream at the hour of their death. The wealthy
Christians were encouraged by the example of their sovereign. An
absolute monarch, who is rich without patrimony, may be charitable
without merit; and Constantine too easily believed that he should
purchase the favor of Heaven, if he maintained the idle at the expense
of the industrious; and distributed among the saints the wealth of the
republic. The same messenger who carried over to Africa the head of
Maxentius, might be intrusted with an epistle to Caecilian, bishop of
Carthage. The emperor acquaints him, that the treasurers of the province
are directed to pay into his hands the sum of three thousand folles, or
eighteen thousand pounds sterling, and to obey his further requisitions
for the relief of the churches of Africa, Numidia, and Mauritania.
 <span id="fr_738"></span>[103](#fn_737) The liberality of Constantine
increased in a just proportion to his faith, and to his vices. He
assigned in each city a regular allowance of corn, to supply the fund of
ecclesiastical charity; and the persons of both sexes who embraced the
monastic life became the peculiar favorites of their sovereign. The
Christian temples of Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem, Constantinople &c.,
displayed the ostentatious piety of a prince, ambitious in a declining
age to equal the perfect labors of antiquity.  <span
id="fr_739"></span>[104](#fn_738) The form of these religious edifices
was simple and oblong; though they might sometimes swell into the shape
of a dome, and sometimes branch into the figure of a cross. The timbers
were framed for the most part of cedars of Libanus; the roof was covered
with tiles, perhaps of gilt brass; and the walls, the columns, the
pavement, were encrusted with variegated marbles. The most precious
ornaments of gold and silver, of silk and gems, were profusely dedicated
to the service of the altar; and this specious magnificence was
supported on the solid and perpetual basis of landed property. In the
space of two centuries, from the reign of Constantine to that of
Justinian, the eighteen hundred churches of the empire were enriched by
the frequent and unalienable gifts of the prince and people. An annual
income of six hundred pounds sterling may be reasonably assigned to the
bishops, who were placed at an equal distance between riches and
poverty,  <span id="fr_740"></span>[105](#fn_739) but the standard of
their wealth insensibly rose with the dignity and opulence of the cities
which they governed. An authentic but imperfect  <span
id="fr_741"></span>[106](#fn_740) rent-roll specifies some houses,
shops, gardens, and farms, which belonged to the three Basilicoe of
Rome, St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. John Lateran, in the provinces of
Italy, Africa, and the East. They produce, besides a reserved rent of
oil, linen, paper, aromatics, &c., a clear annual revenue of twenty-two
thousand pieces of gold, or twelve thousand pounds sterling. In the age
of Constantine and Justinian, the bishops no longer possessed, perhaps
they no longer deserved, the unsuspecting confidence of their clergy and
people. The ecclesiastical revenues of each diocese were divided into
four parts for the respective uses of the bishop himself, of his
inferior clergy, of the poor, and of the public worship; and the abuse
of this sacred trust was strictly and repeatedly checked.  <span
id="fr_742"></span>[107](#fn_741) The patrimony of the church was still
subject to all the public compositions of the state.  <span
id="fr_743"></span>[108](#fn_742) The clergy of Rome, Alexandria,
Chessaionica, &c., might solicit and obtain some partial exemptions; but
the premature attempt of the great council of Rimini, which aspired to
universal freedom, was successfully resisted by the son of Constantine.
 <span id="fr_744"></span>[109](#fn_743)

IV\. The Latin clergy, who erected their tribunal on the ruins of the
civil and common law, have modestly accepted, as the gift of
Constantine,  <span id="fr_745"></span>[110](#fn_744) the independent
jurisdiction, which was the fruit of time, of accident, and of their own
industry. But the liberality of the Christian emperors had actually
endowed them with some legal prerogatives, which secured and dignified
the sacerdotal character.  <span id="fr_746"></span>[111](#fn_745) 1.
Under a despotic government, the bishops alone enjoyed and asserted the
inestimable privilege of being tried only by their peers; and even in a
capital accusation, a synod of their brethren were the sole judges of
their guilt or innocence. Such a tribunal, unless it was inflamed by
personal resentment or religious discord, might be favorable, or even
partial, to the sacerdotal order: but Constantine was satisfied,  <span
id="fr_747"></span>[112](#fn_746) that secret impunity would be less
pernicious than public scandal: and the Nicene council was edited by his
public declaration, that if he surprised a bishop in the act of
adultery, he should cast his Imperial mantle over the episcopal sinner.
2. The domestic jurisdiction of the bishops was at once a privilege and
a restraint of the ecclesiastical order, whose civil causes were
decently withdrawn from the cognizance of a secular judge. Their venial
offences were not exposed to the shame of a public trial or punishment;
and the gentle correction which the tenderness of youth may endure from
its parents or instructors, was inflicted by the temperate severity of
the bishops. But if the clergy were guilty of any crime which could not
be sufficiently expiated by their degradation from an honorable and
beneficial profession, the Roman magistrate drew the sword of justice,
without any regard to ecclesiastical immunities. 3. The arbitration of
the bishops was ratified by a positive law; and the judges were
instructed to execute, without appeal or delay, the episcopal decrees,
whose validity had hitherto depended on the consent of the parties. The
conversion of the magistrates themselves, and of the whole empire, might
gradually remove the fears and scruples of the Christians. But they
still resorted to the tribunal of the bishops, whose abilities and
integrity they esteemed; and the venerable Austin enjoyed the
satisfaction of complaining that his spiritual functions were
perpetually interrupted by the invidious labor of deciding the claim or
the possession of silver and gold, of lands and cattle. 4. The ancient
privilege of sanctuary was transferred to the Christian temples, and
extended, by the liberal piety of the younger Theodosius, to the
precincts of consecrated ground.  <span
id="fr_748"></span>[113](#fn_747) The fugitive, and even guilty
suppliants,were permitted to implore either the justice, or the mercy,
of the Deity and his ministers. The rash violence of despotism was
suspended by the mild interposition of the church; and the lives or
fortunes of the most eminent subjects might be protected by the
mediation of the bishop.

V. The bishop was the perpetual censor of the morals of his people The
discipline of penance was digested into a system of canonical
jurisprudence,  <span id="fr_749"></span>[114](#fn_748) which accurately
defined the duty of private or public confession, the rules of evidence,
the degrees of guilt, and the measure of punishment. It was impossible
to execute this spiritual censure, if the Christian pontiff, who
punished the obscure sins of the multitude, respected the conspicuous
vices and destructive crimes of the magistrate: but it was impossible to
arraign the conduct of the magistrate, without, controlling the
administration of civil government. Some considerations of religion, or
loyalty, or fear, protected the sacred persons of the emperors from the
zeal or resentment of the bishops; but they boldly censured and
excommunicated the subordinate tyrants, who were not invested with the
majesty of the purple. St. Athanasius excommunicated one of the
ministers of Egypt; and the interdict which he pronounced, of fire and
water, was solemnly transmitted to the churches of Cappadocia.  <span
id="fr_750"></span>[115](#fn_749) Under the reign of the younger
Theodosius, the polite and eloquent Synesius, one of the descendants of
Hercules,  <span id="fr_751"></span>[116](#fn_750) filled the episcopal
seat of Ptolemais, near the ruins of ancient Cyrene,  <span
id="fr_752"></span>[117](#fn_751) and the philosophic bishop supported
with dignity the character which he had assumed with reluctance.  <span
id="fr_753"></span>[118](#fn_752) He vanquished the monster of Libya,
the president Andronicus, who abused the authority of a venal office,
invented new modes of rapine and torture, and aggravated the guilt of
oppression by that of sacrilege.  <span
id="fr_754"></span>[119](#fn_753) After a fruitless attempt to reclaim
the haughty magistrate by mild and religious admonition, Synesius
proceeds to inflict the last sentence of ecclesiastical justice,  <span
id="fr_755"></span>[120](#fn_754) which devotes Andronicus, with his
associates and their families, to the abhorrence of earth and heaven.
The impenitent sinners, more cruel than Phalaris or Sennacherib, more
destructive than war, pestilence, or a cloud of locusts, are deprived of
the name and privileges of Christians, of the participation of the
sacraments, and of the hope of Paradise. The bishop exhorts the clergy,
the magistrates, and the people, to renounce all society with the
enemies of Christ; to exclude them from their houses and tables; and to
refuse them the common offices of life, and the decent rites of burial.
The church of Ptolemais, obscure and contemptible as she may appear,
addresses this declaration to all her sister churches of the world; and
the profane who reject her decrees, will be involved in the guilt and
punishment of Andronicus and his impious followers. These spiritual
terrors were enforced by a dexterous application to the Byzantine court;
the trembling president implored the mercy of the church; and the
descendants of Hercules enjoyed the satisfaction of raising a prostrate
tyrant from the ground.  <span id="fr_756"></span>[121](#fn_755) Such
principles and such examples insensibly prepared the triumph of the
Roman pontiffs, who have trampled on the necks of kings.

VI\. Every popular government has experienced the effects of rude or
artificial eloquence. The coldest nature is animated, the firmest reason
is moved, by the rapid communication of the prevailing impulse; and each
hearer is affected by his own passions, and by those of the surrounding
multitude. The ruin of civil liberty had silenced the demagogues of
Athens, and the tribunes of Rome; the custom of preaching which seems to
constitute a considerable part of Christian devotion, had not been
introduced into the temples of antiquity; and the ears of monarchs were
never invaded by the harsh sound of popular eloquence, till the pulpits
of the empire were filled with sacred orators, who possessed some
advantages unknown to their profane predecessors.  <span
id="fr_757"></span>[122](#fn_756) The arguments and rhetoric of the
tribune were instantly opposed with equal arms, by skilful and resolute
antagonists; and the cause of truth and reason might derive an
accidental support from the conflict of hostile passions. The bishop, or
some distinguished presbyter, to whom he cautiously delegated the powers
of preaching, harangued, without the danger of interruption or reply, a
submissive multitude, whose minds had been prepared and subdued by the
awful ceremonies of religion. Such was the strict subordination of the
Catholic church, that the same concerted sounds might issue at once from
a hundred pulpits of Italy or Egypt, if they were tuned  <span
id="fr_758"></span>[123](#fn_757) by the master hand of the Roman or
Alexandrian primate. The design of this institution was laudable, but
the fruits were not always salutary. The preachers recommended the
practice of the social duties; but they exalted the perfection of
monastic virtue, which is painful to the individual, and useless to
mankind. Their charitable exhortations betrayed a secret wish that the
clergy might be permitted to manage the wealth of the faithful, for the
benefit of the poor. The most sublime representations of the attributes
and laws of the Deity were sullied by an idle mixture of metaphysical
subleties, puerile rites, and fictitious miracles: and they expatiated,
with the most fervent zeal, on the religious merit of hating the
adversaries, and obeying the ministers of the church. When the public
peace was distracted by heresy and schism, the sacred orators sounded
the trumpet of discord, and, perhaps, of sedition. The understandings of
their congregations were perplexed by mystery, their passions were
inflamed by invectives; and they rushed from the Christian temples of
Antioch or Alexandria, prepared either to suffer or to inflict
martyrdom. The corruption of taste and language is strongly marked in
the vehement declamations of the Latin bishops; but the compositions of
Gregory and Chrysostom have been compared with the most splendid models
of Attic, or at least of Asiatic, eloquence.  <span
id="fr_759"></span>[124](#fn_758)

VII\. The representatives of the Christian republic were regularly
assembled in the spring and autumn of each year; and these synods
diffused the spirit of ecclesiastical discipline and legislation through
the hundred and twenty provinces of the Roman world.  <span
id="fr_760"></span>[125](#fn_759) The archbishop or metropolitan was
empowered, by the laws, to summon the suffragan bishops of his province;
to revise their conduct, to vindicate their rights, to declare their
faith, and to examine the merits of the candidates who were elected by
the clergy and people to supply the vacancies of the episcopal college.
The primates of Rome, Alexandria, Antioch, Carthage, and afterwards
Constantinople, who exercised a more ample jurisdiction, convened the
numerous assembly of their dependent bishops. But the convocation of
great and extraordinary synods was the prerogative of the emperor alone.
Whenever the emergencies of the church required this decisive measure,
he despatched a peremptory summons to the bishops, or the deputies of
each province, with an order for the use of post-horses, and a competent
allowance for the expenses of their journey. At an early period, when
Constantine was the protector, rather than the proselyte, of
Christianity, he referred the African controversy to the council of
Arles; in which the bishops of York of Treves, of Milan, and of
Carthage, met as friends and brethren, to debate in their native tongue
on the common interest of the Latin or Western church.  <span
id="fr_761"></span>[126](#fn_760) Eleven years afterwards, a more
numerous and celebrated assembly was convened at Nice in Bithynia, to
extinguish, by their final sentence, the subtle disputes which had
arisen in Egypt on the subject of the Trinity. Three hundred and
eighteen bishops obeyed the summons of their indulgent master; the
ecclesiastics of every rank, and sect, and denomination, have been
computed at two thousand and forty-eight persons;  <span
id="fr_762"></span>[127](#fn_761) the Greeks appeared in person; and the
consent of the Latins was expressed by the legates of the Roman pontiff.
The session, which lasted about two months, was frequently honored by
the presence of the emperor. Leaving his guards at the door, he seated
himself (with the permission of the council) on a low stool in the midst
of the hall. Constantine listened with patience, and spoke with modesty:
and while he influenced the debates, he humbly professed that he was the
minister, not the judge, of the successors of the apostles, who had been
established as priests and as gods upon earth.  <span
id="fr_763"></span>[128](#fn_762) Such profound reverence of an absolute
monarch towards a feeble and unarmed assembly of his own subjects, can
only be compared to the respect with which the senate had been treated
by the Roman princes who adopted the policy of Augustus. Within the
space of fifty years, a philosophic spectator of the vicissitudes of
human affairs might have contemplated Tacitus in the senate of Rome, and
Constantine in the council of Nice. The fathers of the Capitol and those
of the church had alike degenerated from the virtues of their founders;
but as the bishops were more deeply rooted in the public opinion, they
sustained their dignity with more decent pride, and sometimes opposed
with a manly spirit the wishes of their sovereign. The progress of time
and superstition erased the memory of the weakness, the passion, the
ignorance, which disgraced these ecclesiastical synods; and the Catholic
world has unanimously submitted  <span id="fr_764"></span>[129](#fn_763)
to the infallible decrees of the general councils.  <span
id="fr_765"></span>[130](#fn_764)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_735"></span>[101](daf02026.htm#fr_736) The edict of Milan
(de M. P. c. 48) acknowledges, by reciting, that there existed a species
of landed property, ad jus corporis eorum, id est, ecclesiarum non
hominum singulorum pertinentia. Such a solemn declaration of the supreme
magistrate must have been received in all the tribunals as a maxim of
civil law.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[102](daf02026.htm#fr_737) Habeat unusquisque
licentiam sanctissimo Catholicae (ecclesioe) venerabilique concilio,
decedens bonorum quod optavit relinquere. Cod. Theodos. l. xvi. tit. ii.
leg. 4. This law was published at Rome, A. D. 321, at a time when
Constantine might foresee the probability of a rupture with the emperor
of the East.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[103](daf02026.htm#fr_738) Eusebius, Hist.
Eccles. l. x. 6; in Vit. Constantin. l. iv. c. 28. He repeatedly
expatiates on the liberality of the Christian hero, which the bishop
himself had an opportunity of knowing, and even of lasting.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[104](daf02026.htm#fr_739) Eusebius, Hist.
Eccles. l. x. c. 2, 3, 4. The bishop of Caesarea who studied and
gratified the taste of his master, pronounced in public an elaborate
description of the church of Jerusalem, (in Vit Cons. l. vi. c. 46.) It
no longer exists, but he has inserted in the life of Constantine (l.
iii. c. 36) a short account of the architecture and ornaments. He
likewise mentions the church of the Holy Apostles at Constantinople, (l.
iv. c. 59.)

<span id="fn_739"></span>[105](daf02026.htm#fr_740) See Justinian.
Novell. cxxiii. 3. The revenue of the patriarchs, and the most wealthy
bishops, is not expressed: the highest annual valuation of a bishopric
is stated at thirty, and the lowest at two, pounds of gold; the medium
might be taken at sixteen, but these valuations are much below the real
value.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[106](daf02026.htm#fr_741) See Baronius,
(Annal. Eccles. A. D. 324, No. 58, 65, 70, 71.) Every record which comes
from the Vatican is justly suspected; yet these rent-rolls have an
ancient and authentic color; and it is at least evident, that, if
forged, they were forged in a period when farms not kingdoms, were the
objects of papal avarice.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[107](daf02026.htm#fr_742) See Thomassin,
Discipline de l'Eglise, tom. iii. l. ii. c. 13, 14, 15, p. 689-706. The
legal division of the ecclesiastical revenue does not appear to have
been established in the time of Ambrose and Chrysostom. Simplicius and
Gelasius, who were bishops of Rome in the latter part of the fifth
century, mention it in their pastoral letters as a general law, which
was already confirmed by the custom of Italy.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[108](daf02026.htm#fr_743) Ambrose, the most
strenuous assertor of ecclesiastical privileges, submits without a
murmur to the payment of the land tax. "Si tri butum petit Imperator,
non negamus; agri ecclesiae solvunt tributum solvimus quae sunt Caesaris
Caesari, et quae sunt Dei Deo; tributum Caesaris est; non negatur."
Baronius labors to interpret this tribute as an act of charity rather
than of duty, (Annal. Eccles. A. D. 387;) but the words, if not the
intentions of Ambrose are more candidly explained by Thomassin,
Discipline de l'Eglise, tom. iii. l. i. c. 34. p. 668.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[109](daf02026.htm#fr_744) In Ariminense synodo
super ecclesiarum et clericorum privilegiis tractatu habito, usque eo
dispositio progressa est, ut juqa quae viderentur ad ecclesiam
pertinere, a publica functione cessarent inquietudine desistente; quod
nostra videtur dudum sanctio repulsisse. Cod. Theod. l. xvi. tit. ii.
leg. 15. Had the synod of Rimini carried this point, such practical
merit might have atoned for some speculative heresies.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[110](daf02026.htm#fr_745) From Eusebius (in
Vit. Constant. l. iv. c. 27) and Sozomen (l. i. c. 9) we are assured
that the episcopal jurisdiction was extended and confirmed by
Constantine; but the forgery of a famous edict, which was never fairly
inserted in the Theodosian Code (see at the end, tom. vi. p. 303,) is
demonstrated by Godefroy in the most satisfactory manner. It is strange
that M. de Montesquieu, who was a lawyer as well as a philosopher,
should allege this edict of Constantine (Esprit des Loix, l. xxix. c.
16) without intimating any suspicion.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[111](daf02026.htm#fr_746) The subject of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction has been involved in a mist of passion, of
prejudice, and of interest. Two of the fairest books which have fallen
into my hands, are the Institutes of Canon Law, by the Abbe de Fleury,
and the Civil History of Naples, by Giannone. Their moderation was the
effect of situation as well as of temper. Fleury was a French
ecclesiastic, who respected the authority of the parliaments; Giannone
was an Italian lawyer, who dreaded the power of the church. And here let
me observe, that as the general propositions which I advance are the
result of many particular and imperfect facts, I must either refer the
reader to those modern authors who have expressly treated the subject,
or swell these notes disproportioned size.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[112](daf02026.htm#fr_747) Tillemont has
collected from Rufinus, Theodoret, &c., the sentiments and language of
Constantine. Mem Eccles tom. iii p. 749, 759.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[113](daf02026.htm#fr_748) See Cod. Theod. l.
ix. tit. xlv. leg. 4. In the works of Fra Paolo. (tom. iv. p. 192, &c.,)
there is an excellent discourse on the origin, claims, abuses, and
limits of sanctuaries. He justly observes, that ancient Greece might
perhaps contain fifteen or twenty axyla or sanctuaries; a number which
at present may be found in Italy within the walls of a single city.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[114](daf02026.htm#fr_749) The penitential
jurisprudence was continually improved by the canons of the councils.
But as many cases were still left to the discretion of the bishops, they
occasionally published, after the example of the Roman Praetor, the
rules of discipline which they proposed to observe. Among the canonical
epistles of the fourth century, those of Basil the Great were the most
celebrated. They are inserted in the Pandects of Beveridge, (tom. ii. p.
47-151,) and are translated by Chardon, Hist. des Sacremens, tom. iv. p.
219-277.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[115](daf02026.htm#fr_750) Basil, Epistol.
xlvii. in Baronius, (Annal. Eccles. A. D. 370. N. 91,) who declares that
he purposely relates it, to convince govern that they were not exempt
from a sentence of excommunication his opinion, even a royal head is not
safe from the thunders of the Vatican; and the cardinal shows himself
much more consistent than the lawyers and theologians of the Gallican
church.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[116](daf02026.htm#fr_751) The long series of
his ancestors, as high as Eurysthenes, the first Doric king of Sparta,
and the fifth in lineal descent from Hercules, was inscribed in the
public registers of Cyrene, a Lacedaemonian colony. (Synes. Epist. lvii.
p. 197, edit. Petav.) Such a pure and illustrious pedigree of seventeen
hundred years, without adding the royal ancestors of Hercules, cannot be
equalled in the history of mankind.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[117](daf02026.htm#fr_752) Synesius (de Regno,
p. 2) pathetically deplores the fallen and ruined state of Cyrene.
Ptolemais, a new city, 82 miles to the westward of Cyrene, assumed the
metropolitan honors of the Pentapolis, or Upper Libya, which were
afterwards transferred to Sozusa.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[118](daf02026.htm#fr_753) Synesius had
previously represented his own disqualifications. He loved profane
studies and profane sports; he was incapable of supporting a life of
celibacy; he disbelieved the resurrection; and he refused to preach
fables to the people unless he might be permitted to philosophize at
home. Theophilus primate of Egypt, who knew his merit, accepted this
extraordinary compromise.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[119](daf02026.htm#fr_754) The promotion of
Andronicus was illegal; since he was a native of Berenice, in the same
province. The instruments of torture are curiously specified; the press
that variously pressed on distended the fingers, the feet, the nose, the
ears, and the lips of the victims.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[120](daf02026.htm#fr_755) The sentence of
excommunication is expressed in a rhetorical style. (Synesius, Epist.
lviii. p. 201-203.) The method of involving whole families, though
somewhat unjust, was improved into national interdicts.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[121](daf02026.htm#fr_756) See Synesius, Epist.
xlvii. p. 186, 187. Epist. lxxii. p. 218, 219 Epist. lxxxix. p. 230,
231.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[122](daf02026.htm#fr_757) See Thomassin
(Discipline de l'Eglise, tom. ii. l. iii. c. 83, p. 1761-1770,) and
Bingham, (Antiquities, vol. i. l. xiv. c. 4, p. 688- 717.) Preaching was
considered as the most important office of the bishop but this function
was sometimes intrusted to such presbyters as Chrysoetom and Augustin.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[123](daf02026.htm#fr_758) Queen Elizabeth used
this expression, and practised this art whenever she wished to
prepossess the minds of her people in favor of any extraordinary measure
of government. The hostile effects of this music were apprehended by her
successor, and severely felt by his son. "When pulpit, drum
ecclesiastic," &c. See Heylin's Life of Archbishop Laud, p. 153.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[124](daf02026.htm#fr_759) Those modest orators
acknowledged, that, as they were destitute of the gift of miracles, they
endeavored to acquire the arts of eloquence.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[125](daf02026.htm#fr_760) The council of Nice,
in the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh canons, has made some
fundamental regulations concerning synods, metropolitan, and primates.
The Nicene canons have been variously tortured, abused, interpolated, or
forged, according to the interest of the clergy. The Suburbicarian
churches, assigned (by Rufinus) to the bishop of Rome, have been made
the subject of vehement controversy (See Sirmond, Opera, tom. iv. p.
1-238.)

<span id="fn_760"></span>[126](daf02026.htm#fr_761) We have only
thirty-three or forty-seven episcopal subscriptions: but Addo, a writer
indeed of small account, reckons six hundred bishops in the council of
Arles. Tillemont, Mem. Eccles. tom. vi. p. 422.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[127](daf02026.htm#fr_762) See Tillemont, tom.
vi. p. 915, and Beausobre, Hist. du Mani cheisme, tom i p. 529. The name
of bishop, which is given by Eusychius to the 2048 ecclesiastics,
(Annal. tom. i. p. 440, vers. Pocock,) must be extended far beyond the
limits of an orthodox or even episcopal ordination.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[128](daf02026.htm#fr_763) See Euseb. in Vit.
Constantin. l. iii. c. 6-21. Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiastiques, tom. vi.
p. 669-759.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[129](daf02026.htm#fr_764) Sancimus igitur
vicem legum obtinere, quae a quatuor Sanctis Coueiliis . . . . expositae
sunt act firmatae. Praedictarum enim quat uor synodorum dogmata sicut
sanctas Scripturas et regulas sicut leges observamus. Justinian. Novell.
cxxxi. Beveridge (ad Pandect. proleg. p. 2) remarks, that the emperors
never made new laws in ecclesiastical matters; and Giannone observes, in
a very different spirit, that they gave a legal sanction to the canons
of councils. Istoria Civile di Napoli, tom. i. p. 136.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[130](daf02026.htm#fr_765) See the article
Concile in the Eucyclopedie, tom. iii. p. 668-879, edition de Lucques.
The author, M. de docteur Bouchaud, has discussed, according to the
principles of the Gallican church, the principal questions which relate
to the form and constitution of general, national, and provincial
councils. The editors (see Preface, p. xvi.) have reason to be proud of
this article. Those who consult their immense compilation, seldom depart
so well satisfied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI: Persecution Of Heresy, State Of The Church. Part
I.](daf02027)
