[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aot08.md) 
[Next](aot10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/156459131X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Apollonius of Tyana*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

### SECTION VIII

#### THE TRAVELS OF APOLLONIUS

<span class="smallcaps">And</span> so Apollonius departs from Antioch
and journeys on to Ninus, the relic of the once great Nina or Nineveh.
There he meets with Damis, who becomes his constant companion and
faithful disciple. "Let us go together," says Damis in words reminding
us somewhat of the words of Ruth. "Thou shalt follow God, and I thee!"
(i. 19).

From this point Philostratus professes to base himself to a great extent
on the narrative of Damis, and before going further, it is necessary to
try to form some estimate of the character of Damis, and discover how
far he was admitted to the real confidence of Apollonius.

Damis was an enthusiast who loved Apollonius with a passionate
affection. He saw in his master almost a divine being, possessed of
marvellous powers at which he continually wondered, but which he could
never understand. Like Ānanda, the favourite disciple of the

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Buddha and his
constant companion, Damis advanced but slowly in comprehension of the
real nature of spiritual science; he had ever to remain in the outer
courts of the temples and communities into whose shrines and inner
confidence Apollonius had full access, while he frequently states his
ignorance of his master's plans and purposes. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[\*](#fn_88.md) The additional fact that he refers to his
notes as the "crumbs" <span id="fr_89"></span>[†](#fn_89.md) from the
"feasts of the Gods" (i. 19), those feasts of which he could for the
most part only learn at secondhand what little Apollonius thought fit to
tell him, and which he doubtless largely misunderstood and clothed in
his own imaginings, would further confirm this view, if any further
confirmation were necessary. But indeed it is very manifest everywhere
that Damis was outside the circle of initiation, and this accounts both
for his wonder-loving point of view and his general superficiality.

Another fact that comes out prominently from the narrative is his timid
nature <span id="fr_90"></span>[‡](#fn_90.md). He is continually afraid for
himself or for his master; and even towards the end, when Apollonius is
imprisoned by Domitian, it requires the phenomenal removal of the
fetters before his

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

eyes to assure him that Apollonius is a willing victim.

Damis loves and wonders; seizes on unimportant detail and exaggerates
it, while he can only report of the really important things what he
fancies to have taken place from a few hints of Apollonius. As his story
advances, it is true it takes on a soberer tint; but what Damis omits,
Philostratus is ever ready to supply from his own store of marvels, if
chance offers.

Nevertheless, even were we with the scalpel of criticism to cut away
every morsel of flesh from this body of tradition and legend, there
would still remain a skeleton of fact that would still represent
Apollonius and give us some idea of his stature.

Apollonius was one of the greatest travellers known to antiquity. Among
the countries and places he visited the following are the chief ones
recorded by Philostratus. <span id="fr_91"></span>[\*](#fn_91.md)

From Ninus (i. 19) Apollonius journeys to Babylon (i. 21), where he
stops one year and eight months (i. 40) and visits surrounding cities
such as Ecbatana, the capital of Media (i. 39); from Babylon to the
Indian frontier no names

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

are mentioned; India was entered in every probability by the Khaibar
Pass (ii. 6), <span id="fr_92"></span>[\*](#fn_92.md) for the first city
mentioned is Taxila (Attock) (ii. 20); and so they make their way across
the tributaries of the Indus (ii. 43) to the valley of the Ganges (iii.
5), and finally arrive at the "monastery of the wise men" (iii. 10),
where Apollonius spends four months (iii. 50).

This monastery was [presumably](errata.htm#0.md) in Nepal; it is in the
mountains, and the "city" nearest it is called Paraca. The chaos that
Philostratus has made of Damis’ account, and before him the wonderful
transformations Damis himself wrought in Indian names, are presumably
shown in this word. Paraca is perchance all that Damis could make of
Bharata, the general name of the Ganges valley in which the dominant
Āryas were settled. It is also probable that these wise men were
Buddhists, for they dwelt in a τύρσις, a place that looked like a fort
or fortress to Damis.

I have little doubt that Philostratus could

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

make nothing out of the geography of India from the names in Damis’
diary; they were all unfamiliar to him, so that as soon as he has
exhausted the few Greek names known to him from the accounts of the
expedition of Alexander, he wanders in the "ends of the earth," and can
make nothing of it till he picks up our travellers again on their return
journey at the mouth of the Indus. The salient fact that Apollonius was
making for a certain community, which was his peculiar goal, so
impressed the imagination of Philostratus (and perhaps of Damis before
him) that he has described it as being the only centre of the kind in
India. Apollonius went to India with a purpose and returned from it with
a distinct mission; <span id="fr_93"></span>[\*](#fn_93.md) and perchance
his constant inquiries concerning the particular "wise men" whom he was
seeking, led Damis to imagine that they alone were the "Gymnosophists,"
the "naked philosophers" (if we are to take the term in its literal
sense) of popular Greek legend, which ignorantly ascribed to all the
Hindu ascetics the most striking peculiarity of a very small number. But
to return to our itinerary.

Philostratus embellishes the account of the voyage from the Indus to the
mouth of the

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

Euphrates (iii. 52-58) with the travellers' tales and names of islands
and cities he has gleaned from the Indica which where accessible to him,
and so we again return to Babylon and familiar geography with the
following itinerary:

Babylon, Ninus, Antioch, Seleucia, Cyprus; thence to Ionia (iii. 58),
where he spends some time in Asia Minor, especially at Ephesus (iv. 1),
Smyrna (iv. 5), Pergamus (iv. 9), and Troy (iv. 11). Thence Apollonius
crosses over to Lesbos (iv. 13), and subsequently sails for Athens,
where he spends some years in Greece (iv. 17-33) visiting the temples of
Hellas, reforming their rites and instructing the priests (iv. 24). We
next find him in Crete (iv. 34), and subsequently at Rome in the time of
Nero (iv. 36-46).

In <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 66 Nero issued a decree
forbidding any philosopher to remain in Rome, and Apollonius set out for
Spain, and landed at Gades, the modern Cadiz; he seems to have stayed in
Spain only a short time (iv. 47); thence crossed to Africa, and so by
sea once more to Sicily, where the principal cities and temples were
visited

(v. 11-14). Thence Apollonius returned to Greece (v. 18), four years
having elapsed since his landing at Athens from Lesbos (v. 19). <span
id="fr_94"></span>[\*](#fn_94.md)

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

From Piræus our philosopher sails for Chios (v. 21), thence to Rhodes,
and so to Alexandria (v. 24). At Alexandria he spends some time, and has
several interviews with the future Emperor Vespasian (v. 27-41), and
thence he sets out on a long journey up the Nile as far as Ethiopia
beyond the cataracts, where he visits an interesting community of
ascetics called loosely Gymnosophists (vi. 1-27).

On his return to Alexandria (vi. 28), he was summoned by Titus, who had
just become emperor, to meet him at Tarsus (vi. 29-34). After this
interview he appears to have returned to Egypt, for Philostratus speaks
vaguely of his spending some time in Lower Egypt, and of visits to the
Phoenicians, Cilicians, Ionians, Achæans, and also to Italy (vi. 35).

Now Vespasian was emperor from 69 to 79, and Titus from 79 to 81. As
Apollonius’ interviews with Vespasian took place shortly before the
beginning of that emperor's reign, it is reasonable to conclude that a
number of years was spent by our philosopher in his Ethiopian journey,
and that therefore Damis’ account is a most imperfect one. In 81
Domitian became emperor, and just as Apollonius opposed the

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

follies of Nero, so did he criticise the acts of Domitian. He
accordingly became an object of suspicion to the emperor; but instead of
keeping away from Rome, he determined to brave the tyrant to his face.
Crossing from Egypt to Greece and taking ship at Corinth, he sailed by
way of Sicily to Puteoli, and thence to the Tiber mouth, and so to Rome
(vii. 10-16). Here Apollonius was tried and acquitted (vii. 17–viii.
10). Sailing from Puteoli again Apollonius returned to Greece (viii.
15), where he spent two years (viii. 24). Thence once more he crossed
over to Ionia at the time of the death of Domitian (viii. 25), visiting
Smyrna and Ephesus and other of his favourite haunts. Hereupon he sends
away Damis on some pretext to Rome (viii. 28) and—disappears; that is to
say, if it be allowed to speculate, he undertook yet another journey to
the place which he loved above all others, the "home of the wise men."

Now Domitian was killed 96 <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>, and one
of the last recorded acts of Apollonius is his vision of this event at
the time of its occurrence. Therefore the trial of Apollonius at Rome
took place somewhere about 93, and we have a gap of twelve years from
his interview with Titus in 81, which Philostratus can only fill up with
a few vague stories and generalities.

As to his age at the time of his mysterious

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

disappearance from the pages of history, Philostratus tells us that
Damis says nothing; but some, he adds, say he was eighty, some ninety,
and some even an hundred.

The estimate of eighty years seems to fit in best with the rest of the
chronological indications, but there is no certainty in the matter with
the present materials at our disposal.

Such then is the geographical outline, so to say, of the life of
Apollonius, and even the most careless reader of the bare skeleton of
the journeys recorded by Philostratus must be struck by the indomitable
energy of the man, and his power of endurance.

We will now turn our attention to one or two points of interest
connected with the temples and communities he visited.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[74:\*](aot09.htm#fr_88.md) See especially iii. 15,
41; v. 5, 10; vii. 10, 13; viii. 28.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[74:†](aot09.htm#fr_89.md) ἐκφατνίσματα.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[74:‡](aot09.htm#fr_90.md) See especially vii. 13,
14, 15, 22, 31.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[75:\*](aot09.htm#fr_91.md) The list is full of
gaps, so that we cannot suppose that Damis’ notes were anything like
complete records of the numerous itineraries; not only so, but one is
tempted to believe that whole journeys, in which Damis had no share, are
omitted.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[76:\*](aot09.htm#fr_92.md) Here at any rate they
came in sight of the giant mountains, the Imaus (Himavat) or Himālayan
Range, where was the great mountain Meros (Meru). The name of the Hindu
Olympus being changed into Meros in Greek had, ever since Alexander's
expedition, given rise to the myth that Bacchus was born from the thigh
(*meros*) of Zeus—presumably one of the facts which led Professor Max
Muller to stigmatise the whole of mythology as a "disease of language."

<span id="fn_93"></span>[77:\*](aot09.htm#fr_93.md) Referring to his
instructors he says, "I ever remember my masters and journey through the
world teaching what I have learned from them" (vi. 18).

<span id="fn_94"></span>[78:\*](aot09.htm#fr_94.md) According to some,
Apollonius would be now about sixty-eight years of age. But if he were
still young (say thirty years old or so) when he left for India, he must
<span id="page_79">p. 79</span> either have spent a very long period in
that country, or we have a very imperfect record of his doings in Asia
Minor, Greece, Italy, and Spain, after his return.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section IX. In the Shrines of the Temples and the Retreats of
Religion](aot10.md)
