[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aot01.md) 
[Next](aot03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/156459131X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Apollonius of Tyana*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# APOLLONIUS OF TYANA

### SECTION I

#### INTRODUCTORY

<span class="smallcaps">To</span> the student of the origins of
Christianity there is naturally no period of Western history of greater
interest and importance than the first century of our era; and yet how
little comparatively is known about it of a really definite and reliable
nature. If it be a subject of lasting regret that no non-Christian
writer of the first century had sufficient intuition of the future to
record even a line of information concerning the birth and growth of
what was to be the religion of the Western world, equally disappointing
is it to find so little definite information of the general social and
religious conditions of the time. The rulers and the wars of the Empire
seem to have formed the chief interest of the historiographers of the
succeeding century, and even in this department of political history,
though

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

the public acts of the Emperors may be fairly well known, for we can
check them by records and inscriptions, when we come to their private
acts and motives we find ourselves no longer on the ground of history,
but for the most part in the atmosphere of prejudice, scandal, and
speculation. The political acts of Emperors and their officers, however,
can at best throw but a dim side-light on the general social conditions
of the time, while they shed no light at all on the religious
conditions, except so far as these in any particular contacted the
domain of politics. As well might we seek to reconstruct a picture of
the religious life of the time from Imperial acts and rescripts, as
endeavour to glean any idea of the intimate religion of this country
from a perusal of statute books or reports of Parliamentary debates.

The Roman histories so-called, to which we have so far been accustomed,
cannot help us in the reconstruction of a picture of the environment
into which, on the one hand, Paul led the new faith in Asia Minor,
Greece, and Rome; and in which, on the other, it already found itself in
the districts bordering on the south-east of the Mediterranean. It is
only by piecing together laboriously isolated scraps of information and
fragments of inscriptions, that we become aware of the existence of the
life of a world of religious associations and private cults which
existed at

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

this period. Not that even so we have any very direct information of
what went on in these associations, guilds, and brotherhoods; but we
have sufficient evidence to make us keenly regret the absence of further
knowledge.

Difficult as this field is to till, it is exceedingly fertile in
interest, and it is to be regretted that comparatively so little work
has as yet been done in it; and that, as is so frequently the case, the
work which has been done is, for the most part, not accessible to the
English reader. What work has been done on this special subject may be
seen from the bibliographical note appended to this essay, in which is
given a list of books and articles treating of the religious
associations among the Greeks and Romans. But if we seek to obtain a
general view of the condition of religious affairs in the first century
we find ourselves without a reliable guide; for of works dealing with
this particular subject there are few, and from them we learn little
that does not immediately concern, or is thought to concern,
Christianity; whereas, it is just the state of the non-Christian
religious world about which, in the present case, we desire to be
informed.

If, for instance, the reader turn to works of general history, such as
Merivale's History of the Romans under the Empire (London; last ed.
1865), he will find, it is true, in chap. iv., a description

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

of the state of religion up to the death of Nero, but he will be little
wiser for perusing it. If he turn to Hermann Schiller's Geschichte der
römischen Kaiserreichs unter der Regierung des Nero (Berlin; 1872), he
will find much reason for discarding the vulgar opinions about the
monstrous crimes imputed to Nero, as indeed he might do by reading in
English G. H. Lewes’ article "Was Nero a Monster?" (Cornhill Magazine;
July, 1863)—and he will also find (bk. IV. chap. iii.) a general view of
the religion and philosophy of the time which is far more intelligent
than that of Merivale's; but all is still very vague and unsatisfactory,
and we feel ourselves still outside the intimate life of the
philosophers and religionists of the first century.

If, again, he turn to the latest writers of Church history who have
treated this particular question, he will find that they are occupied
entirely with the contact of the Christian Church with the Roman Empire,
and only incidentally give us any information of the nature of which we
are in search. On this special ground C. J. Neumann, in his careful
study Der römische Staat and die allgemeine Kirche bis auf Diocletian
(Leipzig; 1890), is interesting; while Prof. W. M. Ramsay, in The Church
in the Roman Empire before <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 170
(London; 1893), is extraordinary, for he endeavours to interpret Roman
history by the

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> New Testament
documents, the dates of the majority of which are so hotly disputed.

But, you may say, what has all this to do with Apollonius of Tyana? The
answer is simple: Apollonius lived in the first century; his work lay
precisely among these religious associations, colleges, and guilds. A
knowledge of them and their nature would give us the natural environment
of a great part of his life; and information as to their condition in
the first century would perhaps help us the better to understand some of
the reasons for the task which he attempted.

If, however, it were only the life and endeavours of Apollonius which
would be illuminated by this knowledge, we could understand why so
little effort has been spent in this direction; for the character of the
Tyanean, as we shall see, has since the fourth century been regarded
with little favour even by the few, while the many have been taught to
look upon our philosopher not only as a charlatan, but even as an
anti-Christ. But when it is just a knowledge of these religious
associations and orders which would throw a flood of light on the
earliest evolution of Christianity, not only with regard to the Pauline
communities, but also with regard to those schools which were
subsequently condemned as heretical, it is astonishing that we

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

have had no more satisfactory work done on the subject.

It may be said, however, that this information is not forthcoming simply
because it is unprocurable. To a large extent this is true;
nevertheless, a great deal more could be done than has as yet been
attempted, and the results of research in special directions and in the
byways of history could be combined, so that the non-specialist could
obtain some general idea of the religious conditions of the times, and
so be less inclined to join in the now stereotyped condemnation of all
non-Jewish or non-Christian moral and religious effort in the Roman
Empire of the first century.

But the reader may retort: Things social and religious in those days
must have been in a very parlous state, for, as this essay shows,
Apollonius himself spent the major part of his life in trying to reform
the institutions and cults of the Empire. To this we answer: No doubt
there was much to reform, and when is there not? But it would not only
be not generous, but distinctly mischievous for us to judge our fellows
of those days solely by the lofty standard of an ideal morality, or even
to scale them against the weight of our own supposed virtues and
knowledge. Our point is not that there was nothing to reform, far from
that, but that the wholesale

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

accusations of depravity brought against the times will not bear
impartial investigation. On the contrary, there was much good material
ready to be worked up in many ways, and if there had not been, how could
there among other things have been any Christianity?

The Roman Empire was at the zenith of its power, and had there not been
many admirable administrators and men of worth in the governing caste,
such a political consummation could never have been reached and
maintained. Moreover, as ever previously in the ancient world, religious
liberty was guaranteed, and where we find persecution, as in the reigns
of Nero and Domitian, it must be set down to political and not to
theological reasons. Setting aside the disputed question of the
persecution of the Christians under Domitian, the Neronian persecution
was directed against those whom the Imperial power regarded as Jewish
political revolutionaries. So, too, when we find the philosophers
imprisoned or banished from Rome during these two reigns, it was not
because they were philosophers, but because the ideal of some of them
was the restoration of the Republic, and this rendered them obnoxious to
the charge not only of being political malcontents, but also of actively
plotting against the Emperor's *majestas*. Apollonius, however, was
throughout a warm supporter of

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

monarchical rule. When, then, we hear of the philosophers being banished
from Rome or being cast into prison, we must remember that this was not
a wholesale persecution of philosophy throughout the Empire; and when we
say that some of them desired to restore the Republic, we should
remember that the vast majority of them refrained from politics, and
especially was this the case with the disciples of the
religio-philosophical schools.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section II. The Religious Associations and Communities of the
First Century](aot03.md)
