[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aot09.md) 
[Next](aot11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/156459131X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Apollonius of Tyana*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

### SECTION IX

#### IN THE SHRINES OF THE TEMPLES AND THE RETREATS OF RELIGION

<span class="smallcaps">Seeing</span> that the nature of Apollonius’
business with the priests of the temples and the devotees of the mystic
life was necessarily of a most intimate and secret nature, for in those
days it was the invariable custom to draw a sharp line of demarcation
between the inner and outer, the initiated and the profane, it is not to
be expected that we can learn anything but mere externalities from the
Damis-Philostratus narrative; nevertheless, even these outer indications
are of interest.

The temple of Æsculapius at Ægæ, where Apollonius spent the most
impressionable years of his life, was one of the innumerable hospitals
of Greece, where the healing art was practised on lines totally
different to our present methods. We are at once introduced to an
atmosphere laden with psychic influences, to a centre whither for
centuries patients had flocked to "consult

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

the God." In order to do so, it was necessary for them to go through
certain preliminary purifications and follow certain rules given by the
priests; they then passed the night in the shrine and in their sleep
instructions were given them for their healing. This method, no doubt,
was only resorted to when the skill of the priest was exhausted; in any
case, the priests must have been deeply versed in the interpretation of
these dreams and in their rationale. It is also evident that as
Apollonius loved to pass his time in the temple, he must have found
there satisfaction for his spiritual needs, and instruction in the inner
science; though doubtless his own innate powers soon carried him beyond
his instructors and marked him out as the "favourite of the God." The
many cases on record in our own day of patients in trance or some other
psychic condition prescribing for themselves, will help the student to
understand the innumerable possibilities of healing which were in Greece
summed up in the personification Æsculapius.

Later on the chief of the Indian sages has a disquisition on Æsculapius
and the healing art put into his mouth (iii. 44), where the whole of
medicine is said to be dependent upon psychic diagnosis and prescience
(παντεία).

Finally it may be noticed that it was the invariable custom of patients
on their recovery to

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

record the fact on an *ex-voto* tablet in the temple, precisely as is
done to-day in Roman Catholic countries. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[\*](#fn_95.md)

On his way to India Apollonius saw a good deal of the Magi at Babylon.
He used to visit them at mid-day and mid-night, but of what transpired
Damis knew nothing, for Apollonius would not permit him to accompany
him, and in answer to his direct questions would only answer: "They are
wise, but not in all things" (i. 26).

The description of a certain hall, however, to which Apollonius had
access, seems to be a garbled version of the interior of the temple. The
roof was dome-shaped, and the ceiling was covered with "sapphire"; in
this blue heaven were models of the heavenly bodies ("those whom they
regard as Gods") fashioned in gold, as though moving in the ether.
Moreover from the roof were suspended four golden "Iygges" which the
Magi call the "Tongues of the Gods." These were winged-wheels or spheres
connected with the idea of Adrasteia (or Fate). Their prototypes are
described imperfectly in the Vision of Ezekiel, and the so-called
*Hecatine strophali* or *spherulæ* used in magical practices

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

may have been degenerate descendants of these "living wheels" or spheres
of the vital elements. The subject is one of intense interest, but
hopelessly incapable of treatment in our present age of scepticism and
profound ignorance of the past. The "Gods" who taught our infant
humanity were, according to occult tradition, from a humanity higher
than that at present evolving on our earth. They gave the impulse, and,
when the earth-children were old enough to stand on their own feet, they
withdrew. But the memory of their deeds and a corrupt and degenerate
form of the mysteries they established has ever lingered in the memory
of myth and legend. Seers have caught obscure glimpses of what they
taught and how they taught it, and the tradition of the Mysteries
preserved some memory of it in its symbols and instruments or engines.
The Iygges of the Magi are said to be a relic of this memory.

With regard to the Indian sages it is impossible to make out any
consistent story from the fantastic jumble of the Damis-Philostratus
romance. Damis seems to have confused together a mixture of memories and
scraps of gossip without any attempt to distinguish one community or
sect from another, and so produced a blurred daub which Philostratus
would have us regard as a picture of the "hill" and a description

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

of its "sages." Damis’ confused memories, <span
id="fr_96"></span>[\*](#fn_96.md) however, have little to do with the
actual monastery and its ascetic inhabitants, who were the goal of
Apollonius’ long journey. What Apollonius heard and saw there, following
his invariable custom in such circumstances, he told no one, not even
Damis, except what could be derived from the following enigmatical
sentence: "I saw men dwelling on the earth and yet not on it, defended
on all sides, yet without any defence, and yet possessed of nothing but
what all possess." These words occur in two passages (iii. 15 and vi.
11), and in both Philostratus adds that Apollonius wrote <span
id="fr_97"></span>[†](#fn_97.md) and spoke them enigmatically. The meaning
of this saying is not difficult to divine. They were on the earth, but
not of the earth, for their minds were set on things above. They were
protected by their innate spiritual power, of which we have so many
instances in Indian literature; and yet they possessed nothing but what
all men possess if they would but develop the spiritual part of their
being. But this explanation is not simple enough for Philostratus, and
so he presses into

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

service all the memories of Damis, or rather travellers' tales, about
levitation, magical illusions and the rest.

The head of the community is called Iarchas, a totally un-Indian name.
The violence done to all foreign names by the Greeks is notorious, and
here we have to reckon with an army of ignorant copyists as well as with
Philostratus and Damis. I would suggest that the name may perhaps be a
corruption of Arhat. <span id="fr_98"></span>[\*](#fn_98.md)

The main burden of Damis’ narrative insists on the psychic and spiritual
knowledge of the sages. They know what takes place at a distance, they
can tell the past and future, and read the past births of men.

The messenger sent to meet Apollonius carried what Damis calls a golden
anchor (iii. 11, 17), and if this is an authentic fact, it would suggest
a forerunner of the Tibetan *dorje*, the present degenerate symbol of
the "rod of power," something like the thunder-bolt wielded by Zeus.
This would also point to a Buddhist community, though it must be
confessed that other indications point equally strongly to Brāhmanical
customs, such as the caste-mark on the forehead of the messenger (iii.
7, 11), the carrying of (bamboo) staves (daṇḍa), letting the hair grow
long, and wearing of turbans (iii. 13). But indeed the

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

whole account is too confused to permit any hope of extracting
historical details.

Of the nature of Apollonius’ visit we may, however, judge from the
following mysterious letter to his hosts (iii. 51):

"I came to you by land and ye have given me the sea; nay, rather, by
sharing with me your wisdom ye have given me power to travel through
heaven. These things will I bring back to the mind of the Greeks, and I
will hold converse with you as though ye were present, if it be that I
have not drunk of the cup of Tantalus in vain.

It is evident from these cryptic sentences that the "sea" and the "cup
of Tantalus" are identical with the "wisdom" which had been imparted to
Apollonius—the wisdom which he was to bring back once more to the memory
of the Greeks. He thus clearly states that he returned from India with a
distinct mission and with the means to accomplish it, for not only had
he drunk of the ocean of wisdom in that he has learnt the Brahma-vidyā
from their lips, but he has also learnt how to converse with them though
his body be in Greece and their bodies in India.

But such a plain meaning—plain at least to every student of occult
nature—was beyond the understanding of Damis or the comprehension of
Philostratus. And it is doubtless the mention

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

of the "cup of Tantalus" <span id="fr_99"></span>[\*](#fn_99.md) in this
letter which suggested the inexhaustible loving cup episode in iii. 32,
and its connection with the mythical fountains of Bacchus. Damis presses
it into service to "explain" the last phrase in Apollonius’ saying about
the sages, namely, that they were "possessed of nothing but what all
possess"—which, however, appears elsewhere in a changed form, as
"possessing nothing, they have the possessions of all men" (iii.
15). <span id="fr_100"></span>[†](#fn_100.md)

On returning to Greece, one of the first shrines Apollonius visited was
that of Aphrodite at Paphos in Cyprus (iii. 58). The greatest external
peculiarity of the Paphian worship of Venus was the representation of
the goddess by a mysterious stone symbol. It seems to have been of the
size of a human being, but shaped like a pine-cone, only of course with
a smooth surface. Paphos was apparently the oldest shrine dedicated to
Venus in Greece. Its mysteries were very ancient, but not indigenous;
they were brought over from the mainland, from what was subsequently
Cilicia, in times of remote antiquity.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The worship or
consultation of the Goddess was by means of prayers and the "pure flame
of fire," and the temple was a great centre of divination. <span
id="fr_101"></span>[\*](#fn_101.md)

Apollonius spent some time here and instructed the priests at length
with regard to their sacred rites.

In Asia Minor he was especially pleased with the temple of Æsculapius at
Pergamus; he healed many of the patients there, and gave instruction in
the proper methods to adopt in order to procure reliable results by
means of the prescriptive dreams.

At Troy, we are told, Apollonius spent a night alone at the tomb of
Achilles, in former days one of the spots of greatest popular sanctity
in Greece (iv. 11). Why he did so does not transpire, for the fantastic
conversation with the shade of the hero reported by Philostratus (iv.
16) seems to be devoid of any element of likelihood. As, however,
Apollonius made it his business to visit Thessaly shortly afterwards
expressly to urge the Thessalians to renew the old accustomed rites to
the hero (iv. 13), we may suppose that it formed part of his great
effort to restore and purify the old institutions of Hellas, so that,
the accustomed channels being freed, the life might flow more healthily
in the national body.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

Rumour would also have it that Achilles had told Apollonius where he
would find the statue of the hero Palamedes on the coast of Æolia.
Apollonius accordingly restored the statue, and Philostratus tells us he
had seen it with his own eyes on the spot (iv. 13).

Now this would be a matter of very little interest, were it not that a
great deal is made of Palamedes elsewhere in Philostratus’ narrative.
What it all means is difficult to say with a Damis and Philostratus as
interpreters between ourselves and the silent and enigmatical
Apollonius.

Palamedes was one of the heroes before Troy, who was fabled to have
invented letters, or to have completed the alphabet of Cadmus. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[\*](#fn_102.md)

Now from two obscure sayings (iv. 13, 33), we glean that our philosopher
looked upon Palamedes as the philosopher-hero of the Trojan period,
although Homer says hardly a word about him.

Was this, then, the reason why Apollonius was so anxious to restore his
statue? Not altogether so; there appears to have been a more direct
reason. Damis would have it that Apollonius had met Palamedes in India;
that he was at the monastery; that Iarchas had one day pointed out a
young ascetic who could "write without ever learning letters"; and that

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

this youth had been no other than Palamedes in one of his former births.
Doubtless the sceptic will say: "Of course! Pythagoras was a
reincarnation of the hero Euphorbus who fought at Troy, according to
popular superstition; therefore, naturally, the young Indian was the
reincarnation of the hero Palamedes! The one legend simply begat the
other." But on this principle, to be consistent, we should expect to
find that it was Apollonius himself and not an unknown Hindu ascetic,
who had been once Palamedes.

In any case Apollonius restored the rites to Achilles, and erected a
chapel in which he set up the neglected statue of Palamedes. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[\*](#fn_103.md) The heroes of the Trojan period, then,
it would seem, had still some connection with Greece, according to the
science of the invisible world into which Apollonius was initiated. And
if the Protestant sceptic can make nothing of it, at least the Roman
Catholic reader may be induced to suspend his judgment by changing
"hero" into "saint."

Can it be possible that the attention which Apollonius bestowed upon the
graves and funeral monuments of the mighty dead of Greece may have been
inspired by the circle of ideas which

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

led to the erection of the innumerable dāgobas and stūpas in Buddhist
lands, originally over the relics of the Buddha, and the subsequent
preservation of relics of arhats and great teachers?

At Lesbos Apollonius visited the ancient temple of the Orphic mysteries,
which in early years had been a great centre of prophecy and divination.
Here also he was privileged to enter the inner shrine or adytum (iv.
14).

The Tyanean arrived in Athens at the time of the Eleusinian Mysteries,
and in spite of the festival and rites not only the people but also the
candidates flocked to meet him to the neglect of their religious duties.
Apollonius rebuked them, and himself joined in the necessary preliminary
rites and presented himself for initiation.

It may, perhaps, surprise the reader to hear that Apollonius, who had
already been initiated into higher privileges than Eleusis could afford,
should present himself for initiation. But the reason is not far to
seek; the Eleusinia constituted one of the intermediate organisations
between the popular cults and the genuine inner circles of instruction.
They preserved one of the traditions of the inner way, even if their
officers for the time being had forgotten what their predecessors had
once known. To restore these ancient rites to their purity, or to

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

utilise them for their original object, it was necessary to enter within
the precincts of the institution; nothing could be effected from
outside. The thing itself was good, and Apollonius desired to support
the ancient institution by setting the public example of seeking
initiation therein; not that he had anything to gain personally.

But whether it was that the hierophant of that time was only ignorant,
or whether he was jealous of the great influence of Apollonius, he
refused to admit our philosopher, on the ground that he was a sorcerer
(γόης), and that no one could be initiated who was tainted by
intercourse with evil entities (δαιμόνια). To this charge Apollonius
replied with veiled irony: "You have omitted the most serious charge
that might have been urged against me: to wit, that though I really know
more about the mystic rite than its hierophant, I have come here
pretending to desire initiation from men knowing more than myself." This
charge would have been true; he had made a pretence.

Dismayed at these words, frightened at the indignation of the people
aroused by the insult offered to their distinguished guest, and overawed
by the presence of a knowledge which he could no longer deny, the
hierophant begged our philosopher to accept the initiation. But
Apollonius

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

refused. "I will be initiated later on," he replied; "*he* will initiate
me." This is said to have referred to the succeeding hierophant, who
presided when Apollonius was initiated four years later (iv. 18; y. 19).

While at Athens Apollonius spoke strongly against the effeminacy of the
Bacchanalia and the barbarities of the gladiatorial combats (iv. 21,
22).

The temples, mentioned by Philostratus, which Apollonius visited in
Greece, have all the peculiarity of being very ancient; for instance,
Dodona, Delphi, the ancient shrine of Apollo at Abæ in Phocis, the
"caves" of Amphiaraus <span id="fr_104"></span>[\*](#fn_104.md) and
Trophonius, and the temple of the Muses on Helicon.

When he entered the adyta of these temples for the purpose of
"restoring" the rites, he was accompanied only by the priests, and
certain of his immediate disciples (γνώριμοι). This suggests an
extension to the meaning of the word "restoring" or "reforming," and
when we read elsewhere of the many spots consecrated by Apollonius, we
cannot but think that part of his work was the reconsecration, and hence
psychic purification, of many of these ancient centres. His main
external work, however, was the

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

giving of instruction, and, as Philostratus rhetorically phrases it,
"bowls of his words were set up everywhere for the thirsty to drink
from" (iv. 24).

But not only did our philosopher restore the ancient rites of religion,
he also paid much attention to the ancient polities and institutions.
Thus we find him urging with success the Spartans to return to their
ancient mode of life, their athletic exercises, frugal living, and the
discipline of the old Dorian tradition (iv. 27, 31-34); he, moreover,
specially praised the institution of the Olympic Games, the high
standard of which was still maintained (iv. 29), while he recalled the
ancient Amphictionic Council to its duty (iv. 23), and corrected the
abuses of the Panionian assembly (iv. 5).

In the spring of 66 <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> he left Greece
for Crete, where he seems to have bestowed most of his time on the
sanctuaries of Mount Ida and the temple of Æsculapius at Lebene ("for as
all Asia visits Pergamus so does all Crete visit Lebene"); but curiously
enough he refused to visit the famous Labyrinth at Gnossus, the ruins of
which have just been uncovered for a sceptical generation, most probably
(if it is lawful to speculate) because it had once been a centre of
human sacrifice, and thus pertained to one of the ancient cults of the
left hand.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

In Rome Apollonius continued his work of reforming the temples, and this
with the furl sanction of the Pontifex Maximus Telesinus, one of the
consuls for the year 66 <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>, who was
also a philosopher and a deep student of religion (iv. 40). But his stay
in the imperial city was speedily cut short, for in October Nero crowned
his persecution of the philosophers by publishing a decree of banishment
against them from Rome, and both Telesinus (vii. 11) and Apollonius had
to leave Italy.

W e next find him in Spain, making his headquarters in the temple of
Hercules at Cadiz.

On his return to Greece by way of Africa and Sicily (where he spent some
time and visited Etna), he passed the winter (? of 67 <span
class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>) at Eleusis, living in the temple, and in
the spring of the following year sailed for Alexandria, spending some
time on the way at Rhodes. The city of philosophy and eclecticism *par
excellence* received him with open arms as an old friend. But to reform
the public cults of Egypt was a far more difficult task than any he had
previously attempted. His presence in the temple (? the temple of
Serapis) commanded universal respect, everything about him and every
word he uttered seemed to breathe an atmosphere of wisdom and of
"something divine." The high priest of the temple looked on in proud

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

disdain. "Who is wise enough," he mockingly asked, "to reform the
religion of the Egyptians?"—only to be met with the confident retort of
Apollonius: "Any sage who comes from the Indians." Here as elsewhere
Apollonius set his face against blood-sacrifice, and tried to substitute
instead, as he had attempted elsewhere, the offering of frankincense
modelled in the form of the victim (v. 25). Many abuses he tried to
reform in the manners of the Alexandrians, but upon none was he more
severe than on their wild excitement over horse-racing, which frequently
led to bloodshed (v. 26).

Apollonius seems to have spent most of the remaining twenty years of his
life in Egypt, but of what he did in the secret shrines of that land of
mystery we can learn nothing from Philostratus, except that on the
protracted journey to Ethiopia up the Nile no city or temple or
community was unvisited, and everywhere there was an interchange of
advice and instruction in sacred things (v. 43).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_95"></span>[84:\*](aot10.htm#fr_95.md) For the most recent
study in English on the subject of Æsculapius see The Cult of Asclepios,
by Alice Walton, Ph.D., in No. III. of The Cornell Studies in Classical
Philology (Ithaca, N.Y.; 1891).

<span id="fn_96"></span>[86:\*](aot10.htm#fr_96.md) He evidently wrote the
notes of the Indian travels long after the time at which they were made.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[86:†](aot10.htm#fr_97.md) This shows that
Philostratus came across them in some work or letter of Apollonius, and
is therefore independent of Damis’ account for this particular.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[87:\*](aot10.htm#fr_98) I—arχas, arχa(t.md)s,
arhat.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[89:\*](aot10.htm#fr_99.md) Tantalus is fabled to
have stolen the cup of nectar from the gods; this was the amrita, the
ocean of immortality and wisdom, of the Indians.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[89:†](aot10.htm#fr_100.md) The words οὐδὲν
κεκτημένους ἠ?\` τὰ πάντων, which Philostratus quotes twice in this
form, can certainly not be changed into μηδὲν κεκτημένους τὰ πάντων
ἔχειν, without doing unwarrantable violence to their meaning.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[90:\*](aot10.htm#fr_101.md) See Tacitus,
Historia, ii. 3.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[91:\*](aot10.htm#fr_102.md) Berwick, Life of
Apollonius, p. 200 *n*.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[92:\*](aot10.htm#fr_103.md) He also built a
precinct round the tomb of Leonidas at Thermopylæ (iv. 23).

<span id="fn_104"></span>[95:\*](aot10.htm#fr_104.md) A great centre of
divination by means of dreams (see ii. 37).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section X. The Gymnosophists of Upper Egypt](aot11.md)
