[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj06)  [Next](chj08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

### CHAPTER V

<span class="smallcaps">Pusityamitra</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Pusityamitra</span> was an important factor in
the development of the Mahāyāna, whose claims to distinction have
generally been overlooked.

As’oka, it is evident, ruled over a very extensive kingdom, and was one
of the great monarchs of the day. It has always been a matter of wonder
how his empire, so great, and apparently so firmly based on
righteousness and judgment, should, after his death, have come to such a
speedy ruin that the Mauryan family practically disappears from the
annals of India.

A recent writer in the *Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal* <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62) calls attention to the fact that As’oka's
policy was one of unmerciful antagonism to the Brahmans, whose most
cherished prejudices he took a pride in shocking. As’oka had, by precept
and example, discouraged the taking of animal life, and had thereby put
an end to much of the worship of the Brahman rites. He had appointed
"superintendents of morals," Dharma Mahāmātās, whose functions
necessarily superseded those of the Brahmans as expositors of the law.
He had proclaimed the principle of Vyavahāra Samatā, "equality of
punishment," "equality in lawsuits," which did away with the peculiar
privileges

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

of the sacerdotal caste, and secured fair treatment for all subjects,
irrespective of caste, creed, or colour. Above all, he had boasted that
he had, in a short period of time, reduced "those who were once regarded
as gods," *i.e.* the Brahmans (whose privileges as the twice-born seemed
to entitle them to a quasi-divine position in the eyes of India), to the
position of false gods whose claims to respect he had demonstrated to be
baseless.

It could not reasonably be expected that the Brahmans should acquiesce
without any feelings of resentment in such drastic changes. They were
not fighting men, however, and their only course of action was to bow
before the storm and wait for a good opportunity.

The opportunity came about B.C. 185, in the reign of one of As’oka's
weakling successors, the last of the Mauryan house. The Greeks were
still active, pushing their conquests further and further to the east,
and founding principalities, some of which seem to have been still in
existence at the beginning of the first century A.D. As’oka bad lived on
good terms with his Greek neighbours; his successors found it necessary
to fight against them for the defence of their own shrunken territories,
and the commander-in-chief of the Mauryan army was a certain
Pushyamitra. It has been conjectured, from the termination of this man's
name, that he was of Persian stock. He was certainly a very determined
enemy of the Buddhist religion, and he had the confidence of the
Brahmans, who had been biding their time and quietly growing in numbers
and influence.

After a successful campaign against the Greeks, who had advanced into
the very heart of the Mauryan country, Pushyamitra returned in triumph
to Pataliputra. A review of the troops was held; in the midst of the
festivities, the Mauryan emperor suddenly fell dead, slain

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

by an arrow from an unknown hand. The successful general, whose triumph
was being celebrated, was at once proclaimed emperor in his stead—and
the hour of vengeance had come for the Brahmans. In the very city where
As’oka had prohibited animal sacrifices, Pushyamitra celebrated (B.C.
184) the Hindu rite of As’vamedha, the "sacrifice of the horse"; the
equality in the eyes of the law, which As’oka had established,
disappeared once more. Hinduism was once more the dominant faith, though
a Hinduism more elaborate, more philosophical than it had been, and one
that had come into fertilizing contact with foreign influences. Buddhism
was in its turn downtrodden and oppressed.

But beyond the limits of the kingdom ruled over by the new dynasty,
there were principalities and kingdoms in which Buddhism found a welcome
and a home, the principalities of the Greeks, the Parthians, the
Yuetchi, S’akas, who come and go round the north-western confines of
India during the two troubled centuries which precede the Christian era.

It is here, rather than in India itself, that must be sought those germs
of thought which ended by making the Mahāyāna so very different from its
more southerly and more purely Indian sister. Buddhism has always been a
faith that has readily taken into itself whatever in its immediate
surroundings it has found suitable for its purposes. Even Jewish
influences would not necessarily be excluded. "Woe is me," says the
Hebrew pilgrim, "that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech." <span
id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63) There

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

were Buddhists in Mesech as well as Israelites; there were also
Zoroastrians and Greeks, and the remnants of the old Babylonian cults.

Presently, with Kanishka, this Buddhism returns to India, and in
As’vaghosha's time appears as a conqueror before the walls of Benares.
And in process of time As’vaghosha is converted to the Mahāyāna.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[47:1](chj07.htm#fr_62) See *Journal and
Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal*, vol. vi., No. 5 (May,
1910), "Causes of the Dismemberment of the Maurya Empire," by
Mahamahopadhyaya Haraprasad S’astri.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[49:1](chj07.htm#fr_63) The Jewish diaspora went
as far as China. The Chinese Jews at Kaifongfu, in Honan, seem to have
entered China between B.C. 170 and the Nativity of Christ, though laying
claim to an even earlier date. But it is clear that they must be
post-Captivity Jews. They are acquainted with the name of Ezra, and they
possess portions of the books of Daniel, Zechariah, Malachi, Esther,
They reckon time <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> by the Seleucid era;
they are ignorant of the name of Jesus, and equally so of the Rabbinical
traditions. They know of *Shiloh*, which they interpret as the "great
one descending man" (which is practically the Buddhist *Nyorai*). And
they wear a veil over the face in reading the Law (*Chinese Recorder*,
vol. xiv. p. 325).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The New Testament in Touch with the East](chj08)
