[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj07)  [Next](chj09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

### CHAPTER VI

<span class="smallcaps">The New Testament in Touch with the East</span>

<span class="smallcaps">There</span> are a few passages in the New
Testament which seem to bear on the subject we have in hand. I propose
to touch upon them in this chapter.

The visit of the Magi will at once occur to the mind of every Christian
reader as having (or as being intended to have) some bearing on the
relations of Christianity to the country or countries from which the
Wise Men came. The account given in St. Matthew presents many
difficulties owing to the apparent impossibility of giving a scientific
explanation of the star which is said to have guided these Eastern sages
to the cradle of the Infant Saviour, and many, even devout, Christians
are disposed in consequence to treat the visit as unhistorical. We have
not at the present day the evidence required to prove the historicity of
the story, and it would not therefore be wise to lay too much stress on
the account of the Gospel record. But certain deductions are evidently
legitimate. It is quite clear that St. Matthew believed the story when
he inserted it in the forefront of his narrative. Or, if it be
maintained that the narrative forms no integral part of the original
Gospel, it is evident that the later interpolator recognized the story
as having some important bearing on the preaching of Christ in the
Orient. St. Matthew's Gospel—thanks, it may be, to the Jews of the
Dispersion, for whom he wrote quite as much

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

as for the Jews of Palestine, early met with favour in the remote
countries where the Mahāyāna took its birth. Pantænus of
Alexandria <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) found it in India when he
went to that country as a Christian missionary at the end of the second
century, and the story of the visit of the Magian pilgrims to Bethlehem
evidently had a vogue of its own in Central Asia. An expanded version of
the story has but recently been recovered from a sand-buried ruin in
Turkestan, and given to the world of students. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65) It is true, it may be argued, that the
Magi were Parthians, and that the Parthians have had but little
proveable connection with Indian forms of religion; <span
id="fr_66"></span>[3](#fn_66) but we know that there were Parthian
Buddhists, and must remember that, besides the great Parthian Empire
with which the Romans of the period so often came into conflict, there
were at the time the Indo-Parthian satrapies in the Indus Valley, which
were almost as good as independent sovereignties, and in parts of which
the followers of Zoroaster lived side by side with those of S’akyamuni.

The second point is evidently the selection of

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Capernaum as the
centre of our Lord's ministerial activity. "Galilee of the Gentiles" was
a country with a mixed population. It lay on, or near, some of the
greater trade-routes between Rome and the unknown Orient; it must have
been constantly visited by strange figures from the lands of Asia. The
custom-house at Capernaum must have been frequently called upon to
appraise, and to pass through, bales of precious merchandise from
Persia, India, and beyond, and he who, before his vocation to be an
evangelist, had served as head of that establishment must have had many
opportunities of making the acquaintance of travellers front distant
countries. The silk trade between Asia and Europe was in the vigour of
its early development. Varro is the first Roman writer to mention the
subject. As’vaghosha, <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67) the first
great teacher and inspirer of the Mahāyāna, is honoured in Japan as the
patron saint of the silkworm culture, and it was the Jews <span
id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_68) who were the active promoters of this
trade all along the lines of the trade routes from Antioch and
Alexandria to their outpost colony in Kaifongfu, <span
id="fr_69"></span>[3](#fn_69) in the province of Honan. It is evident
that the tradal affinities of Galilee of the Gentiles lay much more with
the East than the West, and the personal influence of the evangelist who
sat at the receipt of customs at Capernaum must have tended to spread
the gospel he was commissioned to preach amongst the Jews of Babylonian,
Indian, and Central Asian Dispersions, and, through them, to the heathen
amongst whom they dwelt.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

I find a third point of possible contact in St. John xii. 20. We are
there told that the Feast of the Passover at Jerusalem was visited not
only by Jews, but also by Greeks (Ἕλληνες, not Ἑλληνισταί), <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70) and that, on the occasion of the great
Passover which saw the consummation of Christ's work, some of these
Greeks came to Philip with the request that they might see Jesus. We are
not told that Jesus saw them, but St. John tells us how Jesus recognized
in the coming of these Gentile inquirers a sign that His work was
drawing near to its accomplishment. "The time has come," He said, "for
the Son of Man to be glorified. In most solemn truth I tell you that
unless the grain of wheat falls into the ground and dies, it remains
what it was—a single grain; but if it dies, it yields a rich harvest.…
Now is My soul troubled.… Father, save Me from this hour.… Father,
glorify Thy Name.…" Then followed a voice from heaven, which they that
heard it failed to comprehend. "It is not for My sake," said Jesus,
"that the voice came, but for yours. Now is the judgment of this world:
now will the prince of this world be driven out.… And I—if I am lifted
up from the earth—shall draw all men to Me."

Who were these Greeks, and where did they come from? After Pentecost,
and still more so after the subsequent dispersion of the Apostles and
the recognition of St. Paul as the Apostle of the Græco-Roman world, the
gospel of Christ spread rapidly throughout the bounds of the Roman
Empire. Nay, it is clear that the zeal of unofficial preachers of Christ
outran the slower movements of the authorized evangelists, and that the
good news reached the extreme West, Spain, Gaul, and Britain, long
before the arrival of Christian missionaries. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71)

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But there is no
trace or sign of any interest taken in Christ, during His earthly life,
by any European Greek. The centurions mentioned in the Gospels and Acts
were Romans, not Greeks, and the Greek influence exercised in Palestine
through Herodians and Sadducees was notoriously and actively opposed to
Christ's claims and teachings. It is evident that the Greeks of whom St.
John tells us were of a different kind from the friends and abettors of
Herod.

We will call to mind the statement made by Irenæus <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) that the Gospel of St. John was written
for the purpose of combating the heresy of the Nicolaitans, and we will
anticipate matters a little by stating that there is very good reason
for believing that the Nicolaitans professed a form of Buddhism almost
identical with the still-existing Shingon sect of Japan, a sect which
pins all its faith on the mercies of an abstract and eternal Buddha of
the name of Vairoc’ana, and which, significantly enough, gives to
S’akyamuni the title of the "Lord of this World." <span
id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73) We will also remind ourselves of the fact
that there existed an Asiatic colony of Greeks <span
id="fr_74"></span>[3](#fn_74) in the valley of the Indus,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

who professed Buddhism as their religion, and who were still under the
rule of their own Greek princelets during the time of Christ's earthly
life.

It is quite clear to all students of the history of North-West India and
the lands around the Hindu Kush that things were in a state of religious
ferment at the period of which we are speaking. Some change was
imminent. The Mahāyāna was approaching the end of its period of
gestation; the vague prophecies of a teacher to come had filled men's
minds with anticipation. The Greeks of Asia had felt it; they had also
heard, from the hearsay stories of caravan travellers, of the great
Teacher who had appeared ill the neighbourhood of the Sea of Galilee,
and some of them went to the Passover at Jerusalem, "desiring to see
Jesus," not from any idle curiosity, but because they had been taught to
look for some such solution of their difficulties.

And Christ recognized the significance of their appeal. There was
nothing yet to differentiate Him front him whom the East worshipped as
the "Lord of this Saba-world," but He knew the lurking potentiality. His
death, His uplifting, would give Him the magnetic power He needed. He
would then begin to draw all men to Himself.

Two further points of contact between the infant Church of Christ and
the East will be found in the Acts of the Apostles.

Men from many lands heard St. Peter's first Christian sermon on the Day
of Pentecost. If the Acts are a genuine record of facts, Parthians,
Medes, and Elamites, as well as Jews of Libya and Cyrene, and proselytes
from Rome, listened to that great announcement of the gospel of Christ.
It is hard to believe that the men who heard and believed, and were
pricked to the heart by what they

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

heard, should not have told their fellow-townsmen of the great events
that they had witnessed at Jerusalem. There is also something peculiarly
significant in the selection of Antioch as the headquarters of Gentile
Christianity. No town, not even Alexandria, was more advantageously
situated in this respect than Antioch. I shall reserve to the next
chapter what I have to say about these two great cities.

I find one more point of contact with the Far East in the Book of the
Revelation, in the vision of the man with the bow, who rides on a white
horse and goes forth conquering and to conquer. Again I must content
myself here with a bare mention of the fact. It will require a chapter
to itself if the point is to be so put as to carry conviction to the
mind of the reader, to whom it may possibly come with a shock of
surprised horror.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[52:1](chj08.htm#fr_64) *Cf*. Eusebius, "Eccl.
Hist.," V.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[52:2](chj08.htm#fr_65) By Dr. Müller in the
*Transactions* of the Berlin Museum für Völkerkunde.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[52:3](chj08.htm#fr_66) Amongst the Sūtras
translated into Chinese by the batch of Buddhist missionaries who
arrived at Lōyang in A.D. 147 is one on Astrology, of which an English
translation was given in the *Contemporary Review* for February, 1876
(vol. xxvii. pp. 417–424), by the late Prof. Childers. It is directed
against the practice of astrology as a useless and misleading
superstition, and shows how foolish it is to suppose that the stars can
possibly have any influence on the welfare or happiness of man. This
would seem to show that the particular form of Buddhism preached by
these men (which seems to have been a kind of undeveloped Amidaism) was
strenuously opposed to fortune telling and astrology. Nevertheless, it
will be seen, there were some sects of Buddhism which allowed their
followers to have recourse to the soothsayer. There are such in Japan
to-day. But see what I have to say in my chapter on the Han translators.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[53:1](chj08.htm#fr_67) "Bukkyō Mondō Shū," p.
33 ff.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[53:2](chj08.htm#fr_68) I believe it is Dr.
Graetz, in his "Geschichte der Juden," who brings out this point. The
Jewish Diaspora must have been a great means of spreading a knowledge of
Christ in remote regions. Think how Arab traders carry Mahometanism in
Africa.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[53:3](chj08.htm#fr_69) This little colony of
Chinese Jews still exists, though on the verge of extinction.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[54:1](chj08.htm#fr_70) The Hellenists (Acts
vi.) were Jews who spoke Greek; the Hellenes were Gentiles not in
connection with either Judaism or Christianity.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[54:2](chj08.htm#fr_71) See J. W. Taylor, "The
Coming of the Saints."

<span id="fn_72"></span>[55:1](chj08.htm#fr_72) See Irenæus, "Adv.
Hær.," iii. xi.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[55:2](chj08.htm#fr_73) The Japanese Shingon
hold that S’akyamuni was only a partial manifestation of Vairoc’ana, and
that his value as a teacher of religion is entirely confined to the
things of this world. For all higher truths, they say, we must have
recourse to the Supreme Buddha Vairoc’ana. See next chapter.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[55:3](chj08.htm#fr_74) These Greek
principalities were the remnants of the Greek kingdom of Bactria,
established by Diodotus in B.C. 248, and recognized by Antiochus B.C.
208. It was divided in B.C. 175, Eucratides retaining Bactria, and
Demetrius ruling in the Indus valley, which he had conquered. The
Bactrian portion, broken into many principalities, was overrun by
barbarians in B.C. 130, Hellocles being the last Greek ruler north of
the Hindu Kush. The Greeks of the Indus valley continued to hold to
their little principalities for two centuries longer, though much
troubled by the Indo-Parthian sovereigns, who robbed them of much
territory. The last Greek prince in India, Hermaios, finally succumbed
to the Turkish or Scythian invader Kadphises I. about A.D. 50. See
Smith, "Early History of India."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Alexandria and Antioch at the Time of Christ](chj09)
