[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj09)  [Next](chj11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

<span class="smallcaps">The Legend of St. Thomas</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> last chapter will, it is hoped, have
prepared the mind of the reader for accepting the idea that the
beginnings of Christianity and of the Mahāyāna were nearly related in
time, in place, and in idea. Nicolas of Antioch, who became a worshipper
of Caulaucau, was certainly a contemporary of the Apostles; the
testimony of St. Cyril and others, to say nothing of the Buddhist Sūtra
of which we have found a chapter embedded in the "Pistis Sophia," may be
taken as evidence of local connection in Alexandria, and the testimony
of the same two books may be taken to show that there was a connection
(some might call it a confusion) of thought in Gnostic minds between
S’akyamuni and Christ.

An early Christian legend, given in the Apocryphal Acts of St. Thomas,
and supported by the testimony of Eusebius and others, connects the
Apostle St. Thomas with the valley of the Indus. The legend has
undoubtedly been much embellished by later additions, but competent
scholars have concluded that it is quite possible that it may rest on a
substratum of fact. Let us examine the story. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_102.md)

Eleven of the original Apostles (Matthias is not mentioned) are supposed
to have been together in Jerusalem.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They were, we may
presume, in possession of their Master's commandment to go into all
nations, and were considering how to fulfil the commandment. "We
portioned out the regions of the world in order that each one of us
might go into the region that fell to him, and to the nation to which
the Lord sent him." They then proceeded to cast lots, a procedure quite
in accordance with what we know from the Acts, and "by lot, then, India
fell to Judas Thomas, <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_103.md) also called
Didymus or the Twin."

But Thomas did not wish to go. He pleaded "the weakness of the flesh,"
"and how can I, being a Hebrew man, go among the Indians to proclaim the
truth?" What we know of St. Thomas from the Canonical Gospels makes his
hesitancy on this occasion quite natural—in him.

Then Christ appears to him in the night. "Fear not, Thomas," He says;
"go away to India, and proclaim the word; for My grace shall be with
thee."

But Thomas is not to be moved: "Wherever Thou wishest to send me," he
says, "send me elsewhere; for to the Indians I am not going."

But Christ overrules the obstinate refusal of his doubting Apostle. A
merchant has arrived from India, with a commission from a certain King
Gundaphorus, to buy him a carpenter, and for three pounds Christ sells
him His servant Judas, "who also is Thomas." The slave-dealing need not
stop us. It only amounts to saying than Thomas came to be sold as a
slave to an Indian merchant, and that people saw in the circumstance the
overruling finger of God. But Gundaphorus is a historical personage,
whose identity has been brought to light by the industry of the pioneers
of modern historical research, and was an

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Indo-Parthian
king, ruling in the Indus valley. Thus St. Thomas goes, according to one
story, to India; according to another, to Parthia. Both stories may be
true, supposing that he went to Indo-Parthia. Gundaphorus had a long
reign, from A.D. 21 to A.D. 60, and he ruled over the districts of
Arachosia, the lower Indus, Herat, and Peshawur. He was a great ruler,
for the Scythian hordes of the Yuetchi had not yet swept down upon his
territories, and, like great rulers, he immortalized himself in stone.
He was a mighty builder, and his buildings were artistically adorned. We
shall see in discussing Gandhāra art, which is the art of North-West
India at the beginning of the Christian era, that it is dominated by
Græco-Roman conceptions, and a recent discovery at Peshawur has given
the world the name of a Greek architect for the stūpa erected by the
Scythian King Kanishka in honour of S’akyamuni's relics. It is,
therefore, an altogether possible story that St. Thomas should fall into
the hands of kidnappers, and be taken, as a slave skilled in building
and architecture, to the court of a great Indian king, thus fulfilling,
in spite of himself, the desires of his Master.

The Indian merchant, Abbanes, having made his purchases, returns to his
master in Indo-Parthia. "They began, therefore, to sail. And they had a
fair wind, and they sailed fast until they came to Andrapolis, a royal
city." The Syrian trade with India went overland as far as the head of
the Persian Gulf, and thence by sea to the mouth of the Indus. If St.
Thomas was sold as a slave and taken to India, it would be by that route
that he would be taken. Andrapolis means the "city of the man," and
Purushapura, the modern Peshawur, has the same meaning. Purushapura was,
as the legend says, actually the royal city of Gundaphorus.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

After being for some time in the service of Gundaphorus, at Andrapolis,
or Purushapura, where he did much preaching of the gospel, St. Thomas
goes to a neighbouring kingdom, the sovereign of which appears as
Misdeus or Basdeo. The second of these names gives us an Indian form,
Vasudeva, and it is known that a king of this name was reigning,
contemporaneously with Gundaphorus, at Matharā on the Jumna.

It is on the strength of evidence such as this that scholars such as
Fleet, Smith, Dahlmann, and others have concluded that it is quite
possible that the story of St. Thomas the Apostle having preached the
Gospel of Christ in North-West India is well within the bounds of
probability, though the same cannot be said of the other story, which
tells us that he preached in South India, and was buried at Mailapûr,
near the coast of Madras. This much, however, we can say of it. There is
a constant tradition in South India which for centuries has connected
the shrine of Mailapûr (or Meliapore) with the death, not the preaching,
of St. Thomas; and the so-called Christians of St. Thomas can be traced,
not certainly to Apostolic times, but to a period of great antiquity. In
A.D. 78 there is a Pallava king reigning at Mailapûr and its
neighbourhood, and Ceylon tells of another king, named
Shálivahana, <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_104.md) who was a
*Takshakaputra*, "son of a carpenter," *i.e.* a Christian—a follower of
Christ, or a follower of Thomas the Carpenter. The phrase is a Gnostic
one; at some later time I shall show traces of a Gnostic connection
between the Alexandrian Gnosis, a Tamil poet from Mailapûr, and Kōbō
Daishi.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

For present purposes, I shall assume that the earlier portion of the St.
Thomas legend is at least so far true that there actually was Christian
preaching at a very early period in North-West India. What I have to say
in the next chapter may (or may not) be found to confirm the truth of
the ancient legend.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[71:1](chj10.htm#fr_103.md) "Acts of the Holy
Apostle Thomas" in "Ante-Nicene Fathers," vol. viii. p. 535.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[72:1](chj10.htm#fr_104.md) *Cf*. Eusebius, "Ecc.
Hist.," i. 13.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[74:1](chj10.htm#fr_105.md) *J.R.A.S*, vol. xvii.
The Pallavas, or Parthians, seem to have carried on an extensive
commerce both with the West and the East. It seems probable that
Gondopharus and Vasdeo were both Parthians and if so, the Pallava king
at Mailapûr may have been Vasdeo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Call from China](chj11.md)
