[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj17)  [Next](chj19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

### CHAPTER XVI

<span class="smallcaps">China in the Third, Fourth, and Fifth
Centuries</span>

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is very difficult for the mind to
frame for itself a distinct picture of China from the middle of the
third century A.D. to that of the sixth. The three kingdoms of the Wei,
the Wu, and the Shu, of which I have spoken in a previous chapter, came
to an end in A.D. 265, when Szuma I. established himself as the first
ruler of the Tsin dynasty on the ruins of the Wu and the Shu, which he
annexed to the Wei. The Tsin dynasty formally united China under one
sovereign, but the unity was apparent rather than real. There were many
semi-independent principalities, which were extremely reluctant to
acknowledge the supremacy of the Dragon Throne, and the unification of
the empire was not carried out without considerable difficulty. Many of
these border principalities were Buddhist, and it was from them, more
even than from India, that came that overwhelming flood of Buddhist
books and translators which has served to make the history of Buddhism
in China such a hopeless chaos. Many of these translators brought their
books from Khotan. Khotan, about the year A.D. 270, was a
semi-independent state, tributary to China, with which it had very close
trade relations. Buddhism was practically the only religion of the
country, the common language was an Indian dialect, and the script a
form of Sanskrit known as Kharoshti. There were other principalities of

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

the same sort. How small was the intercourse with India proper may be
inferred from the fact that, during the years 317–439, out of thirty-six
translators mentioned by Nanjo, twelve came from the western regions
(including Khotan), eight from Kubhâ (Kabul), ten from various parts of
China proper, two from Turkestan and Bokhāra, and only four from India.

The Emperor Wu-ti (for this was the name that Szuma I. assumed on his
accession) was an extremely able ruler. He not only unified the country
and saved it for the time from foreign invasion, but he also did much
for literature and the general development of the empire. He encouraged
travel (we read of a Chinese scholar, Tsushi, or the "Red Teacher,"
being sent to India), and in the year 284 he received at his capital
(more probably at Nanking) an embassy from a Roman emperor. It was the
year of Diocletian's accession: the embassy, which may have been some
time on its way, must have been sent by Probus (276–284), or by
Aurelian, the "Restitutor Orbis" (270–276). Possibly it was not an
embassy at all, but only a company of traders whom the vanity of the
Chinese raised to the dignity of ambassadors.

Wu-ti died in 290, and was succeeded by his son Hweiti, a simpleton "who
could not distinguish pulse from wheat," and who was entirely in the
hands of an unprincipled wife. The country was immediately a blaze of
rebellion from one end to another, and the Tartars on the frontier set
up a rival kingdom in Shansi, with a pretender on the throne who claimed
descent from the great family of the Han. The Han had not yet been
forgotten, and the great Wu-ti had after all only been a successful
usurper. The feeble Hweiti was poisoned in 306, his successor was killed
in battle against the Tartars in 311. Mingti, who succeeded him, was
compelled to remove his

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

capital from Lôyang to Singanfu, and in 317 Mingti's successor, Yuanti,
was obliged to make another remove, and to bring his capital to Nanking.
From 317 to its extinction in 420, the dynasty was known as the Eastern
Tsin. Thus China, remaining united in name, was divided into two
portions, the line of division being the Yangtze river. In the south the
Chinese ruled, in the north the Tartars. India had its own troubles, and
concerned itself very little about its missions to China.

It will easily be understood that the sympathies of the Buddhists would
be more with the Buddhist principalities on the north and west than with
the Confucianist Chinese State of Tsin. <span
id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_202.md) The "Bibliothecal catastrophe," or
"burning of the books," instituted by Hweiti in A.D. 306, must have been
directed against the Buddhists and their importations, and appears to
have been well deserved. It also possibly affected the Taoists. It would
almost seem as though something had for a while driven Taoists and
Buddhists into a common camp. About the year A.D. 240, Taoist sectaries
began to live as Buddhist monks in bamboo-groves and caves, and to
cultivate the philosophy of the Void, as did many of the Buddhists: nay,
even the Confucianists were tempted to follow suit by erecting images of
"the Five Rulers" in the Temples of the God of Heaven. The literati
saved Confucianism from this stupid imitation of the Five Dhyāni
Buddhas; shortly after Hweiti's "bibliothecal catastrophe," the votaries
of the Void were forcibly put down, on the ground that their doctrines
and practices were subversive of public order. But it is evident that
these measures

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

were limited to the dominions of Hweiti and his Tsin successors.

In the year 335 A.D. an Indian monk, of the name of Buddhoganga,
persuaded the Emperor She-hu of the Posterior Chow to allow Chinese
subjects to take monastic vows. The Chow were Huns, <span
id="fr_204"></span>[1](#fn_203.md) in touch with the main body of their
tribe, whose vanguards, driven from their homes by the same process of
desiccation which had sent the Chow against China, were now on their way
to Europe. The permission obtained by Buddhoganga enabled Buddhism, at
any rate in the Chow dominions, to become a native growth instead of an
exotic. This is the first sign that Buddhism was becoming an object of
serious study to the Chinese people.

Buddhism was also much furthered by the establishment at Singanfu of the
Empire of the Anterior Thsin. This dynasty was of Tangut, or Thibetan
origin, and had extensive trade relations both with India and the West.
They were very zealous Buddhists, and did much for the spread of their
faith. Cave temples, after the manner of the celebrated holy places of
India, were established in this kingdom about A.D. 370, and it was from
the kingdom of the Anterior Thsin also that, in A.D. 372, the first
Buddhist missionary was sent to the Korean kingdom of Koma.

In 366 there was translated into Chinese a portion of the Avataṃsaka, or
Kegon Scriptures. The reader will remember that these were the
Scriptures fabled to have been brought by Nāgārjuna from the Dragon's
Palace

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

at the bottom of the sea. How suitable those weird books must have
seemed for reconciling the occupants of the Dragon-throne to the faith
of the great Sea-dragon! In the year 381 Hiao-wu-ti, Emperor of the
Anterior Thsin, was the first ruler of China openly to profess the
Buddhist faith. <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_204.md) He built large
monasteries and did much for the spread of Buddhism in his extensive
dominions. He was not a great gain, perhaps, to his new religion. He was
a very sensual man, and was smothered by one of his concubines whom he
had offended.

The Thsin dominions extended far to the West, possibly as far as
Bokhara, with which country they had, at any rate, many trade relations,
and from which they received Buddhist missionaries. In 375, two
Christian missionaries, Palladius, a Goth, and Musæus, Bishop of Aduli,
were sent from Galatia to India. Palladius turned back, Musæus went on
from India to Bokhara, and there established a mission. <span
id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_205.md) It was probably not without some
results.

Communications with India were restored. The peninsula was now under the
sway of the later Gupta sovereigns. Samudragupta (326–375) ruled over an
empire larger than any that had acknowledged a purely Indian sovereign
since the days of As’oka. He was paramount in the peninsula, and his
alliances extended from Ceylon to the Oxus, where he came in touch with
the Thsin. Neither he nor his successor Chandragupta II. (shall we call
him Vikramāditya?) were Buddhists. They were both worshippers of Vishnu,
but both were tolerant men and gave free liberty to Buddhism and
Jainism. What wonder is it that, the way being once more open to the
Holy Land of Buddhism, devout Chinese pilgrims

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

should have flocked to visit the places associated with the birth, life,
and death of S’akyamuni? And what wonder that the net result of the
journeys of these pilgrims was to give them, and, through them, their
countrymen, a juster appreciation of the religion of the Master? Much
strange matter had come into China by all manner of by-paths and
highways. True it all claimed to be Buddhist, but it was not all such as
Pataliputra, or even Peshawur, would have recognized.

The first of these pilgrims was Fah-hian, who started in 399 and
returned by way of the sea in 414, four years after Alaric had sacked
Rome, and the year after the accession of Kumaragupta I., whose reign
was likewise to be disturbed by the inroads of the dreaded Huns.
Fah-hian found Buddhism flourishing in Khotan, Yarkhand, and Kashgar, in
Kashmir, Punjaub, and the valley of the Indus. At Pataliputra he found
two monasteries, one for the followers of each Vehicle, but many of the
holy places connected with the life of S’akyamuni—S’ravasti,
Kapilavastu, Kus’inagara, and even the Bodh Gaya itself—were in decay.
Men did not trouble themselves about the historical Buddha; they were
too much occupied with his deified aspects. Whilst Fah-hian was still in
India, the Buddhist monk Buddhaghosha reached Burma, but there was no
sign of Buddhism to be seen in Java.

But before Fah-hian returned to China, there had arrived at Singanfu a
man whose activity constitutes an epoch in the history of Chinese
Buddhism—the celebrated Kumarajīva.

Kumarajīva came of a family that had long been domiciled at Kharachar, a
town and kingdom in Eastern Turkestan, at the foot of the Tien Shan
mountains. Entering the Fraternity at the age of seven, he was sent

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

for his education to Kubhā (Kabul), where he was put under the charge of
a famous Hīnayānist priest, who was cousin to the king of that country.
At the age of twelve, *i.e.* in 352, he returned to Kharachar, where he
remained until 383, spending the thirty years of his sojourn there in
the prosecution of his theological studies. He was admirably suited for
the work of an interpreter. An Indian by descent and by education, he
was familiar with all the twists and turns of Sanskrit; in Kharachar he
had been forced to familiarize himself with Chinese and one or more
Turkish dialects. There are vague hints to be found here and there of
sporadic Christian communities in that part of Central Asia.

In 383 the town of Kharachar was attacked and destroyed by Chinese from
Thsin, and Kumarajīva, still in the prime of life, was taken prisoner,
and carried, first to Liancheu, and thence, in 401, to Singanfu, where
he was attached to the court of Yao Hing, second ruler of the Posterior
Thsin. His fame as a scholar had preceded him; he had established his
reputation as a Saint by a very successful resistance to a fleshly
temptation thrown in his way by his Chinese captors, and was received by
the Thsin court with much honour. His opinion was at once asked with
regard to the numerous translations of Buddhist Scriptures with which
the country was flooded. Travellers to India had already brought back
stories of how the Buddhism being introduced into China differed from
that of India; it was certain that the translations into Chinese
offended the literary tastes of the educated classes. What guarantee was
there that they were even accurate translations?

Kumarajīva's verdict was that the translations made hitherto were
neither accurate nor elegant, and that he had better be set to the task
of revision. This work

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

occupied him for the rest of his lifetime, and was the joy and pride of
his declining years. The proper conversion of China had been laid upon
him as a charge by his teachers both in Kabul and in Kharachar, and he
was glad to be able to set himself to the task. "I have translated many
books," he said to his disciples on his death-bed, "and ye shall know by
a sign that I have done my work well. When my body is cremated, it will
all be consumed, but the tongue only will remain untouched by the fire."
So his disciples knew that his written words were true and correct.

Among Kumarajīva's most notable translations were the Smaller
Sukhāvati-vyūha, <span id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_206.md) the
Saddharmapundarika, and the three S’āstras <span
id="fr_208"></span>[2](#fn_207.md) which form the basal teaching of the
Sanron sect. These last he had studied under Suryasoma in Kharachar, and
it was to the expounding of them that he devoted the greater part of his
energy. The result of his labours was the formation of a sect—the
so-called Sanron—the first definite sect in Chinese Buddhism, a sect
which was brought to Japan in A.D. 625 by Ekwan, where it flourished for
some time before being finally merged into other schools.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

Kumarajīva died about the year 420, just as the Thsin Dynasty was being
replaced by the Sung. Four years before him died Eon (Chinese Hwui-Yin),
the Founder of the White Lotus Society. Eon is not reckoned among the
patriarchs of the Amitābha sects in Japan, but he is surely deserving of
such honour, for he was the first to gather into a distinct body a band
of monks and laymen combined for the sole invocation of Amida's name.
There is a great deal to be said for the contention of the Amidaists
that their beliefs are of the essence of the Mahāyāna; that they are, in
fact, the one true form of that religion. We have seen the faith in
Amida with As’vaghosha in the first century A.D., with Nāgārjuna,
Anshikao, Lokaraksha, and other Han missionaries in the second. In the
third there was Sanghavarman (252), whose translation of the larger
Sukhāvatî Vyūha is still much used. In the fourth century we have Dō-an
(Thâo Ān, ob. 390), of whose faith we know from a story that is told of
him. A certain very conceited Indian monk entered into conversation with
him. "I am Shūsakushi," said the Indian (I give the Japanese equivalent
for his name); "I am well known within the four seas." "Oh, are you?"
said Dō-an. "My name is Dō-an, and I am well known in the Paradise of
Amida." The repartee shows Dō-an's faith quite clearly. Eon was a
disciple of Dō-an. Like his master, he lived south of the Yangtze, in
districts where there was not so much Buddhism, perhaps, as in the
dominions of the Thsin. He does not seem to have troubled himself very
much about the Amida Scriptures (of which only one was accessible to him
in a Chinese dress), but to have led a monastic life constantly devoted
to the worship of Amida. His writings had a great influence on the
Amidaist Patriarch Zendō. It has been said that he was a Manichæan: the

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> White Lotus
Society still exists in China, I am told, and its members sing hymns
which it is hard to distinguish from Christian ones. <span
id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_208.md)

With Kumarajīva commences the period of Saddharmapundarika influence.
That remarkable book (the connection between which and one of the
Gnostic books I have already pointed out) may be spoken of as a species
of Buddhist Apocalypse.

The Master, on the Vulture Peak, awakes from his trance to show his
auditors that, though men may think there are three forms of saving
doctrine, there is really only one, the apparent differences arising
from the fact that the One Truth has to be adapted and modified to suit
the needs of those to whom it is delivered. This is illustrated by
various parables, and the hearers have the lesson impressed upon them
that the ultimate goal of all endeavours must be to reach
All-knowingness. And to know everything is the same thing as to know
nothing.

The Master is endowed with all knowledge and with all power. He knows
the past, the long record of his own existences, and the future, the
destinies of his hearers, both of which he describes. His knowledge is
so great that even the Buddhas made Perfect in the past are anxious to
hear his Wisdom, and he proposes himself, made one with a great Buddha
of previous times, for the adoration of the congregation.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

Then he sends forth his disciples to preach his gospel. He promises them
his protection, and he encourages them by showing the wonderful success
of their preaching. It will really be He that preaches, and not they.
Every one of their countless myriads of converts has been somewhere at
some time his personal disciple. He gives them rules for their conduct
in preaching.

At the head of the bands of those that shall believe are four great
Bodhisattvas. The later chapters make us infer that "the Four" are
Yakushi, Kwannon, Fugen, Myō-On. <span id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_209.md)
Nichiren claimed that he himself was one of the Four. Whoever they are,
they are beings of great power, and they stand around the Master, who is
supreme, and uncircumscribed in time or space.

If Professor Takakusu is right, we must assign to this period the two
brothers Asangha and Vasubandhu, who play such an important part in the
development of the Mahāyāna. Takakusu places them about A.D. 445, and
gives reason for so doing. But Vasubandhu, on the list of the Mahāyāna
Patriarchs given by Nanjo, comes just halfway between Nāgārjuna and
Bodhidharma. We know Bodhidharma's date, A.D. 520; if we place Nāgārjuna
about A.D. 120, we shall find that a halfway date will place Vasubandhu
about A.D. 300, which fits in better with what one can judge of the
effects of his work. Vasubandhu, like Nāgārjuna, is claimed by many
sects. He belongs to the Kusha, the Hossō, and the Jōdo, the latter,
especially, esteeming him to be one of the most powerful advocates of
Faith in Amitābha and Rebirth in the Pure Land.

His brother, Asangha, who was a Mahāyanist before him, is looked upon as
the founder of the Hossō or

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dharmalakshana
sect. A story is told of him which throws an interesting light on the
superstitions of his day. He was delivering a course of lectures in a
preaching-place in Ayodhya, his place of residence. The lectures were
not his own. Every evening he ascended to the Tushita Heaven and was
coached for the next day's lesson by the Great Maitreya himself, the
Buddha of the Future. One day a student doubted his word. "You must not
do that," said the Professor; "what I am giving you I obtained from the
Tushita Heaven, from Maitreya himself." With an incredulity which would
have done honour to a class of Japanese students his auditors refused to
believe him. "Very well, then," said Asangha, "I'll bring my Maitreya
with me next time!" And the lessons thus delivered were the foundation
of the doctrines of the Hossō Sect!

A. <span class="smallcaps">Note on the Chinese Sects</span>.

The following notes on Chinese sects will be found useful for reference,
as some of them will occur again in the Japanese chapters. Many of them
were extremely superstitious and corrupt; but few professed much real
reverence for the teachings of S’akyamuni, and in none, except in the
Jōdo, do we find any of the enthusiasm that uplifts its followers. I
take my information mainly from Nanjo and Murakami.

1\. The *Abhidharma* sect. This in India was reckoned as one of the
twenty sects of the Hīnayāna. It was based on the Commentary on the
Abhidharma treatises written by Kātyāyaniputra, and was brought to China
about A.D. 394 by three Indian monks, Sanghadeva, Dharmanandin, and
Sanghabhiiti. It seems to have prospered until about A.D. 440. 1 have
found no traces of it in Japan.

2\. *Jōjitsu*, based on Harivarman's "Satyasiddhis’āstra" (Nanjo, No.
1274), and brought to Singanfu by Kumarajīva in 401. It was opposed to
the doctrines of the Sarvāstivādins. It prospered in China until the
beginning of the Tang period, when it was absorbed by the Tendai. It
appeared in Japan only to disappear again.

3\. *Sanron*, based on three S’āstras, two by Nāgārjuna, one by

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Deva, with
commentaries by Asangha and Vasubandhu. It was severely metaphysical,
and was in high esteem in China during the Sui dynasty (589–618). Under
the Tang it lost its prestige. It was brought to Japan during the time
that the Sui influence was strong, and its first recognized head was
Ekwan (624), but was ousted from favour by the Hossō and Kegon.

4\. *Nirvana* (Nehan). May be said to have flourished from A.D. 386 to
A.D. 589, first among the Lian, and afterwards at Nanking under the
earlier Sung. It was one of the first sects to construct a "Harmony" of
the numerous miscellaneous Sūtras. It divided Shaka's life into five
periods, and considered the Sūtra of the Great Decease (Nehangyō) as
representing the highest and final teachings of the Master. The
Saddharmapundarika and the most of the Amida books had not yet come to
the fore in China when this sect was started. It was absorbed under the
Tang by the Tendai sect, and reached Japan under that name.

5\. *Jiron*, based on the Das’abhūmika, with Vasubandhu's (not
Nāgārjuna's) commentary. Introduced by Bodhiruci A.D. 508, it flourished
under the Northern Wei (386–534). It was eventually absorbed by Kegon.

6\. *Jōdo*. This sect is an effort at simplification. It tries to
present *one* object of Faith to its followers. Its best-known teacher
is Zendō, a contemporary of the Nestorian missionaries at Singanfu. He
advised his followers (and in this he was followed by the Japanese
Hōnen) to throw away the other books of the Canon, and to pin their
faith on the central clause of Amida's vow. His writings contain some
wonderfully striking echoes of Scriptural phrases, *e.g.* "the turning
of the hearts of the children to the Fathers, and *vice versâ*"," and
the warning against adding to or taking from the words of his book. Haas
("Amida Buddha unsere Zuflucht") gives quotations from his works, as
well as from those of Donran and Dōshaku.

7\. *Zen*, another effort at simplification. Bodhidharma, who arrived in
China in A.D. 527, advised his followers to throw away all books, and to
strive to attain to Enlightenment by way of Meditation. Bodhidharma
taught in the Kingdom of the Lian, and afterwards among the Northern
Wei. This sect, like the Jōdo, has had a great influence in Japan. I
have a chapter on it in my "Wheat among the Tares." See also "Sermons by
a Buddhist Abbot," published by the Open Court, Chicago. It was not
taught much at Singanfu, and was consequently slow in reaching Japan.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

8\. *Ritsu*, founded as a separate organization by Dōsen, at the
beginning of the Tang period. But the Vinaya discipline had been taught
long before that time, and came very early to Japan (see chapter on
Dharmagupta), "If a man does not practise the Dhyāna and Samādhi, *i.e.*
meditation and contemplation, he cannot understand the truth. If he does
not keep all the precepts, he cannot accomplish his excellent practice."
This would seem to show that the Ritsu is in some ways an amplification
of the Zen. The sect in Japan was ultimately merged in the Shingon.

9\. *Hossō*, *i.e.* "the sect that studies the nature of things," also
known as the Dharmalakshana, or Yoga sect. This is the doctrine
contained in the lectures given by Maitreya for Asangha to which I have
already alluded. It was established in China by Hiouen Thsang, about
A.D. 640. It was brought to Japan in 653 by Dōsō, who transmitted it to
Gyōgi, and again, independently, in 712 by the notorious Gembō. It was
the Hossō that brought about in Japan the system known as Ryōbu Shinto.
It cannot be accused of having done much for the bettering of humanity
in Japan.

10\. *Tendai*, so called from the mountain on which its chief founder,
Chisha Daishi, had his monastery. It is based on the Saddharmapundarika,
and is one of the harmonizing sects. Emon (A.D. 551) is the first man to
grasp the full significance of the Lotus Scripture. He was assisted in
his work by Eshi and Chi-ki, the latter of whom, under the name of
Chisha Daishi, becomes the actual founder of the sect. This sect sets
out to be all embracing. Its supreme Buddha is Vairoc’ana, who
transmitted his teaching to S’akyamuni, who transmitted it to Maitreya,
and thus through Asangha's lecture-hall to the world. It divides the
period of S’akyamuni's life into five. It admits Amida as another name
for Vairoc’ana. It practises Yoga, and charms like the Hossō and Shingon
do, but rejects the Shingon claim of a revelation to Nāgārjuna through
the sage of the Iron Tower. Chisha Daishi died in A.D. 597.

11\. *Kegon* (Avataṃsaka). The basal scriptures were translated in A.D.
418 by Buddhabhadra (Kakugen). It had a great vogue under the Tsin
(557–589) and throughout the Tang period. In Japan it arrived later than
the Hossō, but was swallowed up by the Shingon (see below on Namudaishi)
and Tendai.

12\. *Shingon*. We have seen that this sect (as also the Tendai)
contains doctrines very similar to those of the Gnostics of Alexandria.
The Secret Shingon was not, however, brought to China

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

till 710, when it was brought by Subhakarasiṇha (Zenmui), Vajrabodhi,
and Amoghavajra. The Tendai claims to have the true Shingon, which it
obtained by another route. There was a Syrian Gnosticism as well as an
Egyptian one.

B. <span class="smallcaps">Note on the Three Amida Books.</span>

The three books are—

1\. The Larger Sukhāvati Vyūha, translated by Lokaraksha, <span
id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_210.md) Anshikao, and numerous other translators
during the first three centuries. The translation most in use now is
that made by Sanghavarman in A.D. 252. "This Sūtra gives a history of
the Tathāgata Amitābha, from the first spiritual impulses which led him
to the attainment of Buddhahood in remote Kalpas down to the present
time when he dwells in the Western world called Sukhāvati (Goku-raku),
where he receives all living beings from every direction, helping them
to turn away from confusion and to become enlightened" (Nanjo). The
Sūtra is known in Japanese as the *Muryōjukyō*.

It should be noticed that, in spite of what is said in the Sūtra,
Amidaists always speak of Amida as an Eternal Being without beginning or
end. Also that very little attention is paid to any

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

portion of Amida's Vow except to that portion (eighteenth section) which
relates to Salvation through Faith in Amida's Name.

2\. The Smaller Sukhāvati Vyūha (Japanese *Amida Kyō*), brought to China
by Kumarajīva soon after A.D. 400, and by him translated. It is not
certain whether Eon had access to this Sūtra or not. Probably not. "It
is taught in this Sūtra that if a man keeps in his memory the name of
Buddha Amitābha one day or seven days, the Buddha together with
Bodhisattvas will come and meet him at the moment of his death in order
to let him be born in the Pure Land Sukhāvatī; and that this matter has
equally been approved by all the other Buddhas of the Universe." Eon's
ceaseless devotion to the Sacred Name seems scarcely necessary in view
of the words of the Sūtra, "one day or seven days."

3\. *Amitāyur-dhyāna-sūtra* (Jap. *Kwammuryōjukyō*), translated by
Kalayas’as in A.D. 424, eight years after Eon's death. In this Sūtra,
Queen Vaidehi is weary of this wicked world, and is coin-forted by
S’akyamuni, who teaches her how to be born in the Pure Land, and
instructs her in the three kinds of goodness. These are (i) worldly
goodness, *e.g.* filial piety, loyalty, respect for parents, etc.; (ii)
morality, of that internal and unworldly kind which is the first
foundation of the religious life; and (iii) the goodness of practice,
which includes the practical application to life of the Four Great
Truths and the Six Pārāmitas or Cardinal Virtues. A good seed produces
good fruit in abundance. If we sow the seed of the three goodnesses we
shall reach, as a fruit, the ninefold bliss of the Pure Land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_202"></span>[154:1](chj18.htm#fr_203.md) There is a long and
painstaking article on the history of the Tsin Dynasty by Ch. Pithon in
China Review, vol. xii. p. 401. He shows that during this period the
illegitimate states were the true props of Buddhism, just as in Germany
it was the small states that favoured the Reformation.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[155:1](chj18.htm#fr_204.md) In 375, the Huns,
with the Alani and Ostrogoths, crossed the Volga and attacked the West
Goths. The latter applied for help to the Emperor Valens, and it was on
this occasion that they brought into prominence the bishops, priests,
nuns, etc., whom they had according to their ancient rites. See the
quotation from Eunapius at the end of the preceding chapter.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[156:1](chj18.htm#fr_205.md) *China Review*, vol.
xi. p. 308.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[156:2](chj18.htm#fr_206.md) Mentioned by Cosmas
Indicopleustes.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[159:1](chj18.htm#fr_207.md) See note on the three
Amida books at the end of this chapter.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[159:2](chj18.htm#fr_208.md) The three S’astras
are (i) "the *Madhyamika-s’āstra*, or "Book of the Mean" (*Chūron*);
(ii) the *S’ata sātra*, or "Collection of one hundred Essays"
(*Hyaku-ron*) and (iii) *Dvādas’anikāya s’āstra*, or "Book of the Twelve
Gates" (*Jūni mon ron*). They were composed by the Bodhisattvas
Nāgārjuna and Deva to clear the confusion arising in men's minds from
the distinctions between entity and non-entity. They expound, from a
Mahāyānistic standpoint, the whole teachings of Buddha's long life, with
special emphasis perhaps on the "Twelve Gates" that lead to the Inmost
Shrine of Perfect Enlightenment. They accepted the Kegon, the Âgamas,
the Saddharmapundarika as three periods in S’akyamuni's ministerial
career, and placed the Saddharmapundarika last as being the crown of
Buddha's personal teachings. It is not the object of this book to
explain Buddhist philosophy. I leave these questions for discussion in a
later volume.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[161:1](chj18.htm#fr_209.md) I have had no
opportunities of verifying this statement, nor have I been able to find
any account of the White Lotus Society in any publication accessible to
me. The statement may be capable of verification by persons residing in
China. I have discussed the question in the appendix to "Shinran and his
Work."

A book of dialogues, mainly religious, between Eon and Kumarajīva exists
in the library of the *Shinshu Daigakko* at Sugamo near Tokyo. The work
is said to be unique, no other exemplar being known to exist. Through
the kindness of the librarian of that institution, a copy is now being
made for me.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[162:1](chj18.htm#fr_210.md) Their names in
Sanskrit are Bhaishajyarāja, Avalokites’vara, Samantabhadra, and
Gadgadasavara.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[166:1](chj18.htm#fr_211.md) With regard to the
earliest extant Chinese translation of this work, the one made by
Lokaraksha in A.D. 147, it is worthy of notice that Hōzō Biku, the
earthly phase of Amida, there makes his vow before not the last, but the
first of his eighty-one predecessors, and that the Name of that Being is
Lokeśvararāja, "the King, the Lord of the World." In the description of
his Vow, the conditions of salvation are faith and obedience, not faith
only, and the obedience required embraces the ordinary morality, which
is largely common to all religions. In Sanghavarman's translation the
twenty-four paragraphs of the original vow have been expanded to
forty-eight; the chief stress being laid by subsequent teachers on the
paragraphs which accentuate the importance of Faith alone as a means of
salvation. But even in the earliest version it is laid down most
distinctly that, though there are many Buddhas (as there are gods many
and lords many), yet they all are summed up in Amitābha, the Buddha of
Infinite Purity, whose vow was made countless ages ago in the presence
of the Buddha whose name is "the King, the Lord of the World."

If we judge by the dates of the translations, the other Amida books
clearly do not belong to the first stages of the Amida cult.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Buddhism Reaches Japan](chj19.md)
