[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj16)  [Next](chj18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

### CHAPTER XV

<span class="smallcaps">Manichæism</span>

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> we reach this point in our history
of the Mahāyāna, it behoves us to turn a glance to that great religious
movement which began in the middle of the third century.

Mani, or Manichæus, <span id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_192) to give him
the name by which he was generally known, was born in A D. 215, almost
contemporaneously with the fall of the Han Dynasty. He was descended
from a distinguished Persian family which had emigrated from Ecbatana in
Persia, and had settled in Babylonia. His early days were spent amongst
the Mugtasilahs, or Baptizers, <span id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_193) a
sect which his father, Fathak,

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

joined shortly after Mani's birth, a sect out of which sprang in later
years the sect of the Mandæans, and which was undoubtedly a form of
Gnosticism. But the boy separated himself from this body when he was
about fourteen, choosing to spend the next eleven years in travelling in
search of a religion. I believe I am right in saying that some of the
recently discovered Central Asian manuscripts now in the Berlin
Ethnographical Museum show conclusively that his travels at this period
embraced Egypt.

It was from Egypt, though indirectly, that he obtained the books which
eventually gave a definite shape to his religious speculations. The
story is told by St. Cyril of Jerusalem ("Cat. Lect.," vi. 22). It has
been almost uniformly rejected by modern scholars; but I hope that what
I have been able to show of the existence of Buddhism in Alexandria
during the first century of our era may lead some scholars to reconsider
their verdicts. I will give St. Cyril's own words, which are mainly
taken from the Acta Archelai.

"There was in Egypt one Scythianus, a Saracen <span
id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_194) by birth, having nothing in common
either with Judaism or with Christianity. This man, who dwelt at
Alexandria and imitated the life of Aristotle, composed four books—one
called a Gospel which had not the Acts of Christ, but

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

the mere name only; and one other called the Book of Chapters; and a
third of Mysteries; and a fourth, which they circulate now, the
Treasure. This man had a disciple, Terebinthus by name. But when
Scythianus purposed to come into Judæa <span
id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_195) and make havoc of the land, the Lord
smote him with a deadly disease, and stayed the pestilence. But
Terebinthus, his disciple in this wicked error, inherited his money and
books and heresy, and came to Palestine, and becoming known and
condemned in Judæa, he resolved to pass into Persia; <span
id="fr_197"></span>[2](#fn_196) but lest he should be recognized there
also by his name, he changed it and called himself Buddas. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[3](#fn_197) However, he found adversaries there also
in the priests of Mithras; and being confuted in the discussion of many
arguments and controversies, and at last hard pressed, he took refuge
with a certain widow."

Here Terebinthus died. "The books, however, which were the records of
his impiety, remained; and both these

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

and his money the widow inherited. And having neither kinsmen nor any
other friend, she determined to buy with the money a boy named Cubricus;
him she adopted and educated as a son in the learning of the Persians,
and thus sharpened an evil weapon against mankind. So Cubricus, the vile
slave, grew up in the midst of the philosophers, and on the death of the
widow inherited both the books and the money. Then, lest the name of
slavery might be a reproach, instead of Cubricus he called himself
Manes, which in the language of the Persians signifies
'Discourse.'" <span id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_198)

In the year A.D. 242, at the coronation of King Sapor I., Manes, now
twenty-four years of age, and fed upon the doctrines of the Baptizers,
and of the Aristotelian and Buddhist philosophy of the Scythianus books,
as well as on the varied experiences of his *Wanderjahre*, proclaims his
new religion. It was an auspicious moment. King Sapor was the successor
of Ardashir, who had driven out the Parthian dynasty and restored a
Persian Empire under the Persian dynasty of the Sassanid House. It was a
strictly nationalistic movement, encouraged by the Magian priests, and
the new rulers were bent on restoring that ancient faith of the land
which had been overthrown when Alexander burnt its sacred books and
proscribed its sacred rites. Manes apparently thought it a favourable
opportunity for proclaiming a new religion. So he announced himself as
the prophet of God to his own people of Babylonia. "What Buddha was to
India, Zoroaster to Persia, Jesus to the lands of the West, that am I to
Babylonia."

In its first form, his preaching was a protest against the forcing of
Zoroastrianism on his own people of Babylon

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

by the victorious Sassanid House, and it is probable that, had he been
left alone, his religion would have had nothing but a mere local
importance. But the Magians did not want to see Babylonia aroused to
national enthusiasm by the preaching of a new national faith, and Manes
was driven into exile. His exile, followed later by his martyrdom,
changed his system from a merely local cult to one of world-wide
significance. He wandered as an exile through the countries north,
north-east, and east of the newly constituted Persian kingdom, from
which he was an outcast, and when, venturing to return to Persia, e was
cruelly put to death by his enemies, his disciples seized upon his
memory with enthusiasm, and carried his teachings far and wide through
Europe and Asia. Manichæism was for many centuries a serious menace to
the Christian Church.

Manichæism may most properly be described as the completion of the
Gnostic systems. It seems to have swept them all together, and to have
joined them into one cohesive whole. We hear no more of Gnosticism after
the rise of Manichæism. It was not a Christian religion, yet it had its
Christian side. It could speak to Christians in Christian language, and
it made claim for Manes that he was the Paraclete, the Comforter whom
Christ had promised. We have but to read the Anti-Manichæan treatises of
St. Augustine, or any of the notices of Manichæism in the Greek or Latin
Fathers, to understand that Manes could talk, when he pleased, as a
Christian. But he faced many ways, and in China the Manichæan clergy
rather seem to have aimed at identifying themselves with the Buddhists.

Manichæism did not, like Christianity, "present itself to man as a power
to save him by cleansing his heart from sin; but, like Gnosticism, it
simply proposed to

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

gratify man's craving for knowledge by explaining the very problem of
his existence." <span id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_199) It had a phrase in
China which well sums up its principal teaching—a word pronounced in
Japanese as *Dai-un-Kōmyō*, "the Light on the Great Cloud." <span
id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_200) It recognized two elements—the Light and
the Cloud; and the Light, which is all good, is God. The personality of
God comprises five spiritual and five material sub-elements, a division
clearly corresponding to the five Dhyāni Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. "But
God is not alone in the light: His fulness comprehends an air of light,
an earth of light, and numberless glories and magnificences. Upwards and
sidewise this realm of light is unbounded; but from below it is met by
the realm of darkness, the Cloud." Thus "Light resting on the Great
Cloud" becomes the symbol of the Manichæan system. The term is found in
China and Japan, often as a name for temples. I believe that in every
case it can be traced back to a Manichæan origin or connection.

The ethical system of Manichæism is more clearly allied with Buddhism.
Whether Manes, coming to India, found the Dharmagupta system at work and
incorporated it into his own, or whether the later Vinayists borrowed
from the Manichæans, I cannot tell. It all depends on the date to be
assigned to books like the Brahmajāla Sūtra. But there is no doubt that
the "Perfect" of the Manichæan system are remarkably like the candidates
for Buddhaship who take upon themselves the 250 Rules of the
Bodhisattva. In both systems there is the same threefold arrangement of
sins according as they concern the hand, the mouth, or the heart. In
both there is the same prohibition of marriage, and of every sort of
sensual pleasure; Bodhisattvas and "Perfect" are alike forbidden

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

to dig the earth, to build houses, to engage in industry or commerce.
The Bodhisattva and the Perfect alike are forbidden to partake of the
"five strong herbs," known in Japan as "Go Shin." <span
id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_201)

It is impossible to deny the influence exercised upon the plastic
Mahāyāna by Manichæism. From the middle of the third century onwards the
two religions were constantly side by side, and whatever person we
consider after that date, we must always take into consideration the
fact that most probably he knew something of Manichæism. Zoroastrianism
also comes into account, but the Zoroastrians were not a proselytizing
community like the Manichæans, and it is not until the Tang period that
we find them side by side with Buddhism.

Manichæism did not set itself to work to preach Christ, but it had its
Christian aspect, and wherever in Central Asia we find, as we often do,
a Manichæan temple almost side by side with a Buddhist monastery, we may
safely infer that there must have been some indirect knowledge among the
Buddhists of the fact of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[145:1](chj17.htm#fr_193) *Mani* means a
painter. I have often wondered if there can be any connection between
the name *Manichæus* and the famous Buddhist monastery of Manikyala. I
draw my materials for this chapter mainly, though not entirely, from
Kessler's article on Mani in the "Schaff-Herzog Encyclopædia." It is
probable that in the course of a few years our knowledge of Manichæism
will be much increased as a result of recent finds in Central Asia.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[145:2](chj17.htm#fr_194) The Mendæans or
Mandæans still subsist, in a very small community, on the eastern banks
of the Tigris. They are sometimes called the Christians of St. John, on
account of the great veneration they pay to St. John the Baptist, whom
they consider to have been a true prophet, in contradistinction to
Abraham, Moses, Solomon, Jesus the Sorcerer, and Mahomet, all of whom
they consider to have been false prophets. The true religion, they say,
still existed in the days of Moses, and was in the possession of the
Egyptians, and was brought back into the world by St. John. It was this,
doubtless, that turned Mani's thoughts towards Egypt in his travels in
search of religion. The official name, among themselves, for their
religion is *Mandā*, which is Gnosis. But Mandā is personified, as it is
among the <span id="page_146">p. 146</span> Buddhists, and so becomes a
sort of counterpart of the personified though indefinite *Butsu* of
which many Japanese Buddhists speak (especially the followers of the old
Ritsu or Vinaya sect, now amalgamated with the Shingon). They also talk
of themselves as "Subbā," *i.e.* "Baptists," and their Baptismal rites,
oft repeated, are again, like those of the Marcosians mentioned in a
previous chapter, very similar to those of the Shingon *Kwanjo*. Like
many Japanese Buddhists, they have a special veneration for the Polar
Star (Jap. *myōken*), towards which they turn when praying.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[146:1](chj17.htm#fr_195) I have already shown
how widely, even in As’oka's days, was the expansion of Buddhism among
non-Indian peoples.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[147:1](chj17.htm#fr_196) In the "Acta
Archelai" we read, "Scythianus thought of making an excursion into
Judaea, with the purpose of meeting all those that had a reputation
there as teachers." And this is said to have been in the days of the
Apostles. See my paper on the "Formative Elements of Japanese Buddhism,"
in *Trans. As. Soc. Japan*, vol. xxxv.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[147:2](chj17.htm#fr_197) In the "Acta
Archelai" it is "Babylon, a province which is now held by the Persians."

<span id="fn_197"></span>[147:3](chj17.htm#fr_198) Does the name of some
great Mahāyānist doctor—for instance, Nāgārjuna—lurk behind Terebinthus?
Nag is the name of a tree, "the *arjuna* tree sacred to the worship of
the Nagas," and always appears in Japanese as *Ryū ju*, the "tree of the
Dragon" or Nāga. Can it be that the name of Nāgārjuna was similarly
translated into Greek, and that the *terebinthus* was the "sacred tree
of the Nāgas"? Nāgārjuna's date corresponds roughly with that assigned
to Terebinthus. There is a great similarity of ideas between Nag. and
Manichaeism; the "Thibetan Life of Nāgārjuna," translated by Mr. Das in
*J.A.S. Bengal*, speaks of a journey westwards undertaken by Nāgārjuna,
and Nāgārjuna, like Terebinthus, was known amongst his contemporaries as
"Buddha." The establishment of this conjectural identification would
clear up many difficulties.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[148:1](chj17.htm#fr_199) The name also means
"painter." The Greeks, not unnaturally perhaps, nicknamed him the
Maniac.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[150:1](chj17.htm#fr_200) Kessler, *l.c.*

<span id="fn_200"></span>[150:2](chj17.htm#fr_201) See my "Shinran and
His Work," p. 166.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[151:1](chj17.htm#fr_202) *Cf*. "Shinran and
His Work." The lower class of Manichæan disciples, the "Hearers,"
corresponds, even philologically, with the S’ravakas of Buddhism. The
distinction lies at the basis of the distinction, common in Japanese
sects, of *Shintai* and *Zokutai*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. China in the Third, Fourth, and Fifth
Centuries](chj18)
