[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj12)  [Next](chj14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

### CHAPTER XI

<span class="smallcaps">As’vaghosha</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Everybody</span> in Japan reckons As’vaghosha as
the founder of the Mahāyāna Faith, and yet there is not a single
Mahāyāna sect in Japan which traces its official lineage back to him.
They all go back to Nāgārjuna, who is made to be responsible for very
great varieties of doctrine; and one or two of them will then add, in a
parenthetic and half apologetic manner, that As’vaghosha said something
of the sort.

The Zen teachers give him in their list of Patriarchs <span
id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_127) of the Mahāyāna, but do not in any way
treat him as one of the pivots of their system. The mystic Kegon, now
practically non-existent, spoke of As’vaghosha as their founder, in the
sense that the germ of their teachings may be found in him who first
roused his fellow-religionists to faith in the Mahāyāna, then coming
into the world; but their doctrines they derived, through Nāgārjuna,
from some mysterious books said to have been brought by that saint from
some "Dragon's palace under the sea." And the believers in salvation by
faith in the vow of Amida,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

while acknowledging that the first signs of that faith are to be found
in As’vaghosha's treatise, yet make Nāgārjuna the first in their list of
Patriarchs. <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_128)

There is a great deal of uncertainty about As’vaghosha's life. His
advent is said to have been foretold by Buddha himself, but
Suzuki, <span id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_129) who has written a very
full and candid account of As’vaghosha, quotes a passage from a book
claiming to be written by Nāgārjuna, in which it is stated that, in
order to fulfil all the prophecies concerning him, there must have been
six As’vaghoshas, each of whom "appeared to fulfil his mission according
to the necessity of the time, and there is no contradiction in them."
(Nāgārjuna's book was translated into Chinese in A.D. 401.) According to
the first of these prophecies, As’vaghosha had been a disciple of Buddha
in his earthly life. When the Buddha was telling his disciples of his
approaching Nirvana, he had asked to accompany him, and then, "gazing at
the pupil of Buddha's eye, had passed out of life." In the next
prophecy, Buddha is said to have told As’vaghosha that *three hundred
years* after the Nirvana, he would obtain an inspiration from him which
would be for the happiness of mankind. According to another, he was to
come *six hundred years* after the Nirvana to confute the heretics. A
fourth prophecy places him in the *eighth century* after the Nirvana; a
fifth brings him back to *one hundred years*. A sixth represents him as
having appeared to Buddha, seventeen days after his Enlightenment, in
the form of a monster serpent with 86,000 heads and 86,000 tongues, and
to have asked the Tathāgata 86,000 questions all at once. This sixth
legend was evidently invented to bolster up the pretended revelations of
the Kegon Scriptures,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

but it is not without its significance for the contemporary Ophite
Gnosticism.

A similar uncertainty hangs about the name and place of birth.
As’vaghosha <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_130) is the most common of
his designations; but in Chinese books he is sometimes Punyaditya, or
Punyaśrika, while in Thibetan he has at least eight other names. His
place of birth is sometimes Ayodhya, sometimes Pataliputra, but Benares
puts in a claim, and so do South India and Khorta.

All accounts agree in saying that he was a Brahman by birth; that he
wandered through many parts of India searching for knowledge; that he
eventually fixed his residence at Benares, where he acquired
considerable reputation as a deep scholar and skilled reasoner. He was a
pillar of Brahmanism, when, for reasons unknown, he was converted to the
Hīnayāna. As a Hīnayāna monk he acquired a great reputation for
sanctity.

The latter half of the first century was a period of trouble, and not
for India only. The Scythians, who had long threatened the north-western
frontiers, at last made their anticipated invasion. The year 50 saw the
overthrow of the last Greek princelet by the Scythian king, Kadphises
I., who also a little later overthrew the power of Gundaphorus of the
St. Thomas legend. His successor, Kadphises II., extended his power down
the valley of the Ganges as far as the gates of Benares, which he
reached between 85 and 90 A.D. <span id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_131) The
whole of India was in the tumult of war. The Scythians were on the move
from Bactria to Benares, the Chinese under Panchao were

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

marching to the shores of the Caspian Sea, the Parthians were restless,
there was war on the eastern frontiers of the Roman Empire. The White
Horse of the vision had been succeeded by the red, black, and pale
steeds.

Benares, it is said, was saved by the sanctity of As’vaghosha. The
Scythian king lay at its gates. He was willing to spare it, but he
wanted money, and he also desired to impoverish the Magadhan kingdom. So
he laid upon Benares a fine of enormous dimensions. The King of Benares
declared himself unable to pay it. "Then," said the Scythian king, "give
me Buddha's Begging-bowl and the person of your great sage As’vaghosha."
(An alternative story adds a "compassionate fowl" which would not drink
dirty water for fear of killing the insects in it. <span
id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_132)) Thus As’vaghosha and the Begging-bowl
of Buddha saved Benares.

It has been said that it is unlikely that the Scythian king should thus
accept a monk and a bowl in lieu of the heavy ransom which he had at
first demanded from the city of Benares. Yet there is a good deal to be
said in favour of its probability. The Scythian king had, by virtue of
his recent conquests in Afghanistan, the Indus valley, Punjaub, and the
Northern-Western Provinces, become the ruler of a great Buddhist
kingdom, and the Buddhist provinces of his empire were about to be
increased by the conquests in Central Asia which took place a few years
later. Kadphises II. (if it were indeed that

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

monarch) was, in fact, the greatest Buddhist monarch of the world. The
Begging-bowl, however, which is the prototype of the Holy Grail of the
Arthurian legend, <span id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_133) was the holiest
of all relics of the Buddha, and its possession, like the Sacred
Sword <span id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_134) and Mirror of the Japanese
Imperial House, brought with it the recognized spiritual headship of the
whole Buddhist world. Neither Balkh, nor Peshawur, nor any other city
that the Scythian king might choose for his capital, could hope to be
the centre of Buddhism so long as the Bowl remained at Benares. With the
Begging-bowl in his possession, the Scythian king might safely assert
that the headship of the Buddhists had been transferred to him. The Bowl
meant very little to the King of Benares, for the Hīnayāna was losing
its prestige, and already that Hindu reaction had set in which well-nigh
expelled Buddhism from the soil of India. To the alien ruler of recently
annexed Buddhist provinces, its possession was beyond all price
important.

As’vaghosha's conversion to Buddhism has been variously described.
According to one story, he was converted by the singing of a bird, whose
notes sounded like the praises of Buddha. According to another, he
found, in a Buddhist book, a prophecy of Buddha's in

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

which his own name was mentioned. According to a third, which comes from
Thibet, he was converted by Āryadeva, a prominent disciple of
Nāgārjuna's, not by argument or reasoning, but by a liberal display of
magic arts. According to a fourth, which agrees with Thibetan as well as
with Chinese authorities, he was reasoned into belief by Pārśva, or
Punyayaśas. These two men were As’vaghosha's immediate predecessors in
the list of Patriarchs. Of the five lists given by Suzuki, three have
Pārśva, Punyayaśas, As’vaghosha as consecutive Patriarchs; two omit
Punyayaśas, and go straight from Pārśva to [As’vaghosha](errata.htm#4).
It is possible that Pārśva and Punyayaśas are one and the same person.

It may be that there is some truth in each of these stories. As’vaghosha
was a poet, <span id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_135) and his poetical
imagination may have been awakened and turned to Buddhism by the song of
a bird. He would be neither the first nor the last man whose conversion
has been due to a bird's song or a beautiful piece of scenery. Thus
converted, he passes over from the Hindu worship of Mahes’vara to the
faith of S’akyamuni, only to find that the Hīnayāna, seen from within,
was not all that his fancy had painted it from without. He would not be
the first idealist that has found his dreams destroyed by the
disappointments of the actualities. And yet we may imagine that in this
period of his life he may still have done good service to his new faith
by the publication of the *Vajrasuci*, <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_136) in which he combats the mistaken Hindu
theory of caste.

So far we may presume his literary activity to have gone in his Benares
days. But following in the train of the Scythian monarch, he finds
himself, in the dominions

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

of the conqueror, among what M. Sylvain Levi <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_137) calls "des cultes, des rites, des usages
inconnues." His new companions are still Buddhists, but they have
brought with them from Bactria, Turkestan, Khotan, new ideas, foreign to
the Hīnayānists of Benares. Again his imagination is kindled; he
recognizes in Pārśva a dialectician greater than himself, in Aryadeva,
the master of a magic more powerful than any that he knows of, and he
accepts the new and enlarged faith, and becomes its first great
exponent. <span id="fr_139"></span>[2](#fn_138)

In truth, there were, in germ, in the new Buddhism which was then coming
into shape in the Indus valley, three modes of expression which must all
be taken into account, if we would understand the ‚Japanese Mahāyāna of
to-day. They are not confined to Buddhism: they are found in Gnosticism,
in Hinduism, in Christianity; they are, in fact, universals of religion.
They may, for brevity's sake, be termed the Way, the Truth, and the
Life; the appeal to the affections, the intellect, the spiritual
imagination of Faith.

The new Life imported into Buddhism, connected, as we have seen, with
the Gnosis of the Egyptians, and profoundly influenced by the Magianism
of Bactria, was quite ready to assert its claim to supernatural powers.
It rested with As’vaghosha, while re-asserting the half-forgotten claims
of S’akyamuni, to provide a philosophic basis for the polytheistic
conceptions of the mixed multitude of the North-West, and thus to
commend to the people of Hindustan the spiritual authority of the new
Truth proclaimed by the new possessors of the Buddha's Begging-bowl.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

It is noteworthy that in doing so he opens the Way to Life, which a
large and constantly increasing school of Northern Buddhism has from the
beginning interpreted as being Faith in one who is greater than
S’akyamuni.

"Therefore" (these are almost the last words of his Discourse on the
Awakening of Faith), "it is said in the Sutra that if devoted men and
women would be filled with concentration of thought, think of Amitābha
Buddha in the world of highest happiness in the Western region, and
direct all the root of their good work toward being born there, they
will assuredly be born there. Thus always seeing Buddhas there, their
faith will be strengthened, and they will never relapse therefrom.
Receiving instruction in the doctrine, and recognizing the Dharmakāya of
the Buddha, they will by gradual discipline be able to enter upon the
state of truth." <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_139)

It is surely significant that at this particular period in the world's
history the very first book which describes itself definitely as
belonging to the Mahāyāna should end with a recommendation to faith in
one who bears such a strange resemblance to Christ.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

The name of Pārśva who converted As’vaghosha to the Mahāyāna gives a
clue to As’vaghosha's date. For Pārśva was the chairman, or at any rate
an active member, of Kanishka's Great Council which took place at
Jhālamdara early in the second century. We may therefore, with a certain
amount of confidence, place As’vaghosha about the year A.D. 80 or 90,
some twenty or thirty years after St. Thomas, and about the same period
before Kanishka's Council. <span id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_140)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[96:1](chj13.htm#fr_128) It is noteworthy that
there are great discrepancies in these lists. Suzuki ("Awakening of the
Faith," p. 33) quotes five lists. In most of them As’vaghosha comes
about eleventh or twelfth, with Nāgārjuna thirteenth or fourteenth. But
in the list given by the Sarvāstivādins As’vaghosha is 12 and Nāgārjuna
34.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[97:1](chj13.htm#fr_129) See translation of the
*Shōshinge* in "Shinran and His Work."

<span id="fn_129"></span>[97:2](chj13.htm#fr_130) "As’vaghosha's
Awakening of Faith." Chicago, Open Court.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[98:1](chj13.htm#fr_131) Chinese, *Maming;*
Japanese, *Memyō*. As’vaghosha means the Neighing Horse, and it is
striking that he is in certain Japanese books connected with the "White
Horse," which is one of the forms he is said to assume, *e.g.* in
amulets.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[98:2](chj13.htm#fr_132) Smith, "Early History
of India."

<span id="fn_132"></span>[99:1](chj13.htm#fr_133) The "compassionate
fowl" I have found in Japanese sources, besides those mentioned by
Suzuki. It is said that As’vaghosha not only appeared in the forms of a
thousand white horses, but that he also caused a thousand white birds to
sing, *Issen no hakuba to genji, issen no hakuchō wo nakashimu*. It is
said of him that he was a manifestation or temporary incarnation of Dai
Kōmyō Nyorai, "the great Tathāgata of Light," an expression which some
explain as Vairoc’ana, others as Amitābha.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[100:1](chj13.htm#fr_134) I will remind Celtic
readers of the Welsh tradition preserved in *Barddas* that their ancient
religion came to them from Taprobane, or Ceylon. In that case, it is
within the bounds of possibility that the Arthurian legend may have been
an adaptation of the Indian one, with Arthur as S’akyamuni, and Modred
as Devadatta.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[100:2](chj13.htm#fr_135) In Japan, the
possession of the sword, mirror, and jewel makes their owner the
legitimate sovereign. When the empire was for a few years divided
between two rival lines, the legitimate line was recognized by these
tokens, though it was the other line which eventually won the day. The
Huns had the same tradition about the sword. But theirs had been lost
for centuries (can it have been in Japan?), and was discovered
accidentally and brought to Attila. The possession of this sword made
Attila the recognized chieftain of all the Huns.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[101:1](chj13.htm#fr_136) As’vaghosha's great
poem is the *Buddhacarita*, of which there is a translation in *S.B.E.*,
vol. xix., but there are some other minor poems as well, in praise of
Amida.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[101:2](chj13.htm#fr_137) See *Journal
Asiatique*, Ser. X. vol. xii. p. 1 (July, 1908).

<span id="fn_137"></span>[102:1](chj13.htm#fr_138) See *Journal
Asiatique*, Ser. X., vol. xii. p. 1.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[102:2](chj13.htm#fr_139) As’vaghosha's great
works are the "Awakening of Faith" and the "Book of Great Glory." See
Suzuki, *op. cit.*

<span id="fn_139"></span>[103:1](chj13.htm#fr_140) Suzuki, *op. cit.*,
p. 145. It is not known what Sūtra is here mentioned, but it is
generally supposed to be the Sukhāvati Vyūha. If so, this is the
earliest mention of the book, as it is also the earliest mention of the
name of Amitābha. For the development of the doctrine of Amitābha, I
will refer the reader to my "Shinran and His Work"; also to Haas, "Amida
unsere Zuflucht" (Leipzig: Dietrich, 1910). The allusion to "seeing
Buddhas" is capable of two interpretations, for the word for Buddha may
be singular or plural. If singular, then it refers to Amitābha; if
plural, it refers to the many inferior Buddhas, who are treated as so
many "members" (*bunshin*) of the True Buddha Amida, who in the Sūtra of
Forty-two Sections is treated as superior to all Buddhas. The Japanese
Shingonists, who make Vairoc’ana to be the Supreme, say that Amida is
identical with him.

The Dharmakaya is that spiritual body of Buddha which is capable of
being spiritually present everywhere. The conception is not unlike that
of the Christian "Real Presence" of Christ.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[104:1](chj13.htm#fr_141) I would refer my
readers to Professor Anesaki's article on As’vaghosha in vol. i. of
Hasting's Encyclopædia of Religion and Philosophy, and to a long article
by M. Sylvain in the *Journal Asiatique* for July and August, 1908.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Nāgārjuna](chj14)
