[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj24)  [Next](chj26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

### CHAPTER XXIII

<span class="smallcaps">The Buddhism of Kamakura</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Kamakura</span> is connected with Yoritomo and
the Regents of the Hōjō family. Yoritomo, the first of the Minamoto
Shōguns (1147–1199), was the son of that Yoshitomo who, after leaguing
himself with the Taira against his own clan, and bearing arms against
his own father, ended by breaking with the Taira for their want of
gratitude, and perished miserably at the hands of one of his own
retainers, who hoped to earn the favour of Kiyomori by sending him the
head of his misguided master.

His wife, Tokiwa Gozen, who had once been a consort of the Emperor
Konoe, and had escaped with her three children from the massacre in
which her husband had perished, sacrificed her own person to the
vindictive Kiyomori, in order thereby to save the three children whom
she had borne to Yoshitomo. One of these children was Yoritomo; the
other was Yoshitsune, the favourite hero of Japanese history and
romance.

Yoritomo was about thirteen years old when his father died. His mother's
self-sacrifice induced Kiyomori to spare him; but he was banished to
Izu, where he did not behave very well; though he managed to secure the
affections of his guardian's daughter, the beautiful and capable
Masa-ko, who ran away from home to join her lover on the outbreak of his
war against the Taira, and who may be said to have laid the foundations
of the Hōjō

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

family, by procuring for her father the nomination to the office of
Regent (Shikken). Yoritomo's arms were successful; he and his associates
defeated the Taira partisans at Ichi-no-tani (1184), at Yashima (1184),
and finally at Dan-no-ura (1185), after which he found himself
practically master of Japan, being invested in 1192 with the title of
*Sei-i-tai Shōgun*, a title which for seven successive centuries
continued to designate the personage in whose hands nominally lay the
practical administrative and military power in Japan.

But long before that, in the early part of his campaigns, after his
defeat at Ishibashiyama in 1181, he had (under Hōjō Tokimasa's advice)
made Kamakura his headquarters, and had there organized the *samurai*
who rallied round the Minamoto standard into a compact military body,
which assured to him the victory over his rivals throughout Japan. The
Kamakura Bakufu—a state within a state—organized by the genius of Hōjō
Tokimasa—was to the rest of Japan in those days what Prussia was to the
rest of Germany in 1866, better organized, better drilled, better
disciplined, and it was thanks to the Hōjō genius that the Minamoto
secured the hegemony of the Empire.

When Yoritomo died, in 1199, his widow, Masako, who knew the impetuous
stormy character of the Minamoto family, took precautions to preserve
from destruction the system which her father at Kamakura had elaborated
with so much care and forethought. Yoritomo's son, Yoriie, was indeed
put in his father's place, and in 1202 invested with the title of
Sei-i-tai-shōgun; but he was restricted in his liberty by a Council of
State, appointed to assist him in his functions, and the chairman of
that Council was Hōjō Tokimasa, who now received the title of Shikken,
or Regent. The Shōgunate soon passed out

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

of the feeble hands of Yoritomo's descendants; but the Hōjō Regents
still continued to exercise their power in the name of the
puppet-Shōguns, whom they themselves nominated. Japan thus beheld the
spectacle of an Emperor the whole of whose administrative powers had
devolved upon a Shōgun, who, again, was but a puppet, with all his
functions usurped by a Regent who ruled in the Shōgun's name.
Theoretically, nothing could be conceived more hopeless than this
extremely anomalous arrangement of the government. Practically, the
system worked with fair smoothness for over a century, from A.D. 1200 to
1333. The Hōjō Regents were on the whole men of ability, power, and
uprightness (as uprightness was reckoned in those difficult days), and
brought the ship of State to a safe haven through some most dangerous
storms. But they had nothing to recommend them except their own personal
qualities. Takatoki, the ninth and last of the Regents, was weak and
dissolute, and his enemies promptly seized the opportunity to overthrow
the Hōjō house. The Emperor Godaigo was a strong man, and powerfully
supported by the Tendai monks from Hieizan. For a brief space the
Imperial House became the ruling power; the Regency was abolished, the
puppet-Shōguns disappeared, and a new succession of actual Shōguns (of
the Ashikaga House) was inaugurated in 1338, residing once more in
Kyōto. The day of Kamakura was over.

The Hōjō Regents were by no means indifferent to the claims of religion.
But theirs was a military organization, supported by all that was best
and most practical among the military classes of Japan, and neither
Tendai, Shingon, nor Jōdo was robust enough to attract the spirit of a
true soldier (for the term "soldier" could scarcely be applied to the
fighting men who fattened on the revenues of the Hieizan and similar
temples, and fought the battles

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

of the worldly priests). The Hōjō found in the Zen sects the particular
form of Buddhism that suited them best.

The Zen sects (there are three in Japan) derive their separate existence
from a celebrated Indian priest, Bodhidharma, who arrived in China in
the year 526 A.D., just two years before the foundation of the
Benedictine Order in Europe.

It was in India a period of religious strife and confusion. The Hindus
were protesting, vigorously and successfully, against Mahāyāna and
Hīnayāna alike, and were gradually absorbing into their own systems all
that was good in the Buddhist religion. <span
id="fr_386"></span>[1](#fn_384.md) A great opposition (we might better call
it a persecution <span id="fr_387"></span>[2](#fn_385).md) was being raised
against the "sons of S’akyamuni," and many Buddhist priests found it
convenient to leave India and seek refuge abroad. Many of them found
their way to China, which was then divided into two rival kingdoms, of
the north under the Wei, of the south under the Sung, with several minor
principalities. Both dynasties favoured the Buddhist religion, partly,
it may be presumed, for political reasons, and many embassies came from
India and Central Asia to ask for the assistance of China, the leading
Buddhist power in Asia. The prince of the Wei, like Shōtoku Taishi,
lectured publicly on Buddhism, but his Confucianist subjects observed
that his Buddhist principles did not prevent him from waging an active
war against the neighbouring principality of the Liang. In the early
years of the sixth century it was estimated

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

that there were over three thousand refugee Indian missionaries at work
in China. It was observed with concern that there was a tremendous
multiplication of Mahāyāna books, many of them evidently spurious, and
the rapid spread of magical arts among the Buddhists was very rightly
viewed as a matter of very ill omen. The early "harmonists" (as they may
be called) were trying to bring order out of the chaos by constructing
schemes of S’akyamuni's life and ministry which might embrace the whole
of this wide cycle of doctrines and scriptures. The predecessors of
Chisha Daishi, the founder of the Chinese Tendai, were already hard at
work in framing their philosophy of religion. But the temporal
authorities of the time had other and more drastic measures. In A.D. 515
the rulers of the Wei put to death a number of Chinese Buddhist priests
for practising magical arts; in 518 the Wei Government dispatched two
commissioners to India to report on religion and bring back authentic
books; and in 526 Bodhidharma arrived to put things in order.

Bodhidharma was no ordinary priest. He was esteemed amongst the
Buddhists as the twenty-eighth Patriarch of their Church, as the
legitimate successor of the first Apostles of S’akyamuni, the rightful
occupant of the chair in which Mahākaśyapa had sat in the first Council
immediately after the Master's death. Troubles in India had undoubtedly
something to do with Bodhidharma's visit to China; but, apart from that,
he had undoubtedly also come to fulfil a mission of reform. His visit to
China had very much the same significance as would have that of an
Archbishop of Canterbury who should undertake a "mission of help" to the
Anglican Missions in Japan.

He was a man of strong will and character. He did

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

not stoop to flatter kings. When he first met the Emperor Wu of the Sung
Dynasty, the Emperor began to speak of the good works that he had done.
"I have built many temples," he said, "and endowed thousands of priests.
What merit have I acquired?" <span id="fr_388"></span>[1](#fn_386.md) "None
at all," was the priest's blunt reply. The man who would thus address an
Emperor was not likely to spare his own religious household. He sat in
the Chair once occupied by As’vaghosha, Nāgārjuna, Vasubandhu, and the
great Doctors whose names have come before us so often in the course of
this history, but he would not recognize as genuine the many works that
claimed to come from their pens. <span id="fr_389"></span>[2](#fn_387.md)
"You cannot get Buddhism from books," was his contention. "If you want
Enlightenment you must get it as S’akyamuni did, as the great Kaśyapa
did, as Nāgārjuna and Vasubandhu did—by meditation. Books will only tell
you about it—meditation and contemplation will *procure* it for you."
And he established a discipline of contemplation which may be compared
with the spiritual exercises of St. Ignatius Loyola.

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Zazen*, as the
Japanese call it, is a very difficult course of contemplations, with
suggestions from the spiritual director which furnish topics and hints,
but no more. When the postulant has got through the course, he may have
obtained Enlightenment, or he may not; he has, at any rate, gone through
a course of mental discipline which has given him to some extent the
mind of a soldier.

Such was the Buddhism which the Hōjō Regents called to their aid when
they were engaged in making Kamakura the military centre of a reformed
Japan. The Contemplative Teaching had, it is true, been for some time in
the country, under the name of the Busshinshū, or Sect of Buddha's
Heart, but it had been too Puritanic to find favour with the courtiers
of Nara or Kyōto. In the year 1201, when Yoriie, the son of Yoritomo,
was Shōgun, with his widowed mother Masako as the power behind the
throne, and her father Hōjō Masamune as Regent and Head of the Kamakura
Bakufu, Eisai Zenshi, the founder of the Rinzai Sect of the Zen, was
invited to establish himself, first in Kyōto at the Kenninji, and
afterwards at Kenkōji in Kamakura. A few years later, between 1222 and
1232, Shōyō Daishi, or Dōgen, as he was known to his contemporaries,
founded the sister sect of the Sōtō which has its headquarters in the
province of Echizen. <span id="fr_390"></span>[1](#fn_388.md)

The *Rinzai* and the *Sōtō*, both of which came to Japan from the south
of China, differ in this, that the former depends wholly and entirely on
contemplation as the sole means of obtaining saving Enlightenment, while
the latter adds the use of books as subsidiary aids. A translation of
the chief manual used by the Zen will be found in the published
transactions of the Oxford Congress of the

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> History of
Religions (1908); when, some twenty-five years ago, I asked a Sōtō
priest to give me instruction, he began his lectures by a course of
expositions of the Hannya Shingyō, or *Parāmita Hridaya Sūtra*. Nearly
all the Sōtō priests whom I have known have been learned men; I think I
may say the same of all the Rinzai priests with whom I have become
acquainted. It is difficult to talk with them on purely spiritual
issues, because they hold that Truth is not communicated orally from
mouth to ear, but, without the intermediary of words, by a kind of
wireless telegraphy from heart to heart. *Zen wa zeni nashi, Monto mono
wo shiradzu*. "The Zen priests have no money," says the proverb, "the
Monto (Shinshu) priests no understanding."

The Zen sects have always been more or less influenced by Confucianism.
Indeed, I have heard them described as being more Confucianist than
Buddhist—au obvious exaggeration of facts. But the Zen monks sat loose
to the teachings of the Sūtras, which their: first Founder had taught
them to look on with suspicion, and in their office as teachers they
required some mental food to take the place of the discredited
books. <span id="fr_391"></span>[1](#fn_389.md) Confucianism had never been
looked upon in Japan as being antagonistic to Buddhism, and Kōbō Daishi
(even if it was not Shōtoku) had spoken of Buddhism, Taoism (Shinto),
and Confucianism as the three legs of the tripod on which rested the

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

religious and temporary welfare of Japan. Confucianism had from the
earliest times in historical Japan been looked upon as the religious
philosophy of the man-at-arms or the man of affairs, and the bid which,
under the patronage of the Hōjō Regents, the Zenshu teachers made for
the suffrages of the samurai was likely to be all the more acceptable if
it came strongly seasoned with a Confucianist flavour. The establishment
of the Zen corresponded with the entry into China of the improved and
refined Confucianism of the Chinese reformer Chūhi, or Shushi (to give
him his Japanese name), and the two systems may be said to have made
common cause in their attempts to influence the religious thought of the
military and governing classes.

Perhaps the most picturesque figure in the Zen world is that of Hōjō
Tokiyori, the fifth of the Kamakura Regents, who held office from 1246
to 1256, and then retired into a monastery, being henceforth known as
Saimyōji Nyūdō. But his retirement was not in the least like those of
the poor Emperors and Shōguns at Kyōtō, who were dropped from the ship
for fear they should want to take part in the management of the vessel
of State. Tokiyori knew that, as Regent, it was very difficult for him
to learn the true state of the country. He could only make State
progresses along roads carefully swept and cleaned for his reception, to
see just what the local authorities wanted him to see. And the times
made it imperative for the men at the helm of State to have accurate and
trustworthy knowledge. Tokiyori accordingly resigned his Regency in
favour of his young son Tokimune, whom he left in the care of
trustworthy ministers, <span id="fr_392"></span>[1](#fn_390.md) donned

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

the priestly habit, and started off on an unofficial tour of inspection.
He learned a very great deal, and, returning to Kamakura, placed the
information he had gained at the disposal of his son and successor. The
information was most valuable, for Japan was about to pass through one
of the most severe crises in her national history—a crisis of which I
shall speak in a subsequent chapter.

 

The Zen system touches the philosophic thought of India very closely. It
has also many points of contact with Confucianism. It recognizes a
supreme Being; but absolutely refuses to personify Him. To personify
God, says the Zenshuist, whether as Vairoc’ana, as Amida, as S’akyamuni,
or as Jehovah, is to limit Him. He cannot be tied up to any form; He
transcends the widest, highest, deepest conceptions of the human mind.
Yet the Zen does not blame those who thus personify God and by
personifying limit Him. It recognizes that for certain minds
personification is a necessity. The Infinite mind must become Finite, in
order that the Finite mind may grasp it. But a personified God is
nothing but a hōben, an adaptation of the Truth to the weakness of the
human intellect. Such personification, it has been observed, always
serves to narrow the mind and make it intolerant. The Jew, the
Mahometan, the Christian, the worshipper of Amida, of S’akyamuni, of
Vairoc’ana—all in turn have become dogmatic, intolerant, uncharitable,
and all for the same reason. They start from a personal, and therefore
an imperfect, conception of God.

In the same way, the Zen possesses no Canon of Scripture. The Christian
has his Bible, the Mahometan his Koran, every sect of Buddhism has
formed its own little Canon of Holy Books out of the unwieldy mass of
the Tripitaka. The formation of a canon leads to loss of

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

charity. Certain books are taken as representing a divine revelation;
all other books of religion are judged by this arbitrary standard, and
whatever does not agree with it is rejected. The letter of Scripture has
always proved to be a fruitful mother of controversy and dissension. The
Zen has no special list of Sacred Books. It does not reject any Sūtras
or Abhidharmas; it reads and values them for all the truths they
contain, but it sets up no books as being infallible or beyond
criticism. It criticizes freely all the Sacred Books of Buddhism; and it
accepts, with equal freedom and reverence, the good books of all
countries.

It has been said already that Zen, whilst rejecting a personal God,
accepts with reverence a Something Beyond Knowledge, which lies at the
back of phenomenal existence. We can never know that Being in its
entirety, but we can reach to Him in three ways—"feeling after Him, and,
haply, finding Him." We may look into our own hearts, by introspection
and meditation, and there we shall find Him. We may look into the hearts
of others by means of the Word, spoken or written, and there we shall
find Him. We may look at Nature, in all its manifestations, romantic or
commonplace, and there we shall find Him. For my heart is Buddha; and
the heart of my brother whose books I read, is Buddha; and Nature in its
entirety, the Infinitely Great, the Infinitely Small, every star or
comet, every mountain range or ocean, every insect, every leaf, is
Buddha.

Such is the faith of the Zenshuist. For his daily conduct he accepts no
infallible guide but his own enlightened conscience, which is one with
the enlightened conscience of the universe. For the details, however, of
his behaviour he will follow Confucius, S’akyamuni, Epictetus, anything
that will help him to lead his daily life in a manner worthy of a
religious philosopher.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

The Zen, as taught by its Japanese founders, Eisai and Dōgen, and as
fostered by the wise counsels of the Hōjō regents, was quite a different
religion from the miracle-mongering, worldly, intriguing parody of
religion which the Hossō, Kegon, Tendai, and Shingon had been palming
off on the country to the obvious disgust of the warrior and the man of
action. It was very different, again, from the pietistic solifidianism
of Honen and Shinran, with its contempt for this world and its fixed
gaze upon the joys of the Western Paradise. The Zen fired the
imagination of the warrior, the statesman, the man of letters, and if
Japanese art drew its inspiration from the wild fancies of Kegon and
Shingon Buddhology, Japanese poetry drew it from the solid quietude of
the Zen monasteries, where it was taught to look "within," into the
heart and into the innermost shrine of Nature, and there to be comforted
by the One, Omnipresent, Heart of Buddha, whom man can feel but not
know. <span id="fr_393"></span>[1](#fn_391.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_384"></span>[278:1](chj25.htm#fr_386.md) It was this
absorption into Hinduism of Buddhistic elements which enabled it to
overcome the Faith of S’akyamuni. To the present day a great deal of
Buddhism may be found lurking in the popular cults of India, and the
Japanese Buddhist finds himself more in sympathy with the Hindu than he
does with his brother Buddhist in Ceylon.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[278:2](chj25.htm#fr_387.md) *E.g.* the one
instituted by Mihirakula.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[280:1](chj25.htm#fr_388.md) "Tsūzoku Bukkyo gimon
Kaitoshu," vol. iii. p. 254. It is a book containing a vast amount of
information, from which I hope in some subsequent volume to give many
illustrative extracts. I have never seen but one copy of it, and I have
only succeeded in getting vols. i. and iii. It was published in fairly
simple Japanese some twenty years ago.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[280:2](chj25.htm#fr_389.md) It is evident that
this action on the part of Bodhidharma materially strengthens the view
constantly brought forward in this work, viz. that the Mahāyāna books of
China must be considered as of late origin, none of them being much
earlier (if at all) than the first century of the Christian era.

Bodhidharma evidently held that many of the books were not in any sense
Buddhist. Some of them possibly may have been, but it was impossible to
distinguish the spurious from the genuine, and therefore during all the
nine years of his stay in China ho is said never once to have made a
discourse based on a Sūtra.

My authority is a long article on "Kenshō-jōbutsu, by Maruyama, in vol.
iii. of "Tsūzoku Bukkyo gimon Kaitōshū," p. 498.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[281:1](chj25.htm#fr_390.md) There is in Japan a
third Zen sect, known as the *Obaku*, which was founded by refugees from
China in 1659. It will be mentioned in its proper place (Chapter XXIX.).

<span id="fn_389"></span>[282:1](chj25.htm#fr_391.md) The relations between
the Zen sects and the other bodies of Japanese Buddhists is well
illustrated by a phrase which I have often heard Zen priests use when
speaking of other sects. They call them *hōben no shūha*, "The sects
which employ *hōben*." *Hōben* is sometimes translated as a "fraud,"
sometimes as a "pious device." Both phrases are a little too strong.
*Hōben* is an "accommodation of truth to the intelligence of the
hearer," and the Zenshuists declare that the anthropomorphism of *e.g.*
the Amida or Vairoc’ana sects is such an "accommodation of Truth." They
profess not to use such accommodations themselves, but they do not blame
those that do.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[283:1](chj25.htm#fr_392.md) *Hōjō Nagatoki* had
been the governor of the northern portion (*rokuhara*) of Kyōtō, but
came to Kamakura to assist his young cousin.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[286:1](chj25.htm#fr_393.md) I have drawn the
thoughts contained in this description of the Zen from a treatise on
*Zengaku*, "The Zen Philosophy," by Mr. K. Nukariya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. Nichiren and the Earlier Sects](chj26.md)
