[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj25)  [Next](chj27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

### CHAPTER XXIV

<span class="smallcaps">Nichiren and the Earlier Sects</span>

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the year 1257 Japan was visited by a
very terrible earthquake. After the earthquake, in 1258, came a
destructive hurricane which overthrew much that the earthquake had left
standing. In 1259 there was, as a natural result of the two calamities
already mentioned, a famine throughout Japan, with the pestilence which
always seems to follow in famine's train. The distress was so great,
says Nichiren, in one of his letters, that men prayed to die rather than
remain alive in the midst of the universal misery. The Government was at
its wits’ end to know what to do to relieve the general suffering:
supplications and prayers were ordered to be offered up in all temples
throughout the land. But months passed by without any signs of
alleviation or abatement. At last, in 1260, Nichiren took to preaching
in the public streets of Kamakura, after having handed in to the Regent
and his retired father his newly written treatise entitled "Rissho
Ankoku-ron." In the same year, Kublai Khan, the grandson of Jingis Khan,
established his capital at Pekin, or Khambalik, where he received a
visit from the Italian traveller, Marco Polo. These few facts will
serve, I trust, as a sufficient introduction to this chapter.

Nichiren was born in 1222, in a remote village on the coast of Awa. He
was in the habit of describing his

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

father as an outcast, from whence some have inferred that he was of low
descent. This was not so, however; his father had been the retainer of a
high noble at the Court of Kyōtō, and had been banished, according to
the custom of the time, for some fault which had displeased his master.
What the fault was is not mentioned; if the father was at all like the
son, we may infer that it was that outspoken plainness which men of high
position do not always like. The family, which consisted of father,
mother, and the one child born to them in exile, lived alone and apart
in the fishing village, shunned by the natives because they were in
disgrace, and holding little intercourse with their neighbours. The
child, sensitive, tender-hearted, high-spirited, and fearless, grew up
solitary and alone, the butt of the fisher lads, but devoted to animals,
especially to the injured and maimed.

In 1234, being about twelve years, he was taken by his parents to the
Temple of Kyosumidera, not far from his native village, and there placed
under the care of an old Shingon priest, who was the incumbent. It has
always been, in Japan, the course pursued in dedicating a child to the
priesthood, to take him to some worthy priest to be trained and
educated, and to let him serve as acolyte and personal attendant on his
master until such time as he is ready to take upon himself the Vows of
the Order.

Nichiren took his life seriously. One of his first acts after entering
the Kiyozumi Temple <span id="fr_394"></span>[1](#fn_392.md) as a student
was

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

to slip away by himself into the Temple Oratory, and there, before the
image of Kokūzō Bosatsu, to offer a prayer that he might grow up to be a
good priest worthy of the name; and as he went on with his studies in
the quiet seclusion of that country monastery, he felt the premonitory
symptoms of his great vocation. He realized that the Buddhism of the
Kamakura period had departed very widely from the primitive Buddhism of
its Indian Founder; he saw that it was hopelessly divided by sects,
schisms, and varieties of contradictory doctrines, and that, being so,
it was necessarily incapable of doing the good in the world which its
Founder had meant it to accomplish. The condition of Japan was
miserable; the Buddhist sects, whether of Kyōtō, Nara, or Kamakura, were
powerless to resist the growing evils: a Buddhism purified, vivified,
united, might and would save Japan from dangers external and internal.
He determined to be the man who should accomplish this great design.

Those who know the precociousness of youthful Japanese will not be
surprised at Nichiren's forming this plan before he was twenty years of
age. The idea seems to have been suggested to him by the reading of that
very remarkable book, the "Saddharmapundarika Sutra." <span
id="fr_395"></span>[1](#fn_393.md)

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Having read it and
interpreted it to himself, he became quite confident of his mission, and
with characteristic energy set himself to work to prepare for executing
it. He left the quiet Temple of Kyosumidera, and for several years set
himself to work to travel throughout Japan and make a study of every
existing form of Buddhism. When he had thus finished his survey of the
whole field, he felt himself in a position to formulate his own views on
religion and national life. Nichiren has often been described, by those
who knew him only superficially, as a mere dreamer and fanatic. A more
careful study reveals him as a man of very decided opinions, and
extremely outspoken. But he was always able to give a reason for his
conclusions, and those reasons were sane and cogent; and in putting his
views into practice he constantly showed that if he dared to upbraid
error in severe tones, his courage came from reflection and not from
mere impulse.

For more than twenty years Nichiren devoted himself with great diligence
to the study of Japanese Buddhism. He has told us in one of his letters
that from twelve to thirty-two he gave himself up to the comparative
study of all Buddhist sects in his country—Kusha, Jojitsu, Ritsu
(Vinaya), Hossō, Sanron, Kegon, Shingon, and the Tendai-Hokke, which was
the official designation of the sect founded by Dengyo Daishi at
Hieizan. To these he

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

had added the more recent foundations of the Jōdo and Zen, having
pursued his studies at Kamakura and Kyōtō, at Hieizan and Onjōji, at
Kōbo's great shrine on Kōyasan, and Shōtoku's temple of Tennōji at
Osaka. <span id="fr_396"></span>[1](#fn_394.md) At the conclusion of his
studies he had some very bitter things to say about the older sects into
which Buddhism, "which should be one," had crumbled.

My readers will have noticed, in the previous chapters of this book,
that Buddhism, whether in India, in China, or in Japan, has always shown
an inveterate tendency to shield itself under Government favour and
patronage. Kings were its nursing-fathers in India, where, under As’oka,
Kanishka, and like-minded rulers, it had flourished and become a mighty
tree. When royal patronage was withdrawn, and Hinduism asserted itself
once more, the zeal of the Indian Buddhist lost its ardour, and the
Faith maintained itself only in those lands where the rulers were
Buddhists. We see the same phenomenon in China, where the personal creed
of the ruling house had very much to do with the ups and downs of the
religion of S’akyamuni.

In Japan, Buddhism failed to take root at all until

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

it came as a personal gift from the King of Kudara to the Emperor of
Japan, and it put forth no leaves or buds until watered by the Imperial
hand of the Crown Prince, Shōtoku Taishi. The Nara priests were nearly
all courtiers, who, though they might intrigue at times against the
Government, still intrigued only as courtiers, in the interests of one
faction against another. The Heian clergy, followers of Dengyō and Kōbō,
had become the subservient courtiers of the dominant Fujiwara family;
the pietists of the Gempei period had been the favoured ones of Emperors
like Toba and Shirakawa in their resistance to the gloved hand of the
Fujiwara; the Zen had become political tools in the powerful grasp of
the Hōgō Regents. Nichiren could see no hope of social or political
amelioration from the sectwise Buddhism of his time. Religious and
political Japan were, in Nichiren's eyes, alike suffering from a
dangerous disease.

"Awake, men, awake!" he cried in one of his earliest sermons; "awake,
and look around you. No man is born with two fathers or two mothers.
Look at the heavens above you: there are no two suns in the sky. Look at
the earth at your feet: no two kings can rule a country." <span
id="fr_397"></span>[1](#fn_395.md)

And yet that was precisely what Japan was trying to do. Politically, she
was giving her allegiance to Emperor, Shōgun, Regent; spiritually, to
Amida, Vairoc’ana, S’akyamuni. Politically, the rightful sovereign had
been pushed aside to make way for ambitious subjects; spiritually, the
rightful Lord of the Buddhist heritage had been thrown "to the moles and
bats" to make room for

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

the ambitious upstarts, Amida and Dainichi, whose claim to spiritual
homage rested on no sound rock of Buddhist doctrine.

He therefore constantly condemned the already existing sects of
Buddhism. He denounced them in his first sermon; he continued his
denunciations to the very end. *Nembutsu wa mugen no gō*. <span
id="fr_398"></span>[1](#fn_396.md) The Nembutsu was consistently deprecated
as a practice which leads men to the lowest of the hells. Nichiren never
treated Amida as being in any sense a Buddhist divinity. He looked on
him, in the garb which the Shinshu made him wear, as an unauthorized
importation from somewhere outside of Buddhism, and his Paradise as a
pure fancy. At the very best he held him to be but a partial
manifestation of S’akyamuni, the One and Eternal. It was not likely that
the peculiar Jōdo tenet of salvation by faith alone, without repentance
or works, would commend itself to Nichiren's mind.

*Zenshū wa tenma ha-jun no setsu*. "The Zen," he continued, "is a
doctrine of demons and fiends." We are familiar with the illustration of
the man whose house, "empty, swept, and garnished," stood open for the
return of a company of evil spirits larger than the one that had been
cast out. The Zen house was just in that position. Bodhidharma had cast
out of his Buddhism all the superstitious books and doctrines with which
the miracle-mongering [Mahāyānism](errata.htm#10.md) of Central Asia and
China had overlaid the original simplicity of S’akyamuni's teaching. He
had put nothing in its place, and had bidden his followers look within
to see what form they should see, and to listen for what voice they
should hear, coming to them from the empty chambers of their own minds.
The practice of Zazen leads to spiritual pride, a

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

failing not rare amongst *bushi* and *samurai*, in spite of their other
great virtues, and the many things that Nichiren had to suffer at the
hands of Zenshū priests and laymen will perhaps account for the extreme
bitterness of this sentence.

*Daishō no Kairitsu wa seken ōwaku no hō* (or, as it is to be found in a
shorter recension, *Ritsu Kokuzoku*). "The Vinaya sects, whether of the
Small Vehicle (*i.e.* connected with the *Kaidan* at Nara), or of the
Great Vehicle (*i.e.* those connected with the *Kaidan* at Hieizan), are
brigands that disturb the peace of the country." We have seen how
ambitious priests, in the Nara period, interfered with the Imperial
succession in the case, *e.g.*, of the Empress Shōtoku, and the Emperor
Junnin, and how, after Kwammu had moved his capital to Kyōtō, to be free
from sacerdotal meddling, the Tendai priesthood had still managed to
become the allies of the Fujiwara in their manipulation of Emperors to
suit their own policy. We have also seen how the *Kaidan* question,
which was mainly one of discipline, and which, therefore, deeply
concerned the Ritsu sects, had caused a schism between Hieizan and Nara,
and, later, a schism and civil war between Hieizan and her daughter
temple of Miidera. When we think of the Fighting Temples, with their
train-bands and men-at-arms, we can see some reason for Nichiren's
denunciation of the brigand sects that "throw the world into confusion."

Shingon he described as *bōkoku*, "traitors to their country," probably
with reference to their adoption of a lord other than S’akyamuni, the
rightful lord in spiritual matters in Japan, and their constant
reference to India as the seat of authority in matters of religion. His
language as to Vairoc’ana, or Dainichi, was more contemptuous even than
that which he had used as to Amida.

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He maintained that
for Vairoc’ana's existence there was no evidence at all that could be
brought forward, as in the case of S’akyamuni; that the story of the
finding of the Shingon books by Nāgārjuna, in the Iron Tower, in South
India, was a pure fabrication; and that Kōbō Daishi was the "prize liar
of Japan" (*Nihon no dai mōgo*).

As for the images of Amida, Kwannon, and the rest; he was charged with
recommending that they should be cast into the fire or the sea. They
had, in his judgment; wrought enough mischief in Japan. <span
id="fr_399"></span>[1](#fn_397.md)

Nichiren first enunciated these views in a sermon preached in the
neighbourhood of his native village; which he visited again at the end
of his period of study; in 1254. He then took up his abode near
Kamakura; where he built a little hermitage for himself in the hamlet of
Nagoye; for there was no temple in the capital of the Hōjō Regents which
would receive him as an inmate.

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Neither was there
any pulpit for him to occupy, except that which has always been open to
the agitator and the reformer, the street corner. He became an outdoor
preacher, and his sermons, plain, simple, and full of conviction, soon
attracted a great deal of attention. The earthquake, the famine, the
pestilence, the fruitless prayers offered in the temples, the shadow of
the terrible Mongol power creeping closer to Japan, all served to give
point to his oratory. He was rapidly gaining the popular favour; the
priests of the official sects were conscious that power was slipping
from them; the Regent had reason to be annoyed at the boldness with
which the hermit of Nagoye addressed him in his semi-political,
semi-religious pamphlet on the "Reformation of Religion and the
Pacification of the Country." Nichiren's enemies combined to bring
against him a formal accusation of fomenting rebellion and promulgating
heresy. He was arrested, brought before the Regent's Court, found
guilty, and banished to Ito in the peninsula of Idzu. This was in 1261;
in 1264 he was once more in Kamakura, more outspoken than ever. Another
great calamity was impending—a long-continued drought hung over the
land, and threatened a failure of the rice-crops. The official
priesthood were praying for rain, but there was none to answer. Nichiren
laughed at their vain efforts. At last he took his turn at prayer:
Heaven answered, and the people were convinced that he was a prophet.

But he had, in the excitement of his preaching, allowed himself to use
unseemly expressions. He had told the people that the late Regent, the
well-meaning and devoted Saimyoji, was in hell, suffering torments, and
that the present Regent, Tokimune, was preparing to follow him. The
words were seized, twisted, and exaggerated. His enemies procured his
arrest and haled him before the

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Regent's Court,
where, after an eventful trial which his followers to-day read with
something of the reverence with which we listen to the recital of the
familiar story of our Lord's Passion, he was condemned to death, and led
out for execution on the sands of Tatsu no Kuchi, <span
id="fr_400"></span>[1](#fn_398.md) halfway between Kamakura and Enoshima.

But the Regent must have felt that Nichiren was in the right. His
conscience troubled him after he had passed the sentence of death, and
he sent a messenger post haste after the executioner's cavalcade to
revoke the condemnation, and changed the sentence to one of banishment
to the distant island of Sado. The messenger arrived only just in time.
The mats were already spread for the prisoner to kneel on while waiting
for the fatal stroke, the prisoner was already kneeling on the mat, and
his faithful disciples held, and have ever since held, that their master
was given back to them from the dead. Legend has been busy with the
embellishment of the story. The executioner, it was said, had already
lifted his sword, when a flash of lightning from a cloudless sky
rendered the blow innocuous. Before he had recovered for a second
stroke, the messenger from the Regent had arrived and the danger was
past.

The exile in Sado was not of long duration. Nichiren returned in 1272,
busily warning the nation about the danger of the Mongol invasion. When
asked by the officers of the *Kingo*, or body-guard, what reasons he had
for his predictions of evil, he replied that he had general Scriptural
authority for what he said, and that he had come to his particular
conclusions as to time, etc., through

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "discerning the
face of the heavens." <span id="fr_401"></span>[1](#fn_399.md) He now bore
a charmed life, and was quite secure in the affection of his followers.
His later years were devoted to Minobu and Ikegami, the two monasteries
especially connected with the memories of his personality, and at the
latter he passed to his rest, in the year 1282. His had been an eventful
life. He still has, among his countrymen, many friends and many
detractors. To the outsider, who studies him impartially, he will always
appear as a fearless man who had the courage of his convictions.

Now let us turn to the theological remedy which Nichiren proposed for
the ills both of Church and State.

It was his great idea to restore S’akyamuni (not in his temporal
manifestation in fleshly form, but as the Eternal and Infinite) to his
proper place in the Buddhist Heavens. False brethren, calling themselves
Buddhists, had given to S’akyamuni a place of inferiority. They had
spoken of him as only a temporary manifestation of a part of the glories
of some other Buddha, Amitābha or Vairoc’ana, greater than himself, and
the simpler Sūtras of the Hīnayāna they had despised as containing a
simplified Gospel watered down to suit the intelligence of the
ill-instructed. Nichiren reversed the position. He had been much shocked
on one of his journeys to find some children playing with an idol of
S’akyamuni which had been discarded from the temple to make room for a
newfangled image of Amida, and he was resolved to make reparation for
the insult which had thus been offered to the lawful Lord of Buddhism.
"S’akyamuni," he said,

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

in one of his voluminous writings, <span id="fr_402"></span>[1](#fn_400.md)
"is the lord of this Saba-world, for three reasons—firstly, because he
is the World-honoured One for all sentient Beings; secondly, because he
is both Father and Mother of all sentient Beings in this Saba-world; and
thirdly, because he is the Original and First Teacher of all sentient
Beings in this Saba-world." Everything that the Jōdoist said about
Amida, Nichiren said about S’akyamuni. S’akyamuni was uncreated, without
beginning, without end, unlimited in every aspect. S’akyamuni was the
Light of the World, had always been so, would always remain so. Whatever
teaching there was in the world, whatever hope there was for man of
ultimate perfection, all came to him from S’akyamuni, whose mercies were
over all the world, but more especially over the fortunate inhabitants
of the *ichi-embudai* <span id="fr_403"></span>[2](#fn_401.md)—India,
China, and Japan—which had embraced his Faith.

S’akyamuni's teachings are summed up, said Nichiren (following herein
the teachings of the Japanese Tendai), in the Hokekyō or
Saddharmapundarika Sūtra, spoken on the Vulture's Peak during the last
few years of his earthly life. <span id="fr_404"></span>[3](#fn_402.md) But
this Sūtra he interpreted in a new manner, with great ingenuity.

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

The Hokekyō, in Nichiren's interpretation, was an Apocalypse containing
a forecast of the things which should come to pass in Buddhism after the
death of its founder. It deals with the "Millenniums" of Buddhism—the
three periods, one of five hundred, and two of one thousand years each,
which should cover what might be called the present dispensation—a
conception which is quite a familiar one to the whole family of Japanese
Buddhism.

In the Hokekyō itself the scene is laid on the Vulture's Peak, the
favourite haunt of S’akyamuni in his later years. The Master, now an old
man, is weary with teaching and has fallen into a trance. "His body was
motionless, and his mind had reached perfect tranquillity. And as soon
as the Lord had entered upon his meditation there fell a great rain of
divine flowers, covering the Lord and the four classes of hearers, … and
at that moment there issued a ray from within the circle of hair between
the eyebrows of the Lord. It extended over eighteen thousand Buddha
fields in the Eastern quarter." The trance Nichiren took as denoting the
Parinirvana of S’akyamuni. Then comes a period of silence, that period
which we have already noticed in our historical review of the Buddhist
Church—a period much longer to the Northern Buddhist who knows nothing
of As’oka, and passes straight from the Vaisali Council to that held
under Kaniskha. At the

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

close of that period there comes the "great rain of divine flowers," and
the ray of light travels from S’akyamuni eastward. The first
"Millennium," <span id="fr_405"></span>[1](#fn_403.md) the period of the
Upright Law (*Sho Hō*), was over, the activities of As’vaghosha and
Nāgārjuna represent a kind of Pentecostal shower of Buddhist revival,
and Buddhism travels to China. When the Lord awakes from his trance, he
explains the meaning of the shower and ray. The wheel of the Law is to
receive a fresh turn, a higher form of Buddhism is to be preached, and
the idea of the twofold Vehicle of Salvation is enforced by many
parables. <span id="fr_406"></span>[2](#fn_404.md) The early Apostles of
Buddhism, Kaśyapa, Ananda, Rahula, etc., whose labours had kept Buddhism
alive during the first Millennium of its existence, are praised and
thanked, and the reward prepared for them is announced. A number of
discontented monks leave the assembly in anger on hearing of the
impending changes in Buddhist doctrine (Nichiren explains this as
referring to the discontented Hīnayānists who opposed the Mahāyāna at
its first inception), but eighty thousand remain faithful, and
S’akyamuni turns to Bhaishajyarāja (Jap. Yaku-Ō) as the representative
of the new order of preachers. The period of Image Law (*zō hō*) <span
id="fr_407"></span>[3](#fn_405.md) has begun; a *stupa*, or

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

tabernacle, descending out of Heaven, reveals to the worshipping
multitude the image of S’akyamuni fusing itself into that of his
predecessor, whom the Japanese know as Tahō Butsu; and crowds of smaller
Buddhas, partial manifestations (*bunshin*) of S’akyamuni the One and
Eternal, sit on lotus-thrones around the throne. The great preachers of
the New Law are the Bodhisattvas, Manjuśri, Avalokites’vara, Yakuō,
etc., whom Nichiren treats as having been historical personages, <span
id="fr_408"></span>[1](#fn_406.md) and the work before them is to prepare
for the third Millennium, the Period of the Destruction of the Law <span
id="fr_409"></span>[2](#fn_407) (*Mappō*.md), which Nichiren places about
the middle of the eleventh century A.D. Thanks to Chisha Daishi, Dengyō,
and other labourers in the field of the Mahāyāna, the true meaning of
S’akyamuni's teaching was gradually being brought out during the whole
of this second period. The author of the Hokekyō had spoken of it as the
period of the "Destruction of the Upright Law;" with the Mongol terror
lying thick and gloomy over two continents, the phrase must have been a
significant one.

But Nichiren had a word of comfort for this period of gloom. <span
id="fr_410"></span>[3](#fn_408.md) In chap. xiv. of the "Saddharma
pundarika"

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

there is a scene which reminds the reader of the "multitude which no man
could number" in the Book of the Revelation. An innumerable host of
Bodhisattvas ("Saints," we might call them in Christian language) is
seen issuing from the gaps in the earth and standing before the stupa
throne of S’akyamuni. At the head of them are four Great Saints
(Bodhisattvas Mahāsattvas) who lead in the worship of the Eternal
S’akyamuni and receive his commission. "The very first of those
afore-mentioned Bodhisattvas Mahāsattvas" ("S.B.E.," vol. xxi. p. 364)
was named *Visishta-c’aritra*, which in Sinico-Japanese is
Jōgyō-Bosatsu. Nichiren proclaimed that he himself was Jōgyō-Bosatsu,
the minister of S’akyamuni, predestined by his Master to preach the
Faith in the dark period of the Destruction of the Upright Law. Thus had
the Master provided for each Millennium in the duration of his
Community, and for each of the three great countries comprised in the
*ichi-embudai*—for India, which had been the centre of teaching during
the first Millennium; for China, which had received it during the
second, and for Japan, from which had now come forth the Apostle and
Teacher of the third.

And the saving doctrine which Nichiren felt himself moved to proclaim in
the third dark Age was that contained in the Daimoku or Title of the
Book which he revered with all his soul—*Myō-hō-ren-ge-kyō*, "the
scripture of the Lotus of the Good Law," the name carved on stone or
painted on wood, which is found all over Japan as the honoured symbol of
the Nichirenist worship, the name which is constantly on the lips of the
Nichirenist believer. The title signifies the doctrine contained in the
whole book, and that doctrine is one of Unity. <span
id="fr_411"></span>[1](#fn_409.md) There

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

are many saints, many Bodhisattvas, many Buddhas. And yet there is but
One Buddha—Eternal, Unlimited, in Past, Present, Future, and that Buddha
is He whom men know as S’akyamuni, of whom the rest are but partial
manifestations or, in some cases, spurious counterfeits. The teachings
of that One Buddha are absolutely true and conformable to Reason and
Nature; for the Oneness is more than a mere Unity of Person. The One
Eternal Buddha is one with all Reason, and one with all Nature. There
are not two; there is only One. <span id="fr_412"></span>[1](#fn_410.md)

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

It is not difficult for a modern critic to pick holes in Nichiren's
argument. We know, thanks to modern research, that S’akyamuni's birth
must be put no earlier than the fifth century B.C., and that therefore
what Nichiren calls the first period cannot have ended earlier than the
first century A.D. We feel sure that if Manjuśri, Yaku-ō, and the other
Bodhisattvas are meant to be true historical personages, the prophecies
announcing their future destinies must be put on a par with, *e.g.*, the
prophecy in the Lankāvatāra Sūtra, <span id="fr_413"></span>[1](#fn_411.md)
which mentions the coming of Nāgārjuna, or that which announced the
coming of King Kanishka, <span id="fr_414"></span>[2](#fn_412.md)
prophecies made up after the event. What is really of interest is the
connection traceable between the millennarian teachings of the Hokekyō
and the similar teachings which were so rife among some of the Gnostics
and some of the early Fathers. Still more curious is the similarity of
thought between Nichiren and

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Abbot
Joachim <span id="fr_415"></span>[1](#fn_413.md) of the Franciscan Order,
who was almost his contemporary. The Christian Friar, who had travelled
in the East, and was the protégé of three successive Popes, also
postulated three millenniums or periods of 1000 years, connected
respectively with the names of the Three Persons of the Trinity. His
calculations did not quite coincide with those which Nichiren based on
the Hokekyō, but he significantly gave the year 1260 as the date for the
inauguration of the third millennium, that of the Holy Ghost. And 1260
brings him very close to Nichiren. <span id="fr_416"></span>[2](#fn_414.md)
Possibly our next chapters may throw some light on the subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_392"></span>[288:1](chj26.htm#fr_394.md) I take my materials
for Nichiren's life from the following sources: (1) Principally from the
"Seigoroku," a collection of extracts from his writings, which is a
veritable mine of information; (2) from two Japanese lives of the Saint,
which appeared, one in 1893 and one in 1909; (3) from a play entitled
*Nichirengi*, which was brought out in 1894; and (4) from the chapters
on Nichiren in vol. v. of "Bukkyō-Kakushū Kōyō" (1885).

<span id="fn_393"></span>[289:1](chj26.htm#fr_395.md) I have already, in my
book "The Wheat among the Tares," written at some length on the
"Saddharmapundarika." I wish here to add that the book falls into two
portions, viz. (1) *Shakumon*, as it is called in Japanese, which
comprises chaps. i.–xiv., and consists of a connected series of what may
be termed "Visions;" and (2) *Hommon*, which consists of a series of
miscellaneous chapters, on Spells, on Avalokites’vara, Samantabhadra,
and other Bodhisattvas, etc., which are but loosely connected with the
main action of the main part of the book.

It is often held by Japanese Buddhists that the *Hommon* is a series of
later additions to the original book, dating not much earlier than
Kumarajīva's time (A.D. 350–400), and the Tendai sect, which, like the
<span id="page_290">p. 290</span> Nichiren, professes to base all its
teaching on this Sūtra, confines itself mainly to the *Shakumon*
section.

It was Nichiren's claim that to him had been revealed the true meaning
of the *Hommon*, which had been concealed from former ages, and been
kept for revelation in the last "millennium" of the "Destruction of the
Law." The *Shakumon*, according to him, must be interpreted in the light
of the *Hommon*, which is the really important part. The gist of the
whole is to be found in the syllables *myō-hō-ren-ge-kyō*, which form at
once the object of adoration, the protective charm, and the *Kaidan*, or
Ordination Vow of the sect. One sub-sect considers only two chapters of
the *Hommon* to be really genuine and authentic.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[291:1](chj26.htm#fr_396.md) I give Nichiren's
exact words from a modern Japanese edition of extracts from Nichiren's
writings, which has made this great Buddhist leader's mind accessible to
me. The book is entitled "Seigōroku," and was published in 1907.

"Hitotsu no negai wo okosu. Nihonkoku ni waretaru tokoro no Bukkyō
narabi ni Bosatsu no ron to ninshi no shaku wo narai-mi sōrawabaya, mata
Kusha, Jōjitsu, Ritsu, Hossō, Sanron, Kegon, Shingon, Hokke-Tendai, to
mōsu Shu tomo amata ari to kiku ue ni Zenshū, Jōdo shū to mōsu shū mo
sōrō nari. Korera no shūjū shiyō made komaka ni narawadzu to mo shosen
kanyō wo shiru mi to naraba ya to omoishi yue ni, zuibun ni
hashiri-mawari jū-ni jū-roku no toshi yori sanjū-ni ni itaru made nijū
yo nen no aida Kamakura to, Kyō to, Hieizan to, Onjō to, Kōya to,
Tennōji tō no kuniguni tera-dera ara-ara narai mi-mawari sōraishi," etc.
("Seigōroku," p. 764).

<span id="fn_395"></span>[292:1](chj26.htm#fr_397.md) "Same yo hitobito, ma
no atari sono mi wo futari no chichi naku, futari no haha nakute
umaretaru hitobito, aogi miyo, Ten ni ni-jitsu naku, fushite miyo, chi
ni ni-Ō nashi" ("Nichiren," by Murakumo. Tokyo: Minyūsha. 1909).

<span id="fn_396"></span>[293:1](chj26.htm#fr_398.md) "Seigōroku," p. 774.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[295:1](chj26.htm#fr_399.md) "Nembutsu wa mugen no
gō: Zenshū wa Tenma, hajun no setsu: Dai-shō no Kairitsu wa seken ōwaku
no ha: Toshigoro no Honzon, Mida Kwannon tō no zō wo hi ni ire midzu ni
nagasu" ("Seigōroku," p. 774).

It is interesting to observe that there is no idol on the main altar in
a Nichiren temple, though the side altars are frequently so adorned. In,
*e.g.*, the Temple of Myōhōji at Kamakura, the oldest of all Nichirenist
shrines, there is an absolute *stūpa* or tabernacle, such as was found
in the ancient *chaityas* in India, and symbolical of the *stūpa* which
descended from heaven in chap. xiv. of the "Saddharma pundarika." In
front of this tabernacle is the usual "table of prothesis" which is to
be found in all Buddhist temples in Japan, and in front of that, again,
what may be called the Choir, with the desks for the monks. Over this
part, which comes about the middle of the building, is a baldacchino, or
umbrella, from which hang strings of flowers in thin brass, the whole
being intended to symbolize the "Pentecostal" shower of celestial
flowers with which the action of the "Saddharma pundarika" commences.
Curiously enough, S’akyamuni is distinguished from the glorified but
Invisible Buddha, who is supposed to be within the tabernacle. For the
historical S’akyamuni there is a distinct building in another part of
the grounds. This is, I believe, the universal practice.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[297:1](chj26.htm#fr_400.md) To the prosaic
foreign resident of Tokyo and Yokohama the place is known as "Poker
Flat." "What is Nichiren to him, or he to Nichiren?"

<span id="fn_399"></span>[298:1](chj26.htm#fr_401.md) "Kyōmon ni wa bunmyō
in toshi-tsuki wo sashitaru koto wa nakeredomo, Ten no on-keshiki wo
haikenshitatematsuru ni," etc. ("Seigoroku," p. 807). Yet it is quite
possible that Nichiren, as a priest, had means of obtaining information
about foreign countries, which were not accessible to the statesmen of
Kamakura. It was still the practice for Buddhist priests to go over to
China for purposes of study.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[299:1](chj26.htm#fr_402.md) "Kono Shaka Nyorai wa
mitsu no yue mashimashite, ta-Butsu ni kawarase tamaite, Shabo sekai no
issai shūjō u-en no Hotoke to nari tamau: ichiniwa, Kono Shabo-sekai no
issai shūjō no seson nite o washimasu; … ni ni wa, … Shabo-sekai issai
shūjo no fu-mo nari:… san ni wa, … issai shūjō no honshi nari"
("Seigōroku," p. 131).

<span id="fn_401"></span>[299:2](chj26.htm#fr_403.md) The term *ichi
embudai* is used in Nichiren's writings to embrace all the countries
which had adopted the Buddhist Faith. It is, therefore, strictly
analogous to our word "Christendom," used to denote the sum-total of
Christian countries.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[299:3](chj26.htm#fr_404.md) Nichiren was,
however, fully aware of the chronological difficulties connected with
the acceptance of the Hokekyō as a genuine Sūtra actually preached by
S’akyamuni himself. In a passage quoted in <span id="page_300">p.
300</span> "Seigōroku" (p. 645), after enumerating the early patriarchs
of the Northern Buddhism, he adds that during their terms of office
there is not to be found even the name of a single Mahāyāna Sūtra
(*sho-Daijo Kyo wa myoji mo nashi*), and on the following page there is
another passage in which he describes the astonishment and perplexity of
the Hīnayāna doctors when As’vaghosha and Nāgārjuna began to propound
their Mahāyāna doctrines. Nichiren's thought was that the Hokekyō, as a
kind of Apocalypse, was far too advanced for the immediate disciples of
S’akyamuni, and that for this reason it lay fallow for several
centuries, gradually winning recognition for itself as the spiritual
intelligence of the Buddhist communities increased.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[301:1](chj26.htm#fr_405.md) We must remember that
Nichiren, in common with all northern Buddhists until quite recent
times, placed S’akyamuni's birth B.C. 1027, and his death, consequently,
about B.C. 947. The true date places the end of the first age in the
first Christian century, and squares very well with what we know of the
beginnings of Gnosticism, as well as of the Mahāyāna. Nichiren speaks of
the pre-Mahāyāna Sūtras as ni zen ("before the rain"), an expression
which somehow seems to be an echo, as it were, of phrases like
"Pentecostal showers."

<span id="fn_404"></span>[301:2](chj26.htm#fr_406.md) See "S.B.E.," vol.
xxi., and my "Wheat among the Tares" (Macmillan, 1908).

<span id="fn_405"></span>[301:3](chj26.htm#fr_407.md) It is significant
that this period of the Imago Law should coincide so strangely with the
testimony of the Buddhist Stupas in India. See Dahlmann's "Indische
Fahrten," vol. ii. capp. 22–27.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[302:1](chj26.htm#fr_408.md) Similarly, the
Thibetan history of Buddhism published by Sarat Chandra Das (Calcutta,
1908) speaks of the conversion of India as due to S’akyamuni; of Udyāna,
to Vajrapani; Bactria, to the frightful manifestations of the
Bodhisattva; of China, to Monjughosha; of Thibet, to Avalokites’vara;
("Pag. Sam. Jon. Zang," part ii., Table of Contents, chap. i.) See also
"Une Bibliothēque Médievale retrouvée à Kansou," in *Bulletin École
Franç. de l’Extreme Orient*, viii. 3, 4 (Hanoi, 1908).

<span id="fn_407"></span>[302:2](chj26.htm#fr_409.md) See, for instance,
"Sacred Books of the East," vol. xxi. p. 273.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[302:3](chj26.htm#fr_410.md) Nichiren divided the
"Saddharma pundarika" into two parts. The first thirteen chapters he
calls the *Shakumon*, or Preliminary part. This part was understood by
the Tendai doctors. The second part, *Hommon*, or the Real Section, was
not understood until its meaning was revealed to and through Nichiren.
See chapter on Nichiren in "Bukkyō, Kakuḥa Koyō," vol. v.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[303:1](chj26.htm#fr_411.md) Some years ago I had
a pupil who always spoke of himself as a Unitarian, who afterwards went
to America, and there again posed as a Unitarian. When he returned from
America he turned out to <span id="page_304">p. 304</span> be a Nichiren
priest. He had no intention to deceive. The term "Unitarian," to his
mind, exactly described what he was.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[304:1](chj26.htm#fr_412.md) I think it is best to
let Nichiren speak for himself here. He says as follows*:—*

"Our merciful Father, the Tathāgata, manifested himself in Central India
in historical times (lit. since man's life has been limited to one
hundred years), and expounded, for the benefit of all sentient
creatures, the whole of the Holy Teachings of his lifetime. The sentient
creatures of the times when the Tathāgata was in the world, being
closely bound to him by the merits of good actions acquired in the past,
entered upon the way of Truth (and were saved). 'But what,' he lamented,
shall happen to the Sentient Beings who shall come after my Nirvana?' So
he caused the whole eighty thousand of his Holy Teachings to be
committed to writing, and out of these entrusted to Kaśyapa the monk
(*sonja*) all the writings of the Lesser Vehicle, whilst those of the
Greater Vehicle, together with the Saddharma pundarika and the Nirvana
Sūtras, etc., he entrusted to the care of the Bodhisattva Manjuśri. But
the kernel of all the eighty thousand Teachings, the five syllables
*Myō-hō-ren-ge-kyō*, which contain the gist (or main section) of the
Saddharma pundarika Sūtra, he entrusted neither to Kaśyapa and Ananda,
nor yet to Manjuśri, Samantabhadra, Avalokites’vara, Maitreya,
Kshitigarbha, Nāgārjuna, or any of the Great Bodhisattvas, though they
desired him to do so; but summoning, from the depths of the earth, the
old man Visishta-c’aritra, he did there, in the presence of the Buddha
Prabhūtaratna and all the Buddhas of the Ten Quarters, from the centre
of the Stūpa of S’akyamuni made of Seven Precious Substances, deliver to
Visishta-c’aritra the Five Syllables of the *Myō-hō-ren-ge-kyō*. Hence,
after his Nirvana he considered all Sentient Beings as his sons, to be
treated with absolute equality of consideration. But, just as it is the
wont <span id="page_305">p. 305</span> of physicians to give medicines
according to the disease, so during five hundred years he bade Kaśyapa
and Ananda to administer the medicine of the Small Vehicle Doctrines to
all beings, and during the next five hundred years he gave to Manjuśri,
Maitreya, Nāgārjuna, and Vasubandhu, etc., the medicines of the
Avataṃsaka, Vairoc’ana, Prajnaparāmita, and other Sūtras. A thousand
years after his death, in the period of the Image Law, he bade Yaku-Ō,
Kwannon, and the other Bodhisattvas, impart to all Sentient Beings all
the other doctrines, with the exception of the Real Section of the
Hokekyō. 'When the period of the Failure of the Law shall commence,'
said he, 'the Scriptures which I give to Kaśyapa, Ananda, etc., to
Manjuśri, Maitreya, etc., to Yaku-Ō, Kwannon, etc.—the Scriptures of the
Great and Small Vehicles—shall remain in the letter, but shall no more
serve as medicines, for the sickness shall be grievous, but the medicine
light. At that time shall Visishta-c’aritra be manifested, and shall
give the medicine of the Five Syllables of the *Myō-hō-ren-ge-kyō* to
the Sentient Beings within Buddhadom.'"

<span id="fn_411"></span>[305:1](chj26.htm#fr_413.md) Mr. Tada Kanae quotes
this prophecy in his chapters on Nāgārjuna in "Shōshinge Wasan" (p.
224).

<span id="fn_412"></span>[305:2](chj26.htm#fr_414.md) See Kern's
"Buddhismus" (German Trans.), vol. ii. p. 187 (150).

<span id="fn_413"></span>[306:1](chj26.htm#fr_415.md) Abbot Joachim was
born 1145, and was Abbot of Corace (1178) and of Floris (1196).

<span id="fn_414"></span>[306:2](chj26.htm#fr_416.md) Nichiren, however,
writing about 1254, speaks of himself as 220 years after the
commencement of the Last Period, which must therefore have begun about
1034. The student will perhaps remember the peculiar wave of excitement
which swept over Europe as the year A.D. 1000 approached.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. “Risshō Ankoku Ron”](chj27.md)
