[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj21)  [Next](chj23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

### CHAPTER XX

<span class="smallcaps">Heian Buddhism</span> <span
id="fr_298"></span>[1](#fn_296.md)

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> was in the year A.D. 767, in the first
year of the period known to the Japanese as *Jingo Keiun*, that a child
was born in a village in Ōmi, not far from the shores of Lake Biwa, who
was destined to exercise a great influence on the Buddhism of his
country. The father, a Confucianist scholar, and yet withal a man of
religion and piety, had often prayed for a son, and, having obtained his
desire, showed his gratitude to Heaven by the care which he bestowed
upon his son's education. Saichō (that was the name by which the son was
later known) grew up a well-trained lad, with a liking for books and a
wisdom a little (possibly) beyond his years.

His father was a man of religion and piety; it was small wonder that the
son should follow so near an example. Buddhism was at its flood-tide of
popularity during the eighth century, and the Court, dissolute and
luxurious, and yet, like the Athenians, given to superstition,
encouraged a very magnificent system of ritualism as a make-weight for
its moral and ethical deficiencies. It was very natural that the boy's
imagination should be caught by the outward splendour of the worship he
saw around him, and that his favourite pastime should be

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

playing at church. His companions nicknamed him the "Little Abbot."

As he grew older his religious sense deepened, and he saw that splendour
of ritual was only one side of religion, and by no means ṭhe most
important. He understood that the outward magnificence of devotion might
co-exist with a worldly and unregenerate heart, and the age in which he
lived gave him many warning examples. When he was born Japan was ruled
over by a woman, the Empress Shōtoku. Shōtoku first came to the throne
in the year 749. She was then styled *Kōken*, and succeeded her father,
*Shōmu* (823–840), who, after a reign of twenty-five years, had
abdicated and retired to a monastery. Shōmu, like his aunt *Gensho*
(715–823) who preceded him, had been a liberal patron of agriculture,
arts, letters, and religion. The "Nihongi" was published in the reign of
Gensho; under Shōmu were commenced the great temples of Hase-dera and
Todaiji, and the celebrated Daibutsu of Nara. Dispensaries and hospitals
were opened, bridges built, tiles used for the roofing of houses, and
examinations instituted for the selection of candidates for Orders and
the public service. Shōmu was the first Emperor of Japan to receive
Baptism; <span id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_297.md) his whole life

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

was devoted to the furtherance of Buddhism and the exaltation of the
monks, and in the end he joined the Order, and with his mother, the
Empress Dowager, took the vows of the *Bosatsu Kai*.

Kōken, who followed him on the throne, carried her devotion still
further. In the great temple of Todaiji 5000 monks recited the daily
offices, and an Imperial decree forbade the taking of all life. After a
reign of ten years, her minister, Fujiwara Nakamaro, advised her to
abdicate in favour of a distant cousin, *Junnin* (759–764), and an
unlawful affection which she had conceived for an ambitious and worldly
priest, Dōkyō, <span id="fr_300"></span>[1](#fn_298.md) led her to
acquiesce. But the, retirement of the Empress was not what Dōkyō
desired, and Dōkyō had great influence with the clergy. A civil war
ensued. Dōkyō and his followers defeated Fujiwara in a battle fought in
the province of Ōmi, after which the victorious monk dethroned Junnin
and restored Kōken to power. Junnin was banished to Awaji, where he died
the following year. For centuries he was known in history as *Awaji no
haitei* (the Imperial Exile of Awaji), and it was not till 1871 that
tardy justice was done to his memory by his restoration, under the name
of Junnin, to the official list of emperors.

Kōken then reascended the throne as Shōtoku. She had owed her
restoration to the fidelity of her paramour,

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

and he claimed his reward. Dōkyō took the title of *Hō-ō* (the word
which the Japanese always use for the Pope), and he claimed a temporal
throne as well. But here public opinion stepped in, and the god of the
temple of Hachiman <span id="fr_301"></span>[1](#fn_299.md) at Usa, a god
then reverenced by Buddhist and Shintoist alike, pronounced his verdict.
Never yet, he said, had a subject dared to raise himself to the Imperial
throne. Shōtoku was reluctantly compelled to banish her lover. A very
short time after, she died (769).

It was in the midst of these events that Saichō was born. And things did
not go much better as time went on. Shōtoku was succeeded by Konin
(770–781), but the change of sovereign brought no relief to the country.
The Fujiwaras were reinstalled in office, it is true, and the meddling
Pope Dōkyō banished to a safe distance, in what was then the remote
province of Shimotsuke. But the Nara monks were not pleased to see an
end put to their temporal power, and in the next reign, that of Kwammu
(782–805), an insurrection of the Ebisu in the north—one of a series of
similar outbreaks, and therefore possibly traceable to Dōkyō's sinister
influence—gave the authorities a vast amount of trouble. Kwammu resolved
that, at whatever cost, the interference of the Buddhist clergy in
matters of state must come to an end, and accordingly removed his
capital, first to Uda, and eventually to his new city of Kyoto, or
Heian.

Now, is it to be wondered at that the lad Saichō, brought up amidst such
surroundings, should speedily

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

realize that there is something else in religion besides its outward
show? In the year 786, being then nineteen years of age, he resolved to
give himself up to the religious life. But he did not wish to be a monk
like those who were bringing the great monasteries of Nara into
disgrace. He chose out for himself a solitary spot on the slopes of
Mount Hiyei, within the borders of his own province of Ōmi, and there
erected a small hut of grass and rushes, which saw the beginnings of his
monastic life. Here he lived, prayed, studied, meditated, and
contemplated; <span id="fr_302"></span>[1](#fn_300.md) in the intervals of
these exercises, he tilled a few rods of ground; when he could not do
that, he spent his time in carving a statue of Yaku-Ō, <span
id="fr_303"></span>[2](#fn_301.md) which he presently set up in his little
chapel.

Saichō's favourite books at this time were those which explained the
doctrines of the Chinese sect of *Tien-tai*, a sect which, in China,
seemed satisfactorily to have solved the difficult problem of the
relations between Church and State. The sect did not then exist in
Japan; but there were, here and there, a few men, mainly Chinese, who
devoted themselves to the study and exposition of these doctrines. I
will mention one name, as it throws a very favourable light on the
religious feelings of the time. Ganjin Kwashō, to give his name its
Japanese pronunciation, was a Tendai monk in Southern China whose
lectures were attended by many students. He was an ardent

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

advocate of Foreign Missions, and often spoke on the subject to his
students. At last one day he put the matter very strongly before them,
and asked for volunteers. Not a single student answered the call. The
next morning he told them after lecture that, no one having volunteered,
he should go himself, and the superiority of example over precept was at
once shown by the ready response of over twenty men, who had been
willing to follow, but did not feel themselves competent to lead.

But it was easier to volunteer than to go. Storms, pirates, shipwreck, a
casting away on a distant and inhospitable shore, all combined to delay
the journey. Nearly ten years elapsed before Ganjin reached Japan; when
he did so, he had already lost his eyesight through the hardships of his
adventures, and it was sheer pluck that pulled him through. But merits
like these were not likely to go unnoticed. Ganjin was given an
honourable post at one of the Nara temples, where his undoubted sanctity
was highly reverenced by many who could lay no claim to a similar virtue
themselves. He was put in charge of the *Kaidan*, and thus became the
minister of ordination for the monks. He died before Saichō's admission
to the Order, but the books he brought with him influenced Saichō's
course of life.

Saichō was fortunate (we might almost, I think, add long-headed) in his
selection of a site for his monastery. Hiyeizan dominates the plain of
Kyoto, and it was only five years after the consecration of the chapel
with its image of Yakuō that Kwammu Tennō forsook Nara and established
his capital at Heian (794). The following year, Saichō, whose fame for
sanctity had spread very widely, was the celebrant at a great *Dai
Kuyō-e*, or High Mass, at which the Emperor himself was present, as well
as a large number of priests from Nara and the south.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kwammu remained
faithful all his life in his admiration for Saichō. He encouraged him to
go from place to place lecturing on the Hokekyō, and one of the last
acts of his reign was to commission him to go to China to consult the
Tendai authorities at their chief seat, and thus to complete what was
lacking in the system which he had been the means of establishing in
Japan.

Saichō started in 802 <span id="fr_304"></span>[1](#fn_302.md) as a
chaplain (may we call him?) in the suite of Fujiwara Kadomaro, Japanese
Ambassador to the Court of the Tangs. Storms delayed the party, and it
was not until the following year that he reached China, making straight
for the great monastery of Tientai, in the province of Chekiang. Here he
prosecuted his inquiries with the energy of a man who knows exactly what
he wants and can go straight to the point, and was soon ready to return
again to Japan. His studies had touched upon the doctrines of the Zen
and Shingon, but his main interest had been the perfecting of his own
Tendai system by the acquirement of proper authority under the Vinaya,
or Rules of Ecclesiastical Discipline. Here let me digress for a moment
to summarize the chief points of the Tendai system.

It will be remembered that the earliest form of Buddhism in China was
unsectarian, the early missionaries having been content to call
themselves Buddhists without any further sectarian distinctions. From
265 to 589 we get Indian sects, Abhidharma or Kusha, Jōjitsu, Sanron,
Jōdo, and Nirvana, some of which have already been summarized. From the
beginning of the Sui, who ruled from 589 to 618, we get Chinese sects,
the Kegon and Tendai, which gradually drive the others out of the

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

field. We have already spoken of Kegon; the Tendai was founded in 538 by
Chisha Daishi, who had, however, had predecessors, and who claimed to
derive his peculiar tenets from the long-suffering Nāgārjuna, who is
claimed as the founder of nearly every heresy or sect in Northern
Buddhism.

The fundamental principle of Tendai may be called introspection
(*Kwanshin no hōhō*), but it is also a system of harmonization whereby
an attempt is made to evolve something like harmony and order out of the
bewildering chaos of the Buddhist Scriptures. Its teachings are divided
into two great divisions or gates, the gate of teaching (Kyō) and the
gate of meditation (Kwan), and it claims that a man can attain to
Enlightenment by following either the teachings contained in the
Scriptures or the practice of meditation and contemplation. It
distinguishes three Vehicles instead of two: the Hīnayāna (or *Shojō*),
the Apparent or Quasi-Mahāyāna of the Jōdo and Indian sects
(*Gondaijō*), and the true Mahāyāna of the sects which originated in
China—Zen, Shingon, Kegon, and itself (*Jitsudaijō*).

It embraced the whole collection of the Mahāyāna books, which it divided
into five periods. S’akyamuni, it was said, had begun his ministry by
preaching in heaven, to angels and men, the transcendent doctrines of
the Kegon. These being too hard for ordinary, sinful men to comprehend,
he had descended to Benares with the practical teaching of the Agon
Scriptures. As times rolled on the teachings had been "developed"
(*vaipulya*) in the Hodo books, as the next class were called. From
development to wisdom (*prajnā*) was the next step; from wisdom to the
consummated perfection of the Sad-dharma pundarika Sūtra was the natural
conclusion. Thus the doctrines of S’akyamuni were 84,000 in number

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

beginning with extreme simplicity and ending in the clouds of mysticism.
In the delivery of these many doctrines Shaka had used many ways of
teaching: *ton*, or suddenness, letting the truth burst with full
brilliancy on the mind of his hearers; *zen*, or gradual advance from
strength to strength; *himitsu*, or esoteric symbolism; *fujō*, or
parabolic uncertainty. He had adapted his sermons to all hearers, and
had so contrived that in one and the same sermon the same words had
conveyed Hīnayāna doctrines to some hearers and Mahāyāna to others who
were able to bear it. He had indeed become "all things to all men."

The Tendai system, which embraced all, comprised many things which were
not Buddhist at all. Its doctrine of *shō aku no hōmon*, or inherent
evil, is dualistic; it asserts that in *Shinnyo*, which is the
pantheistic god, there is an evil principle as well as a good, that the
two are equal in duration and power. Manichæans <span
id="fr_305"></span>[1](#fn_303.md) and Magi both held that doctrine, but it
was scarcely a Buddhist principle. It must have been a very difficult
task to get doctrines so mutually antagonistic as those of the Zen and
Ado to live side by side in the same religious household.

But the main thing that Saichō wanted was spiritual and ecclesiastical
authority. This the Chinese Tientai seems to have had little hesitation
about granting, and Saichō was soon back in Japan, with a native
episcopate in his own hands.

When Saichō first went to China he was followed, within a few months, by
another young monk, who went at his own charges. Kūkai was born at
Byōbu-ga-ura in Sanuki in 774. In 793 he followed Saichō to China,

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

and occupied himself with the study of the newly imported Shingon or
Mantra, which had but recently arrived in China, by way of sea, from
South India. He stayed longer in China than did Saichō. When he reached
his home he found the latter in the midst of carrying out his plans of
Buddhist reform, and engaged in fierce controversy with the monks of
Nara and the Nanto. <span id="fr_306"></span>[1](#fn_304.md) The
controversy was on the subject of the *Kaidan*.

Kaidan is the name given to a platform or *dais*, which is used for the
distribution of certificates and diplomas to successful candidates for
the priesthood. Its existence in any particular temple implied the right
of the authorities of that temple to confer Orders, and the Buddhist
monk is as jealous of his Apostolic succession as is the highest High
Churchman amongst ourselves. <span id="fr_307"></span>[2](#fn_305.md) There
had been no ordinations of monks in China before A.D. 250, previously to
which the simple taking of the "threefold Refuge," in Buddha, the Law,
and the Community of Monks had been deemed sufficient. The first regular
ordinations had been held about 350, the custom having been brought into
the country by an Indian monk of the name of Buddhoganga. These
ordinations had been of the Hīnayāna type (mainly connected with the old
Indian sect of the Dharmaguptas); they had found their way to Japan,
where Kaidan had

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

been erected, at the Todaiji at Nara, in Chikuzen, and in Shimotsuke.
They had also been much discredited by their connection with men like
the ambitious and unprincipled Dōkyō.

But a new succession had been inaugurated by the Tientai in China, and
Saichō, having received the necessary authorizations, erected, at his
monastery on Hiyeizan, a new Kaidan at which ordinations were to take
place according to the Chinese Mahāyāna discipline. Saichō had probably
his good reasons for taking so serious a step; but his action set the
whole of the South into a blaze of indignation and excitement. In the
midst of it, Kūkai came back to Japan.

Which side would Kūkai take? He was a Southerner by birth, for he hailed
from Sanuki; by education, for he was at the time attached to one of the
great temples at the ancient capital. A feeling of loyalty prevented him
from turning against his old friends in the South. At the same time, he
was, like Saichō, convinced of the necessity of reform, and he had,
moreover, a great friendship for Saichō, who had received Baptism at his
hands.

Both sides appealed to him, and he was at a loss how to act. He resolved
to steer clear of the controversy altogether, and went off on a series
of missionary journeys throughout the land. His first journey was to the
Kwanto districts, and right away to Shimotsuke and beyond. He was more
than a mere preacher; he planned roads, suggested the making of bridges,
encouraged agriculture and education, and simplified the writing of
Japanese. The traveller will find his posthumous name of Kōbō Daishi in
all parts of the land: he was the Apostle of the North, and the
pacification of the troublesome northern tribes was much facilitated by
his efforts. When he returned to Kyoto, the Kaidan controversy was still
raging. So he

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

went off touring again, and this time perambulated his native island of
Shikoku. <span id="fr_308"></span>[1](#fn_306.md) On his next visit to
Kyoto, Saichō, now known as Dengyo Daishi, was dead, and Kōbō felt that
he could at last hope to publish his own views of Buddhist doctrine
without running counter to those of the friend for whom he had so warm
an affection. He retired in the year 816 to his new monastery at Kōya
San, in the province of Kii, and there wrote his "Sangōshiki,"
"Jūjūshinron," and the other treatises in which he develops his system.
He died in 835, a venerable and venerated man. Buddhist Japan scarcely
believes him to be dead even now. He is said to be sitting in his tomb
in Mount Koya, waiting for Maitreya to come and convert the world. Then
he will go forth from his place of waiting and join in the glory of
victory.

In the first of the two works that I have just mentioned, the
"Sangōshiki," Kōbō Daishi works out a comparison of the three great
religions of the East, as he understood them—Confucianism, Taoism, and
Buddhism. All three were to be found in the Japan of his day.
Confucianism (of the ancient, unreformed variety) had been there longer
than Buddhism, and the Confucian literati had joined hands with the Kami
worshippers in opposing Buddhism, just as they had done with Taoism, in
opposition to the same religion in China. The Shinto of Japan Kōbō seems
to have treated as almost identical with the Taoism of China
(etymologically, the two words are the same), and with very good reason.
The inter-

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

course between Japan and China had been going on for over three
centuries, during which period much had come into Japan besides Buddhism
and Confucianism. The original Kami-worship had been raised, as it were,
into a system by the very fact of its early controversies with Buddhism,
and Dr. De Visser <span id="fr_309"></span>[1](#fn_307.md) has recently
shown us how much of Taoism there lurks in the Shintoistic folklore of
Japan. Confucianism, Buddhism, Taoism, formed in Kōbō's mind the three
legs of a tripod on which the cauldron of the State might securely rest.
Only the Buddhism which he taught was not quite the same as that with
which we have been hitherto dealing.

During the Tang Period, in the first half of the eighth century, there
arrived in China a certain number of men, mostly from Southern India,
and travelling by the sea route, <span id="fr_310"></span>[2](#fn_308.md)
who brought with them a new and evidently very late form of Buddhism,
which had practically captured Thibet, then a leading kingdom of Asia,
and which, from its very newness, was likely to captivate the
imagination of the novelty-loving Japanese. This system Kōbō developed
in his "Jūjūshinron," or "Treatise of the Ten Grades of Existence."

All sentient beings, said the Shingon doctors, may be divided into ten
classes. The lowest were the *sanakudō*, or three had classes—the
brutes, the demons, and the hungry spirits; next came man, and next
above him the

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

denizens of heaven. These three grades belonged to the natural
world. <span id="fr_311"></span>[1](#fn_309.md) The spiritual world
consisted of those who were called out from the natural world to follow
after the truth. Its lowest grade was the *S’ramana*, who strove after,
and the *Engaku* or Pratyeka-buddha, who realized, the salvation of his
own soul. That included the whole range of Buddhist believers, but there
was an election within the election—the doctrines of Hossō, of Tendai,
of Kegon, offered three successive steps, each higher than the last, for
their respective devotees, and at the top of all stood the Shingon.

My readers will perhaps remember that in my earlier chapters I spoke of
Vairoc’ana, the supreme Buddha—a reflection, as it were, of Osiris, whom
we found in the Alexandrian Gnosis. Vairoc’ana is honoured as supreme by
the Hossō, Tendai, and Kegon, and the order in which Kōbō places these
sects seems to depend on the amount of honour which they were disposed
to give to Vairoc’ana. <span id="fr_312"></span>[2](#fn_310.md)

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I fear I must
repeat myself here a little to make things clear.

There are two Buddhisms: one is of a plain, simple sort, quite good
enough for the practical purposes of this world; that is the Buddhism
taught by S’akyamuni, whether in the Hīnayāna or the Mahāyāna. The true
spiritual Buddhism is that proclaimed by Vairoc’ana, a Being so high
that S’akyamuni (with a pun on his family name) "was not worthy to be
his cowherd." This secret teaching had been delivered to Nāgārjuna by
one who had received it from Vairoc’ana himself, had been secretly
handed down during the ages, and had finally been published in the
fulness of the times.

Like the gods of the Manichæans and Gnostics, Vairoc’ana is fivefold,
and is represented by the five great statues of the Five Dhyāni Buddhas.
To the mystic five correspond the five elements, the five senses, the
five colours, the five planets, and many other groups of five. But they
are really six, for just as Vairoc’ana, besides occupying his seat of
honour in the midst of the Five, overshadows and embraces all his
colleagues, so there is a sixth sense, a sixth element, etc., which
overshadows and embraces everything (*alaya shiki*). The five are
represented by five Chinese characters, representing the sounds
A-ba-ra-ka-ki, and to these is added a sixth syllable,

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

*un*, *A-ba-ra-ka-ki-un* means "Glory to Abraxas," and Abraxas is the
name found engraved on Egyptian rings and charms. It was the name used
for "God" by Basilides and other Gnostics of the first century. <span
id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_311.md)

As with the Manichæans and Gnostics, the world is twofold. There is the
"Diamond world" (*Kongo-kai*, *Vajradhātu*), in which all is at rest and
eternal, without change, without decay. It is the world of ideas, the
world of gods. The other, equally ancient, is the "Womb World"
(*Taizō-kai*, *Garbhadhātu*), the world of change, decay, birth, death.
The one world is good, the other evil, and thus—as with the
Manichæans—evil and good are co-equal with one another and co-eternal.

In the Womb World there is a constant struggle; from the Diamond World,
where dwell the Everlasting Powers, whose sum-total represents the
Mandala or Pleroma of God, there issue forth countless rays of various
light, incarnated or manifested in many shapes and forms of angels and
gods, to aid man in his struggles. No lasting value need be attached to
these forms. They are but the transient appearances of Vairoc’ana the
Invisible, who is alone unchangeable and everlasting.

Heaven helps man by the enlightenment of his mind. In the Shingon
system, as with the Manichæans, it is supposed to do so much more
efficaciously by revealing to him certain magic formulæ and gestures,
the performance

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

of which enables him to put the enemy to flight and compel Heaven to
take his part. These formulæ are known as the secrets of the body,
mouth, and heart. They are found in Manichæism; they also exist in the
magical systems of Hinduism. The *goma* ceremony, which is the offering
of pure fire, seems to connect the system with Hinduism, and yet the
syllable *ra*, used as the name for "Fire," points to Egypt.

The Manichæans divided their followers into "Hearers" and "Perfect." So
does Shingon. It introduced into Japan the term *sokushin jōbutsu*,
which means that a man may, whilst still living, become a Perfect
Buddha, higher than the gods of the trees and mountains, and, like
S’akyamuni, equal to the Most High.

I will leave it to my readers to imagine what must have been the effect
of a teaching which made the enlightenment of the mind a secondary
matter, which laid its principal stress on magic formulæ and
incantations, and which encouraged its believers to expect, during this
life, a position equal to that of the Almighty.

And yet Kōbō Daishi was very far from being a bad man. We can look upon
him with admiration, we can read most of his books with reverence, only,
alas! we cannot help being reminded, as we read, of a Being who is
sometimes "transformed into an Angel of Light." And when we look at the
degradation of Japan during the Heian period, at the worldliness of the
Buddhist clergy, at the trained fighting men of the Hieizan monastery,
at the powerlessness of the sovereigns, at the robber bands which
infested the capital at the very time when the artistic luxury of the
court was at its height, at the Imperial palace burnt to the ground four
times in the course of one short reign, at the sale of governorships,
etc., for the purpose of raising money for Buddhist temples, at the

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

miseries of the people, and at the piteous spectacle of the
Odorinembutsu <span id="fr_314"></span>[1](#fn_312.md) as a remedy for
those miseries, we shall be inclined to think that, in Japan also, we
have come across some of his traces.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_296"></span>[225:1](chj22.htm#fr_298.md) Heian is the old name
for Kyoto. Kyoto, which is even now the sacred city of Japanese
Buddhism, was built in 794 by Kwammu Tennō, as his capital. Its name
*Heian* signifies "Peace."

<span id="fn_297"></span>[226:1](chj22.htm#fr_299.md) It is a significant
fact that the Buddhist rite of Baptism (*Abhis’ekha*, Jap. *Kwanjō*)
comes into prominence just at the period when Buddhism and Nestorianism
came into contact. The same may be said of the care devoted by Buddhists
at this period to the details of Ordination. Shōmu's reign actually saw
the Nestorian Christian—the physician named Rimitsu—at the Nara Court.
He was evidently honoured, for he was granted official rank along with a
Chinaman named Ritsho, who became naturalized and took the name of
Kiyomaru (Murdoch). Kiyomaru became the head of the university. It seems
probable that Rimitsu was in charge of the hospital in which the Empress
Kōmyō is said to have worked as a nurse during the smallpox epidemic. A
few years later we find a Nestorian priest, Adam, collaborating with a
Buddhist priest, Prajnã, on the translation of a <span id="page_227">p.
227</span> Persian (<span id="img_22700"></span> ![](img/22700.jpg)) or
possibly Uigur text of a treatise on the Cardinal Virtues. This can
hardly have been a Buddhist book, though the Cardinal Virtues must be
much the same in all religions. The treatise known as "Shat parāmitā
sūtra" appears in Nanjo's Catalogue as being the work of Prajnã alone.
Prajnã was a follower of Zendo's, and there seems very little doubt that
Zendoists and Nestorians were supposed to belong to the same ship.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[227:1](chj22.htm#fr_300.md) A similar charge was
brought against the priest Gembō, who had a temple built to his honour
after his death to appease his spirit and prevent it from wreaking
vengeance on his murderers.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[228:1](chj22.htm#fr_301.md) Hachiman is the god
of war. In life, he was the Emperor Ojin, the peaceful son of the
warlike Empress *Jingo*, and his transformation into a god of battles
has always been a puzzle. Originally a Shinto deity, he was adopted into
the Buddhist pantheon (where his position was still more incongruous) by
the Ryōbu. It was the ambition of Hideyoshi to be worshipped after death
as Shin Hachiman, the *New* god of War.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[229:1](chj22.htm#fr_302.md) By *contemplation*,
which must be distinguished from meditation, is meant that quiet
sitting, with mind and body perfectly still, which the Japanese know as
*zazen*. When the absolute stillness can be attained, and the mind is
free from all thought, the Vision of Truth is said to come to it, and
the gate leading into the Invisible World is opened.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[229:2](chj22.htm#fr_303.md) Yaku-ō (Skt.
Bhaishajyarāja) is a divinity who plays an important part in the
Hokekyō. The Vow which he is said to have taken before attaining to
Buddhahood relates almost entirely to physical health and personal
beauty.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[231:1](chj22.htm#fr_304.md) There is a slight
discrepancy in dates in the authorities I have consulted. Some say 804,
but Fr. Papinot, in his Dictionary, says 802, and I have thought myself
safe in following so good an authority.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[233:1](chj22.htm#fr_305.md) The Manichæan
expressions, <span id="img_23300"></span> ![](img/23300.jpg) and <span
id="img_23301"></span> ![](img/23301.jpg), the "two principles" and the
"three moments" are both to be found in the Japanese Tendai.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[234:1](chj22.htm#fr_306.md) *Nanto*, "the South,"
the name given in Kyoto to the district round Nara.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[234:2](chj22.htm#fr_307.md) Thus, when a Buddhist
priest is ordained, he receives "letters of orders" on which are given
the principal names of the priests through whom the succession has come
down to him from the Apostles of S’akyamuni. It seems impossible to
trace this practice earlier than A.D. 250, before which date it was not
deemed necessary in China. It is therefore quite possible that the
Buddhists may have learned the practice from Christian neighbours in
Central Asia. The only exception to this rule is the insignificant sect
of the *Yūdzūnembutsu*, who trace their succession, not to S’akyamuni,
but to the Vision of Amida vouchsafed to their Founder in the twelfth
century.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[236:1](chj22.htm#fr_308.md) In the *Tsuzoku
Bukkyo Shimbun* there appeared, from the beginning of December, 1908, a
series of articles describing the journey which Kūkai took on this
occasion. It is a favourite route for pilgrims, and might still be
followed by the adventurous foreigner. I have drawn my information as to
Kūkai's attitude on the Kaidan question from an article which appeared
in the same paper in September, 1908.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[237:1](chj22.htm#fr_309.md) In papers read before
the Asiatic Society of Japan on Japanese Folklore.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[237:2](chj22.htm#fr_310.md) See, for instance,
what Dr. Nanjo says about Vajrabodhi, [Subhakarasiṇha](errata.htm#9.md),
Amoghavajra, and Bodhiruci ("Catalogue Trip.," App. ii., Nos. 150, 153,
154, 155). The Shingon of Japan is very similar to the Buddhism of
Thibet. Yet it is not identical, and the three books on which the
Japanese Shingonists mainly rely are not to be found in the Thibetan
canon. The Japanese Shingon came from South India.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[238:1](chj22.htm#fr_311.md) It must be remembered
that Buddhism never looks upon heaven as a place of moral or spiritual
excellence. It is a world peopled by spiritual existences, but very much
like our own, with good and bad in it. The least in the kingdom of
Buddha is higher than the Buddhist heaven.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[238:2](chj22.htm#fr_312.md) Both Hōnen Shōnin and
Nichiren criticize Kōbō's arrangement of the order of precedence
assigned to the sects—the latter with considerable asperity, as is his
wont. It was from Nichiren that I got the allusion to S’akyamuni not
being, in Kōbō's opinion, fit to be the cowherd of Vairoc’ana. Nichiren
aptly says that if Vairoc’ana is a personage of so great importance, his
existence should be proved as S’akyamuni's has been, and he roundly
charges Kōbō with being a liar (dai-mōgo) for trying to palm off
fictitious Buddhas on his countrymen.

A distinction is sometimes made between the Roshana of the Hossō, Kegon,
and Tendai, and the Vairoc’ana (*Beroshana*) of the Shingon. It is of
this latter that Nichiren seeks to have proofs. The fact seems to be
that there are, as it were, two strains of cryptic teaching respecting
Vairoc’ana. The one (*Roshana*) came overland, or from North-Western
India, and is probably connected with Syrian Gnosticism. The second
(*Beroshana*) came from Southern India, and has Alexandrine affinities.
<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

The Japanese Tendai has its *mantra* or magic formulæ (Jap. *darani*),
as well as the Shingon. But it has no *mudra*, or manual gestures. These
are peculiar to the Shingonism brought in by Kūkai, or Kōbō. Neither
does the Tendai accept the secret books said to have been found by
Nāgārjuna at the Iron Tower in Southern India It gets its mantra and
dharani from the Dragon Palace books, and from Maitreya's lectures in
Asangha's lecture hall.

There were always certain differences between Syrian and Alexandrine
Gnosticism. It is interesting to find them cropping up in Japan. They
throw a flood of light on the obscure Book of Iao.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[240:1](chj22.htm#fr_313.md) Tin is, of course,
the hum of *Om mani padme hum*. The Shingonists say that *Abarakakiun*
may be contracted into *Om*, which represents the first and last
syllables of the sacred word. In the *goma* ceremony the god of Fire,
*RA*, is worshipped with a ritual which has been described in the
publications of the Musée Guimet. The Shingonists still practise
*Kwanjō*, as do also the Tendai, and I have in my possession a tract,
emanating from the Temple of Daishi at Kawasaki, in which the believer
is urged not to delay coming to Baptism, and to come oft.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[242:1](chj22.htm#fr_314.md) The "*dancing
nembutsu*" was the name given to a priest, Kūya, in the fifteenth
century, who went round the country repeating the nembutsu and dancing.
He hoped by this means to convert the people to religious ways. The
pathetic part of the phenomenon is that Kūya was an Imperial prince, and
that he seems to show us the powerlessness of the Imperial House, kept
in subjection by the dominant Fujiwaras, anxious to help the people, and
yet too ill-instructed to be able to do it. There are forms of
superstition which are absolutely well-intentioned, and such was Kūya's.
Such also was the superstition of the man who, in the next century, made
it a rule to repeat the formula *Namu-amida-butsu* 60,000 times a day.
In the miseries of that age Japan could have been described in
Tennyson's words—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"An infant crying in the night,  
   An infant crying for the light,  
And with no language but a cry."

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. “Namudaishi”](chj23.md)
