[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj30)  [Next](chj32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

### CHAPTER XXIX

<span class="smallcaps">The Buddhism of the Tokugawa Period</span>

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> Ieyasu's victory at Sekigahara
(October 21, 1600) over Ishida Kazushige and the daimyos who supported
the claims of the family of Hideyoshi, Japan became, for the first time
for many centuries, practically united under one head, and was at last
in a position to feel herself a national unit. It is true that the
Imperial House still continued, as before, to sit on the throne in
Kyōto; but its position was a shadowy one, and the new Dictator made
provision for its remaining such; for, in readjusting the finances of
the country, an annual income of 150,000 *koku* of rice was deemed
sufficient to meet all the expenses of the Imperial establishments, and
even that modest sum came, not from any special appropriation, but out
of the liberal income of four million *koku*, <span
id="fr_497"></span>[1](#fn_495.md) which the Shōgunate appropriated to
itself. The Imperial House thus became the pensioner of the Tokugawas,
and it is a matter for wonder and admiration how, under most adverse
circumstances, the Court at Kyōto contrived to retain for itself even
the modicum of power and influence that remained in its hands. Those who
believe in a Divine Providence which shapes the destinies of nations,
will readily see in

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

it a gracious Design watching over the line of the lawful Sovereigns
until the right moment should arrive for the Imperial House to resume
its rightful place as the active head of the nation.

The *Pax Tokugawica*, which Ieyasu inaugurated, rested on very solid
foundations, for it was supported by all the best elements of the
Japanese social system.

It rested, of course, mainly on the power of the sword. The Hōjō Regents
had demonstrated the potential importance of a comparatively small
principality carefully administered on strictly military lines.
Nobunaga, Hideyoshi, and Ieyasu trod in the footsteps of the Kamakura
Regents, and, during the early days of the Shōgunate, the samurai of the
Tokugawa clans maintained the superiority of their military traditions.
"After a victory," said Ieyasu on the bloody day of Sekigahara, "tighten
the strings of your helmet;" and the maxim was acted upon by his
descendants. The new capital at Yedo was the symbol of the new power,
which could here expand itself, without a rival, as freely as the Hōjō
had done at Kamakura. It was the rallying-point for the Tokugawa
clansmen and partisans, who were constantly brought together, and taught
to appreciate the strength that lay in their unity of obedience and
discipline: it was the ruin of the distant daimyos from Kyushu and the
South, whose attendance was required for half the year at the Court of
the new Dictator. It reduced the Imperial Power to a shadow and a
sentiment, for there was no use in raising the standard of loyalist
revolt, or in occupying the city of Kyoto, so long as the military
forces of the country were centred in and directed from the recently
strengthened Castle of Yedo. <span id="fr_498"></span>[1](#fn_496.md)

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

Again, it is certain that Ieyasu had the support of the merchant classes
in the administrative reforms which he established. Even the closing of
the country to foreign trade by the Government of his grandson Iemitsu
was effected without much protest. The truth is that the closing of the
Japanese ports to foreign commerce touched no vested Japanese interests.
The volume of trade was very small: the millions of Japan had no use for
the articles which Europe had to bring them, and the products of the
country, after those long years of anarchy and trouble, were not much
greater than what the nation needed for its own private consumption. The
Southern Daimyos, crushed and crippled, had no longer any need for the
guns and military ammunition which the Portuguese had brought a century
before, and whatever was needed in this line was made by the Japanese
themselves. The closing of the ports to foreign ships injured no one at
the moment; it only prevented the creation of new and artificial wants
among the people, and the merchants were quite content to have it so. In
the development of the internal commerce, which has always been a great
feature in the mercantile life of the country, they could see their
profits before them. They wanted peace and a steady market, and Ieyasu's
administration assured them both.

And the Buddhists were contented; for Buddhism has always been a
merchants' religion, and in the prosperity of the commercial classes
there would always be something to spare for the alms-bowl of the
mendicant friar. They had good reason to be quite satisfied. Ieyasu did
not treat them as Nobunaga or Hideyoshi had done. He summoned them to
his councils; he invited them to instruct him in the tenets of their
religion; he professed himself a convert to the Tendai sect; he
decorated his

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

new capital with magnificent temples <span
id="fr_499"></span>[1](#fn_497.md); and he gave the Buddhist clergy
considerable inquisitorial powers by making them his registrars, charged
with the special surveillance of persons suspected of
Christianity. <span id="fr_500"></span>[2](#fn_498.md)

Allied with the Buddhists were the Confucianists and the Shintoists. The
former of these had, as we have already had more than one occasion to
mention, always cultivated good relationships with the Zen priests.
These relationships were much strengthened by Chinese refugees, who came
over to Japan after the fall of the Ming dynasty, and more especially by
Ingen and the priests of the Chinese Zen sect of Obaku, whom I mentioned
in my last chapter. Priests of other sects likewise professed themselves
followers of the Chinese sages, and many a Confucianist scholar shaved
his head and entered a monastery in order that he might thus, in greater
quietness, prosecute his favourite studies. But the political wisdom of
the Tokugawa Government led to the establishment of schools and
colleges, such as the *Shōheikō* in Yedo (intimately

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

connected with the Temple of Confucius on Yūshimadai in Hongō), and from
the middle of the seventeenth century we get a lay-Confucianism which,
in process of time, completely overshadows the priestly Confucianism, to
which it becomes almost hostile. <span id="fr_501"></span>[1](#fn_499.md)

The Shintoists were but of little account at the beginning of the
Tokugawa age. But Hideyoshi had patronized them, and Hideyoshi remained
for Japan a *beau ideal* of knightly virtues. Very few samurai ever
found much to content their souls in the life and teachings of Buddhism;
only here and there was there a studious soldier to be found to whom the
bookish habits of the Confucianist appealed with anything like the voice
of attraction. Shintoism, with a slight flavour of philosophy, a vague
but deep-seated religiosity, a good deal of common sense, and a strong
appeal to Japanese pride, satisfied most minds, without demanding from
them the adoption of any denominational designation. It was destined in
the

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

course of years to become a very potent factor in the development of the
country.

Only two factors were excluded from the new national life—the Catholics,
and the extreme left wing of the intolerant Nichirenists. Ieyasu found
it necessary in 1610 to inflict a most severe punishment <span
id="fr_502"></span>[1](#fn_500.md) on some Nichiren monks who had been
speaking too freely against Christians and the inoffensive Jōdō
believers, and Iemitsu felt himself obliged to proscribe the *Fujūfuze*
branch of the Nichirenists, exactly as he did the believers in
Catholicism.

Every one knows (who has read anything of Japanese history) that the
persecutions of Christians were of a most severe and cruel character,
and that the Buddhist clergy became the willing instruments of the
Shōgunate in the execution of a cruel legislation. No noblemen or
persons of any position survived that ordeal, except through apostasy: a
few of them were martyred, the rest saved their lives through a timely
return to the religion of their fathers. It was reserved for the farmers
of Kyūshū to set an example of heroism under persecution worthy of the
earliest ages of the Christian Church. Without priests, without
sacraments, except the Baptism which they kept up amongst themselves,
without any of

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

the aids that are used for maintaining the Christian life, and obliged
to practise their religion in the strictest secrecy, in daily peril of
torture and death, these brave men clung tenaciously to the hope of the
Gospel, and when, in 1859, the French missionaries discovered them in
the neighbourhood of Nagasaki, they were keeping their Lent with
simplicity and reverence. <span id="fr_503"></span>[1](#fn_501.md)

But all this was not known to the Shōgunal authorities. Christianity had
disappeared from the surface of affairs, and had ceased to be a force to
be reckoned with by the statesman. And when the noisy left wing of the
Nichirenist extremists had been silenced, the land seemed at peace.

But the peace was only of short duration. The first of the great
Confucianists of the Tokugawa age, Fujiwara Seikwa (1561–1619),
renounced his Buddhism and left the Temple in which he had been living,
on coming across the commentaries of Shushi (Chin. *Chu-hi*) on
Confucius. But he was not a controversialist, and seems to have been
gentle towards Buddhist and Shintoist alike. His

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

successor, Hayashi Razan (1583–1673), who exercised a far greater
influence than Seikwa on the development of thought under the Tokugawas,
hated Buddhism only less than he hated Christianity. Both were to him
anti-social forces, because they preached celibacy and retirement from
the world. Kaibara Ekiken (1630–1714) renounced Buddhism at an early
age; Tani Jichū (1598–1680) was a life-long foe of the monastic system
and of the religion of S’akyamuni. These men were not anti-religious.
"What does it mean," asked one of Kinoshita Junnan's (1621–1698)
scholars, "when we are told that 'Heaven is Intelligent, Upright, and
One'?" "It means," answered Kinoshita, "that Heaven knows what we have
in our minds at the very moment our thoughts arise, that It judges with
impartiality, that It is always the same." Yamazaki Anzai (1618–1682),
who was reproved as a lad by his monastic superiors for laughing in
"chapel," excused himself by saying that "that fellow Shaka talks such
nonsense!" And yet that same man, whose doctrines had much to do with
the ultimate restoration of the Imperial House, had a great deal in him
that was worthy of a Christian. The same may be said of Kaibara Ekiken.
In the non-Christian world it would be hard to find a judge more fair
and impartial than Arai Hakuseki, or a philosophical guide more
trustworthy than Kaibara.

It must be admitted that when the Buddhist clergy got things all their
own way, as they did once for some few sad years during the eighteenth
century, they gave their allies cause enough for grief. The first four
Shōguns, Ieyasu (1603–1605), Hidetada (1605–1622), Iemitsu (16221651),
and Ietsuna (1651–1680), were men of power and intelligence, and the
ministers of the last-mentioned ruler had been trained in the school of
Iemitsu according to the traditions of Ieyasu. The Confucianist
politicians had

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

therefore a weighty voice in the management of affairs, and
extravagances of all sorts were avoided; for even Catholic writers will
admit that, with the one notable exception of the Christian
persecutions, Japan was well governed, on the whole, during the early
Tokugawa administrations. <span id="fr_504"></span>[1](#fn_502.md) Yet,
even under Iemitsu, the Confucianists had been restive in double
harness, and the accession of Ietsuna had brought on an abortive revolt
against the Shōgunate. It became necessary to forbid absolutely the
translation of European books, and the publication of all criticisms on
the Shōgunal Government or the morals of Yedo.

But the fifth Shōgun, Tsunayoshi (1680–1709), was a literary pedant with
a superstitious mind. He built schools, reformed the calendar, and spent
large sums of money on the encouragement of art. On these undertakings
he wasted his substance, and by neglecting the sound political precepts
of his Confucianist advisers, <span id="fr_505"></span>[2](#fn_503.md) got
his finances into disorder. To remedy these disorders he applied to men
with little experience, <span id="fr_506"></span>[3](#fn_504.md) and on
their advice tampered with the coinage and adopted measures which led to
an increase in the prices of all articles of food. This did not make him
popular with the common people, and even the submissive Court of Kyōto
began to be restless when the state of the Shōgunal exchequer would not
permit of the payment of the annual allowance of 150,000 koku of rice.
Then, as though this were not enough, Tsunayoshi gave himself up to
monkish advisers, and embarked on a series of most remarkable
enactments.

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The taking of
animal life was absolutely forbidden, kittens and puppies were saved
from the water-butt, and the Yedo police had to keep track of all the
litters that were born, and make accurate lists of sex, markings, etc. A
samurai of Akita, who had the misfortune to kill a swallow, was put to
death for the crime, and all his family sent into exile (1686); the
whole legislation being based on the theory that life is sacred—unless
it were human life, which in Japan of the Middle Ages was far from being
treated with reverence. The good citizens of Yedo were powerless against
their master, but they took their revenge in lampoons on the *Inu-Kubō*,
or Dog-Shōgun, as they nicknamed him. Tsunayoshi was murdered by his
wife in 1709, and it took the great Arai Hakuseki all his energies and
skill, during the next two reigns, to restore the Shōgunate to popular
favour. The Tokugawas were nearly always fortunate in the fidelity of
their ablest followers. <span id="fr_507"></span>[1](#fn_505.md)

It was under these circumstances that men's minds began to turn once
more to the Imperial House in Kyōto, and to dream of a Restoration of
that House to its legitimate place. Strangely enough, the first impetus
to this movement came from the Tokugawas themselves. Tokugawa Mitsukuni,
a grandson of Ieyasu, succeeded in 1656 to the Daimyate of Mito. He at
once, being a studious and enlightened man, commenced the compilation of
a vast History of his country, for the carrying out of which he gathered
in his fief-city a number of prominent scholars. Eminent amongst these
was a Chinese scholar, *Shu Shunsui*, a refugee, who had left his
country rather than

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

bow before the illegitimate Manshu dynasty, and who now, in his Japanese
retreat, imbued Mitsukuni's undertaking with a spirit of legitimacy. The
whole of this colossal work was not finished until 1908, after a
chequered history of one hundred and fifty years. Its volumes, as they
appeared, taught the country to appreciate rightly the great wrongs that
had been done to the Imperial House by Minamoto, Hōjō, and Ashikaga, to
acknowledge the rightful succession of the South at the time of the
Rival Dynasties, to feel for Go-daigo, to applaud the loyalty of the
brave Masashige. It was but natural for the reader to pass on to the
question of the legitimacy of the Tokugawa Dictatorship. One by one,
converts were gained for the new Crusade; it was not without danger that
such principles were enounced in the face of the hard-handed tyrants of
Yedo; many of the bolder spirits fell as martyrs in the good
cause; <span id="fr_508"></span>[1](#fn_506.md) when at last, in 1867, the
crisis came, and the Emperor claimed his rightful inheritance, the heir
of the Mito Tokugawas was to be found fighting for the principles of
legitimacy against his kinsman the Shōgun.

With the loyalists must be also reckoned the men who wished to see, not
merely the Restoration of the Imperial power, but also that of the old
national Shinto. Kado Azumamaro (1668–1736), Kamo Mabuchi (1697–1769),
Moto-ori Norinaga (1730–1801), and Hirata Atsutane (1776–1843), are all
names of persons well known among their countrymen for their painstaking
boldness in the elucidation of the ancient chronicles, the Kojiki and
Nihongi, and in the enunciation of loyalistic principles. The well-known
story of the Forty-seven Ronin derives

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

its interest to the Japanese from its connection with the slow struggle
between Emperor and Shōgun, with which it was indirectly connected.

Another group, not to be neglected, was the small band of Dutch
scholars. The policy of the Shōgunate had left one little loophole, the
Dutch factory at Deshima, for the entrance of Western thought. The books
and scientific instruments, which thus came into the country, sufficed
to keep alive in many hearts the eager desire for a wider and less
restricted intercourse with the wonderful, because unknown, nations of
the West.

All these elements combined against the Shōgunate and its allies, the
Buddhist congregations. In the course of the two centuries between the
accession of Iemitsu and the arrival of Commodore Perry, the Shōgunal
Government had lost its predominant military strength, and the Buddhists
that chastened meekness which had marked them after Nobunaga, Hideyoshi,
and Ieyasu had taken them well in hand. Neither was as strong as it had
once been, and neither was generally popular. Commodore Perry's arrival
was the occasion, but not the cause, of the successful Restoration of
the Imperial Power. It would have come in any case, for the simple
reason that intelligent Japan was agreed in wanting it.

Shortly after the accomplishment of the Restoration Buddhism was
disestablished and disendowed. The Buddhist emblems were removed from
the Imperial Palace, the Ryobu Temples purified by the removal of
Buddhist Idols and the ejection of the Buddhist clergy, who lost not
only most of their special privileges, but a very large proportion of
their revenues. The newly established Government, while proclaiming its
adhesion to the newly revived Shinto faith, took care to be absolutely
neutral in everything that concerned the religious life of

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

its subjects. It was the only possible course to adopt: the Government
could not favour one religion with the same hand with which it pulled
down another. In process of time, the prohibitions against Christianity
were allowed to drop; the promulgation of the Constitution formally
guaranteed to every subject of the Empire the free exercise of his
religion.

 

Nichiren, who may be looked upon as the prophet of Buddhism, called the
attention of his hearers to the condition of Japan as he saw it,
distracted by many Lords and many Faiths. The subsequent religious
development of the country has been, as it were, a commentary on that
prophecy. The terrible troubles of the sixteenth century, the wars and
the bloodshed, were the necessary instruments in the hands of Providence
for the working out of the first step in the elevation of the country.
Nobunaga and Hideyoshi hammered on the hot iron, and Ieyasu welded it
into a consistent whole, able to stand the test of time.

Japan was united into one body, under one Ruler—but the Ruler was an
usurper, and the legitimate House of Sovereigns did not seem to be in a
position, at the time, to do what the powerful Tokugawa was able to
accomplish. In this chapter I have tried to show the attainment of the
second step. The Meiji Era has seen Japan still united, and united under
its lawful Sovereign. No one can read the moving history of the Imperial
House of this country, with its strange vicissitudes and its
long-continued afflictions, without feeling that it has had some Divine
mission to perform. Nothing but the special protection of God could have
preserved that House through all the troubles of so many centuries, and
these special gifts of Divine protection generally imply some very
special motive in the Giver.

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

One more step seems to be before Japan. She is now One Nation, united
under One Ruler, who has the legitimate right to rule. When she has
taken her next step, and has reached the acknowledgment of the One God,
who also has the legitimate right to rule, she will have reached the
true apex of her moral greatness. In that consummation, the Mahāyāna,
which has for so long had our thoughts, will find its proper place and
its proper meed of honour and reward, for it also, like Nobunaga, and
like the Jesuits, has been but a piece on the chessboard played by the
hand of God, and not one such piece

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                 "shall be destroyed,  
Or cast as rubbish to the Void,  
When God has made the pile complete."</span>

</div>

What agencies shall be employed in the future development, or what other
pieces shall be moved in the course of this interesting game, is a
matter of secondary importance. The real player in the game is God, and
we men, the best of us, are but pawns and knights, and here and there a
bishop. Only, when the last move takes place, and the game is about to
be finished, I will ask for myself "that I may be there to see."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_495"></span>[367:1](chj31.htm#fr_497.md) This sum did not, of
course, exhaust the resources of the Shōgunate. A very large number of
fiefs, some of them of considerable value, was in the hands of members
of the Tokugawa family, or of adherents on whose absolute fidelity
Ieyasu felt that he could rely.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[368:1](chj31.htm#fr_498.md) The ancient Castle of
Yedo, on the site of the present Imperial Palace in Tokyo, was built in
1456 by Ōta Dōkwan.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[370:1](chj31.htm#fr_499.md) The *Kwan-ei-ji* at
Uyeno (burned in 1869 and never restored) was one of the Tokugawa
temples. Its abbot was always a Prince of the Blood, who was thus
practically a hostage. It was probably for this reason, and for its
memories of the degradation of the Imperial House, that the temple was
never restored. Other temples of this period were the *Zōjōji* in Shiba
Park, the popular *Kwannonji* at Asakusa, and the Higashi Hongwanji.
They are all imposing structures. Nor must we forget the great mausolea
at *Nikkō*.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[370:2](chj31.htm#fr_500.md) Popular education was
also in the hands of the Buddhist clergy during this period. The
so-called *tera koya*, or temple-schools, first established under the
Ashikaga, continued their activity until the Meiji Restoration. The
education was not of a very high order, but it was the best that was
generally accessible. The Tokugawa Government, for its own retainers
mainly, founded a certain number of schools, of which the best known was
the *Shōheikō* in Yedo, founded in 1630. Hayashi Razan was a professor
in this school, the programme of studies becoming in a sense official
for the other schools. In most of these, medicine was taught as well as
philosophy. But they did not profess to give a popular education.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[371:1](chj31.htm#fr_501.md) Papinot (s.v.
*Tokugawa-jidai no Keigakuha*) divides the Tokugawa School of
Confucianism into four: (*a*) The school of men like Fujiwara Seikwa,
Hayashi Razan, etc., who, basing their teaching on the most ancient
works of Confucius, placed the Way of Wisdom in the cultivation of human
nature, intelligence, heart, and instinct. (*b*) Nakae Tojū, Kumazawa
Ryōkai, who preached Mencius rather than Confucius, and placed the
*summum bonum* in the harmonious co-operation of knowledge and energy.
These men were practically independent of the school of Fujiwara. (*c*)
Itō Jinsai, Ogin Sorai, etc., opposed the School of Fujiwara, which was
based, they said, on a false interpretation of Confucius. For them,
wisdom lay in the imitation of the ancients. (*d*) Inouye Kinga mediated
between (*a*) and (*c*). His principles led him to the Han and Tang
dynasties for a true interpretation of Confucius. One of the best
Japanese expositions of the history and teachings of Confucianism in
Japan will be found in the writings of Professor Inouye Tetsujirō, of
the Imperial University of Tokyo. See Lloyd, "Development of the Shushi
Philosophy in Japan" (*Trans. As. Soc. of Japan*, xxxiv. 4); papers by
Dr. Knox and Mr. Haga, which take up the whole of vol. xx. pt. i.; and
Mr. Dening's very valuable contribution in vol. xxxv. pt. iii. of the
*Transactions* of the same Society.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[372:1](chj31.htm#fr_502.md) Murdoch, p. 491:
"Iyeyasu gave orders to strip this bonze and all his *confrères* of the
marks of their dignity. He had them ignominiously promenaded in Yedo and
in all the places where the *bonze* had spread his calumnies, and
finally he had the ears and most of the nose of the chief *bonze* cut
off. These unfortunates became the talk of the whole people, and were
banished from Kyōto, leaving there twenty-one magnificent houses."
Murdoch notes that the Nichirenists had almost exterminated Christianity
in the former domains of the Catholic daimyo Konishi, beheaded after
Sekigahara.

The hostility between Nichiren and Jōdo has always been most marked. The
former frequently maintain that the Pure Land Sects, who worship Amida,
should openly declare themselves for what they really are—Christians.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[373:1](chj31.htm#fr_503.md) The story is well
told by Marnas in "La Réligion de Jésus Christ resuscitée au Japon." See
also Wilberforce, "Dominican Martyrs in Japan." One or two attempts were
made by the Roman Church to communicate with these isolated Christians,
but in vain. See *Trans. As. Soc. of Japan*, vol. ix. pt. 2, and xxiii.
pt. 3; also *Mitteilungen d. deutschen Gesellschaft für Natur and
Völkerkunde Ostasiens* (Tokyo), vol. vi. (54), v (45). Occasional relics
of the prosecution are still to be found. The Ven. A. F. King was once
shown by a convert an old box which had been in the possession of his
family for very many years. It had never been opened, and none of the
family knew what it contained; but it had always been the practice for
the head of the family to go into the storeroom where it was kept, on
certain fixed days, and to spend some time before the box in silent
worship. When the box was opened, it was found to contain Christian
pictures and other sacred emblems. A few years ago a Catholic priest in
Tokyo found the bowl of a chalice said to have belonged to a native
Jesuit priest who had been martyred. It still belonged to the family of
the martyr.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[375:1](chj31.htm#fr_504.md) The esteem in which
Iemitsu was held by his immediate retainers is shown by the fact that
ten of his samurai committed suicide at his grave. Ietsuna's Government
subsequently forbade the practice.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[375:2](chj31.htm#fr_505.md) *E.g.* Dazai Junsui.
See articles by R. J. Kirby, *Trans. As. Soc. Japan*, xxxii., xxxiv. 4,
xxxv. 2.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[375:3](chj31.htm#fr_506.md) Yanagisawa Yoshiyasu
and Ogiwara Shigehide.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[376:1](chj31.htm#fr_507.md) Among these must be
reckoned the celebrated O-oka Tadasuke, the judge under Tokugawa
Yoshimune (1716–1745), whose wise though eccentric judgments did much to
reconcile the people to the Shōgunate. Yoshimune was very popular. His
nickname was "Rice-Shōgun."

<span id="fn_506"></span>[377:1](chj31.htm#fr_508.md) We might mention
Yamagata Daini and Fujii Umon, executed in 1758, and Takenouchi Shikibu,
exiled the same year. See also the "Life of Watanabe Noboru" in *Trans,
As. Soc. of Japan*, vol. xxxii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX. Recapitulation](chj32.md)
