[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj29)  [Next](chj31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

### CHAPTER XXVIII

<span class="smallcaps">The Period of the Catholic Missions</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Had</span> St. Francis Xavier and his associates
been acquainted with Nichiren's apocalyptic interpretation of the
Hokekyū, it is possible that they might have been tempted to apply to
themselves the fulfilment of the prophecy, and to claim that they and
theirs constituted the multitude headed by the four great Bodhisattvas
who should appear in the middle of the last Buddhist Millennium, for the
purposes of preaching salvation to a world that was forgetting the Law.

The Buddhism of Japan, in the course of its long development since the
time when the Chinese Emperor Ming-ti had had his epoch-making dream,
had on more than one occasion rubbed shoulders with Christianity. But it
had either been the Christianity of the Nearer Orient, the vague
syncretism of Gnostics and Manichæans; or the dull apathy of the
Nestorians, deprived of vigour in consequence of their estrangement from
the main body of their co-religionists. When the Franciscans reached
Pekin in A.D. 1300, and when, in 1549, the Jesuits landed at Kagoshima,
the Mahāyāna of the Far East found itself confronted for the first time
with the militant Christianity of Europe, which had gone half round the
globe to challenge it to mortal combat.

It is not my intention to write even a sketch of the history of the
Catholic Missions of the sixteenth century.

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Others <span
id="fr_486"></span>[1](#fn_484.md) have done this at considerable length
and with carefully weighed judgment. My task is somewhat different. It
is to trace the movements, if any, that were going on in Buddhism during
this period, and the effects, if any, that the Jesuit Missions had on
the native faiths of Japan. In doing this, I shall be obliged frequently
to mention the Christian propaganda, though without intending to make it
the main purpose of this chapter.

Here let me say, by way of introduction, that none of the Histories, not
even that of Murdoch, who is no great friend of the Jesuits, can
establish anything against the personal uprightness or probity of the
Jesuits, who had the lion's share of the Christian evangelization of
that time, and who have had to bear more than their proper share of the
hatred and ill-will which has, ever since the seventeenth century, clung
to the Catholic name in Japan. That they made mistakes is quite evident;
but the best of men may do that. They came to the Far East without
having shaken off the traditions and atmosphere of the Far West. They
brought with them what I may call the "Walls-of-Jericho" theory of
Christian Missions—the theory that they had only to blow the Gospel
Trumpet long and loud, and to! the walls erected by inveterate error and
falsity would fall down in a moment, and leave the way open for the
hosts of Light to make a triumphant entrance into the beleaguered city.
They were, consequently, in a very great hurry with their

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

earlier, if not with their later, Baptisms, and speedily found their
strategic operations hampered by a mixed multitude of half-converted
disciples, who were a weakness rather than a strength to their cause.
Again, they brought with them the traditions and atmosphere of Europe in
the sixteenth century, and there was not much there to commend itself to
the statesmen of a country like Japan, who were earnestly seeking for
ways and means of bringing peace to their distracted country. <span
id="fr_487"></span>[1](#fn_485.md) Neither were they fortunate in the
companions they brought with them, for all Europe in those days looked
upon slavery as an institution not contrary to the law of Christ, and
the Portuguese merchants, besides selling arms to restless daimyos whose
activities were hindering the pacification of the country, did .a very
considerable trade in Japanese slaves. <span
id="fr_488"></span>[2](#fn_486.md) The Jesuits do not seem to have had
anything to do with this trade themselves, but their reputation had to
suffer for the ill deeds of their associates. In their mission work they
neglected to hallow the Japanese language by consecrating it to the uses
of Christian worship, <span id="fr_489"></span>[3](#fn_487.md) and they
made the fatal mistake of allowing their young converts to ridicule and
denounce the Buddhist clergy, and to urge the people to destroy temples
and

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

shrines. <span id="fr_490"></span>[1](#fn_488.md) It is true that Nobunaga
and others did the same, but things which a native may do with impunity
wear a very different aspect when done under the inspiration of a
foreigner.

The national rivalries between European nations had also much to do with
the ultimate ill success of the Catholic Missions. It is quite certain
that the English and Dutch, though not very friendly towards each other,
were united in their enmity against the Jesuits. But the Catholics
themselves were disunited, and the Franciscans and Dominicans, coming
under Spanish auspices, did much to thwart the Jesuits, who represented
the Portuguese monopoly of trade and missionary effort. <span
id="fr_491"></span>[2](#fn_489.md)

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

The Jesuits first landed in Kyūshū, their labours in that island forming
as it were the first chapter of their activities in Japan. Kyūshū was at
the time divided into several small principalities, practically
independent kingdoms, which scarcely recognized the authority of Kyōto
at all, and which were busily engaged in contests for supremacy within
that island. Here, at first, the new-corners were eagerly welcomed, for
wherever the priests went the merchants followed, with the guns and
implements of war so dear to a warlike people, and the missionaries had
their choice of many daimyates for their evangelization. Even the
Buddhist bonzes spoke well of them, and received them kindly; for
Christianity seemed to them to be but one more sect of the Buddhist
faith, and, indeed, it was so described by Ōuchi Yoshitaka, lord of
Suwo, when Xavier crossed over the Straits of Shimonoseki into the
territories of Yamaguchi. But it was soon found that the new religion
was not in the least disposed to accept so humiliating a classification.
The Jesuits were as intolerant of other creeds as were the Nichirenists
themselves, and the kind sentiments of the Buddhist monks soon changed
to feelings of suspicious hostility.

But before these feelings turned into acts of serious opposition, the
Jesuit leaders had concluded that if the friendship of local daimyos,
such as Ōtomo and Ōuchi, was so advantageous to their cause, very much
more might be expected from the favour of the Emperor and Shōgun. They
had accordingly made their way to Kyōto for the purpose of winning the
ear of those potentates, little knowing that Emperor and Shōgun counted
for so little in those days that the reigning Emperor Go-Nara could not
have been crowned, as one of his predecessors could not have been
buried, had not one of his generous subjects paid the expenses of the
coronation. The generous

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

subject in this case was Ōuchi, the Daimyo of Suwō, and the friend of
Xavier.

The Jesuits did not succeed so easily in gaining a footing in the
Imperial City, though it ultimately became one of the chief seats of
their activity. But their sojourns in Kyōto brought them into contact
with Nobunaga, and thus ultimately with Hideyoshi, Iyeyasu, and
Iyemitsu, and it is around these names that centres the religious as
well as the political history of Japan during the eventful century of
the Catholic Missions.

Oda Nobunaga (1534–1582) was fifteen years of age when he succeeded his
father in the headship of a small daimyate in Owari. He did not at first
realize the importance of his position at this critical period of his
country's history, when the supreme power in Japan lay waiting for the
first bold man to come and take it, and his youthful escapades gained
for him the nickname of Bakadono, "the Fool-Lord." He was recalled to a
sense of duty by one of his retainers, who wrote and presented to his
master a dignified protest against his follies, and then added point to
his remonstrances by committing suicide. Nobunaga mended his ways, and,
fortunately for himself, found amongst his retainers another faithful
adviser—an old man, Tokichirō, who is considered to have been a very
great judge of human character.

Acting on Tokichirō's advice, he put down, in 1557; a revolt amongst his
own subjects to which his foolish conduct had given occasion, and in
which his own brother was a participator. Three years later, his
neighbour, Imagawa, lord of Suruga, Totomi, and Mikawa, one of the most
powerful of the great princes, started for Kyōto with an army, intending
to seize the persons of the Emperor and Shōgun, and thus to legalize his
own designs of making

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

himself supreme in Japan. Nobunaga refused permission for Imagawa to
pass through his diminutive territories, met the invader at the village
of Okehazama, and defeated him utterly. He now found himself the master
of four wealthy and populous provinces, and universally looked up to as
the "coming man." In 1562, two years after his victory over Imagawa, he
received from the Emperor Ōgimachi, the son of Go-Nara, who had
succeeded in 1558 to the impoverished <span
id="fr_492"></span>[1](#fn_490.md) Imperial throne, a secret commission
authorizing him to take steps for the pacification of the country.
Nobunaga accepted the task, and set his hand to the work, being assisted
therein by Hideyoshi and Tokugawa Iyeyasu, <span
id="fr_493"></span>[2](#fn_491.md) who had passed into his service as a
consequence of the defeat of the Imagawas. By 1568 he had overthrown the
Saitō family in Mino, which he annexed, moving his own residence to
Gifu, and had further spread his victorious arms into Ise.

But his progress was not rapid enough to satisfy the Emperor, who saw
himself harassed on all sides. A second envoy reached Nobunaga, urging
him to make his way to the capital, and this message was enforced by an
appeal from Ashikaga Yoshiaki, the brother of the last Shōgun,
Yoshiteru, who had been assassinated by his ministers, Miyoshi and
Matsunaga. The assassins had appointed a puppet Shōgun of their own, and
now Yoshiaki appealed to Nobunaga for assistance in the recovery of his
rights. Nobunaga, who had in the meantime strengthened

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

himself by family alliances with the Asai, the Takeda, the Tokugawa, and
other powerful families, accepted this double invitation, marched
straight into the province of Omi, overthrew the Miyoshi and their
allies, the Sasaki, or Rokkaku, set Yoshiaki on his Shōgunal throne, and
rejoiced the heart of the Emperor by the pacification of the provinces
of Settsu, Kawachi, and Omi.

Nobunaga's successes entailed an immense amount of ill-will from rivals
and competitors, and especially from those enemies whom he had had the
good fortune to vanquish. The mutual jealousies of the great Daimyos of
the North, Uesugi, Takeda, and Hōjō of Odawara; together with the
faithful watch kept by his trusty henchman, Iyeyasu, kept him secure
from armed attack from that quarter; but it needed constant vigilance to
control the provinces he had already subdued, and the Shōgun Yoshiaki,
who had passed from a monastery to a palace, was of no practical value
as an ally. The Miyoshi and others despised him, and he himself bitterly
resented the limits which Nobunaga placed upon his extravagance. At
last, in 1570, while Nobunaga was absent in Ise, finishing his projects
in that province, his enemies revolted. Nobunaga returned, blotted out
the families of Asakura, Asai, Miyoshi, and Sasaki, which now disappear
from history, deposed Yoshiaki, abolished the Ashikaga dynasty of
Shōguns, and received from the Emperor the high-sounding title of
*Gon-Dainagon*. The suppression of this rebellion brought him into
dealings with the Buddhist monks. About the same time, he came into
personal contact with the Jesuits.

It was in 1568 that Nobunaga had the eventful interview with the Jesuit
Froez, which led to an informal alliance between the Dictator and the
Missionaries. Some years before that time, the criticisms of Father
Vilela

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

had led the Nichirenshū priests to depose an abbot for immoral conduct,
and the tension between Christian and Buddhist in Kyōto was
considerable. The Nichiren sect had given considerable aid to the
Miyoshi and Matsunaga at the time of the assassination of Yoshiteru, and
Nobunaga, who already saw that the great worldly monasteries would be
amongst his bitterest enemies in the pacification of the country, had
ordered the demolition of several of the chief houses, using the
materials thereof for the construction of the new palace which he was
constructing for Yoshiaki. After his interview with Froez, Nobunaga
deliberately determined to use the Catholic missionaries as one of his
instruments for crushing the Buddhist monasteries. His heart remained
absolutely untouched by the Christian verities; his head saw the
advantages which were to be gained from an alliance with the Christian
organization.

In 1570, Nobunaga disgraced, and sentenced to death, a Nichiren priest,
Nichijō Shōnin, who had taken a prominent position in the opposition to
his measures. (It was this Nichijō who, in a heated discussion with
Froez about the nature of the human soul, had wanted to cut off the
Jesuit's head in Nobunaga's presence, in order that the Dictator might
see what the soul looked like as it escaped from the human body.) From
that time the Buddhists showed unmistakable signs of hostility. Nobunaga
gave them but short shrift. The Hieizan monks had sided with Matsunaga
and the Miyoshi in their rebellion against him. With a strong army from
Gifu, Nobunaga marched against the monks, stormed the Hieizan heights,
and wiped out the monastery. "The final assault," says Murdoch,
"delivered September 29th, 1571, ended in the extermination of every
occupant of the three thousand monasteries that had studded the faces

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

of the mountain, and its thirteen valleys, a few days before."

Nobunaga next turned against the Monto priests, who, under Kennio Kosa,
had established themselves in what is now Ōsaka, in a strategic position
of prime importance, which they had fortified elaborately. It took him
several years to reduce this priestly fortress, and it was not until
1580 that he made himself master of it. "The slaughter," says Murdoch,
"had been immense, and the stench of burning flesh poisoned the air for
miles around." A small remnant surrendered and were spared, but the
fortress itself was burnt to the ground. Kennio, said Hideyoshi, in his
later years, "had given Nobunaga morn trouble than all his other enemies
combined."

In the meanwhile, a dispute had taken place between the priests of the
Jodo and their bitter enemies of the Nichiren sect, and Nobunaga was
invited to act as umpire, an office which he accepted on the condition
that the defeated controversialists should agree to be decapitated. The
Nichiren champions were obliged in the disputation to own themselves
defeated. Nobunaga not only enforced the penalty agreed upon, but
further laid on the whole sect a money fine so heavy that the Nichiren
priests were unable to pay it, and withdrew to remote provinces where
Nobunaga's hand had not as yet made itself felt. <span
id="fr_494"></span>[1](#fn_492.md)

Thus Nobunaga became the "scourge of God" to the worldly and
carnal-minded priests of the various sects of Buddhism, and the Jesuit
Fathers felt that the ground was being cleared for them by the drastic
measures of the Dictator. But they were mistaken in their estimate of
the situation. Stern measures, such as these were, could

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

not be taken without stirring up bad feeling and resentment, and the
Jesuits, whom Nobunaga had befriended, were the ones to bear the
resentment of the Buddhists, whose feelings Nobunaga had so terribly
outraged. The time came when they had to pay most dearly for the sins
against humanity of which their ally Nobunaga had been guilty.

For Nobunaga himself it could not be pleaded that he had intended to act
*ad majorem Dei gloriam*. Nothing was further from his intentions. He
looked upon the Jesuits merely as convenient tools; his own views of
religion were sufficiently exposed by the great temple (the Sōchenji)
which he built, with a stone image, representing himself, placed higher
than all the other idols of gods and *hotoke*, to receive the adoration
of the people. A few months later (June 22, 1582) his trusted general,
Akechi Mitsuhide, conspired against him, and Nobunaga perished miserably
by an assassin's hand.

The successor to Nobunaga's power was his friend and trusted lieutenant,
Toyotomi Hideyoshi, the famous Taikōsama. Hideyoshi had first come under
Nobunaga's influence after the victory at Okehazama, and had become
allied with the Dictator's family by marriage. When the news of
Nobunaga's death reached him, he was engaged in the Western provinces,
reducing the clansmen of Mōri Terumoto, and the troops with which Akechi
Mitsuhide rose against Nobunaga were troops which Hideyoshi had asked
for as reinforcements for himself. When the news reached him, he
promptly made peace with his enemies and hurried to the Imperial
Capital, where, by a series of triumphs, diplomatic as well as military,
he shortly succeeded in getting into his own hands all the powers that
Nobunaga had wielded, and a great deal more.

Hideyoshi did not wring the neck of the poor nightingale

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

as Nobunaga had done, but he contrived to make it sing to his tune. In
establishing himself in Nobunaga's place, and in extending his authority
over the rest of the Empire, he used the arts of diplomacy much more
than of military compulsion. His aim, as Murdoch says, was "not to kill
two birds with one stone, but to use the same missile for the purpose of
laming a considerable number of fowls, whom he would then catch and
train to lay golden eggs for his own advantage." He did occasionally use
the sword, and then with a cruelty which even Nobunaga might have
envied. When he slew his nephew and adopted son, Hidetsugu, and hacked
his whole family to pieces, he showed how monstrously cruel he was
capable of being, should political expediency demand drastic measures.
But he always stood ready to temper his cruelty by wise diplomacy. Thus
he stormed and destroyed the great Shingon Temple-Fortress of Negoro, in
Kii, with its four thousand armed bonzes, but he spared the
Mother-Temple of Kōya, and practically made the Shignon priests serve
him in the capacity of warders of a prison for political offenders. He
laid a very heavy hand on the Monto priests, but, having done so, he
used Kennio Kosa, who had contrived to escape Nobunaga's massacre of the
bonzes at Ōsaka, as a political agent of his own in the territories of
the Satsuma Daimyo. <span id="fr_495"></span>[1](#fn_493.md) When he
thought that he had reason to fear the influence of the Jesuits (as
before he had seen reason to fear Hidetsugu), he suddenly dropped his
mask of friendship and ordered the execution of the twenty-six victims
who were crucified on the Martyrs’ Mount at Nagasaki on the 5th of
February, 1597. Yet, to

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

the end of his life, Hideyoshi understood how to use the Christians and
their teachers for his own purposes, and Konishi's Christian Brigade did
yeoman service for him in Korea.

It was part of Hideyoshi's plan to impoverish those whom he had reason
to fear. He would invite the powerful and wealthy daimyos to come into
residence in Kyōto, where they were forced to spend huge sums of money
in costly and lavish entertainments. He made one Daimyo bear the expense
of building a great castle or palace; others had to entertain envoys
from Korea, China, or the Philippines, in a manner worthy of the dignity
of a great Empire. For the monks, who still were wealthy, he prepared a
heavy burden in the shape of an immense Colossus—a Daibutsu—and many
sumptuous temples, in the place of those which Nobunaga had destroyed.
The Daimyos and the monks had to bleed their subjects with a sharp
lancet of taxation to meet the expenses of these costly undertakings,
and the peasants in these districts turned envious eyes towards the
happy inhabitants of the provinces under Hideyoshi's direct rule, who
were free from the imposts under which they themselves were groaning.
There were two religious powers that Hideyoshi dreaded—the Jesuits and
the intolerant followers of Nichiren. He placed the Christian Konishi in
command of one battalion, composed mainly of Christians, the Nichirenist
Katō Kiyomasa in command of another battalion, composed mainly of
Buddhists, and sent the two generals to Korea to spy on one another,
and, possibly, to get shot.

Hideyoshi was no more a friend of the Buddhists than he was of the
Christians. What little religion he had inclined him towards the *Kami*
of the native Shinto. Shinto makes little or no demand on the moral
nature of

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

man. It does not forbid the taking of life, nor yet the breach of what
we Christians call the Seventh Commandment. It also holds out to a
distinguished man, such as Hideyoshi undoubtedly was, the prospect—an
extremely gratifying one—of deification after death. Hideyoshi suffered
from *megalomania*. He dreamed of making himself Ruler of All Japan; he
dreamed of conquests on the mainland of Asia; he seems in his dreams to
have seen himself sitting in Pekin on the throne of the Mings. He
certainly saw himself the object of posthumous worship, for he too, like
Nobunaga, spent time and money on the erection of a magnificent temple
to be dedicated to Shin Hachiman, the new god of war, and Shin Hachiman
was his deified self. The temple of Shin Hachiman was in course of
erection when Hideyoshi died. The apotheosis of the Taikōsama was
celebrated in it, with great pomp, by Iyeyasu, in the days before his
final breach with the family of Hideyoshi. After the breach had been
accomplished, in 1615, the temple was quietly demolished by the Governor
of Kyōto, and no one remonstrated. The new god was not much of a success
in his new *rōle*.

We now come to Ieyasu (1542–1616), the founder of the Tokugawa line of
Shōguns, the man who had the wisdom as well as the good fortune to be
able to wait patiently until the nightingale sang to his tune. He was in
a position to do so. Nobunaga and Hideyoshi had laboured at the
unification of the Empire. Ieyasu had but one battle to fight: after
Sekigahara, he was able to enter into the labours of his illustrious
predecessors. <span id="fr_496"></span>[1](#fn_494.md) His talents were
shown in the wonderful administrative

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

machine which he constructed, and the minute care with which he provided
for the transmission of the supreme power to his descendants of remote
generations.

We need not here speak of his secular administration and reforms. Of his
activities in the sphere of religion it may be said that, whilst
disapproving of Christianity and mistrusting, nay disliking, the foreign
missionary clergy, he never put a single one of them to death during the
whole of his tenure of office. It was reserved for Iemitsu, his
grandson, the third Shōgun of the Tokugawa line, to become a persecutor,
and Iemitsu was a very different person from his grandfather.

With regard to Buddhism, Ieyasu was in a position to make use of it for
his own purposes, and ho did so with great success. Nobunaga and
Hideyoshi had broken for ever the military power of the Buddhist
monasteries. There was no fear of a new Hieizan, or Negoro, rising out
of the ruins of the temples, and the sects whom the sword had spared,
Hideyoshi had managed effectually to impoverish by his heavy imposts.
Ieyasu was able to use the broken forces of the clergy for his own
purposes. He encouraged the monks, and made of them a kind of religious
police. For himself, he claimed to have been converted to the Tendai
faith, and his great mausoleum at Nikko was entrusted to Tendai hands,
as was also the great temple he erected at Uyeno Park. But the women of
his household seem to have divided their attention between the Nichiren
and Jōdo, and the Jōdo Temple of Zojoji was likewise of his founding.

But it is evident that his ideas of Buddhism were those of a reformer.
The Confucianist school of Shushi, with its enlightened views of
statesmanship and statecraft, was much encouraged, and it was Ieyasu's
evident endeavour to graft this reformed Confucianism on to a

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Buddhist stock, in
the hopes of thereby producing a better variety of fruit. Many of the
early leaders of this new Confucianism were Buddhist priests, and this
was notably the case with Jigendaishi, the Abbot of the Great Temple at
Uyeno, and the friend and counsellor of both Ieyasu and Iemitsu.

The Zen, whose record has always been a good one, and whose tenets made
the adoption of Confucianist notions comparatively easy, was much
favoured by the half-philosophical, half-religious priests whom the
policy of the early Tokugawas did so much to encourage. In 1654, a
little while after the death of Iemitsu (1651), a celebrated priest was
summoned from China to become the founder of a new and enlightened sect
of the Zen. His name was Ingen, and the sect he founded is known as the
Obaku, a small body, but always influential. It shows the practical
character of the Buddhism which the Tokugawas tried to propagate that
Ingen's sect adopted modern Chinese as the language in which the
Buddhist Scriptures and services should be read. The great mass of the
Buddhist worship is in a dead language, the Chinese of fifteen centuries
ago; in the Ōbaku worship, the ordinary Sinico-Japanese of the modern
literary style has been, as it were, consecrated to the purposes of
religion.

One part of Nichiren's contention had been now fulfilled. He had said
that but one Sun ruled in the Heavens, but one Lord in the religious
world, but one Ruler in the Empire. The Empire had been unified, and
there was but one Ruler. It is true that it was not yet the legitimate
ruler, but the reign of the usurper seems to have been necessary for the
welding together of the whole.

Our sympathies as Christians naturally go out to the heroic martyrs and
confessors of that strangely interesting

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

period. They seem to have been only the pawns on the chessboard, played
by the hands of Nobunaga, Hideyoshi, and Ieyasu. In our next chapter we
shall see how the great men themselves were, after all, but the knights
and castles on the same great chessboard of history, and that the Master
Hand that played them was one far greater than they deemed Him to be
when they set aside the testimony of His servants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_484"></span>[351:1](chj30.htm#fr_486.md) For detailed
information on this period, the student is referred to papers in the
*Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan*, by Sir Ernest Satow, Mr.
Gubbins, the late Rev. J. Summers, and others. Also to the more recent
histories, *e.g.* "Die Entwickelung des Christentums in Japan," by Dr.
Haas, the "Christian Daimyos," by Father Steichen, and Murdoch and
Yamagata's "History of Japan." Papinot's "Dictionnaire d'Histoire et de
Géographie du Japon" gives very useful information.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[352:1](chj30.htm#fr_487.md) We read of the
Jesuits sending some of their converts to Europe to show them the
glories of the Catholic countries. But it was a dangerous remedy. One
man, at least, went as a spy, got himself ordained, and then, returning
to Japan, threw off the mask, and became one of the most determined
enemies of the Jesuits. And Iyeyasu sent a special envoy of his own, a
man named Nishi Sōin (Murdoch, p. 495).

<span id="fn_486"></span>[352:2](chj30.htm#fr_488.md) Murdoch, pp. 241,
242. See also what he says of the slur cast, through slave dealing, on
the charitable institutions of the Jesuits, p. 76.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[352:3](chj30.htm#fr_489.md) Thus, the Christian
converts from Buddhism went from the use of one unknown tongue to
another. See what I say below about Ingen and the Ōbaku sect.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[353:1](chj30.htm#fr_490.md) Murdoch, p. 241, etc.
Had the Jesuits, instead of constantly aiming at the conversion of the
great men, and of then urging them to extirpate "heresy" and paganism
within their dominions, been content to work quietly as a leaven amongst
the mass of the people, their work might have been far more lasting. The
wonderful tenacity of the humble folk of Urakami and Amakusa, who
remained faithful through more than two centuries of relentless
persecution, shows how strong they were in this kind of work.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[353:2](chj30.htm#fr_491.md) The following extract
from Murdoch (p. 282) shows that the charges of political aggrandizement
schemes ought to be laid at the door of the Shōgunate rather than at
that of the Spaniards:—

"Among the converts made by the Jesuits was a certain Harada, who later
on had found his way to the Philippines as a trader, and had taken full
note of the weakness of the Spaniards in their new possessions. In that
weakness he saw his own account, and he made haste to return to Japan,
where ho struck up an acquaintance with one Hasegawa, a courtier of
Hideyoshi. Through Hasegawa, Harada represented to the Regent how easy
it would be for him to take possession of the Philippines. Hideyoshi …
listened to Hasegawa's exposition of Harada's notions readily enough,
and in 1591 he penned a very haughty letter to the Governor of the
Philippines, calling upon His Excellency to recognize him (Hideyoshi) as
his suzerain." Hence, for the Shōgunate to make capital out of the
missionaries, by accusing them of conspiring against the political
liberties of Japan, was, to say the very least, for the pot to call the
kettle black.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[356:1](chj30.htm#fr_492.md) Ōgimachi had to wait
for his coronation three years, the expenses of the festivities being
ultimately defrayed by Mōri Motonari, who had ousted the Ōuchi family
from Suwō and Yamaguchi.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[356:2](chj30.htm#fr_493.md) The differences in
the characters of these three great men has been well summed up by the
Japanese wit. "If you don't sing," said Nobunaga to a silent
nightingale, "I'll wring your neck." "If you don't sing," said
Hideyoshi, "I'll make you sing." "If you don't sing," said Iyeyasu,
"I'll wait until you do."

<span id="fn_492"></span>[359:1](chj30.htm#fr_494.md) Nobunaga never came
into collision with the Shingon priests. It was left for Hideyoshi to
destroy their great monastery fortress of Negoro with its four thousand
fighting priests.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[361:1](chj30.htm#fr_495.md) The Monto priests
made themselves so much hated in Satsuma that, until comparatively
recent years, they were not allowed to enter the province, and the
Satsuma men have nearly always been hostile to Buddhism.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[363:1](chj30.htm#fr_496.md) A well-known
caricature, reproduced by Father Papinot in his Dictionary, represents
Nobunaga and Mitsuhide pounding the rice, Hideyoshi kneading the dough,
and Ieyasu sitting apart and eating the cake.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX. The Buddhism of the Tokugawa Period](chj31.md)
