[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mosy11)  [Next](mosy13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641437X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Migration of Symbols*, by Goblet d'Alviella, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

#### II. <span class="smallcaps">Signification of the Sacred Tree Amongst the Semites.</span>

We have just seen that the adoption of a complex symbol, such as the
Assyrian image of the Sacred Tree, does not necessarily imply the
acceptance of the myths with which it is connected in its original home.
But if distrust is wise when it is a question of interpreting the
earliest meaning of these images by means of the beliefs which they
represent amongst nations unconnected with the Assyrians, such as the
Hindus, the Greeks, the Christians, and the ancient inhabitants of
America, this is no longer the case when we have to deal with nations
belonging to the same race, or possessing at least a common fund of
mythological traditions, as, for instance, almost all the inhabitants of
Anterior Asia, from the Tigris to the Mediterranean; though, even then,
we have to ascertain whether the interpretation which certain branches
of the Semitic race give to their Sacred Trees meets with any
confirmation in the texts of Mesopotamia properly so called.—We might
afterwards, perhaps, go a step further, and find out, amongst some at
least of the nations belonging to other races, whether, in their own
traditions, there are not points of contact which justify or explain the
assimilation of the Assyrian symbol.

The first question to be inquired into is as to whether we are not in
the presence of a mere case of tree-worship. Nearly all nations, and the
Semites in particular, venerated the trees which impressed them by the
singularity of their forms, the vastness of their proportions, their
great age, and especially by the usefulness of their fruits. The first
beings, according to the Phœnician traditions, "consecrated the plants
which grew on the earth; they made gods of them, and worshipped

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

the very things on which they lived, offering up to them libations and
sacrifices." <span id="fr_271"></span>[1](#fn_271)

M. Bonavia, a botanist who has subjected to a minute examination the
flora of the Mesopotamian monuments, maintains that the sacred tree of
Assyria is merely an amalgamation of the plants formerly venerated in
that country by reason of their uses; the palm for its dates, the vine
for its juice, the pine-tree and the cedar for their timber and
firewood, the pomegranate for its services in the production of tannin
and in the preparation of sherberts. As for the horns grafted on the
stem, they would represent the horns of animals,—oxen, wild-goats, ibex,
and so forth,—which doubtless were suspended from the branches to ward
off the evil eye. <span id="fr_272"></span>[2](#fn_272)

I would be the first to admit that purely utilitarian considerations of
this kind had originally suggested to the Mesopotamians the worship of
certain trees which were afterwards used to represent the Sacred Tree.
Yet the boldly conventional form of the latter,—the nature of its
hieratic accessories, starting with the symbolical horns of the
divinity,—its frequent association with the figure of the supreme
God,—the prominence everywhere accorded, in public worship, to its
representations,—already imply that it not only exhibits the image of a
plant venerated for its natural qualities, but that it must be something
more; either the vegetable symbol of a divine power, like the *ashêrah*
mentioned in the Bible, or the *simulacrum* of a mythical plant like the
Winged Oak, on which—according to a Phœnician tradition quoted by
Pherecydes of Syros—the supreme God had woven the earth, the starry
firmament, and the ocean.

Let us therefore carefully consider what share

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

conceptions of this kind may have had in the mythology of the Semitic
nations.

In the first place, these peoples frequently represented by a tree the
female personification of Nature, who, under various names, and even
with different attributes, seems above all to have embodied in their
opinion the conceptions of life, of fecundity, and of universal
renovation: Istar, Mylitta, Anat, Astarte, Tanit, and others.—At
Heliopolis, where the worship of the Great Goddess prevailed, coins
present to our view a cypress of pyramidical form, planted beneath the
peristyle of a temple, in the very place where other medals have either
a Conical Stone, the well-known representation of Astarte, or else the
image, or bust, of the Goddess herself. <span
id="fr_273"></span>[1](#fn_273)

Movers informs us that the Venus of Lebanon bore the local name of the
Cypress. <span id="fr_274"></span>[2](#fn_274) At Rome there is an altar
of the Palmyrene which exhibits on one of its sides the image of a solar
god, and on the other a cypress of pyramidical form, whose foliage
admits a child carrying a ram upon its shoulders. <span
id="fr_275"></span>[3](#fn_275) M. Lajard quotes in this instance the
story related of Apuleius, who, wishing to paint the son of Venus in his
mother's lap, depicted him in the foliage of a cypress. <span
id="fr_276"></span>[4](#fn_276) To the same class of images belongs the
pine in which Cybele imprisons the body of Atys till the spring-time.
This tree has been thought to be the *simulacrum* of the solar god; it
seems to me more logical to seek therein the symbol of the Matrix in
which Atys awaits his annual resuscitation.

We are all acquainted with the legend of Myrrha,

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

another Asiatic variety of Artemis-Aphrodite. Myrrha, bearing Adonis,
was transformed into a tree, and, according to a version recorded by
Hyginus, was set free by the stroke of an axe. Now, on an imperial coin
of Myra, in Lycia, a tree is seen whose fork supports the image of a
goddess ([pl. v., fig. c](mosy11.htm#img_pl05)). On either side is a
wood-cutter with a raised axe. Whatever the meaning of this scene may
have been in the local mythology of the period, it is difficult not to
refer it to the Oriental representations of the Sacred Tree, in so far
as it was a *simulacrum* of the Goddess.

In Palestine, the Bible tells us, they venerated, beside the *stelai* or
*hâmmânim* symbolizing Baal, *simulacra* of Ashtaroth, representing this
goddess of the fruitful and nourishing earth under the form of a tree,
or rather stake, begirt with drapery and bandelets. These are the
*ashêrîm* which the Hebrews, in spite of the upbraidings of the prophets
of *Yahveh*, did not cease to "construct" and "plant," in imitation of
the former inhabitants of the country, from the time when the twelve
tribes settled in the land of Canaan <span
id="fr_277"></span>[1](#fn_277) till the day on which the King Josiah
burnt, near the Kedron, the *ashêrah* set up by Manasseh in the temple
of Jerusalem itself. <span id="fr_278"></span>[2](#fn_278)

The *ashêrah* must then have been a *simulacrum*, which, like our
May-Poles laden with conventional attributes, was at once artificially
constructed and planted in the ground. The Sacred Tree of the
Mesopotamian monuments exhibits this feature more than once. From the
earliest times of Chaldæan engraving, it occurs, as I have above
mentioned, under the form of a staff placed on a support and crowned by
two branches. On a cylinder found by M. de Sarzec at Telloh, two long
strings, plaited like whip-cord, are even seen

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

descending from the fork of the tree. According to M. J. Menant, all
that it has been possible to find out from the archaic inscription on
this cylinder is that it relates to a goddess invoked by a prince who
proclaims himself her servant. <span id="fr_279"></span>[1](#fn_279)

<span id="img_fig078"></span> ![FIG. 78. CHALDÆAN CYLINDER. (HEUZEY. La
Masse d’armes. Paris, 1887, p. 15.)](img/fig078.jpg)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 78. Chaldæan
Cylinder.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Heuzey</span>. *La Masse d’armes*. Paris, 1887,
p. 15.)</span>

On other cylinders, reproducing scenes of adoration, or of sacrifice,
the rudimentary tree sometimes accompanies and sometimes replaces the
image of a naked woman with her heels touching and hands turned towards
her breasts. Now, this hieratic type is incontestably the representation
of Istar, not the chaste and warlike Istar who was worshipped at
Nineveh, but the voluptuous and procreative Istar venerated in
particular at Babylon, and more or less related to the goddess of the
*ashêrim*. <span id="fr_280"></span>[2](#fn_280)

This might justify the hypothesis of M. François Lenormant, who not only
sought an equivalent of the *ashêrah* in the Sacred Tree of Mesopotamia,
but who also descried,—in the combination so often reproduced in Assyria
of the Winged Circle suspended over the Sacred Tree,—the old
cosmogonical

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

pair of Assur and his companion, the creative heaven and the productive
earth. <span id="fr_281"></span>[1](#fn_281)

It ought to be noticed that the representations of the Sacred Tree in
art become particularly frequent under the Sargonidæ. According to Mr.
Boscawen, the symbolical image of the Tree between the two *genii* is
not found prior to the ninth century before our era; <span
id="fr_282"></span>[2](#fn_282) and, with rare exceptions, is met with
on Assyrian, not on Babylonian monuments. Now it was especially at the
time of the Sargonidæ or at least during the second Assyrian empire,
that Istar was placed beside Assur as a divinity of the first rank.

There remains to be seen what could have given the Semites the idea of
representing by a tree their Great Goddess of Nature. I will here call
attention to the interesting essay which Mr. Edw. B. Tylor published in
the *Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archæology* of June, 1890,
under the title of *Winged Figures of the Assyrian and other ancient
Monuments*. The learned Oxford professor points out that in by far the
greater number of cases the Sacred Tree of the Assyrian monuments
exhibits the form of the palm, and also that the two *genii* seem to
hold towards the tree the point of a conical object, with a reticulated
surface, exactly similar to the inflorescence of the male palm. On a
bas-relief in the Louvre one of the *genii* is even seen putting this
object into one of the palmettes at the end of the branches.

We have therefore here a representation of the fertilization of the palm
by the artificial transference of the pollen to the clusters of the
female or date-bearing tree, a process which was known to

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

the Mesopotamians, as passages from Herodotus and Theophrastus formally
prove. <span id="fr_283"></span>[1](#fn_283)

Others have maintained that this object was the cone of a pine or cedar,
a fruit well known for

<span id="img_fig079"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 79. ASSYRIAN
BAS-RELIEF. (PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l’Art antique, vol. ii., f.
8.)](tn/fig079.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig079.jpg)  
FIG. 79. ASSYRIAN BAS-RELIEF. (PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l’Art
antique, vol. ii., f. 8.)  
</span>

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 79. Assyrian
Bas-Relief.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Perrot</span> et <span
class="smallcaps">Chipiez</span>. *Histoire de l’Art antique*, vol. ii.,
f. 8.)</span>

its prophylactic reputation amongst the Assyrians. In adopting this
theory, M. Bonavia adds that the fir-cone doubtlessly performed the
function of an *aspergillum*. The *genii* would have it to besprinkle
the Tree with the lustral water taken from the receptacle which they
carried in the other hand, a receptacle which M. Bonavia takes to be

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

a metal bucket, and Mr. Tylor a wicker basket. We would thus be in the
presence of a true scene of exorcism such as are described in the magic
texts of the period. Water, consecrated by certain *formulæ*, figures
indeed with many nations among the procedures employed to put demons to
flight. <span id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_284)

M. Bonavia, besides, adduces the testimony of an Oriental, alleging that
certain sects use to this day a fir-cone for their sacred
sprinklings. <span id="fr_285"></span>[2](#fn_285)

Nevertheless, the monuments seem to decide in favour of Mr. Tylor, who
places side by side the Cone represented in the hand of the *genii* and

<span id="img_fig080"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 80.
INFLORESCENCE OF THE MALE DATE-PALM.](tn/fig080.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig080.jpg)  
  
</span>

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 80. Inflorescence of
the Male Date-Palm.</span></span>

the inflorescence of the male date-palm copied from nature ([fig.
80](#img_fig080)).

As a complete representation of the scene already become mythical, Mr.
Tylor reproduces a bas-relief on which—in front of the two *genii* who
advance towards the Tree with the inflorescence in one hand—we find two
personages kneeling in an attitude of invocation, and holding the end of

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

an undulating ribbon which falls from the Winged Disc depicted above the
tree.

These personages have generally been taken to be praying, and the two
ribbons to be the symbol of the tie which unites the god to his
worshippers.

<span id="img_fig081"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 81. ASSYRIAN
BAS-RELIEF. (Layard. Monuments of Nineveh, pl. 59A.)](tn/fig081.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig081.jpg)  
  
</span>

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 81. ASSYRIAN
BAS-RELIEF.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Layard</span>. *Monuments of Nineveh*, pl.
59A.)</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mr. Tylor sees
therein two cords by which the deities guide or maintain the solar Globe
above the palm-tree in order to hasten the ripening of the dates, whilst
the two customary *genii* prepare to accomplish their fertilizing
mission.

The representation of the Sacred Tree, in which the traces of a deep and
mysterious symbolism have so often been sought, would therefore only
have the practical import of a scene drawn from everyday life. As for
the intervention of superhuman personages in an operation generally
accomplished by the hand of man, this would be merely a proof of the
importance which the Mesopotamians attached to the cultivation of their
palms and the fertilization of their fruits—at most an historical myth,
attributing to gods the invention of one of the processes which have
most contributed towards securing these results.—Is this not what seems
to be designated by the presence of the inflorescence in the hand of a
personage dressed in the skin of a fish, Dagon or Oannes, the amphibious
god who is held to have

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

instructed the Chaldæans in agriculture, as also in literature, the
arts, and the other elements of civilization?

I consider that Mr. Tylor has thoroughly grasped the primitive and
somewhat material meaning of the subject handled in his essay. I have,
however, already had occasion to show that, amongst the Assyrians, this
subject had above all a symbolical acceptation. It must be remembered
that they could not attach to the cultivation of the date-palm the same
importance as the inhabitants of Lower Chaldæa. In fact, though the palm
grows in Assyria, the date does not ripen there. They must therefore
have seen in this figured representation something else and something
more than the artificial fertilization of the palm.

Mr. Tylor himself suggests, by way of hypothesis, that the *genii*
facing one another might either represent the fertilizing winds, or the
divinities whose fertilizing influence was typified by the artificial
fecundation of the palm. This operation would therefore have become the
symbol of *natural* fertilization, or rather of fertilization brought
about by what we call natural agents, and which the Mesopotamians looked
upon as personifications of the divine forces of Nature.

May we not go further, and inquire if this process might not have
supplied a symbol of fertilization *in general*, a symbolical
representation of the mysterious operation everywhere performed, under
the most different forms, by the fertilizing forces of Nature?

The Tree thus represented is—as we have seen—far from being always a
palm; sometimes it is a vegetable species which does not admit of this
method of fertilization. Moreover, there are monuments on which the
*genii* are seen holding the Cone, not towards a tree, but towards the
face

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

of a king or some other personage. The object in question must here have
a vivifying, or at least a prophylactic import, like the cedar or
fir-cone. "Take the fruit of the cedar"—we read in one of the passages
on which François Lenormant hinged his assumption that the *genii* held
a fruit of this tree in one hand—"and hold it to the face of the sick
person; the cedar is the tree that produces the pure charm and drives
away the unfriendly demons, spreaders of snares." <span
id="fr_286"></span>[1](#fn_286)

On an archivolt of Khorsabad two winged *genii* are seen holding the
inflorescence in the direction of a Rosette. According to Mr. Tylor,

<span id="img_fig082"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 82.
BAS-RELIEF OF KHORSABAD. (V. PLACE. Nimroud et l’Assyrie, vol. iii. pl.
15.)](tn/fig082.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig082.jpg)  
  
</span>

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 82. Bas-Relief of
Khorsabad.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">V. Place</span>. *Nimroud et l’Assyrie*, vol.
iii. pl. 15.)</span>

this Rosette would be nothing else than the crown of a palm-tree seen
from below or above. But, in general, the Rosette—whether derived from
the rose, the lotus, or any other flower—forms an essentially solar
symbol, and the *genii* who here advance towards it can have no other
function—if this scene has a symbolical import—than to revive the power
of the sun, to fertilize the calyx from which he issues forth at each
succeeding dawn, or perhaps to gather his vivifying emanations for the
replenishment of their sacred instrument. It is noteworthy that they
hold the latter exactly as the gods of Egypt sometimes handle the Key of
Life.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

In short, the Assyrians seem to have drawn from the sexual relations of
plants, or, properly speaking, of the palm, the same symbolism, relating
to the renewal and communication of life, as did other nations from
human sexuality. It is, moreover, quite conceivable that the
inflorescence of the date-palm may have performed the symbolical
function which elsewhere devolved upon the phallus, as the pre-eminent
emblem of the fertilizing force. As for the palm, it naturally became,
in this order of images, the symbol of generative nature, or, to be more
exact, of the Universal Matrix so plainly personified amongst the
Mesopotamians, and even the Semites generally, by the great astral, or
terrestrial goddess, represented in the *ashêrah*.

Yet the two *genii* with the inflorescence are not the only acolytes who
appear, in Assyria, round the Tree. We have seen ([pl.
v.](mosy11.htm#img_pl05)) that the latter are often two
monsters—griffins, unicorns, or sphinxes—represented for quite a
different purpose. On a cylinder reproduced above ([fig.
64](mosy11.htm#img_fig064)) both *genii* stand erect on a sphinx which
places a foot on one of the lower branches of the Tree, and puts forward
its head as if to bite at one of the pomegranates at the end of the
branches. This change of attitude would seem to correspond with a
variation of the myth; the monsters approach the Tree as if they
intended to pluck a fruit or a flower, and this idea becomes still more
accentuated if we pass to the neighbouring nations, such as the
Phœnicians and Persians, who took from the Assyrians the type of their
Sacred Tree, but without either the two winged *genii*, or the
inflorescence of the male palm. Now, we know that the Persians possessed
the tradition of a Tree of Life, the *haoma*, whose sap conferred
immortality. We find also, amongst the Western Semites, the belief in a
Sacred Tree whose fruit

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

had the same power. It will be remembered that the Book of Genesis
places in the Garden of Eden two Paradisaical Trees, "the Tree of Life
in the midst of the garden, and the Tree of Knowledge of good and
evil." <span id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_287) When the first human pair,
following the treacherous advice of the serpent, had tasted of the fruit
of the Tree of Knowledge in spite of the explicit command of the
Creator, the latter drove out the guilty ones from the Garden of Eden,
saying: "Behold; the man is become as one of us to know good and evil:
and now, lest he put forth his hand and take also of the Tree of Life,
and eat, and live for ever;" <span id="fr_288"></span>[2](#fn_288)
therefore He drove them out, and placed at the east of the Garden of
Eden *kerubim* with the flaming sword which turned every way, to keep
the way of the Tree of Life.

It is now no longer possible to interpret the traditions of the Hebrew
people without connecting them with the beliefs of the other Semitic
nations. Have we not learnt from the version of the Deluge, discovered
some years ago in the cuneiform writings, how the Israelitish nation
preserved certain Chaldæan myths, whilst transfiguring them by doing
away with their polytheistic elements and by introducing a moral factor?
The Bible itself dates its oldest traditions from Chaldæa, particularly
the narratives referring to the Garden of Eden and its Paradisaical
Trees. We will not here enter into the question as to whether the
traditional Eden should be located in Mesopotamia or further towards the
north-east. But the *kerubim* who guard its entrance certainly seem to
be a creation of the mind revealed in the art and the creeds of
Mesopotamia. They have nothing in common with the chubby cherubs of the
Christian imagery; they bear a far stronger resemblance to the monstrous
*genii* who guard the approaches to the Assyrian palaces; their name

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

in the Bible itself alternates with *shôr*, "a bull," and numerous
indications lead us to assume that they were either winged bulls with
the face of a man, <span id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_289) or winged
*genii* with the head of an eagle. <span id="fr_290"></span>[2](#fn_290)
In the description of the Temple which Ezekiel has left us, he says that
the ceiling was "made with *kerubim* and palm-trees, so that a palm-tree
was between a *kerub* and a *kerub*." <span
id="fr_291"></span>[3](#fn_291) This is exactly the position of the
Sacred Tree between its acolytes on the monuments of Mesopotamia.

Moreover, certain cuneiform texts seem to prove that the
Assyro-Chaldæans were acquainted with a "Tree of Life." Whether it was
thus styled because it served as a *simulacrum* of the Goddess of Life,
or whether it represented this divinity by reason of its own mythical
function, the fact is none the less certain, according to Mr. Sayce,
that the "divine Lady of Eden," or Edin, was termed in Northern
Babylonia "the goddess of the Tree of Life," <span
id="fr_292"></span>[4](#fn_292) and Babylon, before receiving from the
Semites the name of *Bab Ilu*, "Gate of God," was called, in the old
language of the country, Tin-tir-kî, or Dintir-ra, which most
Assyriologists translate as "the place of the Tree (or Grove) of
Life." <span id="fr_293"></span>[5](#fn_293)

As for the fruits depicted on the Sacred Tree, whether they be clusters
of dates, or bunches of grapes, they are naturally adapted to a Tree of
Life, since they yield some of those fermented liquors which in ordinary
language still bear the name of eau de vie <span
id="fr_294"></span>[6](#fn_294)

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

Sometimes they unquestionably represent pomegranates. Now the
pomegranate, which contains hundreds of seeds, has at all times been
considered an emblem of fertility, of abundance, and of life. All
Semitic nations have used it, as a symbol, on the most different kinds
of religious monuments, from the pillars of Solomon's temple <span
id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_295) to the *stelai* dedicated to the
divinities of Libya. <span id="fr_296"></span>[2](#fn_296) The Tree of
Life depicted amongst the bas-reliefs of the Parma baptistery bears
pomegranates for its fruit, <span id="fr_297"></span>[3](#fn_297) and it
is also a pomegranate which, according to a tradition related by M. de
Gubernatis, was the fruit that Eve offered Adam. <span
id="fr_298"></span>[4](#fn_298)

It must be remarked that, on some Assyrian bas-reliefs, the climbing
plant interlacing the sacred tree bears a strong likeness to the
*Asclepias acida*. <span id="fr_299"></span>[5](#fn_299) Now, as we
shall see further on, this is the very shrub which supplied the Hindus
and the Persians with their elixir of life.

Finally it is the Lotus-flower, which, contrary to all the rules of
botany, sometimes blossoms upon the Sacred Tree and is plucked or smelt
by the two acolytes.

We have seen how this flower, which discloses itself every morning to
the sun's rays, evoked ideas of resurrection and immortality amongst all
the ancient nations of the East. When, therefore,

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

we find it on the Sacred Tree of the Phœnicians or the Assyrians, we
have every reason to believe that it there represents a "flower of
life." This divine flower, like the fruit of the Tree of Life, will
doubtlessly have figured in myths whose text has not come down to us,
but whose existence is sufficiently revealed by the monuments. In any
case, the meaning of this symbolical efflorescence seems to be plainly
enough indicated in a scene engraved upon a bowl of Phœnician origin,
which M. de Cesnola discovered at Amathus in the island of Cyprus. The
Sacred Tree here stands, in its most artificial form, between two
personages clad in the Assyrian manner, who with the one hand pluck a
Lotus-blossom from its branches, and in the other hold a *crux ansata*
(see above, [pl. v., fig. b](mosy11.htm#img_pl05)). The Phœnicians,
whose symbols were almost all derived from Egypt on the one side and
Mesopotamia on the other, must have known what they were about in thus
connecting the Sacred Tree with the Lotus-flower and the Key of Life. It
would have been difficult to better express the equivalence of these two
symbols. <span id="fr_300"></span>[1](#fn_300)

It is evident that, in the absence of texts serving as a direct
commentary on the representations of the Sacred Tree amongst the
Semites, other hypotheses again may be formulated upon its original or
derived meaning.

Thus the Chaldæans must be included amongst the nations who saw in the
universe a tree whose summit was the sky, and whose foot or trunk was
the earth. <span id="fr_301"></span>[2](#fn_301)

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

To be sure, this somewhat puerile conception of the universe seems to
have been early thrown into the shade, in Mesopotamia, by the more
subtle cosmogonical system which, according to Diodorus, made of the
earth a boat floating upside down on the watery abyss. <span
id="fr_302"></span>[1](#fn_302) The boat in question was one of those,
shaped like a bowl or cauldron, which are portrayed in the bas-reliefs
of Mesopotamia, and are still used at the present day in the basin of
the Euphrates. The hollow interior formed the region of darkness, the
domain of the dead and of the terrestrial spirits; at the top stood an
immense mountain whose summit served as a pivot to the firmament, and
from whose sides flowed the principal rivers.

This "Mountain of the World," or axis of the universe, became the object
of quite an especial veneration. The Assyrians located it in the high
chains of mountains north-east of Mesopotamia. The Chaldæans named after
it some of the great staged temples which they built in the plains of
their country. <span id="fr_303"></span>[2](#fn_303) It must be
observed, however, that some hymns address it in terms which are
perfectly applicable to a huge tree: "O thou who givest shade, Lord who
casteth thy shadow over the land, great mount, father of the god
Mul!" <span id="fr_304"></span>[3](#fn_304) Another hymn terms it a
"mighty mountain whose head rivals the heavens and whose foundations
rest on the pure deep." <span id="fr_305"></span>[4](#fn_305)

Texts, moreover, prove in a decisive manner that the notion of the
Cosmogonical Tree had endured into the traditions, at least, of certain
local mythologies. A bilingual hymn of Eridu, that ancient centre of
civilization which, at the dawn of

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

history, flourished on the borders of the Persian Gulf, mentions a dense
tree that grew on a holy spot. "Its root (or fruit) of white crystal
stretched towards the deep. … Its seat was the (central) place of the
earth; its foliage was the couch of Zikum the (primæval) mother. Into
the heart of its holy house which spreads its shade like a forest hath
no man entered; there (is the home of) the mighty mother who passes
across the sky; (in) the midst of it was Tammuz." <span
id="fr_306"></span>[1](#fn_306)

This passage seems to connect the Cosmogonical Tree with the Great
Goddess of Nature. Whether the latter be regarded as a celestial,
telluric, or lunar divinity, Tammuz. the sun, is at once her spouse and
child. A cylinder, which M. Menant attributes to the ancient art of
Chaldæa, shows us the goddess beside the Sacred Tree, with an infant
seated in her lap. <span id="fr_307"></span>[2](#fn_307) Perhaps we
ought to see in this the prototype of similar representations wherein
Isis, Tanit, and other mother goddesses appear, each with her son, the
young solar god.

Another reference to the Cosmogonical Tree occurs in a passage
concerning the exploits of Izdhubar or Gilgames, the Chaldæan Hercules.
This mythical personage having reached the "gates of the Ocean"
encounters a forest of trees "resembling the trees of the gods" which
bore "fruits of emerald and crystal." Marvellous birds live amongst the
branches; they build "nests of precious stones." The hero strikes one of
these birds in order to pluck "a large crystal fruit," and then he
wishes to withdraw; but he finds the door

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

of the garden closed by one of the female guardians who live "in the
direction of the Ocean." The rest of the passage is missing. These
details, however, suffice for us to infer that here again the subject in
question is a celestial tree, bearing, for fruits, the planets, the
stars, and all the "jewels" of the firmament. <span
id="fr_308"></span>[1](#fn_308) One cannot but be struck by the strange
similarities which this story offers to the legend of Herakles carrying
off the golden apples from the garden of the Hesperides, "in the
direction of the night, beyond the ocean stream." <span
id="fr_309"></span>[2](#fn_309)

Might not the Sacred Tree have likewise served to portray, amongst the
Chaldæans, an equivalent of the tree designated, in the Bible, as giving
the knowledge of good and evil? M. Sayce does not seem unwilling to
admit this comparison. He gives prominence to the fact that the name of
the god Ea was written upon the heart of the cedar. Now not only was Ea
the god of wisdom, but the possession of his sacred names communicated
his own knowledge to him who pronounced them. <span
id="fr_310"></span>[3](#fn_310) A passage explicitly associates with the
cedar "the revelation of the oracles of heaven and earth." <span
id="fr_311"></span>[4](#fn_311)

Moreover, the scene of the Temptation is believed to have been
discovered on a cylinder in the British Museum. Two personages, in whom
Mr. G. Smith thought he recognized a man and a woman, stretch forth a
hand towards a tree from which hang two large fruits; behind the woman a
serpent erects itself on its tail (see above, [pl. v., fig.
h](mosy11.htm#img_pl05)). <span id="fr_312"></span>[5](#fn_312) M. J.
Menant, however, maintains that both personages belong to the stronger
sex; in any case, he adds, nothing authorizes us, in face of

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

the silence of the texts, to discern in this scene the Scriptural
account of the "original sin." <span id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_313) At
the same time—whilst pointing out that subjects of this kind may lend
themselves to innumerable interpretations—he calls attention to another
cylinder which might still better be compared with the Biblical
narrative. It is the representation of a garden where trees and birds
are visible; in the middle stands a palm, whose fruits two personages
are engaged in plucking, whilst a third, himself holding a separate
fruit, seems to address them. <span id="fr_314"></span>[2](#fn_314)

The comparison attempted by M. Baudissin between the Tree of Knowledge
and the Prophetic Trees whose office was to reveal the future seems to
be less exposed to criticism. <span id="fr_315"></span>[3](#fn_315) The
Chaldæo-Assyrians, in the manner of all the Semitic nations, practised
*phyllomancy*, *i.e.*, the art of divination by the rustling of leaves,
which was held to be the voice of the divinity. <span
id="fr_316"></span>[4](#fn_316) Now, endeavours to gain a foreknowledge
of the decrees of the divine will are often considered an encroachment
upon the celestial power, a rash act, or even a sacrilege, which calls
for punishment.

Cuneiform tablets, commented upon by Mr. Sayce, tell the story of a god
Zu who, covetous of the supreme rank, abstracted the "tablets of fate"
as well as the attributes of Bel, and having made good his escape in a
storm, began to divulge the knowledge of the future. After consulting
the principal gods, Bel, to punish him, contented himself with changing
him into a bird of prey and exiling him, like another Prometheus, upon a
distant mountain. According to Mr. Sayce, Zu is

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

none other than "the bird of the storm," common to so many mythologies,
which, in the rolling of the thunder, discloses to mankind the secrets
of the future, the knowledge of good and evil. <span
id="fr_317"></span>[1](#fn_317) It might almost be said that this legend
lies mid-way between the Scriptural account of "the original sin" and
the Aryan traditions, which we are about to investigate, regarding the
theft of fire and ambrosia from the branches of the Cosmogonical Tree.

Finally, Professor Terrien de la Couperie, having noticed that the
Sacred Tree of Mesopotamia frequently exhibits the same number of
branches (7, 14, 15 or 30), thinks he finds therein an accordance with
the days of the lunar month. He instances, in this connection, a Chinese
tradition, prior to our era, which tells of a wonderful plant that
appeared on both sides of the staircase of the imperial palace, during
the reign of Yao. <span id="fr_318"></span>[2](#fn_318) On this plant a
pod grew every day of the month till the fifteenth; then one fell every
day till the thirtieth; if the month had only twenty-nine days, a pod
withered without falling off. It is not difficult to descry in this
plant a lunar tree; the Chinese themselves termed it the Calendar Plant,
*lik-kiep*.

We must wait for more decisive proofs before admitting that the Sacred
Tree of the Assyrians permitted of a similar interpretation on account
of the number of the branches, which does not always agree—indeed quite
the contrary—with the subdivisions of the lunar month. We have, however,
evidence that the Calendar Plant was not unknown to the Semites, and
that it occurred amongst them in connection with the Tree of Life. The
Apocalypse (xxii., 2), places in the midst of the celestial Jerusalem
"the Tree of Life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her
fruit every month:

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<span id="img_pl06"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE
VI.—MIGRATIONS OF THE EASTERN TYPE OF THE SACRED TREE.](tn/pl06.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl06.jpg)  
  
</span>

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Plate VI.—Migrations of the
Eastern Type of the Sacred Tree.</span></span>

and whose leaves were for the healing of the nations."

Moreover, M. Terrien de la Couperie has shown that the belief in a Tree
of Life existed amongst the Chinese. Traditions mention seven wonderful
trees which grew on the slopes of the Kuen-Lün mountains. One of them,
which was of jade, conferred immortality by its fruit. <span
id="fr_319"></span>[1](mosy13.htm#fn_319) The question—which I do not
pretend to decide—is as to whether this tradition crossed directly from
Mesopotamia into China, some forty centuries before our era, or whether
it reached that country either by way of Persia or of India at a less
distant period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_271"></span>[141:1](mosy12.htm#fr_271) <span
class="smallcaps">Eusebius</span>. *Præparatio Evangelica*, i. 9.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[141:2](mosy12.htm#fr_272) <span
class="smallcaps">E. Bonavia</span>. *The Sacred Trees of the Assyrian
Monuments*, in the *Babylonian and Oriental Record*, vol. iii., pp. 1–6.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[142:1](mosy12.htm#fr_273) <span
class="smallcaps">F. Lajard</span>, in the *Mémoires de l’Académie des
inscriptions et belles-lettres*. Paris, 1854, vol. xx., 2nd part, pl.
vi.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[142:2](mosy12.htm#fr_274) <span
class="smallcaps">Movers</span>. *Die Phönicier*, vol. i., ch. xv.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[142:3](mosy12.htm#fr_275) *Mémoires de
l’Académie des inscriptions et belles-lettres*, vol. xx., pl. i., fig.
2.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[142:4](mosy12.htm#fr_276) *Ibid*., vol. xx.,
p. 221.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[143:1](mosy12.htm#fr_277) *Judges* iii., 7.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[143:2](mosy12.htm#fr_278) 2 *Kings* xxi., 3,
and xiii., 6 and 7.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[144:1](mosy12.htm#fr_279) <span
class="smallcaps">J. Menant</span>. Les pierres gravées de la Haut-Asie,
vol. i., p. 220.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[144:2](mosy12.htm#fr_280) <span
class="smallcaps">Id</span>., *ibid.*, vol. i., pp. 170 *et seq.*

<span id="fn_281"></span>[145:1](mosy12.htm#fr_281) <span
class="smallcaps">F. Lenormant</span>. *Les origines de l’histoire*.
Paris, 1880, vol. i., p. 88.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[145:2](mosy12.htm#fr_282) *Babylonian and
Oriental Record*, vol. iv., No. 4, p. 95.—Yet in the Louvre there is a
specimen found in the palace of Ashur-bani-pal (tenth century B.C.).

<span id="fn_283"></span>[146:1](mosy12.htm#fr_283) "Palm-trees," says
Herodotus in his description of Chaldæa, "grow in great numbers in the
whole of the flat country; most of them bear a fruit which supplies the
inhabitants with bread, wine, and honey. They are cultivated like the
fig-tree, particularly in the following respect: The natives tie the
fruit of the male palm, as the Greeks call it, to the branches of the
date-bearing palm, in order to let the gall-fly enter the dates and
ripen them and prevent the fruit from falling off. (*Hist*., liv. i.,
193.—See also <span class="smallcaps">Theophrastus</span>. *Hist.
plant.*, ii., c. 2, 6, and 7, 4.)

<span id="fn_284"></span>[147:1](mosy12.htm#fr_284) <span
class="smallcaps">M. F. Lenormant</span> quotes the following passage
from the *Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia*, vol. iv., pl. 16, 2:
"Take a vase, put water into it, place therein white cedar-wood,
introduce the charm which comes from Eridu, and perfect thus potently
the virtue of the enchanted waters." (*Origins de l’Histoire*, vol. i.,
p. 84, note.)

<span id="fn_285"></span>[147:2](mosy12.htm#fr_285) *Babylonian and
Oriental Record*, vol. iv., No. 4, p. 96.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[150:1](mosy12.htm#fr_286) *Origines de
l’histoire*. Paris, 1880, vol. i., pp. 83–84.)

<span id="fn_287"></span>[152:1](mosy12.htm#fr_287) *Gen*. ii., 9.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[152:2](mosy12.htm#fr_288) *Gen*. iii., 22–24.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[153:1](mosy12.htm#fr_289) <span
class="smallcaps">Perrot</span> et <span
class="smallcaps">Chipiez</span>. *Histoire de l’art dans l’antiquité*,
vol. iv., p. 305.—Regarding the word *kerub* = bull, *cf*. <span
class="smallcaps">Lenormant</span>. *Orig. de l’hist.*, vol. i., p. 112.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[153:2](mosy12.htm#fr_290) Ezekiel defines the
*kerubim* as beings with a double pair of wings, having beneath their
wings a man's hand.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[153:3](mosy12.htm#fr_291) *Ezekiel* xli., 8.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[153:4](mosy12.htm#fr_292) <span
class="smallcaps">A. H. Sayce</span>. *The Religions of the Ancient
Babylonians*. London, 1887, p. 200.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[153:5](mosy12.htm#fr_293) <span
class="smallcaps">F. Lenormant</span>. *Origines de l’histoire*, vol.
i., p. 76.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[153:6](mosy12.htm#fr_294) In the Assyrian
language the vine was called *karânu*, <span id="page_154">p. 154</span>
which means, according to M. Terrien de la Couperie, *the Tree of the
Drink of Life*. (*Babylonian and Oriental Record*. October, 1890, p.
247.)

<span id="fn_295"></span>[154:1](mosy12.htm#fr_295) Kings vii., 18–20.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[154:2](mosy12.htm#fr_296) <span
class="smallcaps">Ph. Berger</span>. *Représentations figurées des
stèles puniques*, in the *Gazette archéologique* for 1877, p. 27.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[154:3](mosy12.htm#fr_297) <span
class="smallcaps">M. Lopez</span>, in the *Revue archéologique* for
1853, vol. xx., p. 289.—Here again the Tree, embraced by a dragon,
stands between two animals facing one another.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[154:4](mosy12.htm#fr_298) *Mythologie des
plantes*, vol. ii. p. 167.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[154:5](mosy12.htm#fr_299) Sir George Birdwood,
who understands the subject in his two-fold capacity of naturalist and
archæologist, bears witness to this resemblance in the most explicit
terms (*Industrial Arts of India*, part ii. p. 430).

<span id="fn_300"></span>[155:1](mosy12.htm#fr_300) In Egypt itself, on
a monument of the sixth dynasty, the Atlas of Lepsius shows us a queen
with the Key of Life in one hand, and in the other a lotus whose calyx
she holds to her nose.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[155:2](mosy12.htm#fr_301) <span
class="smallcaps">M. W. Mansell</span> points out that the term *gis*, a
tree, occurs in a lexicographical tablet amongst the figurative
expressions which serve to designate heaven (*Gazette archéologique*,
1878, p. 134.)

<span id="fn_302"></span>[156:1](mosy12.htm#fr_302) <span
class="smallcaps">Diod. Sicul.</span> Hist., Vol. ii., 31.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[156:2](mosy12.htm#fr_303) <span
class="smallcaps">Sayce</span>. *Op. cit.*, p. 405 *et seq.*

<span id="fn_304"></span>[156:3](mosy12.htm#fr_304) Quoted by <span
class="smallcaps">De Gubernatis</span>. *Mythologie des plantes*, vol.
i., p. 45.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[156:4](mosy12.htm#fr_305) <span
class="smallcaps">Sayce</span>. O. cit., p. 362.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[157:1](mosy12.htm#fr_306) <span
class="smallcaps">Sayce</span>. *Op. cit.*, p. 238.—M. F. Lenormant has
published a slightly different translation of this passage (*Origines de
l’histoire*, vol. ii., p. 104). But the variations do not bear upon the
cosmogonical character of the Tree. M. Terrien de la Couperie considers
that the plant in question is not so much a tree as a stem similar to
the stakes which support the tents (*Babylonian and Oriental Record*,
vol. iv. No. 10, p. 221).

<span id="fn_307"></span>[157:2](mosy12.htm#fr_307) <span
class="smallcaps">J. Menant</span>. *Pierres gravées*, vol. i., fig.
204.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[158:1](mosy12.htm#fr_308) <span
class="smallcaps">G. W. Mansell</span>. *Un épisode de l’épopée
chaldéennes*, in the *Gazette archéologique* for 1879.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[158:2](mosy12.htm#fr_309) <span
class="smallcaps">Hesiod</span>. *Theogony*, v. 274–275.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[158:3](mosy12.htm#fr_310) <span
class="smallcaps">A. H. Sayce</span>. *Op. cit.*, p. 133 *et seq.*

<span id="fn_311"></span>[158:4](mosy12.htm#fr_311) *Id*., p. 242.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[158:5](mosy12.htm#fr_312) <span
class="smallcaps">G. Smith</span>. *Chaldean account of Genesis*.
London, p. 91.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[159:1](mosy12.htm#fr_313) <span
class="smallcaps">J. Menant</span>. *Pierres gravées*, vol. i., pp.
189-191.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[159:2](mosy12.htm#fr_314) <span
class="smallcaps">J. Menant</span>, *Pierres gravées*, vol. i., fig.
121.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[159:3](mosy12.htm#fr_315) <span
class="smallcaps">W. Baudissin</span>. *Studien zur semitischen
Religiongeschichte*, vol. iii., p. 227.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[159:4](mosy12.htm#fr_316) <span
class="smallcaps">F. Lenormant</span>. *La divination chez les
Chaldéens*. Paris, 1875, p. 85.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[160:1](mosy12.htm#fr_317) <span
class="smallcaps">Sayce</span>. *Op. cit.*, pp. 294–300.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[160:2](mosy12.htm#fr_318) *The Calendar Plant
of China*, in the *Babylonian and Oriental Record* for September, 1890,
p. 218.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Paradisaic Trees of the Aryans](mosy13)
