[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mosy03)  [Next](mosy05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641437X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Migration of Symbols*, by Goblet d'Alviella, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

<span class="smallcaps">Few</span> words have acquired such a wide
signification as the word symbol. <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md)
Originally applied, amongst the Greeks, to the two halves of the tablet
they divided between themselves as a pledge of hospitality—in the manner
of our contract forms, detached along a line of perforations from the
counterfoil record—it was gradually extended to the engraved shells by
which those initiated in the mysteries made themselves known to each
other; and even to the more or less esoteric formulas and sacramental
rites that may be said to have constituted the visible bond of their
fellowship. At the same time its meaning was so amplified as to include
on the one hand oracles, omens, and every extraordinary phenomenon that
could be passed off as a warning from the gods, and on the other,
military pass-words, badges of corporate bodies, tokens of attendance,
and pledges of every kind, from the wedding ring, to the ring deposited
before partaking of a banquet as an earnest for the due payment of one's
share of it. In short the term came to gradually mean everything that,
whether by general agreement or by analogy, conventionally represented
something or somebody.

A symbol might be defined as a representation which does not aim at
being a reproduction. A reproduction implies if not identity with, at
least

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

similitude to, the original; but a symbol only requires that it shall
have certain features in common with the object represented, so that, by
its presence alone, it may evoke the conception of the latter, as is the
case with a missile weapon and lightning, a sickle and harvest-time, a
ring and marriage, a pair of scales and the idea of justice, kneeling
and the sentiment of submission, and so forth.

By symbolism the simplest, the commonest objects are transformed,
idealized, and acquire a new and, so to say, an illimitable value. In
the Eleusinian mysteries, the author of *Philosophoumena* relates that,
at the initiation to the higher degree, "there was exhibited as the
great, the admirable, the most perfect object of mystic contemplation,
an ear of corn that had been reaped in silence." <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) The scrap of cloth which, in ordinary
circumstances, we discard as a rag, at the top of a staff sums up all
the aspirations included in the idea of one's country; and two crossed
lines suffice to recall to millions of Christians the redemption of the
world by the voluntary sacrifice of a god.

We live in the midst of symbolical representations, from the ceremonies
celebrating a birth to the funereal emblems adorning the tomb; from the
shaking of hands all round of a morning to the applause with which we
gratify the actor, or lecturer, of the evening; from the impressions
figuring on the seal of our letters to the bank notes in our
pocket-book. The pictorial and plastic arts are naught else but
symbolism, even when they claim to adhere to the servile imitation of
reality. We write, as we speak, in symbols; and it is in symbols again
that we think, if those schools of philosophy are to be believed which
affirm our powerlessness to perceive things in themselves. The
philosophy

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

of evolution goes the length of proclaiming, through the organ of its
founder, that the conception of force, to which it refers all phenomena,
is simply the symbol of an unknown and unknowable Reality. Herbert
Spencer even adds, in the most explicit terms, that it will always be
permissible for us to picture to ourselves that Reality by concrete
symbols, so long as we do not regard them as resemblances of that for
which they stand. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md)

In this sense we may apply to the symbol what Professor Sabatier has
written of the myth:—"To create a myth, that is to say, to catch a
glimpse of a higher truth behind a palpable reality, is the most
manifest sign of the greatness of the human soul, and the proof of its
faculty of infinite growth and development." <span
id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15.md) Without doubt the symbols that have
attracted in the highest degree the veneration of the multitude have
been the representative signs of gods, often uncouth and indecent; but
what have the gods themselves ever been, except the more or less
imperfect symbols of the Being transcending all definition Whom the
human conscience has more and more clearly divined through and above all
these gods?

It is sentiment, and above all, religious sentiment, that resorts
largely to symbolism; and in order to place itself in more intimate
communication with the being, or abstraction, it desires to approach. To
that end men are everywhere seen either choosing natural, or artificial,
objects to remind them of the Great Hidden One, or themselves imitating
in a systematic manner the acts and deeds they attribute to Him—which is
a way of participating in His life—

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

or again rendering objective by acts, as various as they are
significant, all the gradations of the sentiments with which He inspires
them, from the most profound humility to the most ardent love. Hence the
extreme diversity of symbols; which may be divided into two classes,
according as they consist of acts or rites, and of objects or emblems.
We will here occupy ourselves exclusively with this second category, or
rather with the figured representations it suggests, and which past
generations have transmitted to us as so many material vestiges of their
beliefs. Even thus restricted, the field of investigation is vast enough
to make one fearful of wandering from the right way.

Studies in comparative symbolism have fallen, during the latter half of
this century, into a discredit which their former vicissitudes
sufficiently explain. To the syntheses no less premature than brilliant,
constructed with insufficient and imperfect materials by the
rationalistic school, whose most illustrious representative was the
French Dupuis, there succeeded, more than fifty years ago, the system,
more philosophical than historical, of Creuzer and his followers, who
claimed to discover in all the religious practices of antiquity the
disguised or disfigured reflection of a profound primitive wisdom. All
these theories, after having successively captivated the learned, have
been slowly overthrown by the accumulated objections afforded by later
discoveries in archæology, ethnography, philology, and history; and, as
so often happens, the reaction against them has been in proportion to
the first infatuation in their favour.

Even the more recent attempts of MM. Lajard and Emile Burnouf, although
keeping more closely to facts, were not of such a nature as to cause us
to retrace our steps. It seemed as if comparative archæology must
definitely sacrifice all imagination

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

that could profit critical research, and to-day certain scientists would
even attempt nothing less than the proscription of all hypothesis in
investigations relating to the origin and signification of symbolism; as
if hypothesis was not in every sort of study a necessary factor of
scientific progress, provided it be not enunciated as an ascertained
fact.

Meanwhile, for anyone who would wish to resume this kind of
investigation, the situation has greatly changed within the last
thirty-five years. Documents which allow us to compare, under all the
desirable conditions of authenticity, the symbolic representations of
different nations, have accumulated to such a degree, that henceforth
the principal bar to their utilization lies in their number and their
dissemination. It is not so many years ago that the transactions of the
Academies founded in the principal capitals of Europe, and the new-born
annals of a few archæological societies, constituted, together with
certain great publications relating to the monuments of classical
antiquity and of Egypt, the only collections to which the historian of
symbolism could turn. To-day we have everywhere at hand, in publications
which will never be surpassed in importance and in accuracy, the result
of excavations carried on simultaneously in Chaldæa, Assyria, Persia,
Asia Minor, Phœnicia, Egypt and Libya, not forgetting the reproduction
of memorials discovered or studied anew in Greece, Italy, India, the
extreme East, and even in the two Americas. Archæological reviews and
special collections, which have rendered so much service to the study of
ancient art, have multiplied even in the smallest states of Europe.
There is no branch of archæology, from the study of seals to
numismatics, which has not its organs and societies. Thanks specially to
the liberality of

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the different governments, not only have museums been enriched in
proportion to the discoveries made, but the more important collections
form the subject of descriptive catalogues which allow of the
utilization of materials at a distance. Lastly, the joint labours of
many workers, planned from the most various points of view, are
centralizing all these documents, thus lightening the task of those who
desire to restore the traces and elucidate the meaning of the principal
symbols of the world.

Moreover the deciphering of inscriptions, the classification and
interpretation of written documents, the general advancement of the
study of history, more especially religious history, whilst enlightening
us on the creeds of nations, enable us the better to establish the
connection between their symbols and their myths; at the same time that
a more exact knowledge of the social and geographical centres whence
these symbols originated aids us to discover in many cases the origins
of the image which has furnished a body to the idea.

Henceforth there is no longer any reason why in the study of symbols we
may not arrive at results as positive as in the study of myths. The
comparative examination of myths long ago entered upon a scientific
phase, whether, with Professor Max Müller and the philological school,
we are content to compare the traditions of nations speaking allied
languages; or, with Mr. Andrew Lang and the majority of ethnographers,
we do not scruple to compare the mythology of all known peoples. Now,
the myth, which may be defined as a dramatization of natural phenomena,
or of abstract events, offers more than one feature in common with the
symbol. Both depend upon reasoning by analogy, which in the one case
creates an imaginary tale, in the other a material image.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Doubtless there is
this difference, somewhat ignored by those who have obscured the idea of
religious symbolism by blending it with mythology, that in the symbol we
must be conscious of a distinction between the image and the object, or
being, thus represented, whilst an essential feature of the myth is to
believe the narration to be in conformity with the reality. But it is
easy to understand that both are frequently formed by the help of the
same mental operations, and above all are transmitted through the same
channels.

In any case, there are religions which we cannot understand if we do not
endeavour to supplement the insufficiency of the texts by the study of
the monuments. A significant symptom in this connection is the growing
tendency among savants to utilize, in the study of particular religions,
the texts to verify the symbols, and the symbols to verify the texts; as
may be seen in the recent works of Senart on the history of Buddhism,
Gaidoz and Bertrand on the symbols of ancient Gaul, J. Menant on the
sculptured stones of Central Asia, and Fr. Lenormant, Clermont-Ganneau,
Ledrain, and Ph. Berger on the symbols of the Semitic religions. These
works are the best proofs of the services which the interpretation of
symbols can render to the history of religions when strictly scientific
methods are rigidly followed.

It is not merely a question of avoiding preconceived ideas and hasty
generalizations. What is needed above all is to provisionally substitute
analysis for synthesis, the history of symbols for the history of
symbolism; in other words, to take the principal symbolical figures one
by one, in order to establish their respective history, first among each
people, and then over the whole area of countries where they are found.
It may

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

happen that we may succeed., after repeated and patient investigations
of this kind, if not in establishing the laws of symbolism, as has been
done for comparative grammar, at least in collecting together the
materials for a general history of symbolism, as has been already
accomplished for almost every other branch of knowledge.

My aim is simply to furnish a contribution to this history, by
investigating the limits within which certain symbolical representations
have been transmitted from people to people, and how far in the. course
of their migrations their meaning and their form may have been modified.
I have here applied myself particularly to figures which, by the
importance and the very complexity of their rôle, have seemed to me the
most capable of throwing some light on the general conditions of
symbolical transmission, such as the *gammadion* or *tétrascèle* and the
*triscèle*, the Paradisaical Tree, or rather the special type it assumed
amongst the Assyrians, the Sacred Cone of the western Semitic nations,
the Winged Globe of Egypt, the Caduceus of the Phœnicians, and the
*trisula* of the Buddhists. This selection will further permit me to
bring into prominence one of the most curious and perhaps least explored
sides of comparative symbolism. I speak here of the attraction which
analogous symbols exercise on one another, or rather of the tendency
they display to coalesce and lose themselves in intermediate types.

Most of the observations which I have brought together in the following
chapters have already appeared during the last three years in the
*Bulletins de l’Académie royale de Belgique*, the *Revue des
Deux-Mondes*, and in the *Revue de l’Histoire des Religions*. In
recasting them as a whole I have fully considered the remarks which
their first publication elicited from sympathetic critics, as well as
the modifications produced in my own views by subsequent

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

researches. I have also added a variety of illustrations calculated to
show more strongly the cases of symbolical filiation and fusion of which
I have endeavoured to verify the existence and elucidate the theory.

<span class="smallcaps">Goblet d’Alviella</span>.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Court Saint Etienne,
Brabant,</span>  
       *March*, 1891.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[1:1](mosy04.htm#fr_12.md) Σύμβολον, from σύν and
βάλλειν, to throw together.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[2:1](mosy04.htm#fr_13.md) *Philosophoumena*, v.
i., ed. Cruyce. Paris, 1860, p. 171.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[3:1](mosy04.htm#fr_14.md) *First Principles*.
Lond. 1862, § 32.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[3:2](mosy04.htm#fr_15.md) <span
class="smallcaps">A. Sabatier</span>. *Mémoire sur la notion hébraïque
de l’esprit*. Paris, 1879.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. On Symbols Common to Different Races](mosy05.md)
