[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mosy06)  [Next](mosy08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641437X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Migration of Symbols*, by Goblet d'Alviella, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### II. <span class="smallcaps">Different Interpretations of the Gammadion</span>.

That a great number of *gammadions* have been mere ornaments, monetary
signs, or trade-marks, is a fact which it would be idle to dispute. But
the uses which have been made of this figure in all the countries which
I have just instanced, the nature of the symbols with which it is found
associated, its constant presence on altars, tombstones, sepulchral
urns, idols, and priestly vestments, besides the testimony of written
documents and popular superstitions, afford more than sufficient proof
that in Europe as in Asia it partook everywhere of the nature of the
amulet, the talisman, and the phylactery. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[3](#fn_103) Moreover, for the *gammadion* to have
thus become a charm, it must first of all have been brought into contact
with a being, or a phenomenon, more or less concrete and distinct,
invested, rightly or wrongly, with some sort of influence on the destiny
of mankind. Might it not be possible to rind out this original meaning
of the *gammadion* by laying stress on the indications provided by the
monuments themselves?

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

Many archæologists have thought so, whilst however arriving at different
solutions. There is hardly a symbol which has given rise to more varied
[interpretations](errata.htm#0)—not even the *trisula* of the Buddhists,
which is saying a great deal.

I will confine myself to mentioning the opinion of those who have
confounded the *gammadion* with the *crux ansata* of the Egyptians, the
*tau* of the Phœnicians, the *vajra* of India, the Hammer of Thor, or
the Arrow of Perkun—all of which are signs having a form and meaning too
clearly defined for this identification to be maintained without
corroborative evidence. If even the *gammadion* ever replaced one of
them—as in the Catacombs it sometimes takes the place of the Cross of
Christ—it only did so as a substitute, as the symbol of a symbol.

Several writers have ascribed a phallic import to the *gammadion*, some,
like M. J. Hoffman, seeing therein the union of the male with the female
principle; <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104) others, as Sir George
Birdwood, believing that they recognize in it especially the symbol of
the female sex. <span id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105) The latter
supposition would seem to be sufficiently justified by the position
assigned to the *gammadion* on some female idols from the Troad, as also
by its association with the image of certain goddesses, the Persian
Artemis, Here, Demeter, Astarte. But the *gammadion* may very well have
furnished a symbol of fecundity, as elsewhere a common symbol of
prosperity and of salvation, without therefore being necessarily a
phallic sign. In the one case, as in the other, the point in question is
to ascertain if this is not a secondary meaning, connected with a less
abstract conception.

General Cunningham believes that he found in

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

the *swastika* a Pali monogram formed of four characters corresponding
to our letters S. U. T. I. <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106) But
Professor Max Müller maintains that the likeness is hardly striking, and
seems to be purely accidental. <span id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107) In
any case, the explanation would apply only to the Indian *gammadion*; an
objection which may likewise be urged against Mr. Frederic Pincott's
hypothesis, that the *swastika* is the emblem of the four castes united
in the same symbolical combination. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[3](#fn_108)

Waring held that the *gammadion* was a figurative
[representation](errata.htm#1) of water, on account of its resemblance
to the *meander*, and also of its frequent occurrence in combination
with the wavy line, a well-known symbol for water in motion. <span
id="fr_109"></span>[4](#fn_109) However, as we shall see further on,
this combination is far from being invariable, and certainly the form of
the *gammadion* has, in itself, nothing which conjures up the idea of
running water, or of rain.

Others have discerned in it a symbol of the storm, or lightning, because
it can be separated into two zigzags or interlaced Z's. W. Schwartz,
who, with his usual ability, has upheld this theory,—which conforms with
his general views on the meteorological origin of myths and
symbols,—draws attention to the numerous points of contact existing
between the lightning and the different forms of the Cross not only in
the symbolism of many religions, but also in popular language. <span
id="fr_110"></span>[5](#fn_110) This agrees with the practice, so common
in Catholic countries, of making the sign of the Cross, on the
appearance of lightning, to prevent being

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

struck, as also with the custom spread amongst our peasantry, especially
in Flemish Brabant, of tracing a Cross in whitewash on their houses to
preserve them from the same calamity. But it may be questioned if these
customs are not owing to the general talismanic value which the
Christian symbol receives in the popular beliefs: the sign of the Cross,
in fact, is reputed to drive away evil spirits and to call in divine
protection. As for Crosses painted on the outer walls, they seem to be
held of use not only against lightning, but also against fires,
epidemics amongst cattle, and, generally, against all the unforeseen
accidents which threaten the dwelling-place.

In any case there is here no question of the *gammadion*, and the
popular talk about the flashes of lightning "which cross" is not
sufficient to account for the derivation of the form of the *fylfot*. I
am well aware that amongst the ancient Germans, and even amongst the
Celts, the *gammadion* is sometimes met side by side with the symbols of
thunder on weapons, amulets, ornaments, and even on altars. But these
objects present also to our view the image of the Disk, the Crescent,
the *triscèle*, and many other symbolical figures. <span
id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111) It would seem as if the engraver had
simply wished to bring together all the symbols possessing, to his
knowledge, a phylacteric, or talismanic character; by a process of
reasoning analogous to that which, in the latter period of Greek
paganism, prompted the manufacture of pantheian figures.

M. Emile Burnouf makes the *gammadion* the symbol of fire, or rather of
the mystical twofold *arani*, that is to say of the fire-drill, which
was used to produce fire amongst the early Aryans. "This sign," he
writes, "represents the two pieces of wood forming the *arani*, whose
extremities were

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

curved, or else enlarged, so that they could be firmly kept in place by
four nails. At the point where they joined there was a small hole in
which was placed the piece of wood, shaped like a spear, whose violent
rotation, produced by whipping, made Agni to appear." <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112)

Up till now it has been by no means proved that the lower part of the
*arani* ever had the form of the *swastika* or even of the Cross. On the
contrary there are reasons for supposing that it was usually a mere log
of wood in which the point of the *pramantha* was made to turn. <span
id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_113) Perhaps, in some cases, it had a
circular form; the fire was then produced by making it revolve round a
nave. If, as has been maintained, it really assumed, in some Indian
temples, the appearance of the *gammadion*, it had doubtlessly been
given this form to imitate the *swastika*. <span
id="fr_114"></span>[3](#fn_114) As for the four points which are placed
between the arms of certain *gammadions*, there is nothing to prove that
they represent nails (see our [plate II.](mosy08.htm#img_pl02), *litt.*
B, Nos. 19, 20, 21, 22, and 23), and in most cases they do not even
touch the branches of the cross which, according to M. Burnouf, they are
intended to fasten. Schliemann, who seems not unwilling to subscribe to
M. Emile Burnouf's theory, observes that in Troas the *gammadion*
accompanies the linear drawings of burning altars, <span
id="fr_115"></span>[4](#fn_115) but—admitting that these are altars—can
they not blaze in the honour of some other god than the fire itself?
Further, nothing prevents us from supposing that the sun itself has been
represented as a blazing altar.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

In support of M. Burnouf's theory, attention might further be called to
the fact that the *swastika* with branches turned towards the right is,
amongst the Hindus, accounted of the feminine gender, which would make
it agree with the symbolism of the *arani*. But it must be remarked that
the *swastika* turned in the other direction passes as masculine.
Moreover, according to Sir George Birdwood, it is a common custom in
modern India to divide into the two sexes all objects occurring in
interdependent pairs.

Mr. R.-P. Greg has written, in the Memoirs published by the *Society of
Antiquaries*, London, a very interesting study on the *gammadion*, in
which, whilst striving to deal impartially with the other explanations
of this sign, he contends it is especially a symbol of the air, or
rather of the god who rules the phenomena of the atmosphere, Indra with
the Hindus, Thor with the ancient Germans and the Scandinavians, Perkun
with the Slays, Zeus with the Pelasgians and Greeks, Jupiter *tonans*
and *pluvius* with the Latin race. <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116)
Unfortunately, the proofs which he adduces are neither numerous nor
conclusive. The fact that in India the bull is sacred to Indra, and that
on certain monetary ingots the *gammadion* surmounts an image of this
animal, is hardly sufficient to prove that the *swastika* is a symbol of
Indra. <span id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_117) It is likewise difficult to
admit that the *gammadion* represents the god of the atmosphere amongst
the Greeks because on some pottery from Cyprus there are *gammadions*
which recall the image of birds flying in the air.

The above-named writer makes much of the fact that on many incised
monuments the *gammadion* is placed above images representing the earth,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

or terrestrial creatures, and below other images symbolizing the sky, or
the sun. But this arrangement is far from being invariable or even
predominant. Frequently the *gammadion* is found on the same level with
astronomical symbols; sometimes even it occupies the upper place. Mr.
Greg, it is true, gets over the difficulty by asserting that in this
case it must represent the god of the ether in the capacity of supreme
God. <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118)

The only example I am acquainted with of a *gammadion* consecrated to
Zeus, or to Jupiter, is on a votive altar, where it is incised above the
letters I. O. M. <span id="fr_119"></span>[2](#fn_119) But this is a
Celto-Roman altar, erected, to all appearance, by Dacians garrisoned in
Ambloganna, a town in Great Britain; that is to say, that here again we
may be in the presence of a strange god, assimilated to the supreme
divinity of the empire, the *Jupiter Optimus Maximus* of the Romans.
Moreover, the *gammadion* is here flanked by two four-rayed Wheels,
symbols which M. Gaidoz has clearly proved to have been, amongst the
Gauls, of a solar character. <span id="fr_120"></span>[3](#fn_120)

Lastly, Ludvig Müller, Percy Gardner, S. Beal, Edward B. Thomas, Max
Müller, H. Gaidoz, and others, have succeeded, by their studies of
Hindu, Greek, Celtic, and ancient German monuments, in establishing the
fact that the *gammadion* has been, among all these nations a symbolical
representation of the sun, or of a solar god. I should like here to sum
up the respective conclusions of these authors, setting forth, at the
same time, the other reasons which have led me, not only to accept, but
also to develop their interpretation. This attempt may perhaps be the
less superfluous since, judging by the comparatively recent works of M.
M. Greg

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

and Schwartz, the solar, or even the astronomical character of the
*gammadion* is not yet beyond dispute.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[44:1](mosy06.htm#fr_101) <span
class="smallcaps">Schliemann</span>. *Ilios*, figs. 248, 249, and 250.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[44:2](mosy06.htm#fr_102) <span
class="smallcaps">T. Lamy</span>. *Le svastika et la roue solaire en
Amérique*, in the *Revue d’Ethnographie*. Paris, 1885, p. 15.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[44:3](mosy07.htm#fr_103) M. Michel de
Smigrodzki, who in his recent essay, *Zur Geschichte der Svastika*
(Braunschwig, 1890, extracted from the *Archiv für Anthropologie*), has
classified chronologically a considerable number of *gammadion*s
belonging to monuments of the most different periods and nations, has
made it his special study to show that this cross has everywhere had a
symbolical, and not merely an ornamental value.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[45:1](mosy07.htm#fr_104) *Das Buddha Pantheon
von Nippon*, quoted by <span class="smallcaps">M. Ludvig Müller</span>,
*Op. cit.*, p. 103.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[45:2](mosy07.htm#fr_105) *Jour. R. As. Soc.*,
v. xviii. (n. s.), p. 408.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[46:1](mosy07.htm#fr_106) *The Bhilsa Topes*.
London, 1884, p. 386.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[46:2](mosy07.htm#fr_107) Letter to Schliemann
in *Ilios*, p. 520.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[46:3](mosy07.htm#fr_108) *Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society*, vol. xix. (n.s.), p. 245.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[46:4](mosy07.htm#fr_109) *Ceramic Art in
Remote Ages*. London, 1875, p. 13, *et seq.*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[46:5](mosy07.htm#fr_110) *Der Blitz als
geometrisches Gebild*, in the *Jubiläumschrift der Posener
Naturwissenchaft*. *Verein*, 1887, pp. 221–234.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[47:1](mosy07.htm#fr_111) <span
class="smallcaps">R. P. Greg</span>, in *Archæologia*, 1885, pl. xix.
fig. 31, 32, 23; pl. xx., fig. 2.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[48:1](mosy07.htm#fr_112) <span
class="smallcaps">Emile Burnouf</span>. *La science des Religions*.
Paris, 1876, p. 240.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[48:2](mosy07.htm#fr_113) <span
class="smallcaps">J. C. Nesfield</span>. *Mythology of Fire* in the
*Calcutta Review* of April, 1884, p. 375.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[48:3](mosy07.htm#fr_114) It is thus the
Buddhists have even erected *stoupas* in the form of the *gammadion*.
(*Cf*. <span class="smallcaps">Schliemann</span>. *Ilios*, p. 520.)

<span id="fn_115"></span>[48:4](mosy07.htm#fr_115) <span
class="smallcaps">Schliemann</span>. *Ilios*, figs. 1872, 1911, 1914,
1916.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[49:1](mosy07.htm#fr_116) <span
class="smallcaps">R.-P. Greg</span>. *The Fylfot and Swastika*, in
*Archæologia*, 1885, p. 293 *et seq.*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[49:2](mosy07.htm#fr_117) <span
class="smallcaps">Id</span>., *ibid.*, p. 302.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[50:1](mosy07.htm#fr_118) <span
class="smallcaps">R.-P. Greg</span>. *Loc. cit.*, pp. 307 and 309.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[50:2](mosy07.htm#fr_119) <span
class="smallcaps">Ludvig Müller</span>. *Op. cit.*, fig. 29.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[50:3](mosy07.htm#fr_120) <span
class="smallcaps">H. Gaidoz</span>. *Le dieu gaulois du Soleil et le
symbolisme de la roue*. Paris, 1886.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Probable Meaning of the Gammadion](mosy08)
