[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mosy10)  [Next](mosy12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641437X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Migration of Symbols*, by Goblet d'Alviella, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

#### SYMBOLISM AND MYTHOLOGY OF THE TREE.

I. The Sacred Tree and its acolytes.—The Tree in the art and symbolism
of Mesopotamia.—The Tree between two animals, or two monsters; adoption
of this theme by the Persians, Phœnicians, Greeks, Hindus, Arabs, and
Christians.—The Tree between two human personages; its migrations into
Persia, India, and the extreme East.—Characteristic features of the
images derived from these two themes.—The variety of certain details
does not preclude relationship between symbolical
combinations.—Substitution of sacred objects for the Tree between its
acolytes.

II\. Interpretation of the Sacred Tree amongst the Semites.—The Sacred
Tree does not merely represent a plant venerated for its
uses.—*Simulacra* of the Goddess of Nature; the *asherîm*.—The
representation of the artificial fertilization of the palm-tree became,
in Assyria, the symbol of fecundation in general.—Myths and symbols
relating to the Tree of Life.—The Cosmogonical Tree in the cuneiform
texts.—The Tree of Knowledge.—The Calendar Plant or Lunar Tree.

III\. The Paradisaical Trees of the Aryans.—Mythical Trees of the
Hindus.—The Tree of Knowledge amongst the Buddhists, and its connection
with the Cosmic Tree.—Contests for the fruit of the Tree.—Analogous
myths amongst the Persians, Greeks, and Scandinavians.—How far this
similarity of traditions denotes a common source.—Logical coincidences
in the applications of vegetable symbolism.—Enrichment and approximation
of mythologies by the mutual exchange of myths and symbols.

#### I. <span class="smallcaps">The Sacred Tree and its Acolytes</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Tree is one of the oldest and most
widely diffused subjects in Semitic pictorial art, especially in
Mesopotamia. <span id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_240.md) It first appears, on
Chaldæan

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

cylinders, as a stem divided at the base, surmounted by a fork, or a
crescent, and cut, mid-way,

<span id="img_fig061"></span> ![FIG. 61. RUDIMENTARY FORMS OF THE SACRED
TREE.](img/fig061.jpg.md)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 61. Rudimentary Forms
of the Sacred Tree</span> <span id="fr_241"></span>[1](#fn_241.md)</span>

by one or more cross-bars, which sometimes bear a fruit at each
extremity.

<span id="img_fig062"></span> ![FIG. 62. VARIETIES OF SACRED
TREES.](img/fig062.jpg.md)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 62. Varieties of Sacred
Trees</span> <span id="fr_242"></span>[2](#fn_242.md)</span>

This rudimentary image frequently changes into

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

the palm, the pomegranate, the cypress, the vine, etc. ([fig.
62](#img_fig062).md).

On the monuments of Nimrud and Khorsabad, beginning with the tenth
century before our era, the

<span id="img_fig063"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 63.
CONVENTIONAL TREES OF ASSYRIAN BAS-RELIEFS.](tn/fig063.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig063.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 63. Conventional Trees
of Assyrian Bas-Reliefs</span>.</span>

Tree becomes still more complex; it would sometimes seem to be composed
of fragments belonging to different kinds of plants. The stem, which
suggests a richly ornamented Ionic column, is crowned by a palmette; the
base is concealed

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

behind a bunch of slender loaves, which, in some cases, recall our
*fleur-de-lis* ([fig. 62e](#img_fig062).md), or else it rests upon a pair
of fluted horns, which recur again at the top and even in the middle of
the stem ([fig. 63](#img_fig063).md). On both sides branches spread out
symmetrically, bearing conical fruits ([fig. 63b](#img_fig063).md), or
fan-shaped leaves ([fig. 63c](#img_fig063).md), at their extremities.
Sometimes the ends of these branches are connected by straps which form
a net-work of the most pleasing effect. <span
id="fr_243"></span>[1](#fn_243.md)

Whatever the ornamental value of this figure may be, it is certain that
it has, above all, a religious

<span id="img_fig064"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 64. THE
ACOLYTES OF THE SACRED TREE. (Lajard. Mithra, pl. xlix., fig.
9.)](tn/fig064.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig064.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 64. The Acolytes Of The
Sacred Tree.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Lajard</span>. *Mithra*, pl. xlix., fig.
9.</span>

signification. It is invariably associated with religious subjects,
among the intaglios of the cylinders, the sculptures of the bas-reliefs,
and the embroidery of the royal and sacerdotal garments. Above it is
frequently suspended the Winged Circle, personifying the supreme
divinity, Assur at Nineveh, Bel or Ilu at Babylon. Lastly, it nearly

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

always stands between two personages facing each other, who are
sometimes priests or kings in an attitude of adoration, sometimes
monstrous creatures, such as are so often met with in Assyro-Chaldæan
imagery, lions, sphinx, griffins, unicorns, winged bulls, men, or
*genii*, with the head of an eagle, and so forth.

Hence we have two types, or symbolical combinations, whose migrations we
can easily follow.

A. The Tree between two animals facing each other makes it first
appearance on the oldest

<span id="img_fig065"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 65. (From
the Catalogue of the de Clercq collection, vol. i., pl. ii., 15, and pl.
vii., 61.)](tn/fig065.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig065.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig.</span> 65. (From the
*Catalogue* of the de Clercq collection, vol. i., pl. ii., 15, and pl.
vii., 61.)</span>

cylinders of Chaldæa. In the de Clercq collection it is seen on engraved
stones which are attributed, one to the archaic art of Chaldæa, the
other to the school that flourished, according to M. J. Menant, in the
city of Agadi at the time of Sargon I., some four thousand years before
our era. <span id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_244.md)

<span id="page__000"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_pl04"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate
IV](tn/pl04.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl04.jpg.md)  
Plate IV  
</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Explanation of Plate IV.</span>

Figure *a* is a bas-relief of Nineveh, reproduced from <span
class="smallcaps">Layard</span> (*Monuments of Nineveh*, 2nd series, pl.
xlv., fig. 3).

Figure *b* is taken from a Phœnician bowl discovered at Cærium by M. de
Cesnola, and reproduced by <span class="smallcaps">M.
Clermont-Ganneau</span> (*L’Imagerie phénicienne*. Paris, 1880, pl.
iv.).

Figure *c* comes from a Persian cylinder inscribed with Aramean
characters, the property of M. Schlumberger, and reproduced by <span
class="smallcaps">M. Ph. Berger</span> (*Gazette archéologique* for
1888, p. 143).

Figure *d* belongs to a bowl which was found, together with products of
Sassanian art, near the White Sea (<span class="smallcaps">J. R.
Aspelin</span>. *Antiquités du Nord Finno-Ougrien*. Helsingfors, fig.
610).

Figure *e* is copied from a capital of the temple of Athene at Priene
(<span class="smallcaps">O. Rayet</span> et <span class="smallcaps">A.
Thomas</span>. *Milet et le golfe Latinique*. Paris, 1887, pl. xlix.,
No. 5).

Figure *f* reproduces the ornamentation of an archaic vase of Athens
belonging to the British Museum (<span class="smallcaps">Rayet</span> et
<span class="smallcaps">Collignon</span>. *Histoire de la céramique
grecque*, fig. 25).

Figure *g* comes from the sculptures on the baptistery at Cividale
(<span class="smallcaps">Le Monnier</span>. *L’Architecture in Italie*.
Venice, 1891, fig. 36).

Figure *h* comes from the bas-reliefs of Bharhut, probably anterior to
our era (<span class="smallcaps">A. Cunningham</span>. *The Stupa of
Bharhut*, pl. vi.).

Figure *i* is copied from a Tanjore carpet at the India Museum in London
(<span class="smallcaps">Sir George Birdwood</span>. *The Industrial
Arts of India*. London, 1880, p. 53).

Figure *j* is taken from a tympanum of the church at Marigny, in the
Calvados department (<span class="smallcaps">De Caumont</span>.
*Rudiments d’archéologie*. *Architecture religieuse*. Paris, 5th
edition, p. 269).

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

However this may be, it was only at the time of the Assyrian domination
that it received its definite and so highly artistic shape. While the
Tree becomes larger and more conspicuous, the two animals, no longer
embracing or crossing one another, assume a more natural and strictly
symmetrical attitude (see [pl. iv., fig. a](#img_pl04).md).

From Mesopotamia this subject passed on the one hand among the
Phœnicians and into the whole of Western Asia, on the other among the
Persians after the fall of Babylon.

The latter confined themselves to copying the Assyrian type on their
seals, their jewels, their cloths, and their bas-reliefs, until the end
of the empire of the Sassanidæ, in the seventh century of our era ([pl.
iv., figs. c and d](#img_pl04).md).

From Persia it passed into India, doubtlessly during the period
immediately preceding the invasion of Alexander. The presence of the
Tree between two lions facing one another among the Buddhist sculptures
of Bharhut is even one of the indications that help to prove the
influence of Iranian art on the most ancient monuments of Hindu
architecture ([pl. iv., fig. h](#img_pl04).md). <span
id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_245.md)

In the bas-reliefs of Kanheri, where the symbols of Buddhism are mingled
with the reminiscences of an earlier form of worship, the Sacred Tree is
sculptured as an object of veneration between two elephants facing one
another, whilst in other bas-reliefs it is transformed, flanked by the
same two elephants, into the Lotus-flower which forms the Throne of
Buddha. <span id="fr_246"></span>[2](#fn_246.md) Lastly, after the
extinction of Buddhism in India, it was resumed by the

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brahmanical sects,
which confined themselves to replacing Buddha on his Lotus Throne (still
between the two elephants), by Parbati, the spouse of Vishnu. <span
id="fr_247"></span>[1](#fn_247.md) Moreover, we again meet with the Tree—in
which Sir George Birdwood does not hesitate to recognize the Tree of
Life—between two animals facing one another on the cloths, the carpets,
the vases, and the jewels of contemporary India. <span
id="fr_248"></span>[2](#fn_248.md) In this last case, however, it is not
always easy to discriminate whether we are in the presence of a survival
of pre-Islamitic symbolism, or of a reaction of Sassanian art introduced
into India by the Islamic invasions (*cf*. [fig.
60](mosy10.htm#img_fig060) and [pl. iv., fig. i](#img_pl04).md).

The Phœnicians borrowed it from Mesopotamia

<span id="img_fig066"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 66. STELE
FROM CYPRUS. (PERROT et CHIPIEZ, Vol. iii., fig. 152.)](tn/fig066.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig066.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 66. Stele from
Cyprus</span>.  
(<span class="smallcaps">Perrot</span> et <span
class="smallcaps">Chipiez</span>, Vol. iii., fig. 152.)</span>

more than a thousand years anterior to our era, developing its
artificial appearance until all semblance of its arboreal origin has
well-nigh vanished, to be replaced by an interlacing of spirals and
strap-like curves ([pl. iv., fig. b](#img_pl04).md).

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Some of those
combinations, in which winged sphinxes cling to the spirals, betray a
singular medley of Egyptian influences, whilst at the same time already
suggesting the elegant modifications of Greek art. <span
id="fr_249"></span>[1](#fn_249.md)

This type, as conventional as it is æsthetic, occurs wherever Phœnician
influence was felt, more especially among the archaic pottery of Corinth
and of Athens ([pl. iv., fig. f](#img_pl04).md). Perhaps it had already
penetrated directly into Greece through Asia Minor, for it is seen on an
amphora, discovered by General de Cesnola at Curium, which MM. Rayet and
Collignon place among the vases with geometric decorations belonging to
an

<span id="img_fig067"></span> ![FIG. 67. VASE FROM CURIUM. (CESNOLA.
Cyprus, chap. i., p. 55.)](img/fig067.jpg.md)  
FIG. 67. VASE FROM CURIUM. (CESNOLA. Cyprus, chap. i., p. 55.)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 67. Vase From
Curium.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Cesnola</span>. *Cyprus*, chap. i., p.
55.)</span>

earlier time than the period of Phœnician influence. The Tree preserves
here a more natural appearance; it is placed between two quadrupeds
standing on their hind legs and overlooking the stem. This brings us
back to the Chaldæan prototype of our [fig. 65](#img_fig065.md).

If it did not furnish the Greeks with the first idea of the palmette and
the honeysuckle ornament, it certainly suggested the decoration of
certain capitals, such as those of the temple of Apollo at Didyme, and
of Athene Polias at Priene ([pl. iv., fig. e](#img_pl04).md). <span
id="fr_250"></span>[2](#fn_250.md)

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

Greece, however, seems only to have made use of it by way of exception.
If it penetrated into Italy, and even into Gaul, along with the other
products of Oriental imagery, it did not become an ordinary motive of
classic art. We may draw attention to its presence, by the way, in a
decorative painting at Corneto, <span id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_251.md)
and on a Gallic coin found near Amiens, and attributed to the
commencement of our era.

Following in the footsteps of M. Hucher, I had at first taken the object
engraved on this coin between

<span id="img_fig068"></span> ![FIG. 68. GALLIC COIN. (HUCHER. L’art
gaulois, vol. ii., p. 36.)](img/fig068.jpg.md)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 68. Gallic
Coin</span>.  
(<span class="smallcaps">Hucher</span>. *L’art gaulois*, vol. ii., p.
36.)</span>

two quadrupeds to be a cup or drinking vessel. But my attention has been
directed to some intaglios of Cyprus, and even of Chaldæa, where the
tree assumes the form of a staff supporting a semicircle, as in the
figure [61d](#img_fig061.md) given above. M. Hucher, with his usual
perspicacity, thinks that the subject engraved on this coin belongs "to
the same train of thought as that which in antiquity brought face to
face the lions of Mycenæ on the gates of that town, and the lions of the
Arab or Sassanian fabric of Mans on the shroud of St. Bertin, or even,
in the thirteenth century, the doves with serpents’ tails on the
capitals of the cathedral at Mans." It is strange to note the presence
of the same theme, dealt with in an identical manner, on a *fibula*
discovered

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

near Geneva, which M. Blavignac considers to be of Christian
origin. <span id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_252.md)

However, it is by another way that it was introduced into Christian
symbolism. It was, in fact, taken directly from the Persians by the
Byzantines about the seventh century of our era. The influence of
Sassanian art had made itself felt in the Byzantine Empire from the time
of the death of Theodosus, if not earlier. "The Byzantines," says M.
Charles Bayet, "did not invent all the ornamental combinations from
which they got such pleasing effects; in this instance again they
borrowed them from the East, and on the monuments of Persia models are
found from which they drew their inspirations." <span
id="fr_253"></span>[2](#fn_253.md) The same writer proves that in the sixth
and seventh centuries the apartments of the rich, and even the treasures
of the churches, were filled with stuffs which came from Persia, or
which reproduced the subjects of Persian art. <span
id="fr_254"></span>[3](#fn_254.md) It is related that even Justinian had
employed a Persian architect to decorate several buildings in
Constantinople. <span id="fr_255"></span>[4](#fn_255.md) Under these
circumstances, how could the Byzantines help adopting one of the most
pleasing and widely diffused Sassanian themes of decoration, which lent
itself both to the refinements of ornamentation and to the fancies of
the symbolical imagination? This is, moreover, the way by which the
whole fantastic fauna of the East entered Europe, to form the Christian
symbolic menagery of the Middle Ages. <span
id="fr_256"></span>[5](#fn_256.md)

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

From the Grecian provinces it was introduced into Italy, where it is
often found in religious architecture between the seventh and the
eleventh centuries in Sicily, at Ravenna, and especially at Venice (see
[pl. iv., fig. g](#img_pl04.md), and also [fig.
58](mosy10.htm#img_fig058).md). Here it was even taken up and reproduced by
the Renaissance, as may be seen at Santa Maria del Miracoli, at the
Scuola of San Marco, etc. <span id="fr_257"></span>[1](#fn_257.md)

Finally, it crossed the Alps with Roman art. M. de Caumont was one of
the first to draw attention to its presence amongst the sculptures of
the Roman period, in particular on a tympanum of the church at Marigny,
in the Calvados department. It is here sculptured between two lions,
which hold the stem with their fore-paws, and bite at the extremities of
the middle branches ([pl. iv., fig. j](#img_pl04).md). <span
id="fr_258"></span>[2](#fn_258.md)

What a strange fate for this antique symbol, which, after being used for
several thousand years in the long since vanished worships of Higher
Asia, came thus to be stranded, in the western extremity of Europe, on
the sanctuary of a religion possessing also amongst its oldest
traditions the reminiscence of the Paradisaical Trees of
Mesopotamia! <span id="fr_259"></span>[3](#fn_259.md)

<span id="page__001"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_pl05"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate
V](tn/pl05.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl05.jpg.md)  
Plate V  
</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Explanation of Plate V.</span>

Figure *a* is taken from an Assyrian cylinder (<span
class="smallcaps">Lajard</span>. *Mithra*, pl. lxi., fig. 6).

Figure *b*, from the ornamentation of a Phœnician bowl (<span
class="smallcaps">Clermont Ganneau</span>. *L’Imagerie phénicienne*, pl.
vi.).

Figure *c*, from an imperial coin of Myra in Lycia (<span
class="smallcaps">COLLIGNON</span>. *Mythologie figurée de la Grèce*.
Paris, Bibliothèque des Beaux-Arts, p. 10).

Figure *d*, from a Persian seal (<span class="smallcaps">Lajard</span>.
*Mithra*, pl. xliv., xlvi., No. 3).

Figure *e*, from the sculptures in the caves of Kanerki (<span
class="smallcaps">Ferguson</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Burgess</span>. *Cave Temples of India*, pl. x., fig.
35).

Figure *f*, from the bas-reliefs in the cave of Karli (<span
class="smallcaps">Moor</span>. *Hindu Pantheon*, pl. lxxii.).

Figure *g*, from a wooden group in the Musée Guimet.

Figure *h*, from a Chaldean cylinder (<span
class="smallcaps">Lajard</span>. *Mithra*, pl. xvi., fig. 4).

Figures *i* and *j*, from coins of the Javanese temples (<span
class="smallcaps">Millies</span>. *Monnaies de l’Archipel Indien*, pl.
vi., fig. 50, and pl. ix., fig. 67).

Figure *k*, from a Maya manuscript known by the name of the *Fejervary
Codex* (Publications of the *Bureau of Ethnography*. Washington, 1882,
vol. iii., p. 32).

Figure *l*, from the ornamentation of a modern Syrian copper dish
inscribed with cufic characters, presented by the Count Goblet
d’Alviella to Sir George Birdwood.

Figure *m*, from the bas-reliefs of the cathedral at Monreale (<span
class="smallcaps">D. B. Gravinat</span>. *Il duomo di Monreale*.
Palermo, 1859, pl. xv., *H*).

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

B. The image of the Tree between two human (or semi-human) personages
invariably facing one another followed at first almost the same route as
the type whose migrations I have just described. The two themes are
sometimes combined, as we see, in Assyria itself, on the cylinder
reproduced above ([fig. 64](#img_fig064).md). Modified considerably by
Greek art, like all symbols which made use of the human figure ([pl. v.,
fig. c](#img_pl05), and below, figs. [69](#img_fig069.md) and
[83](mosy13.htm#img_fig083).md), it remained more faithful to its earliest
type in Phœnicia ([pl. v., fig. b](#img_pl05).md), in Persia ([pl. v., fig.
d](#img_pl05).md), and even in India, where the two Assyrian eagle-headed
*genii* ([pl. v., fig. a](#img_pl05).md), which advance towards the Tree
holding the symbolical Cone, became the two *naga-rajahs*, or
"snake-kings,"—their heads entwined with *cobras*—who support the stem
of the Buddhist Lotus ([pl. v., fig. e](#img_pl05).md). In the grottoes of
Karli this stem, which serves as a support to the Throne of the Master,
stands erect both between two of those *naga-rajahs* and two deer facing
one another ([pl. v., fig. f](#img_pl05).md).

These sculptures date back to a period which cannot be prior to the
reign of Asoka, *i.e.*, the middle of the third century B.C., nor much
later than the beginning of our era. It is interesting to again come
across them, at an interval, perhaps, of two thousand years, in Japanese
wooden groups of the seventeenth century belonging to the Guimet Museum.
In one of them the *naga-rajahs* bear a genuine dragon on their
shoulders; this substitution, together with some differences in the
costume and the figure of these personages, is almost the only liberty
which the native art took with the old Buddhist subject, long since
forgotten in its original home ([pl. v., fig. g](#img_pl05).md).

From India it reached, in company with Buddhism, the island of Java,
where we meet with it upon those curious medals of temples which the
natives, although converted centuries ago to

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Islamism, continue
to wear by way of talismans. It occurs there, amongst other Buddhist
symbols, between two figures with human bodies and beasts’ or birds’
heads,—which is surely the Mesopotamian conception in all its integrity
([pl. v., figs. i and j](#img_pl05).md).

It is also found in China on Taoist medals, recalling the coins of the
Javanese temples. <span id="fr_260"></span>[1](#fn_260.md) Here, however,
the disposition of the Tree, as also the costume of the personages,
refer to quite a different type, whether it be that we are here in the
presence of a corruption of Javanese coins, or that these, in imitating
the Taoist coins, cast, so to speak, the subject of the latter in a
mould provided by the Buddhist symbols of India.

From the Indian Archipelago—or from Eastern Asia—it may have even
reached the New World, if we are to judge from the resemblance of the
scene depicted on the Javanese medals to certain images found in
manuscripts connected with the ancient civilization of Central America.

We have seen that the Cross was used, in the symbolism of the ancient
inhabitants of America, to represent the winds which bring the rain.
These crosses sometimes assume a tree-like form, and are then composed
of a stem bearing two horizontal branches, with a bird perched on the
fork, as in the famous *stele* of Palenque. <span
id="fr_261"></span>[2](#fn_261.md) Moreover, this tree is sometimes placed
between two personages facing one another, with a sort of wreath of
feathers on their heads, who cannot but. recall the monstrous aspect of
the beings depicted on both sides of the Tree upon the medals of
Javanese temples. The reproduction which I

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

here give ([pl. v., fig. k](#img_pl05).md) from the Fejervary Codex <span
id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_262.md) shows up this parallel all the more,
since it is placed close to medals of Java and underneath a Chaldæan
cylinder which might be almost made the prototype of all these images
([pl. v., fig. h](#img_pl05).md).—We have here certainly fresh evidence in
favour of the theory which already relies upon so many symbolical and
ornamental similarities in order to discover, in the pre-Columbian
civilization of America, the traces of intercourse with Japan, China, or
the Indian Archipelago.

Finally, by a singular case of atavism, this subject, which already
adorned the Chaldæan cylinders of five or six thousand years ago,
reappears in our own times in the decoration of the copper vases or
plates, known as *mosouli*, which are still manufactured in Syria, on
the banks of the Euphrates and the Tigris ([pl. v., fig. l](#img_pl05).md).
There is still the palm-tree between its two acolytes,—henceforth
dressed as *fellahin*,—who are engaged in plucking the two large fruits,
or rather conventional *clusters*, suspended side by side beneath the
crown.

On the other hand, it was quite adapted to furnish the first Christian
artists with a model of the scene of the Temptation; all that was needed
was to give a different sex to the two acolytes ([pl. v., fig.
m](#img_pl05).md). Already in the art of the Catacombs it frequently occurs
with this application. <span id="fr_263"></span>[2](#fn_263.md)

The cabinet of antiquities at the Bibliothèque Nationale of Paris
possesses a cameo which has likewise been held to represent the scene of
the Temptation, although it depicts the quarrel between Poseidon and
Athene under the sacred olive-tree,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

in the presence of the serpent Erichthonios. <span
id="fr_264"></span>[1](#fn_264.md) What makes the case very interesting is,
not only that we have here engraved upon the stone the Hebrew text of
Genesis III. 6, but that we also find at work those touching-up
processes which were sometimes made use of in order to

<span id="img_fig069"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 69. ANTIQUE
CAMEO. (BABELON. Cabinet des Médailles, pl. xxvi.)](tn/fig069.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig069.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 69. Antique
Cameo</span>.  
(<span class="smallcaps">Babelon</span>. *Cabinet des Médailles*, pl.
xxvi.)</span>

adapt a pre-existent image to the expression of a new tradition.

The olive-tree has been changed into an apple-tree. Neptune's Trident
and Minerva's Spear have been scraped out. The attempt has even been

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

made to transform into some sort of a head-dress the helmet,
inappropriate enough, to be sure, on the head of our first mother, and
in her companion's hand has been placed a round object, which may pass
for an apple.

To be sure, the occurrence of the representation of a tree between two
animals or personages, even when facing one another, is not in itself
sufficient for one to infer that it is connected with the types
described above. Yet, in the examples I have given, the original
identity of the inspiration may be verified, not only by a general
resemblance spread throughout the whole image,—we might call it a family
likeness,—but also by the presence of certain features, its ineffacable
characteristics, so to speak, by which it may everywhere be recognized.

In the first place, there is the symmetry in the expression and attitude
of the two acolytes, often also in the form of the Tree and the
arrangement of the branches. Then we have the presence, often
unaccountable, of a pair of volutes between which the stem rises. These
two spirals sometimes represent branches, or petals, of flowers ([pl.
iv.](#img_pl04.md), figs. *a*, *b*, *c*, *e*, *g*, *i*, *j*,; [pl.
v.](#img_pl05), figs. *a*, *d*, *h*, *i*, *l*.md), sometimes curved horns
([figs. 63](#img_fig063), [64](#img_fig064); [pl. iv.](#img_pl04.md), figs.
*a*, *b*, *e*, *f*, *g*, *i*, *j*; [pl. v.](#img_pl05.md), figs. *a*, *b*,
*f*, *i*, *k*). We may, perhaps, attribute their origin either to the
conventional representation of the *clusters* which adorn the image of
the Chaldæan Palm-tree, or to the introduction of the horns which were
amongst the Assyrians a distinguishing sign of the divinity.

Finally, a detail which seems to be equally characteristic of the Sacred
Tree in the most different countries is the appearance of serpents,
which sometimes twine themselves round the stem ([figs.
60](mosy10.htm#img_fig060), [69](#img_fig069.md),
[83](mosy13.htm#img_fig083); [pl. iv.](#img_pl04.md), fig. d; [pl.
v.](#img_pl05), figs. *c*, *e*, *f*, *g*, *m*.md), and sometimes figure
merely in the

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

background of the image ([fig. 59](mosy10.htm#img_fig059.md), and [pl.
v.](#img_pl05), fig. *h*.md).

It must be observed that it is not the identity of the species of plants
which constitutes the essential feature of the symbol through all its
local modifications, but rather the constant reappearance of its
hieratic accessories.

Each nation seems, indeed, to have introduced into this symbolical
combination the tree which it deemed the most valuable. Thus we see
depicted in turn the date-palm in Chaldæa, the vine or a cone-bearing
plant in Assyria, the lotus in Phœnicia, and the fig-tree in
India. <span id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_265.md)

Moreover, following in the footsteps of the Assyrians, who had inserted
into this Tree features which were quite extraneous to the vegetable
kingdom, some creeds replaced the plant itself by other sacred objects.

The Phrygians placed the representation of a pillar, a *phallus*, or an
urn, between winged sphinxes,

<span id="img_fig070"></span> ![FIG. 70. TOMB AT KUMBET. (Perrot et
Chipiez. Histoire de l’Art, vol. V., fig. 84.)](img/fig070.jpg.md)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 70. Tomb At
Kumbet.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Perrot</span> et <span
class="smallcaps">Chipiez</span>. *Histoire de l’Art*, vol. V., fig.
84.)</span>

lions, or bulls, facing each other, as is still to be seen on the
pediments of the tombs hewn in the rocks of Phrygia. As M. Perrot
observes: "Though one element is substituted for another,

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

the group preserves none the less the same character." <span
id="fr_266"></span>[1](#fn_266.md)

On a cylinder, which M. Menant considers of

<span id="img_fig071"></span> ![FIG. 71. HITTITE CYLINDER. (De Clercq
collection, vol. i. of Catalogue, pl. xxviii., No.
289.)](img/fig071.jpg.md)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 71. Hittite
Cylinder</span>.  
(*De Clercq collection*, vol. i. of *Catalogue*, pl. xxviii., No.
289.)</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hittite origin,
the arborescent stalk becomes a Winged Globe.

The Pelopides of Mycenæ, and, later, the Persians, put in its stead a
pyre or fire-altar. <span id="fr_267"></span>[2](#fn_267.md)

<span id="img_fig072"></span> ![FIG. 72. PERSIAN CYLINDER. (CH.
LENORMANT, in the Mélanges d’archéologie, vol. iii., pp. 130 and
131.)](img/fig072.jpg.md)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 72. Persian
Cylinder.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Ch. Lenormant</span>, in the *Mélanges
d’archéologie*, vol. iii., pp. 130 and 131.)</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The group which
formerly surmounted the celebrated gate of Mycenæ certainly represented
an object of this nature between lions facing one another ([fig.
73](#img_fig073).md).

The Buddhists introduced their principal "jewels" into the image, as may
be seen in the following reproduction of a small portable altar, where
the object, portrayed between two animals in a crouching attitude,
represents perhaps the

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

astronomical emblem of the nine planets, the

<span id="img_fig073"></span> ![FIG. 73. GATE OF MYCENÆ. (Schliemann.
Mycènes.)](img/fig073.jpg.md)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 73. Gate of
Mycenæ.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Schliemann</span>. *Mycènes*.)</span>

*nava-ratna*, borrowed by Buddhist symbolism from the Hindus ([fig.
74](#img_fig074).md).

<span id="img_fig074"></span> ![FIG. 74. TIBETAN SYMBOL. (HODGSON.
Journ. of the Roy. Asiatic Soc., vol. xviii., 1st series, pl. i., No.
18.)](img/fig074.jpg.md)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 74. Tibetan
Symbol</span>.  
(<span class="smallcaps">Hodgson</span>. *Journ. of the Roy. Asiatic
Soc.*, vol. xviii., 1st series, pl. i., No. 18.)</span>

In Chinese and, perhaps, Japanese art, the "great jewel" becomes a
pearl, frequently depicted between two dragons facing one another, with
partly-open jaws. We may, perhaps, find a curious application of this
symbol in the customs of the Chinese. M. de Groodt relates that in the
festival of lanterns they lead about a dragon made of cloth and bamboo,
before whose mouth they wave a round lantern like a ball or pearl of
fire,—whether this scene represents the conflict of the celestial bodies
with the devouring dragon, in keeping with the Chinese conception of
eclipses,

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

or the vain efforts of falsehood to swallow up truth. <span
id="fr_268"></span>[1](#fn_268.md)

We have seen above that the Greeks, in imitation of the Phœnicians,
represented between

<span id="img_fig075a"></span> ![FIG. 75a. BAS-RELIEF ON A SARCOPHAGUS.
(MILLIN. Voyage dans le Midi, pi. lxv.)](img/fig075a.jpg.md)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig.</span> 75*a*. <span
class="smallcaps">Bas-Relief on a Sarcophagus.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Millin</span>. *Voyage dans le Midi*, pi.
lxv.)</span>

<span id="img_fig075b"></span> ![FIG. 75b. CHRISTIAN SCULPTURE OF THE
THIRD CENTURY. (ROLLER. Catacombes, vol. i., p. 53.)](img/fig075b.jpg.md)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig.</span> 75*b*. <span
class="smallcaps">Christian Sculpture of the Third Century.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">Roller</span>. *Catacombes*, vol. i., p.
53.)</span>

two birds the *bethel* of the Cyprian Aphrodite and the *omphalos* of
the Delphic Apollo, thus creating a new theme less extravagant and
fantastic. The Christians, in their turn, from the time of the
Catacombs, placed two figures on the sides of their principal
emblems,—not only of the Cross, which is

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

also called "a Tree of Life," but also of the Chrism, the *labarum*, the
*rouelle*, the Crown, the bunch of Grapes, the eucharistic Cup, and so
forth. <span id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_269.md) Sometimes these figures are
lambs, and sometimes peacocks, or doves (fig. 75, [a](#img_fig075a.md) and
[b](#img_fig075b).md).

Among the wooden ornaments of Romoaldus’ episcopal throne in San Sabino
at Canossa, we even find the mystic candelabrum thus sculptured between
two griffins:

<span id="img_fig076"></span> ![FIG. 76. WOODEN SCULPTURE AT CANOSSA.
(H. W. SCHULTZ. Kunst des Mittelalters in Italien, pl. vi., fig.
1.)](img/fig076.jpg.md)

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 76. Wooden Sculpture at
Canossa.</span>  
(<span class="smallcaps">H. W. Schultz</span>. *Kunst des Mittelalters
in Italien*, pl. vi., fig. 1.</span>

Then chivalry placed its coats of arms between the two creatures facing
one another,—lions, leopards, unicorns, griffins, giants, etc. Charles
Lenormant was not mistaken in saying, with respect to the filiation of
these types: "When the use of armorial bearings began to develop in the
West, Europe was deluged with the manufactured articles of Asia, and the
first lions drawn on escutcheons were certainly copied from Persian and
Arabian tissues. These tissues themselves dated back, from one imitation
to another, to the models from which, perhaps, over a thousand years
before Christ, the author of the bas-reliefs of Mycenæ, drew his
inspiration." <span id="fr_270"></span>[2](#fn_270.md)

The same tendency is still at work. When, more than half-a-century ago,
the *Royal Institute of British Architects* wished to have *armes
parlantes*,

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

it chose a Corinthian column, on the sides of which it placed two
British lions facing each other.

<span id="img_fig077"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 77. SEAL OF
THE R. Inst. of British Architects.](tn/fig077.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig077.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Fig. 77. Seal of the</span>
*R. Inst. of British Architects*.</span>

Some time ago, while on a visit to the fine estate, well-known in the
country round Liege under the name of the Rond-Chêne, I observed,
sculptured on a mantelpiece of recent construction, an oak of pyramidal
form with a heraldic griffin on either side. On inquiring whether these
were not the old armorial bearings of the domain, I was told that it was
merely an artistic conceit, suggested by the name of the locality. I
could not give a better instance of how the sculptor, or engraver, even
whilst yielding to quite a different inspiration, upholds, nevertheless,
a tradition unbroken for thirty centuries, and obeys, more or less
consciously, a law which may be formulated thus: *When an artist wants
to bring into prominence, as a symbol, the isolated image of an object
which lends itself to a symmetrical representation*, particularly a tree
or pillar, *he places on either side two creatures facing one
another*,—giving rise sometimes, in return, to a myth or legend in order
to account for the combination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_240"></span>[118:1](mosy11.htm#fr_240.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Joachin Menant</span>. *Les pierres gravées de la
Haute-Asie*. Paris, 1883–86, vol. i., figs. 41, 43, 71, 86, 704, 115,
120, 121, <span id="page_119">p. 119</span> and 142; vol. ii., figs. 11,
13, 17, 18, 19, 36, 41, 54 to 61, 85, 110, 208, 213, etc.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[119:1](mosy11.htm#fr_241.md) *a* is taken from a
Chaldæan cylinder (<span class="smallcaps">J. Menant</span>, *Pierres
gravées*, vol. i., fig. 71); *b*, from a cylinder of Nineveh (<span
class="smallcaps">Layard</span>, *Monuments of Nineveh*, 2nd series, pl.
ix., No. 9); *c*, from a Chaldean cylinder (<span class="smallcaps">J.
Menant</span>, *Pierres gravées*, vol. i., fig. 115); *d*, from an
Assyrian cylinder (<span class="smallcaps">Perrot</span> et <span
class="smallcaps">Chipiez</span>, *Histoire de l’art dans l’antiquité*,
vol. ii., fig. 342).

<span id="fn_242"></span>[119:2](mosy11.htm#fr_242.md) *a* (<span
class="smallcaps">Menant</span>, *Pierres gravées*, vol. i., fig. 86);
*b* (<span class="smallcaps">Lajard</span>, Mithra, pl. xxxix., fig. 8);
*c* (<span class="smallcaps">Perrot</span> et <span
class="smallcaps">Chipiez</span>, *Histoire de l’art*, vol. ii., fig.
235); *d* (Seal of Sennacherib, <span class="smallcaps">Menant</span>,
*Pierres gravées*, vol. ii., fig. 85).

<span id="fn_243"></span>[121:1](mosy11.htm#fr_243.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Layard</span>. *Monuments of Nineveh*, 1st series, pl.
6, 7, 8, 9, 25, 39, 44.—<span class="smallcaps">G. Rawlinson</span>.
*The Five Great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern World*. London,
1862–67, vol. ii., pp. 236, 237.—See also *passim* in the Atlas,
appended by Félix Lajard to his *Introduction à l’étude du culte de
Mithra*.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[122:1](mosy11.htm#fr_244.md) The object engraved
between the two monsters in fig. [65a](#img_fig065.md) is, according to the
Catalogue of the de Clercq collection, a candelabrum. I think that we
must rather see in this a tree of the kind reproduced above (fig.
[62c](#img_fig062).md), from a bas-relief in the Louvre. Moreover, the
Tree, the Candelabrum, and the Column, are images which merge into one
another with the greatest ease (*cf*. below, fig. [76](#img_fig076).md).
The two objects have not only a resemblance of form, but also of idea,
on which matter I cannot do better than refer the reader to the chapter
entitled The <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> *Jewel Bearing Tree* in
Mr. W. R. Lethaby's recent work, *Architecture, Mysticism, and Myth*.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[123:1](mosy11.htm#fr_245.md) <span
class="smallcaps">A. Cunningham</span>. *The Ships of Bharhut*. London,
1879, pl. vi. and vii.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[123:2](mosy11.htm#fr_246.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Fergusson</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Burgess</span>. *Cave Temples of India*. London, 1880,
p. 350.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[124:1](mosy11.htm#fr_247.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Moor</span>. *Hindu Pantheon*, pl. 30.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[124:2](mosy11.htm#fr_248.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Sir George Birdwood</span>. *Industrial Arts of
India*. London, 1880, p. 350.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[125:1](mosy11.htm#fr_249.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Sara Yorke Stevenson</span>. *On certain Symbols of
some Potsherds from Daphnæ and Naucratis*. Philadelphia, 1892, p. 13 *et
seq.*

<span id="fn_250"></span>[125:2](mosy11.htm#fr_250.md) <span
class="smallcaps">O. Rayet</span> and <span class="smallcaps">A.
Thomas</span>. *Milet et le golfe Latinique*. Paris, 1877, pl. xvii.,
No. 9, and pl. xlix., No. 5.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[126:1](mosy11.htm#fr_251.md) <span
class="smallcaps">J. Martha</span>. *Archéologie Etrusque et Romaine*.
Paris, fig. 8.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[127:1](mosy11.htm#fr_252.md) <span
class="smallcaps">J. D. Blavignac</span>. Histoire de l’architecture
sacrée à Genève. Paris, Atlas, pl. ii., fig. 2.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[127:2](mosy11.htm#fr_253.md) *L’Art Byzantin*.
Paris, p. 60.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[127:3](mosy11.htm#fr_254.md) *Id*., chap. iii.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[127:4](mosy11.htm#fr_255.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Batissier</span>, quoted by <span class="smallcaps">E.
Soldi</span>. *Les Arts méconnus*. Paris, 1881, p. 252.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[127:5](mosy11.htm#fr_256.md) The Tree between two
lions facing one another appears already on an ivory casket which Millin
attributes to an early period of the Byzantine Empire, and which is now
in the <span id="page_128">p. 128</span> cathedral of Sens. (*Voyage
dans les Départements du Midi*. Paris, 1807, pl. x. of Atlas.)

<span id="fn_257"></span>[128:1](mosy11.htm#fr_257.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Bachelin Deflorenne</span>. *L’Art, la Décoration et
l’Ornement des Tissus*. Paris, pl. iv. and xiii.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[128:2](mosy11.htm#fr_258.md) It is generally the
griffin which is chosen in preference, perhaps because it symbolizes
vigilance.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[128:3](mosy11.htm#fr_259.md) The Arabs adopted it
in their turn, when they had overthrown the Sassanian dynasty, but
divesting it of all religious signification. Through their agency it
reached Europe towards the beginning of the Middle Ages, together with
the stuffs which are still extant in private and public collections, in
treasures of churches, and so forth. (See *Anciennes étoffes* in the
*Mélanges d’archéologie* of MM. Ch. Cahier and A. Martin, vol. i., pl.
43; vol. ii., pl. 12 and 16; vol. iii., pl. 20 and 23; vol. iv., pl. 24
and 25.) It is also to be seen on a golden vase, adorned with enamelled
partition work, which belongs to the church of Saint-Martin-en-Valais,
and which is said to have been sent to Charlemagne by the Caliph Haroun
Al Rashid.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[130:1](mosy11.htm#fr_260.md) Specimens of these
medals are to be found in the department of medals in the Bibliothèque
Nationale at Paris.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[130:2](mosy11.htm#fr_261.md) A bird perched on
the fork of the Sacred Tree is likewise seen on certain Persian
cylinders. (<span class="smallcaps">Lajard</span>. *Mithra*, pl.
LIV<sup>c</sup> fig. 6.)

<span id="fn_262"></span>[131:1](mosy11.htm#fr_262.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Cyrus Thomas</span>. *Notes on certain Maya and
Mexican Manuscripts*, in the publications of the *Bureau of Ethnology*.
Washington, 1881–82, vol. iii., p. 32.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[131:2](mosy11.htm#fr_263.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Garucci</span>. *Storia del’ Arte christiana*, tab.
xxiii., 1.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[132:1](mosy11.htm#fr_264.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Babelon</span>. Le Cabinet des Médailles d la
Bibliothèque nationale. Paris, 1888, p. 79.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[134:1](mosy11.htm#fr_265.md) M. Didron observes,
in his *Manuel d’iconographie chrétienne* (Paris, 1845, p. 80), that
each Christian nation chose the plant which it preferred to represent
the Tree of Temptation; the fig and orange-trees in Greece, the vine in
Burgundy and Champagne, the cherry-tree in the Isle of France, and the
apple-tree in Picardy.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[135:1](mosy11.htm#fr_266.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Perrot</span> et <span
class="smallcaps">Chipiez</span>. *Op. cit.*, vol. v., p. 220.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[135:2](mosy11.htm#fr_267.md) See a painted vase
in the Blacas collection. *(Mém. de l’Acad. des inscr. et bel.-lett.*,
vol. xvii., pl. viii.)

<span id="fn_268"></span>[137:1](mosy11.htm#fr_268.md) *Les fêtes annuelles
à Emoui*, in vol. xi. of the *Annales du Musée Guimet*. Paris, 1886, p.
369.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[138:1](mosy11.htm#fr_269.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Roller</span>. *Catacombes*, vol. i., pl. xi., figs.
3, 4, 29 to 34, etc.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[138:2](mosy11.htm#fr_270.md) *Mélanges
d’archéologie*, by MM. Martin and Cahier, vol. iii., p. 138.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Signification of the Sacred Tree Amongst the Semites](mosy12.md)
