[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wnr12)  [Next](wnr14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XI

### ARE PREVENTIVE MEANS CERTAIN?

THERE are several means of preventing conception which are both certain
and harmless. What those means are the state laws forbid me to say. If I
should defy the state laws and name those contraceptives, the federal
laws would forbid this book's going through the mails. Nor can I,
without coming into conflict with the laws, tell why these means are
reliable. It is difficult to discuss the subject without using franker
language than the statutes permit, and I do not wish to violate the law
in this particular book.

"Can I rely upon this? Is it certain? Will it prevent absolutely?" Such
questions, always asked by women who seek advice concerning
contraceptives, testify both to their fear of involuntary motherhood and
their doubt as to any and all means offered for their deliverance.

{p. 131}

Doubt as to the certainty of contraceptives arises from two sources. One
is the uninformed element in the medical profession. A physician who
belongs to this element may object to birth control upon general
grounds, or he may repeat old-fashioned objections to cover his
ignorance of contraceptives. For, strange as it may seem, there is an
amazing ignorance among physicians of this supremely important subject.
The uninformed objector often assumes to speak with the voice of
authority, asserting that there are no thoroughly dependable
contraceptives that are not injurious to the user.

The other source of distrust is the experience of the woman herself.
Having no place to go for scientific advice, she gathers her information
from neighbors and friends. One offers this suggestion, another offers
that, each urging the means that she has found successful and condemning
others. All this is very confusing and extremely disturbing to the woman
who, for one reason or another, is living in constant fear of pregancy.
{*sic*}

It is not at all surprising that such a state of affairs exists. There
has been so much

{p. 132}

secrecy about the whole subject and so much dependence upon amateurish
and nonprofessional advice that it is almost impossible for anyone to
procure reliable information or to recognize it when given. This is
especially true in the United States where there are both federal and
state laws to punish those who disseminate knowledge of birth-control
methods.

Even under present conditions, however, there is a certain amount of
reliable information concerning methods of birth control. We know that
there are several methods of prevention which are not only dependable,
but which can be used without injury either to the man or the woman.
Knowledge of what these methods are and how to apply them should be
available to every married man and woman. It is safe to predict that in
a very few years they will be available.

Some methods are more dependable than others, just as there are some
more simple of adjustment than others. Some are cheap and less durable;
others are expensive and last for years. There are some which for a
quarter of a century have stood the test of certainty in Holland,
France, England and the United

{p. 133}

States among the wealthier classes, as the falling birth rate among
these classes indicates. And just as the reliable, primitive wheelbarrow
is antiquated beside the latest airplane, so, as scientific
investigators turn their attention more and more to this field, will the
awkward, troublesome methods of the past give way to the simpler, more
convenient methods of the morrow.

Although the law forbids information concerning reliable means of
contraception, it is hardly likely that it can be invoked to prevent
warnings against widely practiced methods which are NOT reliable. The
employment of such methods leads not only to disappointment but often to
ill health.

One of the most common practices of this kind is that of nursing one
baby too long in the hope of preventing the birth of the next. The "poor
whites" of the South and many of the foreign-born women of the United
States pin their hopes to this method. Often they persist in nursing a
child until it is eighteen months old--almost always until they become
pregnant again.

Prolonged nursing hurts both child and

{p. 134}

mother, it is said. In the child it causes a tendency to brain disease,
probably through disordered digestion and nutrition. In the mother it
causes a strong tendency to deafness and blindness. If a child is nursed
after it is twelve months old, it is generally pale, flabby and
unhealthy, often rickety, one authority points out, while the mother is
usually nervous, emaciated and hysterical. If pregnancy occurs under
these conditions, the mother not only injures her own health but that of
the next child, often developing in it a weakness of constitution which
it never overcomes.

Moreover, prolonged nursing has been found to be unreliable as a
contraceptive. We know this upon good authority. It should not be
depended upon at all.

In the same class is the so-called "safe period" referred to in another
chapter. For many women there is never any "safe period." Others have
"safe periods" for a number of years, only to find themselves pregnant
because these periods have ceased without warning.

One of the most frequent of all the mistakes made in recommending
contraceptives is the

{p. 135}

advice to use an antiseptic or cold-water douche. This error seems to be
surprisingly persistent. I am particularly surprised to hear from women
that such douches have been prescribed by physicians. Any physician who
knows the first rudiments of physiology and anatomy must also know that
necessary and important as an antiseptic douche is as a cleanser and
hygienic measure, it is assuredly not to be advised as a means of
preventing conception.

A woman may, and often does, become pregnant before she can make use of
a douche. This is particularly likely to happen if her uterus is low.
And the woman who does much walking, who stands for long hours or who
uses the sewing machine a great deal is likely to have a low uterus. It
is then much easier for the spermatazoa {*sic*} to enter almost directly
into the womb than it would otherwise be, and the douche, no matter how
soon it is used, is likely to be ineffective. The tendency of the uterus
to drop under strain goes far to explain why some women who have
depended upon the douche for years suddenly find themselves pregnant. Do
not

{p. 136}

depend upon the douche. As a cleansing agent, it is a necessary part of
every woman's toilet, but it is not a preventive.

Even if the douche were dependable, the absence of sanitary convenience
from households in remote districts and the difficulty of using a douche
in crowded tenements would prevent many women from making use of it.

Despite the unreliability of some methods and the harmfulness of some
others, there are methods which are both harmless and certain. This much
the woman who is seeking means of limiting her family may be told here.
In using any method, whatsoever, all depends upon the care taken to use
it properly. No surgeon, no matter how perfect his instruments, would
expect perfect results from the simplest operation did he not exercise
the greatest possible care. Common sense, good judgment and taking pains
are necessary in the use of all contraceptives.

More and more perfect means of preventing conception will be developed
as women insist upon them. Every woman should make it plain to her
physician that she expects him to be informed upon this subject. She
should

{p. 137}

refuse to accept evasive answers. An increasing demand upon physicians
will inevitably result in laboratory researches and experimentation.
Such investigation is indeed already beginning and we may expect great
progress in contraceptive methods in the near future. We may also expect
more authoritative opinions upon preventive methods and devices. When
women confidently and insistently demand them, they will have access to
contraceptives which are both certain and harmless.

{p. 138}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. Will Birth Control Help The Cause Of Labor?](wnr14)
