[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20300) 
[Next](rp20302) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. III*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### PREFACE

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> presenting a new volume of the
*Records of the Past* to the public, I feel it my duty to remind the
reader of certain words which I wrote in the Preface to the first
volume. I there said that "the writer who wishes to make use of a
translation from an Egyptian or Assyrian text for historical or
controversial purposes ought to know where it is certain, and where it
is only possible, or at most probable." I therefore promised that "in
the present series of volumes doubtful words and expressions should be
followed by a note of interrogation, the preceding word being put into
italics where necessary"; that is to say, that the reader should be
forewarned whenever the translator was himself in doubt as to the
correctness of his rendering.

So far as lies within the power of an editor, this promise has been
fulfilled. But it must be remembered that in many cases a translator may
consider that the version he proposes admits of no question, whereas
another scholar may take a different view, and hold the version to be
incorrect. Such cases occur even in translations from Latin and Greek

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

authors, still more so in the translation of the Old Testament. It is
impossible for all men to think alike even in matters of philology.
Gradually, no doubt, with the progress of knowledge, approach is made to
unanimity of opinion; but after all it is only approach. It is only
young scholars who think themselves qualified to set all the world
right.

In the decipherment and translation of what may be termed the monumental
languages of the past—Egyptian, Assyrian, Phœnician, and the like—much
depends upon the nature of the text. Historical texts are fortunately
the simplest, and are naturally the first to attract the notice of the
decipherer. Consequently the historical texts of Egypt or of Assyria can
now be read with almost as much ease and certainty as the historical
books of the Hebrew Scriptures. The case is different when we come to
deal with texts of a more complicated character, and when we recollect
how uncertain is the translation of much of the language in the
non-historical books of the Old Testament, we need not wonder that the
Egyptian or Assyrian translator should intersperse his renderings of
religious and mythological texts with notes and queries, or should
improve upon them from time to time as his materials increase. In one
respect, however, he possesses an advantage over the Old Testament
student; he generally has to deal with texts which are fairly free from
the corruptions of copyists. The Assyrian translator, moreover, has

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

at his disposal an enormous mass of literature, much exceeding that
contained in the Old Testament, though it is true that but a
comparatively small part of it has as yet been examined.

Like all other branches of inductive science, the science of
decipherment is one of probabilities. Absolute certainty is
unattainable, whether we are translating an inscription of Sennacherib
or the book of Genesis. But for all practical purposes a high
probability amounts to absolute certainty, and it is this high
probability that the decipherment of the ancient monuments of Egypt and
Assyria or Babylonia has now attained. Scholars may dispute about the
exact meaning of certain words or phrases, as they do in the case of the
Hebrew Bible, but it is seldom that anything of importance turns upon
the dispute, at all events so far as regards the historical
inscriptions. And in the present series of volumes due notice is given
to the reader of the occurrence of such disputed words and phrases.

When once we have settled the philological signification of a historical
text there begins the equally important work of critically examining it.
We have first to ask whether it is contemporaneous with the event or
events which it professes to record, and if not, whether its authorities
or its interpretation of its authorities are trustworthy.

This is more especially the case as regards chronology—the skeleton and
framework of history. I do not think, therefore, that it will be out of
place

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

even in a preface, to examine some of the data we possess at present for
determining the chronology of Babylonia and Assyria. Translations of the
documents upon which it rests have been given in the two previous
volumes of this series.

Nothing can be more satisfactory than the chronology of Assyria so far
as it extends. The Assyrians were a people of business, and they carried
their business habits into their mode of reckoning time. Each year was
distinguished by the name of a particular officer, the *limmu* or
"eponym," after whom it was called, and as the names of the eponyms were
recorded on the accession of each to office and registers of them were
kept, there was no difficulty in determining the exact year in which an
event occurred or anew king ascended the throne. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

In Babylonia, however, the custom of counting the years by eponyms does
not seem to have existed, at all events in early times. From the era of
Nabonassar (B.C. 747) downwards Babylonian chronology was fixed by means
of astronomy; before that period it appears to have been determined by
the reigns of the kings and the duration of dynasties. In legal
documents of the time of Khammuragas (or Khammurabi) deeds are not even
dated by the regnal years of the sovereign, but by such occurrences as a
war, the construction of a canal, or the capture of a

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

city. Under such circumstances it is plain that the historian who
endeavoured to restore the early chronology of Babylonia had an
extremely difficult task before him.

Our materials for reconstructing the chronology of Babylonia are given
at the beginning of the present series of *Records of the Past*. I have
already noted the suspicious character of the ciphers attached to the
first dynasty of Babylon, in what may be termed the dynastic tablet, and
the discrepancy in two of our documents between the length of reign
assigned to the kings of the dynasties of the Sea and of Bit-Bazi. Other
facts go to show that the tablet of dynasties was drawn up by a compiler
who lived at a comparatively late date and extracted a system of
chronology from older materials. Contemporaneous documents lately
discovered at Niffer prove that the true name of Ebisum, who is made the
eighth king of the first dynasty, was really Abesukh. A seal in the
possession of Mr. R. P. Greg, belonged to a librarian who calls himself
"the servant of the king Abé-sukh" or "Abi-esukh," and contract-tablets
make it clear that the name is really compounded with the word *abi*,
"father," and has nothing to do with *ebisum*, "an actor." It is
questionable, moreover, whether Khammu-ragas or Khammu-rabi—the exact
reading of the last syllable is still doubtful—was the son of
Sin-muballidh, as is stated by the author of the Dynastic List. At all
events the name he gives to his father in one of his inscriptions seems
to have

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

been different, <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) and the compiler of
the document which contains Assyrian translations of the names of early
Babylonian kings evidently regarded him as of foreign origin. In this
document, accordingly, he is classed, like Ammi-sadugga, <span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2) with Kur-galzu, Simmas-sipak, and other
Kassite princes.

From a strictly philological point of view the classification is
incorrect. The Kassite language was non-Semitic, whereas the names of
Ammi-sadugga and Khammu-rabi are Semitic, though not Assyro-Babylonian.
Along with those of Samsu-satana, and probably also Samsu-iluna and
Abi-esukh, they belong to the Semitic dialects spoken by tribes of
Arabian descent on the western and eastern frontiers of Babylonia. It is
only geographically, therefore, and not philologically, that the names
of Khammurabi and Ammi-sadugga can be grouped with those of the Kassite
kings.

The Babylonians had some difficulty in pronouncing and writing the
second element in the name of Ammi-sadugga, and in contemporaneous
inscriptions it appears under various forms, the most correct of which
is *zaduga*. <span id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3) It represents, in fact,
the Hebrew *tsadoq*, and belongs to a root which is not found in
Assyrian. We now have evidence, however, that it was known at an early
date to the Minæan language, which extended from the southern

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

coast of Arabia to the borders of Palestine and Chaldæa. Among the
inscriptions discovered by M. Halévy in the south of Arabia is one in
which mention is made of ’Ammi-tsadiqa, who was appointed by the Minæan
king, Abi-yada’, governor of the fortress of Zar on the Egyptian
frontier, as well as of the neighbouring district of Ashur (see Gen.
xxv. 3). Prof. Hommel, to whom the discovery of these facts is due,
points out that the inscription must belong to a very early epoch
indeed, probably to that of the Hyksos in Egypt. However this may be,
the name ’Ammi-tsadiqa is identical with that of the Babylonian king
Ammi-zadugga. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) The author of the
explanatory list of Babylonian royal names renders both *ammi* and
*khammu* by the Assyrian *kimtu*, "family." It is more probable that in
both instances it is really the name of a god. Ben-Ammi was the "father
of the children of Ammon," according to Gen. xix. 38, and the Old
Testament presents us with names like Ammiel, Amminadab, Balaam, and
Jeroboam, while Assur-bani-pal tells us of Ammu-ladin, king of the
Kedarites. The more correct rendering of Numb. xxii. 5 would be "Pethor,
which is by the river (Euphrates) of the land of the children of ’Ammo,"
and it is stated in a cuneiform text (*W. A. I.*, ii. 54. 65) that
Emu—the exact equivalent of the Hebrew *’ammo*—was the name given to the
god Nergal by the Shuhites on the western banks of

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

the Euphrates. The fact that in Khammu-rabi the initial *ayin* of
*’ammo* is represented by *kh*, pointing to a pronunciation with
*ghain*, is indicative of dialectal differences, and implies that the
dialects to which the names of Khammu-rabi and Ammi-zadugga belonged
were not the same.

We may conclude, therefore, that "the first dynasty of Babylon" had been
formed out of the reigns of kings who did not belong to the same
nationality, much less to the same family, and that consequently the
relationship assumed by the compiler of the dynastic tablet to have
existed between them was imaginary. The first four or five kings of the
dynasty were probably local rulers of Babylon; Khammu-rabi, as we know,
conquered the other states of Babylonia and made it a united kingdom,
with Babylon as its centre; it is with him, therefore, that the first
dynasty of Babylon ought properly to commence. The earlier kings of the
dynasty owe their inclusion in it to local vanity. It is possible,
however, that they claimed precedence over the other Semitic princes of
Babylonia, since we know that the power of one of them, Zabu, extended
as far as Sippara, and he may accordingly have claimed to have been the
representative of the ancient Semitic empire of Sargon which had its
seat in the close neighbourhood of Sippara.

The relation of the Babylonian dynasties given by the native compiler to
those which have been excerpted by George the Synkellos from the
Chaldean

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

history of Berossos cannot be determined at present. It is difficult to
find any agreement between them before the time of Nabonassar. On the
other hand, the statements of Berossos have been verified by the
monuments in several important particulars. His account of the deluge
was taken from native documents, and his history and chronology of the
period which begins with the era of Nabonassar show a close acquaintance
with the actual facts. It is of course possible that the numbers,
whether of reigns or of years, given by the Synkellos, are corrupt and
erroneous. But even so, the scheme of dynasties proposed by Berossos
does not agree with the scheme found on the cuneiform tablets. It is
clear that more than one system of chronology and dynastic arrangement
must have been current in Babylonia.

In one point, however, I think I can show that Berossos had good
authority at his back. This is the statement that, almost at the
beginning of assured Babylonian history, Babylon was captured by
"Medes," who ruled the country for eight generations. Now the
inscriptions of Nabonidos and Kyros have proved that the subjects of
Istuvegu or Astyages, who were called Medes" by the Greeks, were called
"Manda" by the Babylonians. The Greeks in fact confounded the two words
Madâ, "Medes," and Manda, led thereto by the fact that both Madâ and
Manda alike came from the mountains on the northeast of Babylonia.
Manda, however, was not a

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

proper name in the same sense as Madâ. It is usually preceded by *tsab*,
"soldier," and though not Assyrian, I believe it to have had its origin
among the Semitic tribes on the eastern side of Chaldæa, and to be
related to the Hebrew *nûd*, "to wander." *Tsab manda* will therefore be
the equivalent of the Biblical *erets nôd* or "nomad-land" (Gen. iv.
16). The title is applied by Esarhaddon to Teuspa the Kimmerian, the
Gimirrâ or Kimmerians, the Gomer of the Old Testament, being further
distinguished from the Madâ or "Medes."

The title, however, was much older than the age of Esarhaddon. It occurs
several times in the astrological tablets. The most important example of
its use is in W. A. L, iii. 61. 21, 22, where we read: "The *tsab manda*
comes and governs the land. The altars of the great gods are taken away.
Bel goes to the land of Elam. It is prophesied that after thirty years
the smitten shall be restored (and that) the great gods shall return
with them." The same catastrophe is referred to in another passage of
the great work on astrology (*W. A. I.*, iii. 64. 7, 8). "The *tsab
manda* invades the land and rules over the country." The prophecy is
interesting on account of its analogy to the prophecy of the restoration
of the Jews after seventy years of exile (Jer. xxv. 11). But what is
equally interesting is that while Bel, the national god of Babylon,
flies for refuge to Elam, his country is handed over to the rule of the
Manda and its altars

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

are broken down. I cannot but think that in these Manda we ought to see
the "Medes" of Berossos who captured Babylon and founded there the first
historical dynasty. They will represent Khammu-rabi, Ammi-sadugga, and
the other kings whose names betray their origin among the nomad Semites
on the frontiers of Chaldæa. Berossos was right rather than the compiler
of the dynastic tablet in making Khammu-rabi the founder of the dynasty
under which Babylon became for the first time the capital of a united
Babylonia.

If the Synkellos can be trusted Berossos reckoned eight kings to his
Median dynasty. The compiler gives Khammu-rabi only five successors. But
it is questionable whether he has collected the names of all the kings
who followed him. At all events I possess a contract-tablet from Niffer,
which belongs to the age of Khammu-rabi and Ammi-sadugga, but is dated
in the reign of a king whose name does not occur in the compiler's list.
It reads Am(?)-mu-’SI-DI-DU-an, perhaps Ammu-e’sir-yukan. It is
possible, moreover, that classical mythology has preserved the name of
another prince of the same period. In Ovid's *Metamorphoses*, iv. 212,
mention is made of the Babylonian monarch Orchamus, of whom it is said
that he was seventh in descent from Belus. Orchamus is not an
Assyro-Babylonian name. It actually occurs, however, under the form of
Yar-khamu on contract-tablets which are dated in the

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

reign of Samsu-iluna. <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) Whether it is to
be compared with the Biblical name of Jerahmeel (1 Chr. ii. 25), or
whether it is a mimmated form of the Minæan name of the Moon-god, I do
not know; but its origin must be referred to the dialects of the Arabian
tribes on the borders of Babylonia, and not to the Assyrian language
itself. In any case the name is found on documents of the time of
Khammu-rabi, and consequently it is by no means impossible that the myth
repeated by Ovid may have incorporated the name of a real king.

We must not forget that the passage I have quoted from the astrological
tablet associates the invasion of Babylonia by the Manda with the
departure of the god Bel to Elam. Now about B.C. 2285, or just before
the date assigned by the compiler of the dynastic tablet to the
accession of Khammu-rabi, the goddess Nana of Erech was carried to Elam
by the Elamite king Kudur-nankhundi (see Records of the Past, New
Series, i. p. 10). A mutilated text (*W. A. I.*, iii. 38, No. 2) couples
Kudur-nankhundi with the otherwise unknown Babylonian kings
\[Bel?\]-sum-iddina and Bel-nadin-akhi, but it is probably a later
Kudur-nankhundi to whom reference is here made. What is certain is that,
as the contemporaneous contract-tablets

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

inform us, Khammu-rabi made himself master of Babylonia by the overthrow
of Rim-Sin of southern Chaldæa and his ally "the king of Elam." It was
this event which made Babylonia a homogeneous kingdom, and so
constituted an era of high importance in the annals of the country.

A. H. SAYCE.

<span class="smallcaps">Queen's College, Oxford</span>,  
    *September* 1890.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[viii:1](rp20301.htm#fr_0) The etymology of the
word *limmu* is doubtful. In the bilingual (Assyrian and Aramaic)
tablets it is written ‏לם‎ and ‏לאם‎ in the Aramaic text. In the
Kappadokian cuneiform tablets the "limmu" is frequently named.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[x:1](rp20301.htm#fr_1) Ummu-banit, though Hommel
would read Sin-mubanit.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[x:2](rp20301.htm#fr_2) My reading Ammi-didugga
(*Records of the Past*, New Ser., i. p. 32) must be thus corrected, as
well as the translation of the Assyrian interpretation in which *kittu*
means "justice" and not "established."

<span id="fn_3"></span>[x:3](rp20301.htm#fr_3) In a contract-tablet from
Niffer we even find Ammi-ziduga.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xi:1](rp20301.htm#fr_4) In other Minæan
inscriptions occur the names of ’Ammi-tsaduq and his son ’Ammi-karib, as
well as of the king Waqah-il-tsaduq.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xvi:1](rp20301.htm#fr_5) See Strassmaier: *Die
altbabylonischen Verträge aus Warka* in the *Verhandlungen des fünften
internationalen Orientalisten-Congresses* (1882), ii. x, pp. 95, 98,
100. Among the interesting proper names met with in the tablets
published by Dr. Strassmaier I may notice that of Sabâ, "the Sabæan," as
well as some which exhibit traces of nunnation; *e.g.* Inun-Ea, "the eye
of Ea," Ilun-ka-Rammanu, "thy god is Rimmon."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table of Contents](rp20302)
