[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20305) 
[Next](rp20307) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. III*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

### THE PRECEPTS OF PTAH-HOTEP

<span class="smallcaps">Precepts</span> of the prefect the feudal
lord <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71) Ptah-hotep, under the majesty
of the king of the South and North, Assa, living eternally for ever.

#### I

The prefect, the feudal lord Ptah-hotep says: O God with the two
crocodiles, <span id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72) my lord, the progress of
age changes into senility. Decay falls \[upon man\] and decline takes
the place of youth. <span id="fr_73"></span>[3](#fn_73) A vexation
weighs upon him every day; sight fails, the ear becomes deaf; his
strength dissolves without ceasing. <span id="fr_74"></span>[4](#fn_74)
The mouth is silent, speech fails him; the mind <span
id="fr_75"></span>[5](#fn_75) decays, remembering not the day before.
The whole body <span id="fr_76"></span>[6](#fn_76) suffers. That which
is good

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

becomes <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77) evil; taste completely
disappears. Old age makes a man altogether miserable; the nose is
stopped up, breathing no more from exhaustion. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78) Standing or sitting there is here a
condition (?) of … <span id="fr_79"></span>[3](#fn_79) Who will cause me
to have authority to speak? <span id="fr_80"></span>[4](#fn_80) that I
may declare to him the words of those who have heard the counsels of
former days? And the counsels heard of the gods, who (will give me
authority to declare them?) Cause that it be so and that evil be removed
from those that are enlightened; send the double … <span
id="fr_81"></span>[5](#fn_81)

The majesty of this god says: Instruct him in the sayings of former
days. It is this which constitutes the merit of the children of the
great. All that which makes the soul equal penetrates him who hears it,
and that which it says produces no satiety.

#### II

Beginning of the arrangement of the good saying(s), <span
id="fr_82"></span>[6](#fn_82) spoken by the noble lord, the divine
father, beloved of God, the son of the king, the first-born of his
race, <span id="fr_83"></span>[7](#fn_83) the prefect (and) feudal lord
Ptah-hotep, so as to instruct the ignorant in the knowledge of the
arguments of the good saying(s). It is profitable for him who hears
them, it is a loss to him who shall transgress them.

He says to his son: Be not arrogant because of that which thou knowest;
deal with the ignorant as with the learned; for the barriers of art are
not closed, no artist being in possession of the perfection to which he
should aspire. <span id="fr_84"></span>[8](#fn_84) \[But\] good word(s)
are more difficult to find than

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

the emerald, <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85) for it is by slaves
that that is discovered among the rocks of pegmatite. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_86)

### III

If thou findest a disputant while he is hot, <span
id="fr_87"></span>[3](#fn_87) and if he is superior to thee in ability,
lower the hands, bend the back, do not get into a passion with him. As
he will not let thee destroy his words, it is utterly wrong to interrupt
him; that proclaims that thou art incapable of keeping thyself calm,
when thou art contradicted. <span id="fr_88"></span>[4](#fn_88)

If then thou hast to do with a disputant while he is hot, imitate one
who does not stir. <span id="fr_89"></span>[5](#fn_89) Thou hast the
advantage over him if thou keepest silence when he is uttering evil
words. "The better (of the two) is he who is impassive," say the
bystanders, and thou art right in the opinion of the great.

#### IV

If <span id="fr_90"></span>[6](#fn_90) thou findest a disputant while he
is hot, do not despise him, because thou art not of the same
opinion. <span id="fr_91"></span>[7](#fn_91) Be not angry against him
when he is wrong; away with such a thing. He fights against himself;
require him not \[further\] to flatter thy feelings. <span
id="fr_92"></span>[8](#fn_92) Do not amuse thyself with the spectacle
which thou hast before thee; it is odious, \[it is\] mean, \[it is the
part\] of a despicable soul \[so to do\].

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As soon as thou
lettest thyself be moved by thy feelings, combat this \[desire\] as a
thing that is reproved by the great.

#### V

If thou hast, as leader, to decide on the conduct of a great number of
men, seek the most perfect manner (of doing so) that thy \[own\] conduct
may be without reproach. Justice is great, invariable and assured; it
has not been disturbed since the age of Osiris. To throw obstacles in
the way of the laws, is to \[open\] the way before violence. Shall that
which is below gain the upper hand, if the unjust does not attain to the
place of justice? <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93) even he who says:
I take for myself, of my own free-will; <span
id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94) but says not: I take by \[virtue of\] my
authority. <span id="fr_95"></span>[3](#fn_95) The limitations of
justice are invariable; such is the instruction which every man receives
from his father.

#### VI

\[Inspire not men with fear, \[else\] God will fight against thee\] in
the same manner. If any one asserts that he lives by such means, \[God\]
will take away the bread from his mouth; if any one asserts that he
enriches himself \[thereby\], \[God\] says: I may take \[these riches\]
to myself. If any one asserts that he beats others, \[God\] will end by
reducing him to impotence. Let no one inspire men with fear, this is the
will of God. Let one provide sustenance for \[them\] in the lap of
peace; it will \[then\] be that they will freely give \[what has been
torn from them by terror\].

#### VII

If thou art among the persons seated \[at meat\] in the house of a
greater man than thyself, <span id="fr_96"></span>[4](#fn_96) take that
which he

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

gives \[thee\], bowing to the ground. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97) Regard that which is \[placed\] before
thee, \[but\] point not at it; regard it not <span
id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_98) frequently; he is a blameworthy person who
departs from this rule. Speak not to \[the great man\] more than he
requires, for one knows not what may be displeasing \[to him\]. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[3](#fn_99) Speak when he invites thee and thy word
will be pleasing. <span id="fr_100"></span>[4](#fn_100)

As for the great man who has plenty of means of existence his conduct is
as he himself wishes. He does that which pleases him; if he desires to
repose, he realises his \[intention\]. The great man stretching forth
his hand does that to which \[other\] men do not attain. \[But\] as the
means of existence are under the will of God, one cannot rebel against
it.

#### VIII

If thou art one of those who bring the messages of one great man to
another, conform thyself exactly to that wherewith he has charged thee;
perform for him the commission as he hath enjoined thee. Beware of
altering in speaking the offensive words which one great person
addresses to another; he who perverts the truthfulness of his way, in
order to repeat only what produces pleasure in the words of every man,
great or small, is a detestable person.

#### IX

If thou art an agriculturist, gather the crops (?) in the field which
the great God has given thee, fill not thy mouth in the house of thy
neighbours; <span id="fr_101"></span>[5](#fn_101) it is better to make
oneself dreaded by the possessor. <span id="fr_102"></span>[6](#fn_102)
As for him who, master of his own way of acting, being
all-powerful, <span id="fr_103"></span>[7](#fn_103) seizes \[the goods
of

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

others\] like a crocodile in the midst \[even\] of watchmen, his
children are an object of malediction, of scorn and of hatred on account
of it, while \[his\] father is grievously distressed, and \[as for\] the
mother who has borne \[him\], happy is another rather than
herself. <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104) \[But\] a man becomes a
god when he is chief of a tribe which has confidence in following him.

#### X

If thou abasest thyself <span id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105) in obeying
a superior, thy conduct is entirely good before God. Knowing who ought
to obey and who ought to command, do not lift up thy heart against him.
As thou knowest that in him is authority, be respectful towards him as
belonging to him. Fortune comes only at her own good-will, and her
caprice only is her law; as for him who … <span
id="fr_106"></span>[3](#fn_106) God, who has created his superiority,
turns himself from him and he is overthrown.

#### XI

Be active, <span id="fr_107"></span>[4](#fn_107) during the time of thy
existence, doing more than is commanded. Do not spoil the time of thy
activity; he is a blameworthy person who makes a bad use of his moments.
Do not lose the daily opportunity of increasing that which thy house
possesses. Activity produces riches and riches do not endure when it
slackens.

#### XII

If thou art a wise man, bring up a son who shall be pleasing <span
id="fr_108"></span>[5](#fn_108) to God. If he conforms his conduct to
thy way and occupies himself with thy affairs as is right, do to him all
the good thou canst; he is thy son, a \[person\] attached \[to thee\]
whom thine own self hath begotten. Separate

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

not thy heart from him. … \[But\] if he conducts himself ill and
transgresses thy wish, <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109) if he
rejects all counsel, if his mouth goes according to the evil word,
strike him on the mouth in return. <span id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110)
Give orders without hesitation to those who do wrong, <span
id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_111) to him whose temper is turbulent; and he
will not deviate from the straight path, and there will be no obstacle
to interrupt the way.

#### XIII

If thou art \[employed\] in the *larit*, stand or sit rather than walk
about. Lay down rules for thyself from the first: not to absent thyself
even when weariness overtakes thee. Keep an eye on him who enters
announcing that what he asks is secret; <span
id="fr_112"></span>[4](#fn_112) what is entrusted to thee <span
id="fr_113"></span>[5](#fn_113) is above appreciation and all contrary
argument is a matter to be rejected. He is a god who penetrates into a
place where no relaxation \[of the rules\] is made for the privileged.

#### XIV

If thou art with people who display for thee an extreme affection,
\[saying\]: "Aspiration of my heart, aspiration of my heart, where there
is no remedy! That which is said in thy <span
id="fr_114"></span>[6](#fn_114) heart, let it be realised by springing
up spontaneously. Sovereign master, I give myself to thy opinion. Thy
name is approved without speaking. Thy body is full

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

of vigour, <span id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115) thy face is above thy
neighbours." <span id="fr_116"></span>[2](#fn_116) \[If then thou art
accustomed to this excess of flattery\], and there be an obstacle to
thee in thy desires, then thine impulse is to obey thy passion. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[3](#fn_117) \[But\] he who … according to his
caprice, his soul is …, his body is … <span
id="fr_118"></span>[4](#fn_118) While \[the man who is\] master of
\[his\] soul is superior to those whom God has loaded with his
gifts; <span id="fr_119"></span>[5](#fn_119) the man who obeys his
passion is under the power of his wife (?).

#### XV

Declare thy line of conduct without reticence; give thy opinion in the
council of thy lord; while there are people who turn back upon their own
\[words\] when they speak, so as not to offend him who has put forward a
statement, and answer not in this fashion: <span
id="fr_120"></span>[6](#fn_120) "He is the great man who will recognise
the error of another; and when he shall raise his voice to oppose the
other <span id="fr_121"></span>[7](#fn_121) about it he will keep
silence after what I have said." <span id="fr_122"></span>[8](#fn_122)

#### XVI

If thou art a leader, setting forward thy plans <span
id="fr_123"></span>[9](#fn_123) according to that which thou decidest,
perform perfect actions which posterity may remember, without letting
the words prevail \[with thee\] which multiply flattery, \[which\]
excite pride and produce vanity.

#### XVII

If thou art a leader of peace, listen to the discourse of the
petitioner. Be not abrupt with him; that would trouble him. Say not to
him: "Thou hast \[already\] recounted this." Indulgence will encourage
him to accomplish the

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

object of his coming. As for being abrupt with the complainant because
he described what passed when the injury was done, instead of
complaining of the injury itself, <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124)
let it not be! The way to obtain a clear explanation is to listen with
kindness. <span id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_125)

#### XVIII

If thou desirest to excite respect within \[the house\] thou enterest,
for example \[the house\] of a superior, a friend <span
id="fr_126"></span>[3](#fn_126) or any person of consideration, \[in
short\] everywhere where thou enterest, keep thyself from making
advances to a woman, for there is nothing good in so doing. There is no
prudence in taking part in it, and thousands of men destroy themselves
in order to enjoy a moment, brief as a dream, while they gain death, so
as to know it. It is a villainous *intention* (?), that of a man who
\[thus\] excites himself (?); if he goes on to carry it out, his mind
abandons him. For as for him who is without repugnance for such an
\[act\], there is no good sense at all in him.

#### XIX

If thou desirest <span id="fr_127"></span>[4](#fn_127) that thy conduct
should be good and preserved from all evil, keep thyself from \[every\]
attack of bad humour. <span id="fr_128"></span>[5](#fn_128) It is a
fatal malady which leads to discord, and there is no longer any
existence for him who gives way to it. <span
id="fr_129"></span>[6](#fn_129) For it \[introduces\] *discord* (?)
between fathers and mothers, as well as between brothers and
sisters; <span id="fr_130"></span>[7](#fn_130) it causes the wife
\[and\] the husband to hate each other; it contains all kinds of
wickedness, it embodies all kinds of wrong. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[8](#fn_131) When a man has established his just
equilibrium and walks in this path, there where he makes his dwelling,
there is no room <span id="fr_132"></span>[9](#fn_132) for bad humour.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

#### XX

Be not of an irritable temper as regards that which happens beside
thee; <span id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133) grumble (?) not over thy
\[own\] affairs. Be not of an irritable temper in regard to thy
neighbours; better is a compliment to that which displeases than
rudeness. It is wrong to get into a passion with one's neighbours, to be
no longer master of one's words. <span id="fr_134"></span>[2](#fn_134)
When there is only a little irritation, one creates for oneself an
affliction for the \[time when one will again be\] cool. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[3](#fn_135)

#### XXI

If thou art wise, look after thy house; love thy wife without alloy.
Fill her stomach, clothe her back, these are the cares \[to be
bestowed\] on her person. Caress her, <span
id="fr_136"></span>[4](#fn_136) fulfil her desires during the time of
her existence; it is a kindness which does honour to its possessor. Be
not *brutal* (?); *tact* (?) will influence her better than violence;
her … behold to what she aspires, at what she aims, what she regards. It
is that which fixes her in thy house; if thou repellest her, it is an
*abyss* (?). Open thy *arms* (?) for her, \[respondent\] to her arms;
call her, display to her <span id="fr_137"></span>[5](#fn_137) \[thy\]
love.

#### XXII

Treat <span id="fr_138"></span>[6](#fn_138) thy dependants well, in so
far as it belongs to thee \[to do so\]; \[and\] it belongs to those whom
God has favoured. If any one fails in treating his dependants well it is
said: "He is a person …" As we do not know the events which may happen
to-morrow, he is a wise

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

person by whom one is well treated. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139) When there comes the necessity of
showing zeal, it will \[then\] be the dependants \[themselves\] who say:
"Come on, come on," it good treatment has not quitted (?) the place; if
it has quitted it, the dependants are defaulters.

#### XXIII

Do not repeat any extravagance of language; do not listen to it; it is a
thing which has escaped from a hasty mouth. If it is repeated, look,
without hearing it, towards the earth; say nothing in regard to it.
Cause him who speaks to thee to know what is just, even him who provokes
to injustice; <span id="fr_140"></span>[2](#fn_140) cause that \[which
is just\] to be done, cause it to triumph. As for that which is hateful
according to the law, condemn it by unveiling it. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[3](#fn_141)

#### XXIV

If thou art a wise man, sitting in the council of thy lord, direct thy
thought towards that which is wise. Be silent rather than scatter thy
words. When thou speakest, know that which can be brought against thee.
To speak in the council is an art, and speech is criticised more than
any \[other\] labour; it is contradiction which puts it to the
proof. <span id="fr_142"></span>[4](#fn_142)

#### XXV

If thou art powerful, respect knowledge and calmness of language.
Command only to direct; to be absolute is to run into evil. Let <span
id="fr_143"></span>[5](#fn_143) not thy heart be haughty, neither let it
be mean. Do not let thy orders remain unsaid and cause thy answers to
penetrate; but speak without heat, assume a serious countenance. As for
the vivacity of an ardent heart, temper it; the gentle man penetrates
\[all\] obstacles.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He who agitates
himself all the day long has not a good moment; and he who amuses
himself all the day long keeps not his fortune. Aim at fulness like
pilots; <span id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_144) once one is seated another
works, and seeks to obey \[one's\] orders.

#### XXVI

Disturb not a great man; <span id="fr_145"></span>[2](#fn_145) weaken
not the attention of him who is occupied. <span
id="fr_146"></span>[3](#fn_146) His care is to embrace \[his task\], and
he strips his person through the love which he puts into it. That
transports men to God, \[even\] the love for the work which they
accomplish. Compose \[then thy\] *face* (?) \[even\] in trouble, that
peace may be with thee, when agitation is with … These are the people
who succeed in what they desire. <span id="fr_147"></span>[4](#fn_147)

#### XXVII

Teach \[others\] to render homage to a great man. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[5](#fn_148) If thou gatherest the crop for him among
men, <span id="fr_149"></span>[6](#fn_149) cause it to return fully to
its owner, at whose hands is thy subsistence. \[But\] the gift of
affection is worth more than the provisions <span
id="fr_150"></span>[7](#fn_150) with which thy back is covered. For that
which \[the great man\] receives from thee will enable thy house to
live, without speaking of the maintenance thou enjoyest, which thou
desirest to preserve; <span id="fr_151"></span>[8](#fn_151) it is
thereby \[that\] he extends a beneficent hand, and that in thy home good
things are

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

added to good things. <span id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_152) Let thy love
pass into the heart of those who love thee; cause those about thee to be
loving and obedient.

#### XXVIII

If <span id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_153) thou art a son of the guardians
deputed to watch over the public tranquillity, execute \[thy
commission\] without knowing \[its meaning\], and speak with
firmness. <span id="fr_154"></span>[3](#fn_154) Substitute not for that
which the instructor has said \[what thou believest to be\] his
intention; the great use words as it suits \[them\]. <span
id="fr_155"></span>[4](#fn_155) Thy part is to transmit rather than to
comment upon.

#### XXIX

If thou art annoyed at a thing, <span id="fr_156"></span>[5](#fn_156) if
thou art tormented by some one who is acting within his right, get out
of his sight, and remember him no more <span
id="fr_157"></span>[6](#fn_157) when he has ceased to address thee.

#### XXX

If thou hast become great after having been little, \[if\] thou hast
become rich after having been poor, \[when thou art at the\] head of the
city, know <span id="fr_158"></span>[7](#fn_158) how not to take
advantage of the fact that thou hast reached the first rank, *harden*
(?) not thy heart because of thy elevation; thou art become \[only\] the
steward of the good things of God. <span id="fr_159"></span>[8](#fn_159)
Put not behind thee the neighbour <span id="fr_160"></span>[9](#fn_160)
who is like unto thee; be unto him as a companion.

#### XXXI

Bend thy back before thy superior. Thou art attached to the palace of
the king; thy house is established

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

in its fortune, and thy *profits* (?) are as is fitting. Yet a man is
annoyed at having an authority above himself, <span
id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_161) and passes the period of life in being
vexed thereat. Although that hurts not thy <span
id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_162)… "Do not plunder <span
id="fr_163"></span>[3](#fn_163) the house of thy neighbours, seize not
by force the goods which are beside \[thee\]." Exclaim not then against
that which thou hearest, and do not feel humiliated. It is necessary to
reflect <span id="fr_164"></span>[4](#fn_164) when one is *hindered* (?)
by it that the pressure of authority is felt \[also\] by one's
neighbour.

#### XXXII

Do not make … thou knowest that there are obstacles to the water \[which
comes\] to its hinder part, and that there is no trickling of that which
is in its bosom. Let it not … after having corrupted his heart.

#### XXXIII

If thou aimest at polished manners, call not him whom thou accostest.
Converse with him especially in such a way as not to annoy him. Enter on
a discussion with him only after having left him time to saturate his
mind with the subject of the conversation. If he lets his ignorance
display itself, and if he gives thee an opportunity to disgrace him,
treat him with courtesy rather; proceed not to drive him \[into a
corner\]; do not … the word to him; answer not in a crushing manner;
crush him not; worry him not; in order that in his turn he may not
return \[to the subject\], but depart to the profit of thy
conversation. <span id="fr_165"></span>[5](#fn_165)

#### XXXIV

Let thy countenance be cheerful during the time of thy

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

existence. When we see one departing from the storehouse who has entered
in order to bring his share of provision, <span
id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_166) with his face <span
id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_167)t contracted, it shows <span
id="fr_168"></span>[3](#fn_168) that his stomach is empty and that
authority is offensive \[to him\]. Let not that happen to thee; it is …

#### XXXV

Know those who are faithful to thee when thou art in low estate. Thy
merit \[then\] is worth more than those who did thee honour. His …,
behold that which a man possesses completely. That is of more importance
than his high rank; \[for\] this is a matter \[which passes\] from one
to another. The merit of one's son is advantageous to \[the father\],
and that which he really is is worth more than the remembrance \[of his
father's rank (?)\].

#### XXXVI

Distinguish the superintendent who directs from the workman, for manual
labour is little elevated; the inaction \[of the hands\] is honourable.
If a man is not in the evil way, that which places him \[there\] is the
want of subordination to authority.

#### XXXVII

If thou takest a wife, do not … Let her be more contented than any of
her fellow-citizens. She will be attached \[to thee\] doubly, if her
chain is pleasant. <span id="fr_169"></span>[4](#fn_169) Do not repel
her; grant that which pleases her; it is to her contentment that she
appreciates \[thy\] direction. <span id="fr_170"></span>[5](#fn_170)

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

#### XXXVIII

If thou hearest those things which I have said to thee, <span
id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_171) thy wisdom will be fully advanced.
Although they are the means which are suitable for arriving at the
*Ma*, <span id="fr_172"></span>[2](#fn_172) and it is that which makes
them precious, their memory would recede from the mouth of men. \[But\]
thanks to the beauty of their arrangement \[in rhythm\] all their words
will \[now\] be carried without alteration over this earth
eternally. <span id="fr_173"></span>[3](#fn_173) That will create a
*canvass* (?) to be embellished, whereof the great will speak, in order
to instruct men in its sayings. <span id="fr_174"></span>[4](#fn_174)
After having listened to them \[the pupil\] will become a master, <span
id="fr_175"></span>[5](#fn_175) even he who shall have properly listened
to the sayings because he shall have heard them. Let him win success by
placing himself in the first rank <span id="fr_176"></span>[6](#fn_176);
that is for him a position perfect and durable, <span
id="fr_177"></span>[7](#fn_177) and he has nothing \[further\] to desire
for ever. <span id="fr_178"></span>[8](#fn_178) By knowledge his *path*
(?) is assured, and he is made happy by it on the earth. The wise man is
satiated by knowledge; he is a great man through his own merits. <span
id="fr_179"></span>[9](#fn_179) His tongue is in accord with his

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

mind <span id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_180); just are <span
id="fr_181"></span>[2](#fn_181) his lips when he speaks, his eyes when
he gazes, his ears when he hears. The advantage of his son is to do that
which is just without deceiving himself.

#### XXXIX

To attend \[therefore\] profits the son of him who has attended. To
attend <span id="fr_182"></span>[3](#fn_182) is the result of the fact
that one has attended. A \[teachable\] auditor is formed, because I have
attended. Good when he has attended, good when he speaks, <span
id="fr_183"></span>[4](#fn_183) he who has attended has profited, and it
is profitable to attend to him who has attended. To attend is worth more
than anything \[else\], for it produces love, the good thing that is
twice good. The son who accepts the instruction of his father will grow
old on that account. <span id="fr_184"></span>[5](#fn_184)

What God loves is that one should attend; if one attends not, it is
abhorrent to God. The heart makes itself its own master when it attends
and when it does not attend; \[but\] if it attends, then his heart is a
beneficent \[master\] to a man. <span id="fr_185"></span>[6](#fn_185) In
attending to instruction, a man loves what he attends to, and to do that
which is prescribed is pleasant. When a son attends to his father, it is
a twofold joy \[for both\]; when \[wise\] things are prescribed to him,
the son is gentle towards \[his\] master. Attending to him who has
attended when such \[things\] have been prescribed to him, he engraves
upon \[his\] heart that which is approved by his father; and the
recollection of it is preserved in the mouth of the living who exist
upon this earth.

#### XL

When a son receives the instruction of his father, there is no error in
all his plans. Train thy son to be a teachable

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

man whose wisdom <span id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_186) is agreeable to
the great. Let him direct his mouth <span
id="fr_187"></span>[2](#fn_187) according to that which has been said to
him; in the docility of a son is discovered his wisdom. His conduct is
perfect, while error carries away the unteachable. <span
id="fr_188"></span>[3](#fn_188) To-morrow knowledge will support him,
while the ignorant will be destroyed.

#### XLI

As for the man without experience who listens not, he effects nothing
whatsoever. He sees knowledge in ignorance, profit in loss; he commits
all kinds of error, always accordingly choosing the contrary of what is
praiseworthy. He lives on that which is mortal, in this fashion. His
food are evil words whereat he is filled with astonishment. That which
the great know to be mortal he lives upon every day, flying from that
which would be profitable to him, <span id="fr_189"></span>[4](#fn_189)
because of the multitude of errors which present themselves before him
every day.

#### XLII

A son who attends is like a follower of <span
class="smallcaps">Horus</span>; he is happy after having attended. He
becomes great, he arrives at dignity, he gives the same lesson to his
children. Let none innovate upon the precepts of his father; let the
same precepts form his lessons to his children. "Verily," will his
children say to him, "to accomplish <span
id="fr_190"></span>[5](#fn_190) what thou sayest works marvels."

Cause \[therefore\] that to flourish which is just, in order to nourish
thy children \[with it\]. If the teachers allow themselves to be led
towards evil principles verily the people who understand them not will
speak accordingly, <span id="fr_191"></span>[6](#fn_191) and that being
said to those who are docile, they will act accordingly. Then all the
world considers them \[as masters\] and they inspire confidence in the
public; but their glory endures not so long as would please them. Take
not away \[then\] a word \[from the ancient teaching\], and add one not;
put

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

not one thing in place of another; beware of uncovering \[the rebellious
ideas\] which arise <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192) in thee; but
teach according to the words of the wise. Attend \[if\] thou wishest to
dwell in the mouth of those who shall attend to thy words, when thou
hast entered upon the office of master, that thy words may be upon our
lips … and that there may be a chair from which to deliver thy
arguments. <span id="fr_193"></span>[2](#fn_193)

#### XLIII

Let thy thoughts be abundant \[but\] let thy mouth be under restraint,
and thou shalt argue with the great. Put thyself in unison with the ways
of thy master; cause him to say: "He is my son," so that <span
id="fr_194"></span>[3](#fn_194) those who shall hear it shall say:
"Praise be to \[her who\] has borne him to him!" Apply thyself while
thou speakest; speak \[only\] of perfect things; and let the great who
shall hear thee say: "Twice good \[is\] that which issues from his
mouth! "

#### XLIV

Do that which thy master bids thee. Twice good is the precept of
our <span id="fr_195"></span>[4](#fn_195) father, from whom we have
issued, from his flesh. What he tells us, let it be \[fixed in our\]
heart; to satisfy him greatly let us do for him more than he has
prescribed. Verily a good son is one of the gifts of God, \[a son\] who
does \[even\] better than he has been told \[to do\]. <span
id="fr_196"></span>[5](#fn_196) For his master he does what is
satisfactory, putting himself with all his heart on the part \[of
right\]. <span id="fr_197"></span>[6](#fn_197)

So <span id="fr_198"></span>[7](#fn_198) I shall bring it about that thy
body shall be healthful, that the king shall be satisfied \[with thee\]
in all circumstances, and that thou shalt obtain years of life without
default.

It has caused me on earth to obtain 110 years of life,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

along with the gift of the favour of the king among the first of those
whom their works (?) have ennobled, <span
id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_199) satisfying the king in a place of
dignity.

<span class="smallcaps">Colophon</span>. It is finished, from its
beginning to its end, according to that which is found in writing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[16:1](rp20306.htm#fr_71) See Maspero: *Un
Manuel de Hiérarchie égyptienne*. Maisonneuve, Paris 1889.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[16:2](rp20306.htm#fr_72) Honhen or Osiris, as
is shown by the 43d invocation of the 142d chapter of the Book of the
Dead: "O Osiris, god with the two crocodiles!" But it is Osiris reborn
and regaining, after decline and death, rejuvenescence and vigour.
Chabas (*Zeitschrift*, 1868, p. 10s), studying the stelæ of Horus
standing on the crocodiles, and noticing that this god is named "the
aged who becomes young in his hour, the old man who becomes a child,"
very justly recalls the passage of the *Papyrus Prisse* where Ptah-hotep
invokes the aid of the god with the two crocodiles against the evils of
old age.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[16:3](rp20306.htm#fr_73) Literally "comes upon
newness." Doubtful translation; but I believe with Chabas that *mau*
expresses here the idea of "flourishing" or "brilliant youth" (as in the
Book of the Dead, eh. 87, line 2). *Ahu* seems to be the contrary of
*mau*, so I render it "decline."

<span id="fn_74"></span>[16:4](rp20306.htm#fr_74) We must read *an urd*
and take no account of the *het* which follows and has been erroneously
added by the scribe, accustomed to write the name of the god Urd-het.
Similarly the termination *n Ra* is frequently added erroneously to
*sotep* through the influence of the consecrated formula *sotep n Ra*
"chosen of Ra."

<span id="fn_75"></span>[16:5](rp20306.htm#fr_75) *Papyrus Prisse*, pl.
v.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[16:6](rp20306.htm#fr_76) The carcase.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[17:1](rp20306.htm#fr_77) "Is transformed."

<span id="fn_78"></span>[17:2](rp20306.htm#fr_78) This translation of
the word *tennu*, which I borrow from Chabas, is conjectural.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[17:3](rp20306.htm#fr_79) I cannot read this
passage with certainty.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[17:4](rp20306.htm#fr_80) I am not sure that I
have understood this difficult passage.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[17:5](rp20306.htm#fr_81) I can neither read nor
translate the word.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[17:6](rp20306.htm#fr_82) Ptah-hotep arranges
the good sayings of the past in verses in order to render them
unalterable.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[17:7](rp20306.htm#fr_83) "Of his loins," that
is "legitimate." The meaning of the title has been explained in the
introduction.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[17:8](rp20306.htm#fr_84) Literally "endowed
with his perfections."

<span id="fn_85"></span>[18:1](rp20306.htm#fr_85) Literally "the good
word hides itself more than the emerald." *Teha*, "to hide," is found,
with a slight variation of spelling, in the story of Sinuhit (ll. 4–5 of
the ostrakon discovered by Prof. Maspero).

<span id="fn_86"></span>[18:2](rp20306.htm#fr_86) Literally "being found
by female slaves." The emerald is usually found in pegmatite, a compound
of feldspath and quartz, out of which it was picked. The *Papyrus Ebers*
(lxxxix. 3) informs us that the powder of pegmatite was used in the
composition of a dentifrice.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[18:3](rp20306.htm#fr_87) Literally "in his
hour." A god is said to be "in his hour" when he is warlike. I suppose
the author ridicules the warlike disposition of disputants.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[18:4](rp20306.htm#fr_88) Literally "that
proclaim: it is not to know inaction as regards that which crosses thee,
to maintain it." This inversion is perhaps due to the exigencies of the
rhythm.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[18:5](rp20306.htm#fr_89) Literally "who is in
thy inaction of thy arms."

<span id="fn_90"></span>[18:6](rp20306.htm#fr_90) *Papyrus Prisse*, pl.
vi.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[18:7](rp20306.htm#fr_91) "If thou art not like
\[him\]."

<span id="fn_92"></span>[18:8](rp20306.htm#fr_92) Literally "Call him
not to flatter thy feelings."

<span id="fn_93"></span>[19:1](rp20306.htm#fr_93) Literally "the part of
it" where the feminine pronoun must refer to justice. The phrase seems
to mean that revolutions are occasioned by forgetfulness of the
principles of justice on which society is based.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[19:2](rp20306.htm#fr_94) Literally "I catch for
myself, myself, spontaneously."

<span id="fn_95"></span>[19:3](rp20306.htm#fr_95) Translation very
uncertain.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[19:4](rp20306.htm#fr_96) Comp. Proverbs xxiii.
1. "When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what is
before thee."

<span id="fn_97"></span>[20:1](rp20306.htm#fr_97) Literally "put thyself
on thy nose."

<span id="fn_98"></span>[20:2](rp20306.htm#fr_98) *Papyrus Prisse*, pl.
vii.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[20:3](rp20306.htm#fr_99) "That which is bad to
the heart."

<span id="fn_100"></span>[20:4](rp20306.htm#fr_100) "Is thy word for
being good to the heart."

<span id="fn_101"></span>[20:5](rp20306.htm#fr_101) That is, do not
steal to live.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[20:6](rp20306.htm#fr_102) See ch. vi., where
those are condemned who "fleece" men by terrifying them. It seems that
theft is here considered more blameworthy even than these extortions.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[20:7](rp20306.htm#fr_103) Literally "for the
master of the manner of acting as master of the things." The author
means the powerful man who abuses his power in order to plunder openly
and to place himself above the laws.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[21:1](rp20306.htm#fr_104) This inversion of
the words may be attributed to the exigencies of the rhythm.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[21:2](rp20306.htm#fr_105) Or perhaps "if thou
doest evil."

<span id="fn_106"></span>[21:3](rp20306.htm#fr_106) I have not ventured
to translate this passage, because a study of the rhythm leads me to
suppose that some words are omitted. I believe that half a verse is
lost.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[21:4](rp20306.htm#fr_107) I translate *shes
ab* "activity" because the sense seems to require it. The translation is
necessarily conjectural.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[21:5](rp20306.htm#fr_108) Translation
doubtful.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[22:1](rp20306.htm#fr_109) Or "thy counsels."

<span id="fn_110"></span>[22:2](rp20306.htm#fr_110) Literally "Strike
him on the mouth according to that which it is, such as it behaves
itself, in consequence." It is probable that there is here a sort of
play upon the words, and that the sense is "strike directly against a
bad direction." The sequel seems to state that with disobedient
subordinates it is necessary to give precise and positive orders without
consideration.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[22:3](rp20306.htm#fr_111) Literally "throw, on
account of the 'they act ill,' the order:" *Papyrus Prisse*, pl. viii.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[22:4](rp20306.htm#fr_112) Literally "the
*usekh* is the place of that which he demands." The *usekh* was the hall
in the centre of a building, and consequently protected from intruders.
A "communication *usekh*" would accordingly be a secret communication.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[22:5](rp20306.htm#fr_113) Literally "the
*larit*, the guardianship of the *larit*."

<span id="fn_114"></span>[22:6](rp20306.htm#fr_114) "In his heart."

<span id="fn_115"></span>[23:1](rp20306.htm#fr_115) "Thy flesh is *well
nourished* (?)."

<span id="fn_116"></span>[23:2](rp20306.htm#fr_116) That is, thou art
superior to thy neighbours.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[23:3](rp20306.htm#fr_117) "A contradiction
being to thee in that which pleases thee, thy desire is to obey its
passion.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[23:4](rp20306.htm#fr_118) There are three
words here which I cannot translate.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[23:5](rp20306.htm#fr_119) Literally "has
provided for."

<span id="fn_120"></span>[23:6](rp20306.htm#fr_120) Literally "knowing
this."

<span id="fn_121"></span>[23:7](rp20306.htm#fr_121) When the great man
shall oppose him, who has put forward an error.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[23:8](rp20306.htm#fr_122) He will not be able
to oppose me, because there is no motion in my speech.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[23:9](rp20306.htm#fr_123) *Papyrus Prisse*,
pl. ix.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[24:1](rp20306.htm#fr_124) "And does not
complain of the whole matter on the subject of that,"

<span id="fn_125"></span>[24:2](rp20306.htm#fr_125) "Causing him to
represent the heart is the listening with kindness,"

<span id="fn_126"></span>[24:3](rp20306.htm#fr_126) "Of a lord, of a
brother, and by extension companion, friend."

<span id="fn_127"></span>[24:4](rp20306.htm#fr_127) *Papyrus Prisse*,
pl. x.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[24:5](rp20306.htm#fr_128) Literally "time of
bad humour."

<span id="fn_129"></span>[24:6](rp20306.htm#fr_129) "There being no
existence to him who enters into it."

<span id="fn_130"></span>[24:7](rp20306.htm#fr_130) Literally "the
fathers, men \[and\] women, as well as the brothers, men \[and\] women."

<span id="fn_131"></span>[24:8](rp20306.htm#fr_131) Compare "It is a net
of iniquity."

<span id="fn_132"></span>[24:9](rp20306.htm#fr_132) Not a house of bad
humour."

<span id="fn_133"></span>[25:1](rp20306.htm#fr_133) "On the subject \[of
things which are\] in two halves, on two sides, right and left, at the
side of thee."

<span id="fn_134"></span>[25:2](rp20306.htm#fr_134) Literally "deprived
of the conduct of one's words."

<span id="fn_135"></span>[25:3](rp20306.htm#fr_135) Literally "is a
little difficulty in that, affliction is created in coolness." But the
translation is doubtful.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[25:4](rp20306.htm#fr_136) Literally "anoint
her."

<span id="fn_137"></span>[25:5](rp20306.htm#fr_137) "Make to her." The
translation of the two last lines is uncertain.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[25:6](rp20306.htm#fr_138) *Papyrus Prisse*,
pl. xi.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[26:1](rp20306.htm#fr_139) Literally "the
person is a person well balanced, good treatments \[are\] in him."

<span id="fn_140"></span>[26:2](rp20306.htm#fr_140) Literally "the
unjust being commanded."

<span id="fn_141"></span>[26:3](rp20306.htm#fr_141) Literally "it is
raising the veil from its face."

<span id="fn_142"></span>[26:4](rp20306.htm#fr_142) "Which puts it
according to the measure."

<span id="fn_143"></span>[26:5](rp20306.htm#fr_143) *Papyrus Prisse*,
pl. xii.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[27:1](rp20306.htm#fr_144) I do not know
whether this is the precise rendering, but the object of the chapter is
clear. It is necessary to be moderate in everything; excess of work is
to be avoided like excess of pleasure.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[27:2](rp20306.htm#fr_145) "Let not a great man
be diverted from his hour."

<span id="fn_146"></span>[27:3](rp20306.htm#fr_146) "Of him who is
charged."

<span id="fn_147"></span>[27:4](rp20306.htm#fr_147) "Who cause that
which is loved to prosper." I am not sure of the sense of these last two
phrases.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[27:5](rp20306.htm#fr_148) Literally "teach the
great man that one may honour him, that one may do him honour."

<span id="fn_149"></span>[27:6](rp20306.htm#fr_149) This probably means:
if thou collectest the taxes in the provinces for the governor.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[27:7](rp20306.htm#fr_150) The word also
signifies "offerings."

<span id="fn_151"></span>[27:8](rp20306.htm#fr_151) "With the
consideration, thou lovest that it lives." The taxes levied by the
government pay for the maintenance of its officers, who thereby maintain
their position.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[28:1](rp20306.htm#fr_152) Literally "the
possession."

<span id="fn_153"></span>[28:2](rp20306.htm#fr_153) *Papyrus Prisse*,
pl. xiii.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[28:3](rp20306.htm#fr_154) "Express what thou
dost not comprehend, affirm thy speech."

<span id="fn_155"></span>[28:4](rp20306.htm#fr_155) "As for these great
men, he puts the word in its proper place."

<span id="fn_156"></span>[28:5](rp20306.htm#fr_156) "At a time arrived."

<span id="fn_157"></span>[28:6](rp20306.htm#fr_157) That is, hear no
rancour after being deservedly blamed.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[28:7](rp20306.htm#fr_158) Translation very
doubtful.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[28:8](rp20306.htm#fr_159) "Thou art become the
administrator, the prefect, of the provisions \[which belong\] to God."

<span id="fn_160"></span>[28:9](rp20306.htm#fr_160) "Let there be no
other behind."

<span id="fn_161"></span>[29:1](rp20306.htm#fr_161) "In vexations a
governor in quality of superior, one lives a time of distaste for him."

<span id="fn_162"></span>[29:2](rp20306.htm#fr_162) The text here seems
faulty, some words being wanting as regards both rhythm and sense.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[29:3](rp20306.htm#fr_163) *Papyrus Prisse*,
pl. xiv.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[29:4](rp20306.htm#fr_164) Literally "being one
who knows that …"

<span id="fn_165"></span>[29:5](rp20306.htm#fr_165) Literally "in order
that it may not be his turn not to come, \[and\] that one does not steal
away to the profit of that same."

<span id="fn_166"></span>[30:1](rp20306.htm#fr_166) Literally "the
loaves of communion," probably the part which each had to contribute
from the crops. It is possible, however, that the reference is to
distributions of food by the authorities; the malcontents would then be
those who find that too little is given to them instead of contributors
who think that too much is required from them. But I prefer the first
explanation, since the verb an means "to bring" rather than "to carry
away."

<span id="fn_167"></span>[30:2](rp20306.htm#fr_167) *Papyrus Prisse*,
pl. xv.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[30:3](rp20306.htm#fr_168) "It is the making
known the emptiness of his stomach."

<span id="fn_169"></span>[30:4](rp20306.htm#fr_169) "She being in the
attachment doubly, sweet to her the bond."

<span id="fn_170"></span>[30:5](rp20306.htm#fr_170) "Being her
contentment, she appreciates the work."

<span id="fn_171"></span>[31:1](rp20306.htm#fr_171) The author has
concluded his exposition of the wisdom of the ancients. He now speaks in
his own name, and while eulogising the doctrines he has repeated,
notices with satisfaction the perfect form he has given to them to
prevent them from being effaced from the memory of men and to preserve
them from alteration. Their rhythmic form allows neither omissions nor
variations.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[31:2](rp20306.htm#fr_172) That is to cause
truth and justice to reign.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[31:3](rp20306.htm#fr_173) I do not think that
a clearer statement can be found of the existence of a poetical
language, rhythmically arranged, among the ancient Egyptians.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[31:4](rp20306.htm#fr_174) "The great will
speak above; it is by explaining to a man the word." It therefore
appears that the Precepts of Ptah-hotep were intended to be commented on
by professors, and that there were schools of philosophy.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[31:5](rp20306.htm#fr_175) *Abuu*, "artist," or
"master-workman." Perhaps something analogous to the degree of *magister
artium*.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[31:6](rp20306.htm#fr_176) "Being produced a
good time by being at the head." The reference is possibly to a
competitive examination among the students in order to obtain a public
post.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[31:7](rp20306.htm#fr_177) "Is to him
perfection which endures."

<span id="fn_178"></span>[31:8](rp20306.htm#fr_178) "His complete
satisfaction being for ever."

<span id="fn_179"></span>[31:9](rp20306.htm#fr_179) "Through his good"
or "fortunate time."

<span id="fn_180"></span>[32:1](rp20306.htm#fr_180) With his mind is his
tongue.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[32:2](rp20306.htm#fr_181) *Papyrus Prisse*,
pl. xvi.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[32:3](rp20306.htm#fr_182) Literally "To listen
penetrates by one who has listened."

<span id="fn_183"></span>[32:4](rp20306.htm#fr_183) "Good, listening;
good, speaking." To "listen" includes the idea of "obeying."

<span id="fn_184"></span>[32:5](rp20306.htm#fr_184) Compare Exod. xx.
12. "Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the
land which the Lord thy God giveth thee."

<span id="fn_185"></span>[32:6](rp20306.htm#fr_185) Literally
"life-health-strength of some one is his heart when listening."

<span id="fn_186"></span>[33:1](rp20306.htm#fr_186) *Papyrus Prisse*,
pl. xvii.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[33:2](rp20306.htm#fr_187) Compare chap. xii.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[33:3](rp20306.htm#fr_188) "His ways are
perfect, the bad way takes away the unteachable."

<span id="fn_189"></span>[33:4](rp20306.htm#fr_189) "Departing from his
times because of the multitude of errors."

<span id="fn_190"></span>[33:5](rp20306.htm#fr_190) *Papyrus Prisse*,
xviii.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[33:6](rp20306.htm#fr_191) "Just as that is
\[said\]."

<span id="fn_192"></span>[34:1](rp20306.htm#fr_192) "That which flows in
thee."

<span id="fn_193"></span>[34:2](rp20306.htm#fr_193) Literally "Thy
arguments being on their chair."

<span id="fn_194"></span>[34:3](rp20306.htm#fr_194) *Papyrus Prisse*,
pl. xix.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[34:4](rp20306.htm#fr_195) Literally "The
precept of his father, from whom he has issued."

<span id="fn_196"></span>[34:5](rp20306.htm#fr_196) "Making increase on
that which is said to him."

<span id="fn_197"></span>[34:6](rp20306.htm#fr_197) "He does the *Ma*,
putting himself with all his heart on its ways."

<span id="fn_198"></span>[34:7](rp20306.htm#fr_198) That is, by means of
these precepts.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[35:1](rp20306.htm#fr_199) "The two hands have
made them noble." The whole expression signifies "the first" or
"ancients."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](rp20307)
