[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index.md) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20310.md) 
[Next](rp20312.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. III*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### LETTERS TO EGYPT FROM BABYLONIA, ASSYRIA, AND SYRIA, IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY B.C.

<span class="smallcaps">Translated by the Editor</span>

<span class="smallcaps">An</span> account has already been given in
these volumes of the recent discovery of cuneiform tablets at
Tel-el-Amarna in Upper Egypt, which prove to contain official
correspondence addressed to the Egyptian monarchs of the Eighteenth
Dynasty, Amenôphis III and his son, Amenôphis IV, Khu-n-Aten, "The
Heretic King" (*Records of the Past*, new ser., vol. ii. pp. 57 *sq*.)
One statement, however, in that account requires correction, in view of
the letters from the king of Mitanni, which have now been published.
Queen Teie, the mother of Amenôphis IV, was not the daughter of
Duisratta or Dusratta, the Mitannian king; the daughter of the latter
prince was Tadukhepa, the wife of Amenôphis IV. We are still in the dark
as to the parentage of Teie, and Prof. Maspero may be right in
considering her to be of Egyptian origin, possibly even a sister of
Amenôphis III.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

In the following pages I have given translations of the most important
letters, from a historical point of view, which have yet been published.
They are mostly to be found in the magnificent publication of Messrs.
Winckler and Abel, entitled *Mittheilungen aus den orientalischen
Sammlungen* (Berlin, Spemann, 1889, 1890), of which two parts have
appeared containing the texts of a considerable number of the Tel
el-Amarna tablets at Berlin and Cairo. The promptitude and carefulness
with which they have been edited contrasts favourably with the tardiness
of the authorities of the British Museum in putting the collection of
Tel el-Amarna tablets that exists there at the service of scholars. Of
the eighty-one tablets now in the British Museum four only have been
published (by Mr. Budge in the *Proceedings of the Society of Biblical
Archæology*, June 1888). A few passages in the letters have been
translated by Dr. Winckler in his *Bericht ueber die Thontafeln von
Tel-el-Amarna* in the *Sitzungsberichte* of the Berlin Academy, 1888
(No. xxiii), and Dr. Zimmern has translated four of the texts in the
*Zeitschrift für Assyriologie*, v. (1890). Three of these are the same
as Nos. 2, 3, and 10 translated by myself in the following pages.

An unexpected light is cast by these letters on the literary education
and intercourse which prevailed throughout the ancient civilised world
from the Euphrates to the Nile in the century before the Exodus. The
government of Egypt extended as far

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

as Northern Syria, its political influence as far as the frontiers of
Assyria. But the culture of Western Asia had its primitive home in
Babylonia; it was the language and complicated script of Chaldæa which
were taught and studied in the distant countries of the west, and which
the educated gentleman was required to learn. Egypt exported gold from
the mines which had been opened in the desert, and were worked by
convicts and the captives taken in the Asiatic campaigns of the
Eighteenth Dynasty.

These Asiatic campaigns, however, had tended to Semitise the governing
class in Egypt. The king married into the families of Asiatic princes
and filled his court with Asiatic officials. Amenôphis IV even became a
convert to a Semitic faith, and endeavoured to substitute a belief in
the supreme Semitic Baal, who revealed himself in the fiery orb of the
sun, for the old religion of his people. His dominions in Palestine and
Syria were placed under governors who bore Semitic names, mostly of a
purely Canaanitish stamp. Even the vizier himself has a name which is
otherwise not found outside the Bible, although the name of the
Carthaginian goddess Dido indicates that it was not unknown to the
Phœnicians. This is Dûdu, the Dodo of the Old Testament, etymologically
related to David. Dûdu's two sons, Aziru and Khâi, bear names which are
equally Biblical in their character.

The two letters of Aziru to his father show pretty

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

plainly the position occupied by Dûdu in the kingdom of the Pharaoh. He
alone is addressed like the Pharaoh himself as "my lord," and even his
son calls himself his "servant." Perhaps, however, the most significant
phrase is that which speaks of "Dûdu and the king my lord and the
nobles." We are reminded of what the Pharaoh said to Joseph, "Only in
the throne will I be greater than thou" (Gen. xli. 40).

The letters of Aziru possess a further interest. They bring the Hittites
before us in the act of descending from their old homes in the north
upon the fertile plains and cities of the Semites in the south. Kadesh,
on the Orontes, has not yet become their southern capital; but they are
already threatening Tunip, the Tennib of modern days, to the northwest
of Aleppo. A century later, when the civil wars were ended, which the
death of Amenôphis IV and his attempt to introduce a Semitic religion
and a Semitic government into Egypt had occasioned, when the stranger
and his faith were driven from the land, and the Nineteenth Dynasty was
founded by that "new king which knew not Joseph," the Hittites were
encamped on the northern threshold of Palestine. The Egyptian armies
again marched into Asia, but even the power of Ramses II was unable to
dislodge them from the post they had gained, and the utmost he could do
was to check their southward advance. The chief result of his war was to
weaken both Egyptians and Hittites, and to exhaust the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

cities of Canaan, so that they became an easy prey a few years later to
the invading tribes of Israel.

Assur-yuballidh, king of Assyria, whose letter to Amenôphis IV I have
placed first in my series of translations, is mentioned towards the
commencement of the so-called "Synchronous History of Babylon and
Assyria" (line 8) as a contemporary of the Babylonian king Kara-Urus. We
learn from the letter the name of his father, Assur-nadin-akhi, who must
therefore be inserted between Assur-yuballidh and Buzur-Assur (see "List
of the Kings of Assyria," *Records of the Past*, new ser., vol. ii. p.
206). Buzur-Assur, as we learn from the "Synchronous History," was a
contemporary of Burna-buryas, another correspondent of Amenôphis IV.

A third royal correspondent of the Egyptian monarchs was Dusratta or
Tusratta or Duisratta—for the name is written in these various ways—the
king of Mitanni. According to the Assyrian inscriptions Mitanni was the
district on the eastern bank of the Euphrates which lay opposite to
Carchemish. It is called Maten in the Egyptian inscriptions, and was
included in the kingdom of Nahrina, the Aram-Naharaim, or "Aram of the
two rivers," of Scripture, of which Chushan-rish-athaim was king (Judges
iii. 8). It is possible that an obscure passage in one of the letters
signifies that the Mitannian prince claimed sovereignty also over
Khani-rabbat or eastern Kappadokia. Among the tablets now at Berlin is a
long letter from Dusratta,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

written in cuneiform characters, but in the language of Mitanni, which
seems unlike any other hitherto known. We gather from it that the father
and predecessor of Dusratta was Sutarna, who is stated in an inscription
on an Egyptian scarab to have sent his daughter Kirkipa as a wife to
Amenôphis III in the tenth year of the latter's reign, along with 317
attendants. Artatâmas, the grandfather of Dusratta, had also married his
daughter to Thothmes IV, so that for three generations the rulers of
Egypt and Mitanni had been connected by marriage with one another.

The people of Mitanni, however, did not speak a Semitic language, and it
is probable that they did not belong to the Semitic race. But they had
adopted the Semitic adoration of the winged solar disk, and along with
it, in all probability, some portion of the Semitic worship of Baal. It
was this worship and adoration which Amenôphis IV attempted to force
upon his subjects. The Semitic tendencies of the court and the dominance
of Semitic strangers from Canaan and Syria were due not so much to the
intermarriages with the royal family of Mitanni as to the Egyptian
conquest of Palestine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I.—Letter of Assur-yuballidh, King of Assyria, to Amenophis IV,
King of Egypt](rp20312.md)
