[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20307) 
[Next](rp20309) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. III*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

### THE DAUGHTER OF THE PRINCE OF BAKHTAN

<span class="smallcaps">The Horus</span>, powerful bull, laden with
diadems and established as solidly in his kingdoms as the god <span
class="smallcaps">Atumu</span>; <span id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_200)
the <span class="smallcaps">Horus</span>, the conqueror mighty with the
sword and destroyer of the Barbarians, the king of the two <span
class="smallcaps">Egypts</span>, Usir-ma-rî Sotpuri-rî, son of the Sun,
Ramses Mî-amun, beloved of <span class="smallcaps">Amon-Ra</span>,
master of <span class="smallcaps">Karnak</span> <span
id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_201) and of the circle of the gods, the lords
of <span class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>, the good god, the son of <span
class="smallcaps">Amon</span>, offspring of <span
class="smallcaps">Mut</span>, begotten by <span
class="smallcaps">Har-ma-khuiti</span>, glorious child of the universal
Lord, engendered by the divine husband of his own mother, king of <span
class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>, prince of the tribes of the desert, the
sovereign who governs the Barbarians, scarcely issued from his mother's
womb he directed wars and commanded valiantly while still in the egg,
like a bull which presses forward, for he is a bull, is this king, a god
who issues forth on the day of battles like <span
class="smallcaps">Montu</span>,—who is very valiant like the son of
<span class="smallcaps">Nuit</span>. <span
id="fr_202"></span>[3](#fn_202)

Now his Majesty was in <span class="smallcaps">Naharina</span> <span
id="fr_203"></span>[4](#fn_203) as was his custom each year, and the
princes of every country came bending under the weight of the offerings
which they brought to the souls of his Majesty; <span
id="fr_204"></span>[5](#fn_204) the fortresses brought their

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

tributes, gold, silver, lapis-lazuli, *mafkait*, <span
id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205) (and) all the fragrant woods of Arabia,
on their backs and walking in order one behind the other. The prince of
<span class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> sent his tributes and set his
eldest daughter at the head of the procession, to salute his Majesty and
to ask life from him. She was a very beautiful woman, who pleased his
Majesty more than anything else; taking her as his chief royal wife he
inscribed her with the name of Nofiru-rî, and when he had returned to
<span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span> he assured to her the treatment of
a royal wife. <span id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_206)

And it came to pass in the fifteenth year, the 22d day of the month
Payni, when his Majesty was at <span class="smallcaps">Thebes</span> in
the temple *Nakhthonit-ropeu*, <span id="fr_207"></span>[3](#fn_207)
chaunting the praises of his father <span
class="smallcaps">Amon-Râ</span> the master of <span
class="smallcaps">Karnak</span>, during his excellent festival in
southern <span class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>, <span
id="fr_208"></span>[4](#fn_208) the favourite residence of the god since
the creation, behold a message is brought to his Majesty: "There is
there a messenger of the prince of <span
class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> who is come with numerous presents for
the royal wife." Conducted before his Majesty with his presents, he
says, invoking his Majesty: "Glory to thee, O Sun of foreign peoples, to
thee by whom we live," and when he had uttered his adoration before his
Majesty, he proceeds to speak to his Majesty: "I come to thee, sire, my
master, concerning Bint-Rashit, <span id="fr_209"></span>[5](#fn_209)
the younger sister of thyself and the royal wife Nofiru-rî, for a malady
penetrates her limbs. Let thy Majesty order a sage to set forth to see
her." Then the king said: "Bring me the scribes of the double house of
life who are attached to the palace."

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

When they were come, his Majesty said: "Behold I have summoned you in
order that you may hear these words: 'Bring me one of yourselves who is
expert in his heart, a scribe skilful with his fingers.'" When the royal
scribe Thothimhabi had entered the presence of his Majesty, his Majesty
commanded him to betake himself to <span
class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> with this messenger. As soon as the
sage had arrived in <span class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> he found
Bint-Rashit possessed of a demon, and he found the demon who possessed
her difficult to combat. The prince of <span
class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> thereupon sent a second message to his
Majesty, saying: "Sire, my master, let thy Majesty order a god to be
sent to combat the demon."

When the messenger reached his Majesty in the 23d year, the 1st day of
the month Pakhons, the day of the festival of <span
class="smallcaps">Amon</span>, while his Majesty was at <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>, behold his Majesty spoke again in the
presence of <span class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> in <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>, the god of good counsel, saying:
"Excellent lord, behold me again before thee, concerning the daughter of
the prince of <span class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span>." <span
id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_210) Then <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> In <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>, the god of good counsel, was
transported towards <span class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> who governs
destiny, the great god who drives away strangers, and his Majesty said
before the face of <span class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> in <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>, the god of good counsel: "Excellent
lord, if it pleases thee to turn thy face to <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> who governs

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

destiny, the great god who drives away strangers, he will be sent to
<span class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span>." And the god twice decidedly
nodded assent with the head. <span id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_211) Then
his Majesty said: "Grant unto him thy virtue so that I may send the
Majesty of this god to <span class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> in order
to deliver the daughter of the prince of <span
class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span>." And <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> in <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>, the god of good counsel, violently
nodded assent twice and transmitted his magical virtue to <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> who governs destiny in <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>, four times. <span
id="fr_212"></span>[2](#fn_212) His Majesty ordered <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> who governs destiny in <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span> to be despatched on a great bark,
escorted by five boats, by chariots and by numerous horses which walked
on the right and on the left. When the god had arrived in <span
class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span>, after an interval of a year and five
months, behold the prince of <span class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> came
with his soldiers and his generals before <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> who governs destiny, and flung himself
on his face, saying:

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

"Thou comest to us, thou rejoinest us according to the orders of the
king of the two <span class="smallcaps">Egypts</span>, Usir-ma-rî
Sotpu-ni-rî." Behold as soon as the god was gone to the place where
Bint-Rashit was and had made magical passes over the daughter of the
prince of <span class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span>, she found herself well
at once, and the demon which was with her said in the presence of <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> who governs destiny in <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>: "Come in peace, great god who drivest
away the foreigner; <span class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> is thy city,
its people are thy slaves, and I myself am thy slave. I shall depart
therefore to the place from whence I am come, in order to satisfy thy
heart concerning the matter which brings thee, but let thy Majesty order
a day of festival to be celebrated for me and for the prince of <span
class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span>." The god made his prophet a sign of
approval with the head, meaning to say: "Let the prince of <span
class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> present a great offering to this
demon." Now while this was taking place between <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> who governs destiny in <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span> and the demon, the prince of <span
class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> was there with his army stricken with
terror. And when a great offering had been presented to <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> who governs destiny in <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span> and to the demon of the prince of <span
class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span>, and a day of festival had been
celebrated in their honour, the demon departed in peace to the place
which pleased him, according to the order of <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> who governs destiny in <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>.

The prince of <span class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> rejoiced greatly as
well as the people of <span class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span>, and he
discoursed with his heart saying: "Since this god has been given to
<span class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> I shall not send him back to
<span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>." Now after the god had remained
three years and nine months in <span class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span>,
as the prince of Bakhtan was lying on his bed, he saw in a dream the god
leaving his shrine in the form of a golden hawk which flew on high
towards <span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>; when he awoke he was in a
shiver. Then he said to the prophet of <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> who governs destiny in <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>: "This god who dwelt with us, he returns
to <span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>; let his chariot go to <span
class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>!" The prince of <span
class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> allowed the god to start for <span
class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>, and he gave him numerous presents of all
good things as well as a strong escort of soldiers and

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

horses. When they reached <span class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> who governs destiny in <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span> entered the temple of <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> in <span class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>
the good counsellor; he set the presents which the prince of <span
class="smallcaps">Bakhtan</span> had given him before <span
class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span> in <span
class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>, the good counsellor, he kept nothing
for his own temple. Now <span class="smallcaps">Khonsu</span>, the good
counsellor in <span class="smallcaps">Thebes</span>, re-entered his
temple in peace the 19th day of the month Mekhir, the 33d year of the
king Usir-ma-rî Sotpu-ni-rî, living for ever like the Sun.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_200"></span>[40:1](rp20308.htm#fr_200) \[Otherwise
transcribed Tum.\]

<span id="fn_201"></span>[40:2](rp20308.htm#fr_201) North of Thebes on
the eastern bank of the Nile.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[40:3](rp20308.htm#fr_202) The son of Nouit is
Sit-Typhon, in this kind of phraseology.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[40:4](rp20308.htm#fr_203) Written differently
from the orthography Naharanna in the Tale of the Doomed Prince.
Naharanna was the country between the Orontes and the Balikh, which
falls into the Euphrates (on the eastern bank) a little north of the
Khabour. It is included in the Aram-Naharaim of Scripture.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[40:5](rp20308.htm#fr_204) We know that the Sun
had seven souls and fourteen doubles (Bergmann: *Hier. Inschriften*, pl.
62, 2). The Pharaoh, as son of the Sun and himself the Sun, had also
several *biu* or "souls," and the conquered endeavoured to win them by
presents.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[41:1](rp20308.htm#fr_205) The word *mafkait*
expresses emerald, green jasper, green feldspar, various oxides of
copper, malachite; in short, every kind of precious stone which is
naturally coloured green.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[41:2](rp20308.htm#fr_206) The daughter of the
prince of the Hittites, Khiti-saru, similarly received from Ramses II on
her arrival in Egypt the title of "chief royal wife" and the Egyptian
name of Ma-ur-nofiru-rî, of which the name of the princess in the text
is probably only an abridged form.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[41:3](rp20308.htm#fr_207) These words, which
literally signify "the strong one, the lady of the temples," probably
denote one of the chapels in the temple of Karnak.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[41:4](rp20308.htm#fr_208) Southern Thebes was
the modern Luxor; the festival, consequently, must have been the
festival of the patron deity in the temple of Luxor.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[41:5](rp20308.htm#fr_209) The name of this
princess appears to be formed from the Semitic *bint*, "daughter," and
the Egyptian *rashit*, "joy," the signification being "Daughter of joy."

<span id="fn_210"></span>[42:1](rp20308.htm#fr_210) In order to
understand this passage, we must remember that according to Egyptian
belief every statue of a god in a temple had in it a *ka* or "double,"
detached from the actual person of the god and so an incarnation of the
god different from his other incarnations. The god Khonsu had in his
temple at Karnak two statues at least, each of which was animated by an
independent "double," whom the rites of consecration had detached from
the god. One of them represented Khonsu, immutable in his perfection,
tranquil in his greatness, and not directly interfering with the affairs
of men; this was Khonsu Nofir-hotpu, whose name I have paraphrastically
translated "the god of good counsel." The other statue represented a
more active Khonsu who governed the affairs of mankind and drove away
foreigners (that is to say enemies) from Egypt (*Khonsu p. iri sokhru m
uisit, nutir âa, sahru shemau*). The first Khonsu, being considered the
more powerful, we know not why, does not condescend to go himself to
Syria, but sends the second Khonsu after having transferred to the
latter his own powers (E. de Rouge: *Etude sur une stéle*, pp. 15–19).

<span id="fn_211"></span>[43:1](rp20308.htm#fr_211) The statues, being
animated by a "double," declared their will either by the voice or by
rhythmical movements. We know that queen Hatshopsitu "heard" the god
Amon commanding her to send an expedition to the "Coasts of Incense," in
order to fetch the perfumes necessary for religious worship. The kings
of the twentieth and twenty-first dynasties, less fortunate than she,
were gratified only with gestures, which were always the same; when they
put a question to a god the statue remained motionless if the answer
were negative, but twice shook the head violently if it were favourable.
The inquiries were made in accordance with a fixed ritual, the chief
points in which have been preserved in contemporaneous texts.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[43:2](rp20308.htm#fr_212) The innate virtue of
the gods (*sa*) seems to have been regarded by the Egyptians as a sort
of fluid analogous to that called by us "the electric fluid" or the
like. It was transmitted by the imposition of hands and mesmeric
"passes" over the neck or spine of the patient; this was called *sotpu
sa*, which we may render "to make passes." The ceremony whereby the
first Khonsu transferred his virtue to the second is frequently
represented on the monuments in the scenes where a statue of a god is
making passes over a king. The statue, which was usually of wood, had
movable limbs; it embraced the king and passed its hand four times over
the nape of his neck while he knelt before it with his back turned
towards it. Every statue received at its consecration not only a
"double" but also a portion of the magical virtue of the deity whom it
represented; the "*sa* of life" was "behind it," which animated and
penetrated within it so far as the statue did not lessen the amount of
the magical virtue by transmission. The god himself, whom this perpetual
flow of the *sa* would have ended by exhausting, replenished himself
with a supply of it from a mysterious source in the other world: we are
not told how it happened that the source could not be exhausted
(Maspero: *Bulletin critique de la religion égyptienne*. *Le Rituel du
Sacrifice funéraire*, pp. 17–18, 28–29).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](rp20309)
