[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index.md) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20306.md) 
[Next](rp20308.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. III*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### THE DAUGHTER OF THE PRINCE OF BAKHTAN AND THE SPIRIT THAT POSSESSED HER

<span class="smallcaps">Translated by Prof. Maspero</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> monument which has preserved for us
this curious narrative is a stele discovered by Champollion in the
temple of Khonsu at Thebes, and removed from thence in 1886 by Prisse
d’Avennes, by whom it was given to the Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris.
The text has been published by Prisse d’Avenues: *Choix de Monuments
égyptiens* (Paris, 1847); and Champollion: *Monuments de l’Égypte et de
la Nubie* (Paris, 1846–76, vol. ii. pp. 280-90); and translated by
Birch: *Notes upon an Egyptian Inscription in the Bibliothèque Impériale
of Paris* (in the *Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature*, iv.
new series); and E. de Rougé: *Étude sur une Stèle égyptienne
appartenant à la Bibliothèque Impériale* (in the *Journal Asiatique*,
Aug. 185 6, Aug. 1857, June and Aug. 1858).

Champollion had already studied the text and has cited many phrases from
it in his works. It was sumptuously reproduced on a single sheet at

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

the Imperial Printing-Press for the Paris Exhibition of 1855 under the
superintendence of E. de Rougé.

Little has been added by later works to de Rougé's results. Translations
of it have been given by Brugsch in his *History of Egypt* (English
translation, 2d edit., ii. pp. 191–4), and by Maspero in his *Contes
égyptiens*, ii. pp. 209–224.

The narrative presents the appearance of an official document. The
Ramses recorded in it was believed to be the twelfth of the name who
belonged to the twentieth dynasty, and efforts were made to discover the
country of Bakhtan in the map. The account begins with a royal protocol
in the name of a sovereign who has the same names and *prænomina* as
Ramses II or Sesostris. Next come dates which follow a definite order
throughout the text; the details of the cult of the deity and of the
Pharaonic ceremonial are described with scrupulous exactitude. The whole
possesses such a character of probability that the inscription was
considered historical until quite recently. Prof. Erman, however, has
shown with much sagacity that we must recognise in it a pure fiction
invented by the priests of Khonsu in order to heighten the glory of the
god and the importance of his temple; see A. Erman: *Die Bentreschstele*
in the *Zeitschrift für aegyptische Sprache*, 1883, pp. 53–60.

Prof. Erman has made it clear that the forgers intended to assign the
narrative to the reign of Ramses II, and has thus relieved us from an

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

imaginary Pharaoh. He has brought the redaction of the story down to the
Ptolemaic period, but I believe that I can attribute it to the earlier
days of the Ethiopian invasions, when the high-priest of Amon was about
to fall, and the great priesthoods which still existed at Thebes were to
endeavour by all the means in their power to inherit the influence which
the fallen priesthood had exercised.

The narrative refers to a belief which is common in popular literature;
a spirit has entered the body of a princess and struggles against the
exorcists who have been commissioned to expel it, consenting to depart
only on certain conditions. The story furnishes us with the simplest and
most ancient form of the belief. A modern Egyptologist has adopted it as
the subject of a novelette (H. Brugsch: *Des Priesters Rache, eine
historisch beglaubigte Erzählung aus der aegyptischen Geschichte des
zwölften Jahrhunderts vor Christus*, in the *Deutsche Revue*, v. pp.
15–41).

Prof. Erman has noted in the narrative an affectation of archaism and
somewhat serious errors of language. We can understand that the priests
of Khonsu have endeavoured to imitate the language of the period to
which they attributed the monument. We can also understand that they
could not be equally successful everywhere in maintaining an archaistic
tone, and have thus at times committed errors. The sentences are badly
constructed, the expression of ideas is poor, the phrase curt and flat.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moreover, they
have assigned to a king of the nineteenth dynasty methods of government
which belonged only to sovereigns of the twentieth. Ramses II, devout as
he was, would never have considered it necessary to submit to the
approval of the gods all the affairs of state; it was the last
successors of Ramses III who introduced the custom of consulting the
statue of Amon upon every occasion. With these reservations it may be
admitted that the text offers no further difficulties to the
interpreter, and with a little attention can be easily translated; like
the *Story of the Two Brothers* it can be advantageously placed in the
hands of beginners in Egyptian.

The stele is surmounted by a tableau in which one of the scenes in the
story is enacted before our eyes. On the left, the bark of Khonsu, the
good counsellor, is carried on the shoulders of eight porters and is
followed by two priests reading prayers; the king, standing before it,
offers incense to it. On the right, the bark of Khonsu, which regulates
the destinies of Thebes, is figured, carried by four men only, for it is
smaller than the other; the priest who offers incense to it is the
prophet of Khonsu who regulates the destinies of Thebes,
Khonsu-hâ-nutir-nibit. It is probably the return of the second god to
Thebes which is thus illustrated: the first Khonsu comes to receive the
second, and the priest and king each render equal homage to his
divinity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20308.md)
