[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eoc06)  [Next](eoc08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410203565/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Ethics of Confucius*, by Miles Menander Dawson, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

### CHAPTER II

#### SELF-DEVELOPMENT

THE characteristics of the superior man having been presented, it is in
logical order to examine the faculties and qualities which Confucius
would have one cultivate to attain this ideal state. First in importance
is the will.

**The Will.** "Their purposes being rectified, they cultivated
themselves."

By these words in "The Great Learning" (Text, v. 5) it is meant that
when there is no conflict of aims, of duties and desires, when one wills
what he wishes, and with all his heart singly and clearly wishes what he
wills, then and not till then does the will become clear and firm and
strong.

The man is his will; back of his will is his purpose; and back of his
purpose, his desire. If his knowledge enable him to make right choices,
he should be sincere, his desires should be disciplined, his purpose
lofty, and, resting thereupon as on a rock, his will fixed and
immovable. That is character.

Confucius puts it: "If the will be set on virtue,

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

there will be no practice of wickedness." (Analects, bk. iv., c. iv.)
True; for when the will rests upon set purpose, based upon purified
desire, born of knowledge and discriminating investigation of phenomena,
nothing can undermine it!

This rectification of the antecedent conditions is what the sage refers
to when he says: "To subdue one's self and return to propriety is
perfect virtue" (Analects, bk. xii., c. 1), and again: "The firm, the
enduring, the simple, and the unpretentious are near to virtue."
(Analects, bk. xiii., c. xxvii.)

That the will is proved by its resistance rather than its impelling
force, Mencius says in this: "Men must be resolute about what they will
not do and then they are able to act with vigor." (Bk. iv., pt. ii., c.
viii.)

The same is meant, *i.e.*, that if one's trust is thus grounded, nothing
external can shake his determination, when Confucius says: "The
commander of the forces of a large state may be carried off, but the
will of even a common man cannot be taken from him." (Analects, bk. ix.,
c. xxv.) So speaks Ibsen who puts into the mouth of Brand:

"That one cannot him excuses,  
 But never that he does not will."

Confucius refuses to accept the excuse of inability unless one actually
expires in a supreme effort to achieve. Therefore, when his disciple,
Yen K‘ew, said: "It is not that I do not delight in your

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

doctrines, but my strength is insufficient," he admonished him: "They
whose strength is insufficient give over in the middle of the way, but
now you do but set limits unto yourself." (Analects, bk. vi., c. x.)

The scorn of craven compromise is well voiced in this: "Tsze-Chang said,
'When a man holds fast virtue, but without seeking to enlarge it, and
credits right principles, but without firm sincerity, what account can
be made of his existence or non-existence?'" (Analects, bk. xix., c.
ii.)

That the path of duty leads to the very brink of the grave—and beyond
it—Confucius says in no uncertain language: "The determined scholar and
the man of virtue will not seek to live at the expense of injuring their
virtue. They will even sacrifice their lives to preserve their virtue
complete." (Analects, bk. xiv., c. viii.) "The man who in the view of
gain thinks of righteousness, who in the view of danger is prepared to
give up his life, and who does not forget an old agreement, however far
back it extends—such a man may be reckoned a complete man." (Analects,
bk. xiv., c. xiii., v. 2.)

His disciple, Tsze-Chang, said of this: "The scholar, beholding
threatened danger, is prepared to sacrifice his life. When the
opportunity for gain is presented to him, he thinks of righteousness."
(Analects, bk. xix., c. i.)

This picture, which to uninstructed mortals may seem dark and
forbidding,—it should not

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

seem so, since to die is before every man and few can hope to have so
noble an end,—Confucius did not always hold before the eyes of his
disciples, however, but on the contrary justly declared, in the face of
their craven dread: "Virtue is more to man than either fire or water. I
have seen men die by treading upon fire or water, but I have never seen
a man die by treading the path of virtue." (Analects, bk. xv., c.
xxxiv.)

It costs really nothing to will that which is good and beneficial; the
cost is all on the other side. That one sacrifices, is pure delusion;
the pleasure as well as the solid benefit is to be found where the
enlightened will would bear us. Such conduct is heroic to contemplate;
but it is simple truth and not merely personal praise which Confucius
spake of another: "With a single bamboo dish of rice, a single gourd
dish of drink, and living in a mean, narrow lane, while others could not
have endured the distress, he did not allow his joy to be affected by
it." (Analects, bk. vi., c. ix.)

It might, indeed it ought and would, be true of any other, if unspoiled;
and, as he has well said: "For a morning's anger, to wreck one's life
and involve the lives of his parents, is not this a case of delusion?"
(Analects, bk. xii., c. xxi., v. 3.)

And, while not so strikingly and obviously true, this statement holds
for every aberration from the path of duty, into which one may believe
himself led by reason of the greater pleasure and satisfaction that it
seems to offer, be it what it may.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The beauty, the
compensations and relaxations of the upward course are thus set forth by
the sage: "Let the will be set on the path of duty! Let every attainment
of what is good be firmly grasped! Let perfect virtue be emulated! Let
relaxation and enjoyment be found in the polite arts!" (Analects, bk.
vii., c. vi.)

To the instructed mind there is nothing uninviting in this prospect; and
low and mind-destroying pleasures and comforts which are in fact, though
not apparently, lower and more destructive are well abandoned for these
higher, simpler, keener, and more abiding satisfactions. Confucius puts
it also more explicitly thus: "To find enjoyment in the discriminating
study of ceremonies and music; to find enjoyment in speaking of the
goodness of others; to find enjoyment in having many worthy
friends:—these are advantageous. To find enjoyment in extravagant
pleasures; to find enjoyment in idleness and sauntering; to find
enjoyment in the pleasures of feasting: these are injurious." (Analects,
bk. xvi., c. v.)

Even reverses and hardships have their lesson and reward if one but meet
them with resolution; for as Mencius says: "When Heaven is about to
confer a great office on any man, it first disciplines his mind with
suffering and his bones and sinews with toil. It exposes him to want and
subjects him to extreme poverty. It confounds his undertakings. By all
these methods it stimulates his

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

mind, hardens him, and supplies his shortcomings." (Bk. vi., pt. ii., c.
xv., v. 2.)

This development of the will, which is the development of the man, is
therefore not a thing to terrify or repel. Instead, it is mastery,
power, sway, achievement—that for which the mind of man longs
unceasingly. And it comes of itself, if the basis for it has been safely
and carefully laid in purified desires and righteous aims, without
effort, without strain, without pain or penalty.

"Is virtue a thing remote?" asked the sage; and answered: "I wish to be
virtuous, and lo, virtue is at hand!" (Analects, bk. vii., c. xxix.)

What, then, is this will? What, this virtue? The disciples of Confucius
handed the secret of it down from one to another, in these words: "The
doctrine of our master is to be true to the principles of our nature and
the benevolent exercise of them to others." (Analects, bk. iv., c. xv.,
v. 2.)

That the joy of well-doing is more than comparable with the pleasure of
abandonment to sensual playing with elemental appetites, is said in
these words of Wu, reported in the "Shu King": "I have heard that the
good man, doing good, finds the day insufficient; and that the evil man,
doing evil, also finds the day insufficient." (Pt. v., bk. i., sect. 2)

**Fortitude.** When the will accords completely with the purpose and the
desire, courage follows necessarily; for, if one desires a given result,
designs to compass it, and wills to achieve it, it

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

can only mean that he is not fearful about it but instead is cool and
determined. As it costs nothing to will, when the purpose are rectified;
so, when the will is clear and firm, it costs nothing to be brave.
Therefore in "The Great Learning" it is said that by this course,
"unperturbed resolve is attained." Confucius elsewhere puts it: "To see
what is right and not to do it, is want of courage." (Analects, bk. ii.,
c. xxiv., v. 2.)

For if one see what is right, he should think sincerely about it,
without self-delusion; and, thinking thus, his desires and his purposes
should be rectified and therefrom the will to do right will flow. And if
he see the truth and do not do these things, it is plainly want of
courage—the courage to cast aside comfortable delusions, to think
sincerely and be undeceived. When undeceived and with desire and resolve
purified, the will and courage follow inevitably.

Confucius again refers to this, saying: "When you have faults, do not
fear to abandon them." (Analects, bk. i., c. viii., v. 4.) This is also
the gist of the following injunction from the "Li Ki" (bk. xv., v. 22):
"Do not try to defend or conceal what was wrong in the past."

So also speaks Yueh in the "Shu King": "Do not be ashamed of mistakes
and so proceed to make them crimes!" (Pt. iv., bk. viii., sect. v. I.)

The fear here referred to is doubtless both the fear of discomfort and
the fear of the prying eyes

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

and the caustic tongues of others. To this craven dread, reference is
made when Tsze-Hea says: "The inferior man is sure to gloss his faults."
(Analects, bk. xix., c. viii.) The remedy for it, Confucius demonstrates
in these brave words: "I am fortunate! If I have any faults, people are
sure to know them." (Analects, bk. vii., c. xxx., v. 3.)

Thus Mencius puts it: "When any one told Tsze-loo that he had a fault,
he rejoiced." (Bk. ii., pt. i., c. viii., v. 1.)

Again speaking in the "Yi King" in praise of the son of the Yen family,
Confucius says: "If anything that he did was not good, he was sure to
become conscious of it; and, when he knew it, he did not do the thing
again." (Appendix iii., v. 42.)

So, also, King Thang is represented in the "Shu King" as saying: "The
good in you I will not dare to keep concealed; and for the evil in me, I
will not dare to forgive myself." (Pt. iv., bk. iii., v. 3.)

And in the "Shu King," also, the great Shun is reported to have said:
"When I am doing wrong, it is yours to correct me. Do not concur to my
face and when you have retired, speak otherwise!" (Pt. ii., bk. iv., I.)

Fearlessness Confucius ever named as an attribute of the superior man,
saying (Analects, bk. xiv., c. xxx., v. 1): "The way of the superior man
is threefold, but I am not equal to it. Virtuous,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

he is free from anxieties; wise, he is free from perplexities; bold, he
is free from fear"; and he presents this opposite picture (Analects, bk.
iv., c. ii.): "They who are without virtue cannot abide long either in a
condition of poverty and hardship or in a condition of enjoyment."

This is even more strikingly presented in the following: "Having not and
yet affecting to have, empty and yet affecting to be full, straitened
and yet affecting to be at ease! It is difficult with such
characteristics to have constancy." (Analects, bk. vii., c. xxv., v. 3.)

And in this contrast: "The superior man is satisfied and composed, the
ordinary man is always full of distress." (Analects, bk. vii., c.
xxxvi.)

The cowardice of such concern about the future as sets one to
speculating and worrying is condemned in the "Li Ki" (bk. xv., 22) as
follows: "Do not try . . . to fathom what has not yet arrived."

The sage was not unaware that boldness may be the result of ignorance as
well as of knowledge, that it may be madness and folly instead of clear
sanity and wisdom. It was concerning such that Confucius spoke when he
said of the superior man: "He hates those who have valour only and are
unobservant of propriety. He hates those who are forward and determined
and at the same time of contracted understanding." (Analects, bk. xvii.,
c. xxiv., v. 2.)

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

That the bravery of the superior man and the bravado of the inferior
should be distinguished, is the gist of the following saying: "Men of
principle are sure to be bold, but those who are bold may not always be
men of principle." (Analects, bk. xiv., c. v.)

The absolute need of fearlessness, Mencius enjoins in this which he puts
into the mouth of Mang She-Shay: "I look upon not conquering and
conquering in the same way. To measure the enemy and then advance, to
calculate the chances of victory and then engage—this is to stand in
dread of the opposing force. How can I make certain of conquering? But I
can rise superior to all fear." (Bk. ii., pt. i., c. ii., v. 5.)

The shame of moral cowardice is well set forth by Confucius in the " Yi
King, "thus: "If one be distressed by what need not distress him, his
name is sure to be disgraced." (Appendix iii., sect. ii., c. v.)

What, then, may the superior man fear? The answer, disclosing that upon
which the courage of the superior man rests securely, is in this query:
"They sought to act virtuously and they did so; and what was there for
them to repine about?" (Analects, bk. vii., c. xiv., v. 2.)

The freedom from fear which is here referred to costs no effort; if the
precedent conditions have been fulfilled, it is their natural and
necessary consequence and appears in the noble attributes of the
superior man, to which Confucius often

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

adverted, as thus: "The superior man has neither anxiety nor fear."
(Analects, bk. xii., c. iv., v. t.) "When internal examination discovers
nothing wrong, what is there to be anxious about, what is there to
fear?" (Analects, bk. xii., c. iv., v. 3.)

Poise. "To this"—*i.e.*, to unperturbed calm—"succeeds tranquil poise.
In this poise is found deliberation."

This passage from "The Great Learning" (Text, v. 2) aims to enforce that
it is not enough that one should be resolute and composed in the
presence of danger; he must ever be calm and resolute. Thus the sage has
said: "What the superior man seeks, is in himself; what the ordinary man
seeks, is in others." (Analects, bk. xiv., c. xxviii.) And his disciple,
Tsang, says: "The superior man in his thoughts does not go out of his
place." (Analects, bk. xiv., c. xxviii.)

In the "Yi King" (appendix ii., c. iii.), it is put thus: "The superior
man does not in his thoughts go beyond the position in which he is."

And thus, also: "The influence of the world would make no change in him;
he would do nothing merely to secure fame. He can live withdrawn from
the world without regret; he can experience disapproval without a
troubled mind. . . . He is not to be torn from his root." (Appendix iv.,
c. ii., v. 41.)

In the "Li Ki" this is much expatiated upon, in part only as follows:
"The scholar keeps himself free from all stain; . . . he does not go
among

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

those who are low, to make himself seem high, nor set himself among
those who are foolish, to make himself seem wise; . . . he does not
approve those who think as he, nor condemn those who think differently;
thus he takes his stand alone and pursues his course, unattended." (Bk.
xxxviii., v. 15.)

The reward for this attainment of perfect poise is described in the "Yi
King" (appendix iii., sect. i., c. i., v. 8), in these words: "With the
attainment of such ease and such freedom from laborious effort, the
mastery is had of all principles under the sky."

And the mode and manner of it are portrayed in the same book (appendix
iii., sect. ii., c. v., v. 44) by this saying attributed to Confucius:
"The superior man composes himself before trying to move others; makes
his mind at rest and easy, before he opens his mouth; determines upon
his method of intercourse with others, before he seeks anything of
them."

The central conception is that the man should be so balanced that,
instead of giving unconscious reactions or semi-conscious responses to
stimuli from without, every response, however promptly delivered in
speech or act, should be purposive—the consequence of intelligent
understanding and resolve.

Mencius said of himself (bk. ii., pt. i., c. ii., v. 1): "At forty I
attained to an unperturbed mind"; and Confucius of himself (Analects,
bk. vi., c.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

xxvii.): "There may be those who do this or that, without knowing why. I
do not do so."

The sage also eulogizes the balanced, self-centred man in no uncertain
terms, as follows: "He with whom neither calumny which slowly soaks into
the mind, nor insults that startle like a wound to the flesh, are
successful, may indeed be called intelligent; yea, he with whom neither
soaking calumny nor startling insults are successful may be called
far-seeing." (Analects, bk. xii., c. vi.)

Here are yet other words of penetrating wisdom concerning the advantages
of this perfect poise and calm: "He who does not anticipate attempts to
deceive him nor think beforehand of his not being believed, and yet
apprehends these things readily when they occur, is he not a man of
superior worth?" (Analects, bk. xiv., c. xxxviii.)

Mencius also characterizes such a man as follows: "When he obtains the
desired position to practise virtue for the good of the people; when
disappointed in that ambition to practise virtue for himself; to be
above the power of riches and honours to corrupt, of poverty and a mean
condition to swerve and of might and sway to bend—these characterize the
great man." (Bk. iii., pt. ii., c. ii., v. 3.)

Confucius deemed it indispensable for a ruler to thus possess his soul.
Alone it would make a ruler good, if not indeed great. Therefore, he

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

says: "May not Shun be instanced as having governed efficiently without
exertion? What did he do? He did nothing but gravely and reverently
occupy his imperial seat." (Analects, bk. xv., c. iv.)

And again in these enthusiastic words: "How majestic was the manner in
which Shun and Yu held possession of the empire, as if it were nothing
to them!" (Analects, bk. viii., c. xviii.)

How this singleness of purpose and this perfect poise of soul,
unsuspected during an uneventful life, when great occasion arises, stand
forth and reveal the man, is the burden of this saying: "The superior
man cannot be known in little matters but he may be entrusted with great
concerns." (Analects, bk. xv., c. xxxiii.)

**Self-Control.** " Want of forbearance in small matters confounds great
plans." (Analects, bk. xv., c. xxvi.)

The need for constancy and self-control is often urged by the sage, as
thus: "Inconstant in his virtue, he will be visited with disgrace."
(Analects, bk. xiii., c. xxii., v. 2.) In the "Shu King," I Yin is
represented as expressing this sentiment: "Be careful to strive after
the virtue of self-restraint and to cherish far-reaching plans." (Pt.
iv., bk. v., sect. 1, 2.)

What is emphasized in these passages, is that he who has formed worthy
conceptions of the significance of life and correct designs for
accomplishing its ends must not permit himself, at

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

unguarded moments, to be surprised into revelations of deeper-seated
longings, by the unexpected presentation of opportunities for the safe
enjoyment of sensual delights or by the excitement of rage or terror or
other unworthy emotion.

It is well said in the "Shi King" (Minor Odes of the Kingdom, decade v.,
ode 2): "Men who are grave and wise, though they drink, are masters of
themselves. Men who are benighted and ignorant become slaves of drink
and more so, daily. Be careful, each of you, of your conduct! What
Heaven confers, when once lost, will not be regained."

The necessity for reflection and consideration, though it be but
momentary, before responding to any impulse from without, either in
speech or in action, instead of the automatic, animal response of a
curse or a blow, a smile or a caress, or whatever it may be when one is
played upon, is always present in the mind of the sage. It is
significantly expressed thus: "Ke Wan Tze thought thrice and then acted.
When the Master was informed of it, he said: 'Twice may do.'" (Analects,
bk. v., c. xix.)

That even greater prudence in speech is desirable, is indicated by this
reply to the inquiry of Tsze-kung: "What constitutes the superior man? "
"He acts before he speaks and afterwards speaks in accordance with his
act." (Analects, bk. ii., c. xiii.)

Reasons for reticence are given in several passages,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

from which these are culled: "The Master said, 'The superior man is
modest in his speech but exceeds in his actions.'" (Analects, bk. xiv.,
c. xxix.) "This man seldom speaks; when he does, he is sure to hit the
point." (Analects, bk. xi., c. xiii., v. 3.) "When a man feels the
difficulty of doing, can he be otherwise than cautious and slow in
speaking?" (Analects, bk. xii., c. iii., v. 3.) "The reason why the
ancients did not readily give utterance to their words was because they
feared lest their deeds should not come up to them." (Analects, bk. iv.,
c. xxii.)

The prudence of this course is illustrated in the "Shi King" (Major
Odes, decade iii., ode 2) by this apt comparison: "A flaw in a mace of
white jade may be ground away, but a word spoken amiss cannot be
mended."

This is expatiated upon by the sage as follows: "Hear much and put aside
the points of which you are in doubt, while you speak cautiously at the
same time of others;—then you will afford few occasions for blame. See
much and put aside the things which seem perilous, while you are
cautious at the same time in carrying the others into practice;—then you
will have few occasions for repentance." (Analects, bk. ii., c. xvii.,
v. 2.)

And when Fan Ch‘e asked about perfect virtue, Confucius replied in
practical terms: "It is, in retirement, to be sedately grave; in the
management of business, to be reverently attentive; in

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

intercourse with others, to be strictly sincere." (Analects, bk. xiii.,
c. xix.)

The portrait of such a man is well drawn in these outlines: "Looked at
from a distance, he appears stern; when approached, he is mild; when he
is heard to speak, his language is firm and decided." (Analects, bk.
xix., c. ix.)

By this is not meant mere obstinacy, but firmness, based upon resolve,
resting in turn on rectified purpose, that in turn upon clarified and
illuminated desire, and all upon intelligent investigation and
determination of facts. Therefore, he has also said: "The superior man
is correctly firm, and not firm merely." (Analects, bk. xv., c. xxxvi.)

Dignity also accompanies this aplomb or mental and moral balance, as a
consequence and not as a thing which must be thought about and striven
for—simple dignity which comes as naturally as the bloom upon the peach
or upon the cheek of youth or maiden—never to be confounded with
arrogance. Of this, we learn: "The superior man has dignified ease
without pride. The ordinary man has pride without dignified ease."
(Analects, bk. xiii., c. xxvi.)

**Moderation.** "Sincerely hold fast the due mean." (Analects, bk. xx.,
c. i., v. 1.)

"The Master said: 'Alas, how the path of the mean is not walked in!'"
(Doctrine of the Mean, c. v.)

An entire book, bearing the title: "The Doctrine

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

of the Mean," consisting chiefly of sayings of Confucius upon this
subject, survives. The following account of its origin is found in the
introduction: "This work contains the law of the mind which was handed
down from one to another in the Confucian School till Tsze-tsze (the
grandson of Confucius), fearing lest in the course of time errors should
arise about it, committed it to writing and delivered it to Mencius."

What is meant by "the mean" is the virtue which the ancient Greeks
especially praised under the name of temperance. It is defined in the
"Li Ki" as follows: "Pride should not be allowed to grow. The desires
should not be indulged. The will should not be gratified to the full.
Pleasure should not be carried to excess." (Bk. i., sect. i., pt. i., c.
ii.)

Confucius attached great importance to this idea, saying: "Perfect is
the virtue which is according to the mean. They have long been rare
among the people who could practise it." (Doctrine of the Mean, c. iii.)

He also said: "I know how it is that the path of the mean is not walked
in; the knowing go beyond it and the stupid do not come up to it. I know
how it is that the path of the mean is not understood; the men of
talents and virtue go beyond it, and the worthless do not come up to
it." (Doctrine of the Mean, c. iv., v. 1.)

The difficulty, indeed the well-nigh impossibility, of attaining this
perfect self-control was appreciated

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

by Confucius, who often spoke of it, saying: "All men say, 'We are
wise'; but happening to choose the path of the mean, they are not able
to keep it for a round month." (Doctrine of the Mean, c. vi.)

And again: "The empire, its states, and its families may be perfectly
ruled, dignities and emoluments may be declined, naked weapons may be
trampled under the feet, but the course of the mean cannot be attained
to." (Doctrine of the Mean, c. ix.)

And in another place he says: "The good man tries to proceed according
to the right path, but when he has gone half-way he abandons it."
(Doctrine of the Mean, c. xi., v. 2.)

Yet he does not overemphasize this nor fail to recognize that this path
is as frequently found by the lowly and humble as by those who are
conscious of greatness. He says, instead: "The path is not far from man.
When men try to pursue a course which is far from the common indications
of consciousness, this course cannot be considered the path." (Doctrine
of the Mean, c. xiii., v. 1.)

Mencius in two places reverently echoes this sentiment, as follows: "The
path of duty lies in what is near and men seek for it in what is remote;
to follow it is easy and men seek it among arduous undertakings." (Bk.
iv., pt. i., c. xi.) "The way of truth is like a great road. It is not
hard to find it. The trouble is only that men will not look for it. Go
home and seek it and you will

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

find many ready to point it out." (Bk. vi., pt. ii., c. ii., v. 7.)

This strange but necessary combination of simplicity and complexity, of
things easy and things difficult to understand, is well set forth in the
following cryptic language: "The way of the superior man may be found in
its simple elements in the intercourse of common men and women, in its
utmost reaches it shines brightly through Heaven and earth." (Doctrine
of the Mean, c. xii., v. 4.)

Confucius finds the starting point for following the path of the mean in
this, that one should be natural, should be himself. The whole picture
of what is fundamentally necessary and of what result may be hoped for
is in the following from the "Doctrine of the Mean" (c. xiv.):

"The superior man does what is proper to the station in which he is, he
does not desire to go beyond this. In a position of wealth and honour he
does what is proper to a position of wealth and honour; in a poor and
low position, he does what is proper to a poor and low position;
situated among barbarous tribes, he does what is proper to a situation
among barbarous tribes; in a position of sorrow and difficulty, he does
what is proper to a position of sorrow and difficulty.

"The superior man can find himself in no position in which he is not
himself. In a high situation he does not treat with contempt his
inferiors, in a low situation he does not court the favour of

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

his superiors. He rectifies himself, and seeks for nothing from others,
so that he has no dissatisfaction.

"He does not murmur against Heaven nor grumble against men. Thus it is
that the superior man is quiet and calm, waiting for the appointments of
Heaven, while the inferior man walks in dangerous paths, looking for
lucky occurrences."

This path, according to Confucius, lies before every man. It is put thus
in the "Doctrine of the Mean" in a passage deemed by Chinese scholars to
refer to Confucius only: "It waits for the proper man, and then it is
trodden. Hence it is said, 'Only by perfect virtue can the perfect path
in all its courses be realized.' Therefore the superior man honours his
virtuous nature and maintains constant inquiry and study, seeking to
carry it out to its breadth and greatness, so as to omit none of the
most exquisite and minute points which it embraces, and to raise it to
its greatest height and brilliancy, so as to pursue the course of the
mean." (C. xxvii., v. 4, 5, 6.)

The qualities of the man who follows the path of the mean are matters
about which the author of the "Doctrine of the Mean" becomes
enthusiastic, indulging in declarations such as these: "It is only he,
possessed of all sagely qualities that can exist under Heaven, who shows
himself quick in apprehension, clear in discernment, of far-reaching
intelligence and all-embracing knowledge, fitted to exercise rule;
magnanimous,

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

generous, benign and mild, fitted to exercise forbearance; impulsive,
energetic, firm and enduring, fitted to maintain a firm grasp;
self-adjusted, grave, never swerving from the mean and correct, fitted
to command reverence; accomplished, distinctive, concentrative, and
searching, fitted to exercise discrimination; all-embracing is he, and
vast, deep, and active as a fountain, sending forth, in their due
seasons, his virtues." (Doctrine of the Mean, c. xxxi., v. 1, 2.)

Confucius rarely held out any actual, earthly reward, external to the
man, for any line of conduct; and indeed above all other attitudes of
mind, he praised that which considered solely the thing to be done and
not the reward for doing it. Yet as to certain consequences which flow
from following the path of the mean, the "Doctrine of the Mean" was not
silent, but said of him who follows it consistently: "Wherever ships and
carriages reach, wherever the strength of man penetrates, wherever the
heavens overshadow and the earth sustains, wherever the sun and moon
shine, wherever frost and dew fall, all who have blood and breath
unfeignedly honour and love him." (C. xxxi., v. 3.)

**Righteousness.** "Such deliberation results in achievement of the ends
of being."

These words from "The Great Learning" (Text, v. 2) raise the question:
What is life's object? Confucius elsewhere answers it: "Man is born for
uprightness. If a man lose his uprightness

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

and yet live, his escape is the result of mere good fortune." (Analects,
bk. vi., c. xvii.)

Tsang Tze, according to Mencius, attributes this also to Confucius: "If
on self-examination, I find I am not upright, shall I not be in fear
even of a poor man in his loose garments of hair-cloth? If on
self-examination I find that I am upright, I will go forward against
thousands and tens of thousands." (Mencius, bk. ii., pt. i., c. ii., v.
7.)

It is to this, also, that Confucius refers when he says: "Let every man
consider virtue as what devolves upon himself; he may not yield the
performance of it even to his teacher." (Analects, bk. xv., c. xxxv.)

That it comes naturally and easily if the purpose has been rectified and
the will is clear and strong, he says in these words: "If the will be
set on virtue, there will be no practice of wickedness." (Analects, bk.
iv., c. iv.)

The life which is devoid of purity and rectitude, he regards as thrown
away. Righteousness should reign in men's hearts and in their lives. Its
name and how desirable a thing it is should be upon their lips every
day; for of this he speaks as follows: "When a number of people are
together for a whole day without their conversation turning on
righteousness, and when they are fond of carrying out a narrow
shrewdness, theirs is indeed a hard case." (Analects, bk. xv., c. xvi.)

Cunning shrewdness he regarded as utterly inconsistent with rectitude,
saying: "Who says

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

of Wei-chang Kao that he is upright? One begged some vinegar of him and
he begged it of a neighbour and gave it to him." (Analects, bk. v., c.
xxiii.)

That righteousness is of the man and not only of his deed, Mencius thus
affirms: "Kao Tze has never understood righteousness. He makes it a
thing external." (Bk. ii., pt. i., c. ii., v. 15.)

The attainment of righteousness of thought and conduct, then, is the aim
of all who wish, in conformity with the art of living, to achieve a
well-spent life. Perfect and complete rectitude is, of course, not a
*sine qua non* in order that one should be a superior man; for the word
"superior" is relative. Confucius says: "Superior men, and yet not
always virtuous, there have been, alas! But there has never been an
inferior man who was at the same time virtuous." (Analects, bk. xiv., c.
vii.)

Among the descriptions of the superior man, we find these which bear
upon the same subject; for the most part they have already been quoted,
but it is necessary to reconsider them here: "The superior man thinks of
virtue, the ordinary man thinks of comfort. The superior man thinks of
sanctions of law, the ordinary man of favours." (Analects, bk. iv., c.
xi.) "The mind of the superior man is conversant with righteousness, the
mind of the ordinary man is conversant with gain." (Analects, bk. iv.,
c. xvi.) "The superior man holds righteousness to be of the highest

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

importance." (Analects, bk. xvii., c. xxiii.) "The superior man in all
things considers righteousness essential." (Analects, bk. xv., c. xvii.)

Mencius thus identifies righteousness as the normal attribute of man:
"Benevolence is the tranquil habitation of man and righteousness his
straight path. Alas for them who leave the tranquil habitation
tenantless and dwell not therein and who turn away from the straight
path and pursue it not!" (Bk. iv., pt. i., c. x., v. 2, 3.)

Nine things, as regards which one must keep watch over himself, are
enumerated by Confucius as follows: "The superior man has nine things
which are subjects with him of thoughtful consideration. In regard to
the use of his eyes, he is anxious to see clearly. In regard to the use
of his ears, he is anxious to hear distinctly. In regard to his
countenance, he is anxious that it should be benign. In regard to his
demeanour, he is anxious that it should be respectful. In regard to his
speech, he is anxious that it should be sincere. In regard to his doing
of business, he is anxious that it should be reverently careful. In
regard to what he doubts about, he is anxious to question others. When
he is angry, he thinks of the difficulties his anger may involve him in.
When he sees gain to be got, he thinks of righteousness." (Analects, bk.
xvi., c. x.)

Some of the qualities which go to make up rectitude of demeanour and
conduct are recorded in this passage, with appropriate statements as

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

to their advantages: "If you are grave, you will not be treated with
disrespect. If you are generous, you will win all. If you are sincere,
people will repose trust in you. If you are earnest, you will accomplish
much. If you are kind, this will enable you to employ the services of
others." (Analects, bk. xvii., c. vi.)

And in the "Li Ki" (bk. vii., sect. ii., 19), the following are given as
essentials of right-living: "What are the things which men consider
right? Kindness in a father, filial piety in a son; gentleness in an
elder brother, obedience in a younger; righteousness in a husband,
submission in a wife; kindness in elders, deference in juniors;
benevolence in a ruler, loyalty in a minister. These ten are things
which men consider right. To speak the truth and work for harmony are
what are called things advantageous to men. To quarrel, plunder, and
murder are things disastrous to men."

The philosophy, the sequence, even the causation of it are contained in
this, from the same book: "He who knows how to exemplify what a son
should be, can afterwards exemplify what a father should be. He who
knows how to exemplify what a minister should be, can afterwards
exemplify what a ruler should be. He who knows how to serve others, can
afterwards employ them." (Bk. vi., sect. i., 20.)

Perhaps there are traces of an ancient freemasonry—or did they merely
presage the newer symbolism?—in this, from the "Yi King" (appendix

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

iv., sect. ii., c. ii., 6): "The plumb signifies correctness; the
square, righteousness." There are several such passages in the ancient
books of the Chinese.

Self-righteousness is far from what the sage has in mind. Indeed, such a
conception could not be harboured by him who said: "I am fortunate. If I
have any faults, people are sure to know them" (Analects, bk. vii., c.
xxx., v. 3); and again: "In letters I am perhaps equal to other men, but
the character of the superior man, carrying out in his conduct what he
professes, is what I have not yet attained to." (Analects, bk. vii., c.
xxxii.) As the sage puts it: "To have faults and not to reform them,
this indeed should be pronounced having faults." (Analects, bk. xv., c.
xxix.)

He also said concerning himself: "If some years were added to my life, I
would give fifty to the study of the Yi, and then I might come to be
without great faults" (Analects, bk. vii., c. xvi.); and he especially
praised the selection by Keu Pih-yuh of a messenger who, when asked,
"What is your master engaged in?" replied: "My master is anxious to make
his faults few, but has not yet succeeded." (Analects, bk. xiv., c.
xxvi.)

And the necessity for frequent introspection and unsparing criticism of
self is thus enjoined: "Therefore, the superior man examines his heart
that there may be nothing wrong there, and that he may have no cause for
dissatisfaction with himself." (Doctrine of the Mean, c. xxxiii., v. 2.)

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

That righteousness may—and, indeed, must, in order to be practicable by
mortals—coexist with the presence of many shortcomings and may even be
reflected in them, Confucius indicates in this shrewd remark: "By
observing a man's faults, it may be known that he is virtuous."
(Analects, bk. iv., c. vii.)

Not that one is to hug this to his soul in self-justification and
self-indulgence, for it is written: "Hold faithfulness and sincerity as
first principles, and be moving continually toward what is right! "
(Analects, bk. xii., c. x., v. 1.) He would not lightly excuse or
condone the abandonment of virtue; for is it not he "who in the view of
gain thinks of righteousness," that is pronounced "a complete man"?
(Analects, bk. xiv., c. xiii., v. 2.) "The determined scholar and the
man of virtue," he also said, "will not seek to live at the expense of
injuring their virtue. They will even sacrifice their lives to preserve
their virtue complete." (Analects, bk. xv., c. viii.) Mencius also puts
forth this idea in another dress: "I prize life indeed but there is that
which I prize more than life and therefore I will not seek to preserve
it by improper means. I shrink from death indeed but there is that which
I shrink from more than death, and therefore there are occasions when I
will not avoid danger." (Bk. vi., pt. i., c. x., v. i.)

Confucius had no notion of palliating the offence of one who abandons
right-doing; for he said of

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

this: "If a superior man abandon virtue, how can he fulfil the
requirements of the name? The superior man does not, even for the space
of a single meal, act contrary to virtue. In moments of haste, he
cleaves to it. In seasons of danger he cleaves to it." (Analects, bk.
iv., v. 2, 3.)

And this constancy he again adverts to, sagely: "The virtuous rest in
virtue; the wise desire virtue." (Analects, bk. iv., c. ii.) Yet he
laments: "I have not seen a person who loved virtue, or one who hated
what is not virtuous. He who loved virtue, would esteem nothing above
it. He who hated what is not virtuous, would practise virtue in such a
way that he would not allow anything that is not virtuous to approach
his person. Is any one able for one day to apply his strength to virtue?
I have not seen the case in which his strength would be insufficient.
Should there possibly be such a case, I have not seen it." (Analects,
bk. iv., c. vi.)

Yet he despairs of constant righteousness; for he says elsewhere: "To
subdue one's self and return to propriety is perfect virtue. If a man
for one day subdue himself and return to propriety, all under heaven
will ascribe perfect virtue to him." (Analects, bk. xii., c. i., v. 1.)
And likewise: "If a man in the morning hear the right way, he may die in
the evening without regret." (Analects, bk. iv., c. viii.)

**Earnestness.** "Wheresoever you go, go with all your heart!" (Shu
King, pt. v., bk. ix., 2.)

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

These words are ascribed to the illustrious Wu or to Khang, his son. The
injunction which Ibsen puts into the mouth of Brand:

"Be what thou art, with all thy heart—  
 Not piecemeal, only, and in part!"

seems but a modern echo, or reaffirmation, of this sentiment of
thousands of years ago.

In the "Shu King," also, I Yin is made to say: "What attainment can be
made without anxious thought? What achievement without earnest effort?"
(Pt. iv., bk. vi., sect. iii., 2.)

Mencius puts it strongly thus: "Now chess-playing is but a small art;
but without giving his whole mind to it and bending his will to it, a
man cannot excel in it." (Bk. vi., pt. i., c. ix., v. 3.)

The absolute sincerity of thought which has been found prerequisite to
the acquisition of sound learning, the formation of right desires, and
the planning of the art of life, must ripen into earnestness in conduct
and candour of speech. Else were it fruitless and unavailing. As much is
embraced in this primary injunction of Confucius: "Hold faithfulness and
sincerity as first principles!" (Analects, bk. i., c. viii., v. 2.)

Among the nine things which are with the superior man subjects "of
thoughtful consideration," he includes these: "In regard to his speech,
he is anxious that it be sincere. In regard to his doing

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

of business, he is anxious that it should be reverently careful."
(Analects, bk. xvi., c. x.)

These resulting virtues of speech and action were two of the "four
things which the Master taught: Letters, ethics, devotion of spirit, and
truthfulness." (Analects, bk. vii., c. xxiv.) And urgently did he enjoin
each of his disciples "to give one's self earnestly to the duties due to
men." (Analects, bk. vi., c. xx.)

That this should come naturally and easily, without strain or striving,
Mencius says in this: "The great man does not think beforehand of his
words that they may be sincere nor of his actions that they may be
resolute; he simply speaks and does what is right." (Bk. iv., pt. ii.,
c. xi.)

The opposite Mencius finds in this: "The disease of men is this:—that
they neglect their own fields and go to weed the fields of others and
that what they require from others is great, while what they lay upon
themselves is light." (Bk. vii., pt. ii., c. xxxii., v. 3.)

The evil results of uninstructed earnestness in conduct, *i.e.*,
earnestness unaccompanied by clear knowledge of what is aimed at, of
consequences and causes and of the means by which one's real ends may be
furthered, are set forth in this: "There is the love of being sincere
without the love of learning; the beclouding here leads to an injurious
disregard of consequences." (Analects, bk. xvii., c. viii., v. 3.)

Notwithstanding these obvious limitations, none

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

of which goes to the root and all of which have to do only with what
should accompany earnestness and candour, Confucius enjoins both, upon
the young as upon the old, as absolutely essential to right-living. Thus
of the youth, he says: "He should be earnest and truthful" (Analects,
bk. i., c. vi.), and of the superior man: "He who aims at complete
virtue . . . is earnest in what he is doing and careful in his speech."
(Analects, bk. i., c. xiv.) "The superior man wishes to be slow in
speech and earnest in conduct." (Analects, bk. iv., c. xxiv.) " What the
superior man requires, is just that in his words there may be nothing
inaccurate." (Analects, bk. xiii., c. iii., v. 7.)

Twice in the "Analects," although Confucius spoke seldom about "perfect
virtue," he referred, when replying to inquiries on this important
subject, especially to sincerity of speech and faithfulness of conduct,
the first time briefly thus: "Fan Ch‘e asked about perfect virtue. The
Master said, 'It is in retirement, to be sedately grave; in the
management of business, to be reverently attentive; in intercourse with
others, to be strictly sincere.'" (Analects, bk. xiii., c. xix.)

The second time, he did not content himself with mere categorical
mention, but proceeded to expatiate upon the beneficent results of these
virtues, in the following: "Tsze-chang asked Confucius about perfect
virtue. Confucius said, 'To be able to practise five things everywhere

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

under heaven constitutes perfect virtue.' He begged to inquire what they
were, and was told: 'Gravity, generosity, sincerity, earnestness, and
kindness. If you are grave, you will not be treated with disrespect. If
you are generous, you will win all. If you are sincere, people will
repose trust in you. If you are earnest, you will accomplish much. If
you are kind, this will enable you to employ the services of others.'"
(Analects, bk. xvii., c. vi.)

These results, he further taught, are independent of time and place and
of the state of civilization of those among whom these virtues are
practised, for he says: "Let his words be sincere and truthful, and his
actions honourable and careful;—such conduct may be practised among the
rude tribes of the South or of the North. If his words be not sincere
and truthful, and his actions not honourable and careful, will he, with
such conduct, be appreciated, even in his own neighbourhood?" (Analects,
bk. xv., c. v., v. 2.)

**Humility.** "I am not concerned that I have no place; I am concerned
how I may fit myself for one. I am not concerned that I am not known; I
seek to be worthy to be known." (Analects, bk. iv., c. xiv.) "I will not
be afflicted that men do not know me; I will be afflicted that I do not
know men." (Analects, bk. i., c. xvi.) "I will not be concerned at men's
not knowing me; I will be concerned at my own want of ability."
(Analects, bk. xiv., c. xxxii.) "The superior man is

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

distressed by his want of ability; he is not distressed by men's not
knowing him." (Analects, bk. xv., c. xvii.)

These are but a few of the many expressions in the "Analects" of the
spirit of humility which is essential to true self-development. It is
not want of self-respect that is here inculcated; but, instead, that
poise which demands not the acclaim of others. In the "Yi King"
(appendix ii., sect. i., c. xxviii.) it is put thus: "The superior man .
. . stands alone and has no fear, and keeps retired from the world
without regret."

Yet it is also far from encouraging the progress-destroying
self-sufficiency of one who disregards others’ opinions because placing
too high an estimate upon his own. For in the "Shu King" (pt. iv., bk.
vi., 4) the earnest injunction is found, accredited to I Yin: "Do not
think yourself so large as to deem others small!"

And this, also, is found in the "Shu King" (pt. iv., bk. ii., 4): "He
who says that others are not equal to himself, comes to ruin."

And in the same book (pt. iv., bk. viii., sect. ii., 1) the illustrious
Yueh is reported to have said: "Indulging the consciousness of being
good is the way to lose that goodness; being vain of one's ability is
the way to lose it."

And in its pages also (pt. v., bk. xxvi.) King Mu is made to say of
himself, in all humility: "I rise at midnight and think how I can avoid
falling into errors."

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

The Duke of Khin, also in the "Shu King" (pt. v., bk. xxx.), thus
describes how difficult, albeit salutary, it is to receive, welcome, and
apply the reproof of others: "Reproving others is easy, but to receive
reproof and allow it free course is difficult."

And in the "Li Ki" (bk. ii., sect. ii., pt. iii., 17) the ruinous
consequences of false pride are depicted by means of a clever parable,
as follows: "It is because I would not eat 'Poor man, come here!' food
that I am come to this state."

In the same book (Li Ki, bk. xxvii., 9) it is related of Confucius: "The
Master said, 'The superior man exalts others and abases himself; he
gives the first place to others and takes the last himself.'"

Mencius applied this to himself in this famous colloquy: "The officer
Ch‘oo said, 'Master, the King sent persons to spy out whether you were
really different from other men.' Mencius said, 'How should I be
different from other men? Yaou and Shun were the same as other men."'
(Bk. iv., pt. ii., c. xxxii.)

This also does Confucius teach, that with admiration and appreciation a
man should look upon superior men, rejoicing in their virtue, and
emulating them; and that, on the contrary, when beholding persons with
grave and glaring faults, he is not to rejoice that he is not like unto
them, but instead, with deep humility, to search his own heart with
microscopic care and remorseless

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

earnestness, lest these very faults or errors be hiding there. Thus he
says: "When we see men of worth, we should think of equalling them; when
we see men of contrary character, we should turn inward and examine
ourselves." (Analects, bk. iv., c. xvii.)

The difficulty of doing this, however, he did not minimize, knowing full
well how prone the human mind is to justify its own aberrations. Indeed
he more than once complained with sadness: "I have not yet seen one who
could perceive his faults and inwardly accuse himself." (Analects, bk.
v., c. xxvi.)

He counselled the greatest possible avoidance of the thought of personal
success as a prime consideration of conduct, and inculcated the truth
that unless the mind is devotedly bent to the achievement of its own
purpose, to the accomplishment of the thing which it designs, the man's
work will not be that which he desired to do but will merely be done in
order that men might acclaim him.

He often emphasized even to a superlative degree the obstacles in the
way of the formation of character and of living a well-spent and
therefore successful life. Indeed, that this should ever come up to
one's longings, or even to one's expectations, was, he frequently
granted, quite impossible, meaning thereby not that the structure might
not be imposing or beautiful, but that it would fall short of that
perfect beauty which

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

the mind is able to conjure up before it, and must so imagine to itself
if the man is to be kept steadily on the path of progress.

It is true that in all this there is no departure from the notion that
the man should be in fact self-sufficient. It is not the idea of the
sage that he should abandon himself to despair but that his mind,
beholding clearly and courageously the perfection that he cannot hope to
equal, should do all that lies in its power to mould itself after that
vision of beauty, which after all is but an imperfect attempt to
reconstruct within itself the glories which it cannot fully apprehend.
Thus he teaches that one should be at ease about himself, even though
others should hold him of no account. This is not meant by Confucius to
be mere self-abasement, affected in order to obtain an advantage in
coping with others, but a genuine willingness that one's work be done
year in and year out, without being visited with the acclaim of the
multitude. He says: "Is he not a man of complete virtue who feels no
discomposure though men may take no note of him?" (Analects, bk. i., c.
i., v. 3.)

He thus pays his tribute of praise and appreciation to the great soul
who compasses this: "Admirable, indeed, was the virtue of Hwuy! With a
single bamboo dish of rice, a single gourd dish of drink, and living in
his mean narrow lane, while others could not have endured the distress
he did not allow his joy to be affected by it. Admirable,

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

indeed, was the virtue of Hwuy!" (Analects, bk. vi., c. ix.)

**Aspiration.** "The scholar does not deem gold and jade precious, but
loyalty and good faith. He does not crave broad lands and possessions,
but holds the rectification of himself his domain. He asks not great
wealth but looks upon many- sided culture as true riches." (Li Ki, bk.
xxxviii., 6.)

Thus in the "Li Ki" Confucius indicates that for and unto which man
should aspire. It is contrasted thus with the opposite and vainglorious
but destructive course: "It is the way of the superior man to prefer the
concealment of his virtue while it daily becomes more illustrious, and
it is the way of the inferior man to seek notoriety while he daily goes
more and more to ruin." (Doctrine of the Mean, c. xxxiii., v. 1.)

And in this passage perhaps even more discriminatingly and finely: "The
thing wherein the superior man cannot be equalled is simply this, his
work which other men cannot see." (Doctrine of the Mean, c. xxxiii., v.
2.)

Of the path which leads to this and which Confucius trod, it is said in
this from the "Doctrine of the Mean," already once quoted: "It waits for
the proper man, and then it is trodden. Hence it is said, 'Only by
perfect virtue can the perfect path in all its courses be realized.'
Therefore the superior man honours his virtuous nature and maintains
constant inquiry and study, seeking

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

to carry it out to its breadth and greatness so as to omit none of the
most exquisite and minute points which it embraces and to raise it to
its greatest height and brilliancy, so as to pursue the course of the
mean." (C. xxvii., v. 4, 5, 6.)

This is the portrait, considered by Chinese scholars to be that of
Confucius, which in a passage from the same book, already once quoted,
presents the many-sided character to which men, striving for the right,
are to aspire: "It is only he possessed of all sagely qualities that can
exist under Heaven, who shows himself quick in apprehension, clear in
discernment, of far-reaching intelligence and all-embracing knowledge,
fitted to exercise rule; magnanimous, generous, benign, and mild, fitted
to exercise forbearance; impulsive, energetic, firm, and enduring,
fitted to maintain a firm grasp; self-adjusted, grave, never swerving
from the mean and correct, fitted to command reverence; accomplished,
distinctive, concentrative, and searching, fitted to exercise
discrimination. All embracing is he, and vast, deep, and active as a
fountain, sending forth in their due seasons his virtues." (Doctrine of
the Mean, c. xxxi., v. 1, 2.)

In the "Li Ki," in more prosaic but not less striking fashion, the
aspirations which are justifiable, honourable, and beneficial for a man
are detailed, thus: "There are three things that occasion sorrow to a
superior man. If there be a subject of which he has not heard, and he do
not hear of it; if he hear of it, and do not come to learn it;

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

if he learn it but have no chance to practise it. There are five things
that occasion the superior man humiliation. If in office and unfamiliar
with its duties; if familiar with them but not carrying them into
practice; if once in office and then dismissed; if in charge of a large
territory but not well populated; if anybody with the same duties do
better than he." (Li Ki, bk. xviii., 20.)

In the "Yi King" (appendix iii., sect. ii., c. v., 37), Confucius
sharply contrasts this with the sordid, self-destroying motives of the
inferior man, thus: "The inferior man is not ashamed of what is not
benevolent nor does he fear to do what is not righteous. Without the
prospect of gain he does not stimulate himself to what is good, nor does
he correct himself without being moved."

The attitude which should be taken toward these incentives, usually so
powerful, the sage thus presents: "Riches and honours are what men
desire. If it cannot be brought about in the proper way, they should not
be held. Poverty and meanness are what men dislike. If it cannot be
brought about in the proper way, they should not be avoided." (Analects,
bk. iv., c. v., v. 1.)

Yet Confucius deemed it self-evidently a desirable thing that one's
merit should be recognized and a thing almost incredible that true merit
should go unrecognized. But he urged that this should be regarded as but
an incident and not as the object to be aimed at and striven for.
Instead, the labour must be primarily to serve one's fellowman

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

and to develop one's self. Notoriety and genuine distinction he
discussed in the following: "The Master said, 'What is it you call being
distinguished?' Tsze-chang replied, 'It is to be heard of through the
state, to be heard of through the family.' The Master said: 'That is
notoriety, not distinction. The man of distinction is substantial and
straightforward and loves uprightness. He examines people's words and
looks into their countenances. He is anxious to defer to others. Such a
man will be distinguished in the country; he will be distinguished in
the family. As to the man of notoriety, he assumes the appearance of
virtue but his actions belie it, and he rests in this character without
any doubts about himself. Such a man will be heard of in the country; he
will be heard of in the family.'" (Analects, bk. xii., c. xx.)

There is one sort of aspiration for fame which Confucius said that he
himself did not possess: "To live in obscurity and to practise wonders,
in order to be mentioned with honour in future ages—this is what I do
not do." (Doctrine of the Mean, c. xi., v. i.)

Yet it is by no means his opinion that only they who by their virtues
deserve to be known or even to be loved, receive the acclaim of the
multitude. This but raises the question whether the man is really worthy
or has merely deceived and misled the people. Confucius says that it but
puts one upon inquiry, thus: "When the multitude

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

hate a man, it is necessary to examine into the case. When the multitude
like a man, it is necessary to examine into the case." (Analects, bk.
xv., c. xxvii.)

This he explains more fully at another time in the following colloquy:
"Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'What do you say of a man who is loved by all
the people of his village?' The Master replied, 'We may not for that
accord our approval of him.' 'And what do you say of him who is hated by
all the people of his village?' The Master said, 'We may not for that
conclude that he is bad. It is better than either of these cases that
the good in the village love him, and the bad hate him.'" (Analects, bk.
xiii., c. xxiv.)

Confucius could not enough condemn the doing of any act for the mere
purpose of obtaining the approval of men or of winning the laurels of
fame. The aim must be the accomplishment of the work or service, itself.
This he has said in many passages, among them these: "If doing what is
to be done be made the first business and success a secondary
consideration, is not this the way to exalt virtue?" (Analects, bk.
xii., c. xxi., v. 3.) "In ancient times men learned with a view to their
own improvement. Nowadays, men learn with a view to the approbation of
others." (Analects, bk. xiv., c. xxv.) "The man of virtue makes the
difficulty to be overcome his first business and success only a
subsequent consideration." (Analects, bk. vi., c. xx.)

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

The true spirit of the man with an exalted aim he thus depicts: "Though
he may be all unknown, unregarded by the world, he feels no regret."
(Doctrine of the Mean, c. xi., v. 3.)

In the "Yi King" (appendix iv., sect. i., c. ii., 6) Confucius recurs to
it thus: "He occupies a high position without pride and a low position
without anxiety."

And in the "Li Ki" with greater circumstantiality the indifference and
unconcern of the superior man toward mere worldly rewards or failure to
obtain them, and his complete immunity from evil result of either of
these things, are thus portrayed: "The scholar is not cast down or
uprooted by poverty and a mean condition; he is not elated or enervated
by riches and an exalted condition." (Bk. xxxviii., 19.)

Yet, not utterly is ambition for worldly honours discouraged; for in the
"Doctrine of the Mean," in a passage already once quoted, and which
Chinese scholars deem to refer to Confucius himself, the prospect of the
man who pursues the path of the mean is thus apostrophized: "Wherever
ships and carriages reach, wherever the strength of man penetrates,
wherever the heavens overshadow and the earth sustains, wherever the sun
and moon shine, wherever frosts and dews fall, all who have blood and
breath unfeignedly honour and love him." (Doctrine of the Mean, c.
xxxi., v. 3.)

And, although the words, "I desire nothing but rightly to die," are
ascribed to Tsang-tse,

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

when dying (Li Ki, bk. ii., sect. i., pt. i., 18), Confucius himself has
said: "The superior man dislikes the thought of his name not being
mentioned after his death." (Analects, bk. xv., c. xix.)

**Prudence.** "If a man take no thought about what is distant, he will
find sorrow near at hand." (Analects, bk. xv., c. xi.)

In the "Yi King" (appendix iii., sect. ii., c. v., 39), the wisdom of
prudence and of foresight, thus vividly presented in the "Analects," is
enforced by the Master in these maxims: "He who keeps danger in mind, is
he who will rest safe in his seat; he who keeps ruin in mind, is he who
will preserve his interests secure; he who sets the danger of disorder
before him, is he who will maintain order."

And in the "Shu King" Yueh is represented as urging thoughtful care, by
these words: "For all affairs let there be adequate preparation; with
preparation there will be no calamitous issue." (Pt. iv., bk. viii.,
sect. ii., 1.)

Of the same nature is this injunction from the "Li Ki" (bk. xv., 22):
"Do not commence or abandon anything hastily."

Though far from teaching that the aim of the superior man should be the
acquisition of wealth, and though insistent upon the view that this
depends so much more upon fortune than upon the desert, or even the
scheming, of individuals, Confucius, as in the foregoing, pleads always
for the use of foresight and prudence in the ordinary

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

affairs of life. Thus he places among the cardinal qualities of the
superior man reverent attention to business. (Analects, bk. xvi., c. x.)
Yet he rarely discoursed upon this subject nor, indeed, upon the part of
Heaven in determining the good or ill fortune which attends man; and
that this is not true only of the sayings which have come down to us, is
shown by this statement of his disciples: "The subjects of which the
Master seldom spoke were: profitableness, also the appointments of
Heaven and perfect virtue." (Analects, bk. ix., c. i.)

That the sordid pursuit of wealth is to be avoided he indicated in these
words already quoted: "Riches and honour are what men desire. If it
cannot be brought about in the proper way, they should not be held.
Poverty and meanness are what men dislike. If it cannot be brought about
in the proper way, they should not be avoided." (Analects, bk. iv., c.
v., v. 1.)

This he also said again and again, as in this contrast: "The mind of the
superior man is conversant with righteousness; the mind of the average
man is conversant with gain " (Analects, bk. iv., c. xvi.); and in
another place he names as one of the qualities of "the complete man"
that, "in view of gain," he "thinks of righteousness." (Analects, bk.
xiv., c. xiii., v. 2.)

He teaches that "riches and honours depend upon Heaven" (Analects, bk.
xii., c. v., v. 3); notwithstanding which, prudence and industry

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

will, in a well-governed country, insure a competence. Wherefore he
says: "When a country is well governed, poverty and a mean condition are
things to be ashamed of. When a country is ill governed, riches and
honour are things to be ashamed of." (Analects, bk. viii., c. xiii., v.
3.)

To nothing would his proverb, "To go beyond is as bad as to fall short"
(Analects, bk. xi., c. xiv., v. 3), apply more aptly than to
expenditure, of which he also sagely remarks (Analects, bk. vii., c.
xxxv.): "Extravagance leads to insubordination and parsimony to
meanness. It is better to be mean than to be insubordinate"—though,
obviously, best of all to be neither.

As regards the pursuit of wealth, Confucius spoke, for himself, thus:
"If the search for riches were sure to be successful, though I should
become a groom with whip in hand to get them, I would do so. As the
search may not be successful, I will pursue that which I desire."
(Analects, bk. vii., c. xi.)

Resignation to the appointments of Heaven in this regard, and the
greater desirability that more worthy ambitions be dominant, are urged
in this striking passage: "There is Hwuy! He has nearly attained to
perfect virtue. He is often in want." (Analects, bk. xi., c. xviii.)

That riches is not that to which the soul of the superior man aspires,
he affirms in these words, already quoted in another connection: "The
superior man is anxious lest he should not get truth:

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

he is not anxious lest poverty should come upon him." (Analects, bk.
xv., c. xxxi.)

This version of "Riches takes unto itself wings" is given by the
commentator in "The Great Learning": "Wealth, got by improper means,
will take its departure in the same way." (C. x., v. 10.)

Among the "three things which the superior man guards against," he names
avarice, saying: "In youth, when the physical powers are not yet
settled, he guards against lust. When he is strong, and the physical
powers are full of vigour, he guards against quarrelsomeness. When he is
old, and the animal powers are decayed, he guards against covetousness."
(Analects, bk. xvi., c. vii.)

Though duties, corresponding to their ill fortune or good fortune, rest
upon the poor and upon the rich, Confucius deems it much harder for the
impoverished man to possess his soul and act according to propriety; of
this he says: "To be poor without murmuring is difficult. To be rich
without pride is easy." (Analects, bk. xiv., c. xi.)

The imprudence, not to speak of the immorality, of acting in a purely
selfish manner, is shown in this: "He who acts with a constant view to
his own advantage will be much murmured against." (Analects, bk. iv., c.
xii.)

This, however, is not limited to financial dealings, but applies as well
to all other exactions; as to which the sage shrewdly observes: "He who
requires much from himself and little from others,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

will keep himself from being the object of resentment." (Analects, bk.
xv., c. xiv.)

It is also the part of prudence as early as possible to guard against
speech and conduct which cause dislike; for, as the sage somewhat
sweepingly asserts: "When a man at forty is the object of dislike, he
will always continue what he is." (Analects, bk. xvii., c. xxvi.)

The same idea, but a different application of it, is presented in this
wise saying from the "Shu King" (pt. v., bk. xxi., 2) attributed to King
Khang: "Seek not every quality in one individual!"

And this vivid picture of the foredoomed failure of the ambitious but
imprudent man Confucius gives in the "Yi King" (appendix iii., sect.
ii., c. v., v. 40): "Virtue small and office high; wisdom small and
plans great; strength small and burden heavy—where such conditions
exist, it is seldom they do not end in evil."

The necessity for unflinching self-examination before engaging in any
important undertaking or assuming any heavy obligation, not merely as a
matter of personal honesty, but also as a matter of prudence, is thus
enjoined in the "Li Ki" in a passage already quoted: "For one who wished
to serve his ruler, the rule was first to measure his abilities and
duties and then enter on the responsibilities; he did not first enter
and then measure. The same rule applied when one begged or borrowed from
others or sought to enter their service." (Bk. xv., 19.)

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

And in the "Yi King" (appendix ii., c. xxxiii., v. 4) this caution and
this self-restraint are thus appreciated: "A superior man retires,
notwithstanding his likings; an average man cannot attain to it."

This sketch of the superior man is elaborated further in the following
passage in the "Analects": "He who aims to be a man of complete virtue,
in his food does not seek to gratify his appetite, nor in his
dwelling-place does he seek the appliances of ease; he is earnest in
what he is doing, and careful in his speech; he frequents the company of
men of principle that he may be rectified." (Analects, bk. i., c. xiv.)

Prudence is, of course, merely the application of the same calm
clear-sightedness and study of cause and effect, which the sage enjoins
as the very foundation of the investigation of phenomena, upon which in
turn the entire superstructure of the art of life rests. To what
advantage does one refuse to recognize the stubborn facts, whether as
regards himself or as regards others? Or as the sage phrases it: "Who
can go out but by the door? How is it that men will not walk according
to these ways?" (Analects, bk. vi., c. xv.)

The need of patience and thoroughness he also repeatedly inculcates, as
in this: "Do not be desirous of having things done quickly; do not look
at small advantages! Desire to have things done quickly prevents their
being done thoroughly. Looking at small advantages prevents great

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

things being accomplished." (Analects, bk. xiii., c. xvii.)

And the slow but solid achievement which attends this course is thus
portrayed: "The way of the superior man may be compared with what takes
place in travelling, when to go to a distance we must first traverse the
space that is near and when in ascending a height we must first begin
from the lower ground." (Doctrine of the Mean, C. xv., v. 1.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. General Human Relations](eoc08)
