[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eoc03)  [Next](eoc05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410203565/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Ethics of Confucius*, by Miles Menander Dawson, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

### CONFUCIUS

<span class="smallcaps">K‘ung Fu-tsze</span>, "the philosopher K‘ung,"
whose name has been Latinized into Confucius, was born in the year 551
(or 552) B.C. His father, Shuh-hang Heih was an officer in charge of the
district of Tsow in the State of Lu and had been famous for his strength
and daring; he was of the Kung family and lineally descended from
Hwang-Ti, an almost legendary character of ancient China.

At the age of seventy, Shuh-liang Heih, the father of ten children of
whom but one was a son and he a cripple, sought a wife in the Yen family
where there were three daughters. The two elder of them demurred when
apprised by their father of the old man's suit; but the youngest,
Ching-tsai, only seventeen years of age, offered to abide by her
father's judgment. The following year Confucius was born and three years
later she was a widow.

Confucius was married, in accordance with Chinese custom, at nineteen
and accepted public employment as a keeper of stores and later as
superintendent of parks and herds. At twenty-two, however, he commenced
his life-work as a teacher, and gradually a group of students, eager to
be instructed in the classics and in conduct and government, gathered
about him.

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

He was a contemporary of Lao-tsze, the founder of Taoism, who, however,
was of the next previous generation. Confucius is said to have had
several interviews with him about 517 B.C.

Up to the age of fifty-two, he was not much in public life. He was then
made chief magistrate of the city of Chung-tu, which so thrived and
improved under his care, that the Duke of Lu appointed him minister of
crime which resulted in a great reduction of wrongdoing. The Duke
accepting a present of female musicians and giving himself over to
dissipation, Confucius withdrew and wandered among the various states,
giving instruction as opportunity offered.

His disciples during his lifetime rose to three thousand and of these
some seventy or eighty were highly esteemed by him.

Confucius when he set forth on his wanderings was fifty-six; it was
thirteen years before he returned to Lu.

In 482 B.C., he lost his only son; in 481 B.C., his favourite student,
Yen Hwuy, and in 478 B.C. Tsze-lu, another of his favourites, passed
away, and the same year Confucius himself died at the age of seventy-two
(or seventy-three).

He was buried in the K‘ung cemetery outside the gates of K‘iuh-fow,
where most of his descendants, said to number more than forty thousand,
still live. His tomb is yet preserved and is annually visited by vast
numbers of his followers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](eoc05.md)
