[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eoc12)  [Next](eoc14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410203565/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Ethics of Confucius*, by Miles Menander Dawson, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

### APPENDIX

#### THE "GREAT PRINCIPLE" OF CONFUCIUS

DR. CHEN HUAN CHANG in his work "The Economic Principles of Confucius
and His School" gives the following version of a passage in the "Li Ki"
(bk. vii., sect. i., 2, 3):

"When the Great Principle (of the Great Similarity) prevails, the whole
world becomes a republic; they elect men of talents, virtue, and
ability; they talk about sincere agreement, and cultivate universal
peace. Thus men do not regard as their parents only their own parents,
nor treat as their children only their own children. A competent
provision is secured for the aged till their death, employment for the
middle-aged, and the means of growing up for the young. The widowers,
widows, orphans, childless men, and those who are disabled by disease,
are all sufficiently maintained. Each man has his rights, and each woman
her individuality safeguarded. They produce wealth, disliking that it
should be thrown away upon the ground, but not wishing to keep it for
their own gratification. Disliking idleness, they labour, but not alone
with a view to their own advantage. In this way selfish schemings are
repressed and find no way to arise. Robbers, filchers, and rebellious
traitors do not exist. Hence the outer

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

doors remain open, and are not shut. This is the state of what I call
the Great Similarity.

"Now that the Great Principle has not yet been developed, the world is
inherited through family. Each one regards as his parents only his own
parents, and treats as his children only his own children. The wealth of
each and his labour are only for his self-interest. Great men imagine it
is the rule that their estates should descend in their own families.
Their object is to make the walls of their cities and suburbs strong and
their ditches and moats secure. Rites and justice are regarded as the
threads by which they seek to maintain in its correctness the relation
between ruler and minister; in its generous regard that between father
and son; in its harmony that between elder brother and younger; and in a
community of sentiment that between husband and wife; and in accordance
with them they regulate consumption, distribute land and dwellings,
distinguish the men of military ability and cunning, and achieve their
work with a view to their own advantage. Thus it is that selfish schemes
and enterprises are constantly taking their rise, and war is inevitably
forthcoming. In this course of rites and justice, Yü, T‘ang, Wên, Wu,
Ch‘êng Wang, and the Duke of Chou are the best examples of good
government. Of these six superior men, every one was attentive to the
rites, thus to secure the display of justice, the realization of
sincerity, the exhibition of errors, the exemplification of benevolence,
and the discussion of courtesy, showing the people all the constant
virtues. If any ruler, having power and position, would not follow this
course, he should be driven away by the multitude who regard

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

him as a public enemy. This is the state of what I call the Small
Tranquillity."

Dr. Chen identifies "The Small Tranquillity" with "The Advancing Peace
Stage," into which men proceed in the form of nations out of the
primitive "Disorderly Stage," and "The Great Similarity" with "The
Extreme Peace Stage," *i.e.*, with what Tennyson meant in "Locksley
Hall":

"When the war drums throb no longer and the battle-flags are furled  
 In the parliament of man, the federation of the world."

Proceeding with this interpretation, Dr. Chen says: "This is the most
important statement of all Confucius’ teachings. The stage of Great
Similarity or Extreme Peace is the final aim of Confucius; it is the
golden age of Confucianism. If we make a comparison between the Great
Similarity and the Small Tranquillity, we may get a clear view. Everyone
knows that Confucianism has five social relations and five moral
constants: ruler and subject, father and son, elder and younger
brothers, husband and wife, friend and friend, make up the five social
relations; love, justice, rite, wisdom, and sincerity make up the five
moral constants. But, according to the statement of Confucius himself,
they belong only to the Small Tranquillity. Everyone knows that
Confucianism is in favour of monarchical government and of filial piety.
But they are good only in the Small Tranquillity. In the Great
Similarity, the whole world is the only social organization, and the
individual is the independent unit; both socialistic and individualistic

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

characters reach the highest point. There is no national state, so that
there is no war, no need of defence, nor of men of military ability and
cunning. Men of talents, virtue, and ability are chosen by the people,
so that the people themselves are the sovereign, and the relation
between ruler and subject does not exist. Man and woman are not bound by
the tie of marriage, so that the relations between husband and wife,
between father and son, and between brothers do not exist. The only
relation that remains is friendship. There is no family, so that there
is no inheritance, no private property, no selfish scheme. There is no
class, so that the only classification is made either by age or by sex;
but whether old, middle-aged, or young, whether man or woman, each
satisfies his needs. The Great Principle of the Great Similarity
prevails, so that everyone is naturally as good as everyone else and the
distinction of the five moral constants is gone. Each has only natural
love toward others, regardless of artificial rites and justice. Speaking
of the Small Tranquillity, Confucius gives six superior men as examples,
but for the Great Similarity, he does not mention any one, because it
has never existed. In the Canon of History, Confucius takes up Yao and
Shun to represent the stage of Great Similarity as they did not hand
down their thrones to their sons, yet he does not mention them here. The
principle of the Three Stages is the principle of progress; we must look
for the golden age in the future; the Extreme Peace or the Great
Similarity is the goal."

The similarity of this conception to the social scheme of Socrates, as
set forth in Plato's "Republic," is remarkable, as also its similarity
to the views of

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

advanced socialists nowadays. It is indeed significant and weighty if
these two greatest intellects of the ancients and perhaps of all mankind
saw this ultimate goal alike. But the interpretation may in some regards
be deemed doubtful; and certainly others have interpreted it otherwise.
Thus Legge translates the passage, using the past tense throughout, as
follows:

"When the Grand Course was pursued, a public and common spirit ruled all
under the sky; they chose men of talents, virtue, and ability; their
words were sincere, and what they cultivated was harmony. Thus men did
not love their parents only, nor treat as children only their own sons.
A competent provision was secured for the aged till their death,
employment for the able-bodied, and the means of growing up to the
young. They showed kindness and compassion to widows, orphans, childless
men, and those who were disabled by disease, so that they were all
sufficiently maintained. Males had their proper work, and females had
their homes. (They accumulated) articles (of value) disliking that they
should be thrown away upon the ground, but not wishing to keep them for
their own gratification. (They laboured) with their strength, disliking
that it should not be exerted, but not exerting it (only) with a view to
their own advantage. In this way (selfish) schemings were repressed and
found no development. Robbers, filchers, and rebellious traitors did not
show themselves, and hence the outer doors remained open, and were not
shut. This was (the period of) what we call the Grand Union.

"Now that the Grand Course has fallen into disuse and obscurity, the
kingdom is a family inheritance. Everyone loves (above all others) his
own parents

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

and cherishes (as) children (only) his own sons. People accumulate goods
and exert their strength for their own advantage. Great men imagine it
is the rule that their estates should descend in their own families.
Their object is to make the walls of their cities and suburbs strong and
their ditches and moats secure. The rules of propriety and of what is
right are regarded as the threads by which they seek to maintain in its
correctness the relation between ruler and minister; in its generous
regard that between father and son; in its harmony that between elder
brother and younger; and in a community of sentiment that between
husband and wife; and in accordance with them they frame buildings and
measures; lay out the fields and hamlets (for the dwellings of the
husbandmen); adjudge the superiority to men of valour and knowledge; and
regulate their achievements with a view to their own advantage. Thus it
is that (selfish) schemes and enterprises are constantly taking their
rise, and recourse is had to arms; and thus it was (also) that Yü,
Thang, Wan, and Wu, King Khâng, and the Duke of Kau obtained their
distinction. Of these six great men everyone was very attentive to the
rules of propriety, thus to secure the display of righteousness, the
realization of sincerity, the exhibition of errors, the exemplification
of benevolence, and the discussion of courtesy, showing the people all
the normal virtues. Any rulers who did not follow this course were
driven away by those who possessed power and position, and all regarded
them as pests. This is the period of what we call Small Tranquillity."

But whether past or future is intended, undoubtedly it is the "golden
age," or ideal state, which is meant.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The open question
as to whether the Grand Course is past or yet to come, is of course due
to the ideographic form of the language; owing to his standing as a
Confucian scholar, Dr. Chen is certainly entitled to have his
interpretation preferred, if all else is equal.

The statement concerning safeguarding the individuality of women would
perhaps scarcely seem to warrant the notion that the idea of the family,
upon which Confucius built his entire superstructure of personal and
governmental relations, should be abandoned; Legge translated this, it
should be noted, "Males had their proper work, and females had their
homes."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](eoc14.md)
