[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090082)  [Next](1090084.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.viii"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p1"></span>The following letter is added as a
specimen, out of a very large number, of the natural, almost playful
style, and tone of warm affection, in which Chrysostom wrote to his
intimate friends. All his extant letters were written during his exile,
and therefore there is much repetition in their contents, and great
general similarity of character.

<span id="xvii.viii-p2"></span><span id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span
id="xvii.viii-Page_304"></span><span class="c34"><span
id="xvii.viii-p2.1"></span>to castus, valerius, diophantus,
cyriacus</span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p3"></span><span class="c39"><span
id="xvii.viii-p3.1"></span>presbyters of antioch.</span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p4"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="xvii.viii-p4.1"></span>I am</span> not surprised that you call my
long letter a short one. For this is just the way with lovers; they do
not recognize such a thing as satiety, they will not admit such a thing
as satisfaction, but the more they receive from the objects of their
love the more they seek. Therefore, even if the letter which you have
received had been ten times as large as the former one, it would not
have escaped the epithet of “brief;” in fact it would have been called a
small letter, and not only would it have been so called, but it would
have actually seemed such in your eyes. Hence I also in my turn am never
satisfied with the measure of affection for me which you have attained,
but am always seeking to make additions to your love-draught, and daily
demanding the discharge of your love debt which is always being paid,
and yet is always owing (for it is written, “owe no man anything but to
love one another” <span id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958) .md). I am indeed
continually receiving what I ask in great abundance, yet never think
that I have received the whole. Do not cease then to pay down this
goodly debt, which has a twofold pleasure. For those who pay, and those
who receive, derive equal enjoyment, inasmuch as they are both alike
enriched by the payment; which in the case of money is an impossibility,
for there the one who pays becomes poorer, and only the man who has
received is richer. But this is not what commonly happens in the
covenant of love. For he who pays it is not less bereft of it, as in the
case of money when it is transferred to the receiver; but payment of
love makes him who pays richer than before. Knowing these things then, O
Sirs, most honoured and devout, cease not continually displaying this
excellent disposition towards me. For although you need no exhortation
for this purpose from me yet as I greatly long for your love I remind
you, even when you need it not, both in order that you may constantly
write to me, and also inform me of the state of your health. For even if
you do not need any one to remind you on this account, I shall not
desist from continually seeking this at your hands; as it is a matter
which I have very much at heart. That it is a difficult task owing both
to the season of the year, and the difficulty of the journey, and the
scarcity of travellers who will do this service for you I am well aware:
nevertheless as far as is possible and practicable in the midst of so
much difficulty, we exhort you to write constantly, and crave this
favour from your love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_958"></span>[304:959](1090083.htm#fr_958.md) <span
id="xvii.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p5"></span> [Rom. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008.md)<span id="xvii.viii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Correspondence of St. Chrysostom with the Bishop of
Rome.](1090084.md)
