[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090072)  [Next](1090074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii"></span> <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="xvi.ii-Page_269"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p1"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>INTRODUCTION TO THE TREATISE THAT NO ONE CAN
HARM THE MAN WHO DOES NOT INJURE HIMSELF.</span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="xvi.ii-p2.1"></span>This</span> very beautiful treatise was composed
when St. Chrysostom was in exile, probably not long before his death,
and was sent with a letter to his great friend the deaconess Olympias in
Constantinople.

<span id="xvi.ii-p3"></span>Plato in the 10th book of his Dialogue
called the “Republic” employs an argument to prove the immortality of
the soul, so nearly resembling a portion of this treatise that I can
scarcely doubt St. Chrysostom had it in his mind. The following is the
passage in the Platonic dialogue as rendered in the excellent
translation of Messrs. Davies & Vaughan. I omit a few sentences here and
there.

<span id="xvi.ii-p4"></span>“Have you not learned, I asked, that our
soul is immortal and never dies?

<span id="xvi.ii-p5"></span>He looked at me and said in amazement. No
really I have not: but can you maintain this doctrine?

<span id="xvi.ii-p6"></span>Yes as I am an honest man, I replied, and I
think you could also. It is quite easy to do it.

<span id="xvi.ii-p7"></span>Proceed by all means.

<span id="xvi.ii-p8"></span>So you call one thing good and another evil?

<span id="xvi.ii-p9"></span>I do.

<span id="xvi.ii-p10"></span>And do we hold the same opinion as to the
meaning of two terms?

<span id="xvi.ii-p11"></span>What opinion do you hold?

<span id="xvi.ii-p12"></span>I hold that the term evil comprises
everything that destroys and corrupts, and the term good everything that
preserves and benefits.

<span id="xvi.ii-p13"></span>So do I.

<span id="xvi.ii-p14"></span>Again; do you maintain that everything has
its evil and its good? Do you say for example that the eyes are liable
to the evil of ophthalmia, the entire body to disease, corn to mildew,
timber to rot, copper and iron to rust or in other words that almost
everything is liable to some connatural evil and malady?

<span id="xvi.ii-p15"></span>I do.

<span id="xvi.ii-p16"></span>And is it not the case that, whenever an
object is attacked by one of these maladies it is impaired; and in the
end completely broken up and destroyed by it?

<span id="xvi.ii-p17"></span>Doubtless it is so?

<span id="xvi.ii-p18"></span>Hence everything is destroyed by its own
connatural evil and vice: otherwise if it be not destroyed by this,
there is nothing else that can corrupt it. For that which is good will
never destroy anything, nor yet that which is neither good nor evil.

<span id="xvi.ii-p19"></span>Of course not.

<span id="xvi.ii-p20"></span>If then we can find among existing things
one which is liable to a particular evil which can indeed mar it, but
cannot break it up or destroy it, shall we not be at once certain that a
thing so constituted can never perish?

<span id="xvi.ii-p21"></span>That would be a reasonable conclusion.

<span id="xvi.ii-p22"></span><span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="xvi.ii-Page_270"></span>Well then is not the soul liable to a malady
which renders it evil?

<span id="xvi.ii-p23"></span>Certainly it is: all those things which we
were lately discussing—injustice, intemperance, cowardice, and
ignorance—produce that result.”

<span id="xvi.ii-p24"></span>Then having proved that although these
things injure the soul they do not actually destroy it he proceeds.

<span id="xvi.ii-p25"></span>“Well, it is irrational to suppose that a
thing can be destroyed by the depravity of another thing, though it
cannot be destroyed by its own.

<span id="xvi.ii-p26"></span>True it is irrational.

<span id="xvi.ii-p27"></span>Yes it is: for you must remember that we do
not imagine that a body is to be destroyed by the proper depravity of
its food whatever that may be, whether mouldiness or rottenness or
anything else. But if the depravity of the food itself produces in the
body a disorder proper to the body, we shall assert that the body has
been destroyed by its food remotely, but by its own proper vice or
disease, immediately: and we shall always disclaim the notion that the
body can be corrupted by the depravity of its food which is a different
thing from the body—that is to say, the notion that the body can be
corrupted by an alien evil without the introduction of its own native
evil.

<span id="xvi.ii-p28"></span>You are perfectly correct.

<span id="xvi.ii-p29"></span>Then according to the same reasoning I
continued, unless depravity of body introduces into the soul depravity
of soul let us never suppose that the soul can be destroyed by an alien
evil without the presence of its own peculiar disease: for that would be
to suppose that one thing can be destroyed by the evil of another thing.

<span id="xvi.ii-p30"></span>That is a reasonable statement.

<span id="xvi.ii-p31"></span>Well then let us either refute this
doctrine and point out our mistake or else, so long as it remains
unrefuted, let us never assert that a fever or any other disease, or
fatal violence, or even the act of cutting up the entire body into the
smallest possible pieces can have any tendency to destroy the soul,
until it has been demonstrated that in consequence of this treatment of
the body the soul itself becomes more unjust and more unholy. For so
long as a thing is exempt from its own proper evil, while an evil
foreign to it appears in another subject, let us not allow it to be said
that this thing whether it be a soul or anything else is in danger of
being destroyed.

<span id="xvi.ii-p32"></span>Well, certainly no one will prove that the
souls of the dying become more unjust in consequence of death.” Here
follows a passage to prove that even injustice does not *destroy* the
soul, after which he proceeds,

<span id="xvi.ii-p33"></span>“Surely then when the soul cannot be killed
and destroyed by its own depravity and its own evil, hardly will the
evil which is charged with the destruction of another thing destroy a
soul or anything else beyond its own appropriate object.

<span id="xvi.ii-p34"></span>Hardly: at least that is the natural
inference.

<span id="xvi.ii-p35"></span>Hence, as it is destroyed by no evil at
all, whether foreign to it or its own, it is clear that the soul must be
always existing, and therefore immortal.

<span id="xvi.ii-p36"></span>It must.”

<span id="xvi.ii-p37"></span>If any one will compare this extract with
chapters 2 to 6 in the following treatise he cannot fail to be struck by
the similarity of thought and language, although in the latter case it
is more apparent in the original than it can be in translation. The aim
of the two writers is not indeed identical: Chrysostom’s object is to
prove that nothing can really injure a man except sin—depravity of
soul—Plato begins by proving this, and proceeds to maintain that if even
that which corrupts the soul cannot actually destroy it the soul must be
imperishable. They employ the same argument, only Plato carries it a
step further than Chrysostom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Treatise to Prove that No One Can Harm the Man Who Does Not
Injure Himself.](1090074)
