[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090011)  [Next](1090013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="iii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.x-p1.2"></span>.—*Chrysostom in Exile. His Death. <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.x-p1.3"></span>a.d</span>. 404–407.*</span>

<span id="iii.x-p2"></span>Chrysostom was conveyed under the scorching
heat of July and August over Galatia and Cappadocia, to the lonely
mountain village Cucusus, on the borders of Cilicia and Armenia, which
the wrath of Eudoxia had selected for his exile. The climate was
inclement and variable, the winter severe, the place was exposed to
Isaurian brigands. He suffered much from fever and headache, and was
more than once brought to the brink of the grave. Nevertheless the
bracing mountain air invigorated his feeble constitution, and he was
hopeful of returning to his diocese. He was kindly treated by the bishop
of Cucusus. He received visits, letters and presents from faithful
friends, and by his correspondence exerted a wider influence from that
solitude than from the episcopal throne.

<span id="iii.x-p3"></span>His 242 extant letters are nearly all from
the three years of his exile, and breathe a noble Christian spirit, in a
clear, brilliant and persuasive style. They exhibit his faithful care
for all the interests of the church and look calmly and hopefully to the
glories of heaven. They are addressed to Eastern and Western bishops,
presbyters, deacons, deaconesses, monks and missionaries; they describe
the fatigues of his journey, give advice on a variety of subjects,
strengthen and comfort his distant flock, urge the destruction of
heathen temples in Phœnicia, the extirpation of heresy in Cyprus, and
encourage the missions in Persia and Scythia. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) Two letters are addressed to the Roman
bishop Innocent I., whose sympathy and assistance he courted. Seventeen
letters—the most important of all—are addressed to Olympias, the
deaconess, a widow of noble birth, personal beauty and high
accomplishments, who devoted her fortune and time to the poor and the
sick. She died between 408 and 420. To her he revealed his inner life,
upon her virtues he lavished extravagant praise, which offends modern
taste as fulsome flattery. For her consolation he wrote a special
treatise on the theme that “No one is really injured except by
himself.” <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md)

<span id="iii.x-p6"></span>The cruel empress, stung by disappointment at
the continued power of the banished bishop, forbade all correspondence
and ordered his transfer by two brutal guards, first to Arabissus, then
to Pityus on the Caucasus, the most inhospitable spots in the empire.

<span id="iii.x-p7"></span>The journey of three months on foot was a
slow martyrdom to the feeble and sickly old man. He did not reach his
destination, but ended his pilgrimage five or six miles from Comana in
Pontus in the chapel of the martyr Basiliscus on the 14th of September,
407, in his sixtieth year, the tenth of his episcopate. Clothed in his
white baptismal robes, he partook of the <span id="page_16">p. 16</span>
<span id="iii.x-Page_16"></span>eucharist and commended his soul to God.
His last words were his accustomed doxology, the motto of his life:
“Glory be to God for all things, Amen.” <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md)

<span id="iii.x-p9"></span>He was buried by the side of Basiliscus in
the presence of monks and nuns.

<span id="iii.x-p10"></span>He was revered as a saint by the people.
Thirty-one years afterwards, January 27, 438, his body was translated
with great pomp to Constantinople and deposited with the emperors and
patriarchs beneath the altar of the church of the Holy Apostles. The
young Emperor Theodosius II. and his sister Pulcheria met the procession
at Chalcedon, kneeled down before the coffin, and in the name of their
guilty parents implored the forgiveness of heaven for the grievous
injustice done to the greatest and saintliest man that ever graced the
pulpit and episcopal chair of Constantinople. The Eastern church of that
age shrunk from the bold speculations of Origen, but revered the narrow
orthodoxy of Epiphanius and the ascetic piety of Chrysostom.

<span id="iii.x-p11"></span>The personal appearance of the
golden-mouthed orator was not imposing, but dignified and winning. He
was of small stature (like David, Paul, Athanasius, Melanchthon, John
Wesley, Schleiermacher). He had an emaciated frame, a large, bald head,
a lofty, wrinkled forehead, deep-set, bright, piercing eyes, pallid,
hollow cheeks, and a short, gray beard. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[15:19](1090012.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="iii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p4"></span> See Tom. iii. of the Bened. ed. (in Migne,
III. 529 sqq.)

<span id="fn_19"></span>[15:20](1090012.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="iii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p5"></span> Comp. on Olympias the *Mémoirs* of <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.x-p5.1"></span> Tillemont</span>, XI. 416–440;
<span class="c12"><span id="iii.x-p5.2"></span>Stephens</span>, *l. c*.,
280, 367–373; and <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.x-p5.3"></span>Venables</span> in *Smith & Wace*, IV. 73–75. The
letters to Olympias and Innocent are also published in <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.x-p5.4"></span> Lomler’s</span> selection (pp.
165–252).

<span id="fn_20"></span>[16:21](1090012.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="iii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p8"></span> Δόξα τῷ θεῷ π€ντων œνεκεν.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[16:22](1090012.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="iii.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p12"></span> See the frontispiece in the edition of
<span class="c12"><span id="iii.x-p12.1"></span> Fronto Ducæus</span>,
and in the monograph of <span class="c12"><span id="iii.x-p12.2"></span>
Stephens</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His Character.](1090013.md)
