[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090007)  [Next](1090009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="iii.vi-Page_10"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vi-p1.2"></span>.—*Chrysostom as Deacon, Priest and Preacher at
Antioch. <span class="c12"><span id="iii.vi-p1.3"></span>a.d.</span>
381–398.*</span>

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span>By excessive self-mortifications John
undermined his health, and returned to Antioch. There he was immediately
ordained deacon by Meletius in 380 or 381, and a few years afterwards
presbyter by Flavian (386).

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span>As deacon he had the best opportunity to
become acquainted with the practical needs of the population, the care
of the poor and the sick. After his ordination to the priesthood he
preached in the presence of the bishop his first sermon to a vast crowd.
It abounds in flowery Asiatic eloquence, in humble confession of his own
unworthiness, and exaggerated praise of Meletius and Flavian. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11)

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span>He now entered upon a large field of
usefulness, the real work of his life. The pulpit was his throne, and he
adorned it as much as any preacher of ancient or modern times.

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span>Antioch was one of the great capitals of the
Roman empire along with Alexandria, Constantinople, and Rome. Nature and
art combined to make it a delightful residence, though it was often
visited by inundations and earthquakes. An abundance of pure water from
the river Orontes, a large lake and the surrounding hills, fertile
plains, the commerce of the sea, imposing buildings of Asiatic, Greek,
and Roman architecture, rich gardens, baths, and colonnaded streets,
were among its chief attractions. A broad street of four miles, built by
Antiochus Epiphanes, traversed the city from east to west; the spacious
colonnades on either side were paved with red granite. Innumerable
lanterns illuminated the main thoroughfares at night. The city was
supplied with good schools and several churches; the greatest of them,
in which Chrysostom preached, was begun by the Emperor Constantine and
finished by Constantius. The inhabitants were Syrians, Greeks, Jews, and
Romans. The Asiatic element prevailed. The whole population amounted, as
Chrysostom states, to 200,000, of whom one half were nominally
Christians. Heathenism was therefore still powerful as to numbers, but
as a religion it had lost all vitality. This was shown by the failure of
the attempt of the Emperor Julian the Apostate to revive the sacrifices
to the gods. When he endeavored in 362 to restore the oracle of Apollo
Daphneus in the famous cypress grove at Antioch and arranged for a
magnificent procession, with libation, dances, and incense, he found in
the temple one solitary old priest, and this priest ominously offered in
sacrifice—a goose! Julian himself relates this ludicrous farce, and
vents his anger at the Antiochians for squandering the rich incomes of
the temple upon Christianity and worldly amusements.

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span>Chrysostom gives us in his sermons lively
pictures of the character of the people and the condition of the church.
The prevailing vices even among Christians were avarice, luxury,
sensuality, and excessive love of the circus and the theatre. “So
great,” he says, “is the depravity of the times, that if a stranger were
to compare the precepts of the gospel with the actual practice of
society, he would infer that men were not the disciples, but the enemies
of Christ.” Gibbon thus describes the morals of Antioch: <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) “The warmth of the climate disposed the
natives to the most intemperate enjoyment of tranquility and opulence,
and the lively licentiousness of the Greeks was blended with the
hereditary softness of the Syrians. Fashion was the only law, pleasure
the only pursuit, and the splendor of dress and furniture was the only
distinction of the citizens of Antioch. The arts of luxury were honored,
the serious and manly virtues were the subject of ridicule, and the
contempt for female modesty and reverent age announced the universal
corruption of the capital of the East. The love of spectacles was the
taste, or rather passion of the Syrians; the most skilful artists were
procured from the adjacent cities. A considerable share of the revenue
was devoted to the public amusements, and the magnificence of the games
of the theatre and circus was considered as the happiness and as the
glory of Antioch.”

<span id="iii.vi-p9"></span><span id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span
id="iii.vi-Page_11"></span>The church of Antioch was rent for
eighty-five years (330–415) by heresy and schism. There were three
parties and as many rival bishops. The Meletians, under the lead of
Meletius, were the party of moderate orthodoxy holding the Nicene Creed;
the Arians, headed by Eudoxius, and supported by the Emperor Valens,
denied the eternal divinity of Christ; the Eustathians, under the
venerated priest Paulinus, were in communion with Athanasius, but were
accused of Sabellianism, which maintained the Divine unity and strict
deity of Christ and the Holy Spirit, but denied the tri-personality
except in the form of three modes of self-revelation. Pope Damasus
declared for Paulinus and condemned Meletius as a heretic. Alexandria
likewise sided against him. Meletius was more than once banished from
his see, and recalled. He died during the sessions of the Council of
Constantinople, 381, over which he presided for a while. His remains
were carried with great solemnities to Antioch and buried by the side of
Babylas the Martyr. Chrysostom reconciled Flavian, the successor of
Meletius, with Alexandria and Rome in 398. Alexander, the successor of
Flavian, led the Eustathians back into the orthodox church in 415, and
thus unity was restored.

<span id="iii.vi-p10"></span>Chrysostom preached Sunday after Sunday and
during Lent, sometimes twice or oftener during the week, even five days
in succession, on the duties and responsibilities of Christians, and
fearlessly attacked the immorality of the city. He declaimed with
special severity against the theatre and the chariot-races; and yet many
of his hearers would run from his sermons to the circus to witness those
exciting spectacles with the same eagerness as Jews and Gentiles. He
exemplified his preaching by a blameless life, and soon acquired great
reputation and won the love of the whole congregation. Whenever he
preached the church was crowded. He had to warn his hearers against
pickpockets, who found an inviting harvest in these dense audiences.

<span id="iii.vi-p11"></span>A serious disturbance which took place
during his career at Antioch, called forth a remarkable effort of his
oratorical powers. The populace of the city, provoked by excessive
taxes, rose in revolt against the Emperor Theodosius the Great, broke
down his statues and those of his deceased excellent wife Flacilla (d.
385) and his son Arcadius, dragged the fragments through the streets,
and committed other acts of violence. The Emperor threatened to destroy
the whole city. This caused general consternation and agony, but the
city was saved by the intercession of Bishop Flavian, who in his old age
proceeded to Constantinople and secured free pardon from the Emperor.
Although a man of violent temper, Theodosius had profound reverence for
bishops, and on another occasion he submitted to the rebuke of St.
Ambrose for the wholesale massacre of the Thessalonians (390).

<span id="iii.vi-p12"></span>In this period of public anxiety, which
lasted several months, Chrysostom delivered series of extempore
orations, in which he comforted the people and exhorted them to correct
their vices. These are his twenty-one *Homilies on the Statues*,
so-called from the overthrow of the imperial statues which gave rise to
them. They were preached during Lent 387. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) In the same year St. Augustin submitted
to baptism at the hands of St. Ambrose in Milan. One of the results of
those sermons was the conversion of a large number of heathens. Thus the
calamity was turned into a blessing to the church.

<span id="iii.vi-p14"></span>During the sixteen or seventeen years of
his labors in Antioch Chrysostom wrote the greater part of his Homilies
and Commentaries; a consolatory Epistle to the despondent Stagirius; the
excellent book on the martyr Babylas, which illustrates by a striking
example the divine power of Christianity; a treatise on Virginity, which
he puts above marriage; and an admonition to a young widow on the glory
of widowhood, and the duty of continuing in it. <span id="page_12">p.
12</span> <span id="iii.vi-Page_12"></span>He disapproved of second
marriage, not as sinful or illegal, but as inconsistent with an ideal
conception of marriage and a high order of piety. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[10:12](1090008.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.vi-p4.1"></span>Migne</span>, III. 693 sqq.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[10:13](1090008.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span> *Decline and Fall*, ch. xxiv.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[11:14](1090008.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p13"></span> Montfaucon goes with tedious minuteness
into the chronology of these sermons. The twentieth was delivered ten
days before Easter, the twenty-first on Easter, after the return of
Flavian from Rome with the Emperor’s pardon. The first sermon was
preached shortly before the sedition and has nothing to do with it, but
is alluded to in the second. It is a temperance sermon, based on Paul’s
advice to Timothy, [1 Tim. v. 23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)<span
id="iii.vi-p13.1"></span>, where he emphasized the word “*little*” and
the “often *infirmities*.”

<span id="fn_14"></span>[12:15](1090008.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p15"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.vi-p15.1"></span>Neander</span> (vol. I.) gives large extracts
from these ascetic treatises with many judicious and discriminating
observations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chrysostom as Patriarch of Constantinople. A.D.
398–404.](1090009)
