[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090111)  [Next](1090113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.xxi"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="xix.xxi-p1.1"></span>Homily XIX.</span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p2"></span>*On the Sunday called
“Episozomenes,”* <span id="fr_1755"></span>[1756](#fn_1755) *to those
who had come to Antioch from the country—also on the subject of avoiding
oaths.*

<span id="xix.xxi-p4"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="xix.xxi-p4.1"></span>Ye</span> have revelled during the last few
days in the Holy Martyrs! Ye have taken your fill of the spiritual
feast! Ye have all exulted with honest exultation! Ye have beheld their
ribs laid bare, and their loins lacerated; the blood flowing forth all
around; ten thousand forms of torture! Ye have seen human nature
exhibiting that which is above nature, and crowns woven with blood! Ye
have danced a goodly dance throughout the whole city; this, your noble
captain <span id="fr_1756"></span>[1757](#fn_1756) leading you on; but
sickness compelled me to remain at home, although against my will. But
if I did not take a part in the festival, I partook of the pleasure of
it. If I could not have the enjoyment of your public assembly, yet did I
share in your gladness. For such is the power of love, that it makes
those who are not actually in the enjoyment to rejoice equally with
those who are; persuading them to think the good things of their
neighbour common to themselves. Therefore even whilst I sat at home, I
was rejoicing with you; and now whilst I am not yet entirely freed from
my sickness, I have risen up, and run to meet you, that I may see your
much desired faces, and take a part in the present festival.

<span id="xix.xxi-p6"></span>2. For I think the present day to be a very
great festival indeed on account of our brethren, who by their presence
beautify our city, and adorn the Church; a people foreign to us in
language, <span id="fr_1757"></span>[1758](#fn_1757) but in harmony with
us concerning the faith, a people passing their <span id="page_465">p.
465</span> <span id="xix.xxi-Page_465"></span>time in tranquillity, and
leading an honest and sober life. For among these men there are no
spectacles of iniquity—no horse racings, nor harlots, nor any of that
riot which pertains to a city, but every kind of licentiousness is
banished, and great sobriety flourishes every where. And the reason is,
that their life is a laborious one; and they have, in the culture of the
soil, a school of virtue and sobriety, and follow that art which God
introduced before all others into our life. For before the sin of Adam,
when he enjoyed much freedom, a certain tillage of the ground was
enjoined upon him; not indeed a laborious or a troublesome one, but one
which afforded him much good discipline, for he was appointed, it is
said, “to till the garden, and to keep it.” Each of these men you may
see at one time employed in yoking the labouring oxen, and guiding the
plough, and cutting the deep furrow; and at another ascending the sacred
pulpit, <span id="fr_1758"></span>[1759](#fn_1758) and cultivating the
souls of those under their authority; at one time cutting away the
thorns from the soil with a bill-hook, at another purging out the sins
of the soul by the Word. For they are not ashamed of work like the
inhabitants of our city, but they are ashamed of idleness, knowing that
this has taught every kind of wickedness; and that to those who love it,
it has proved a teacher of iniquity from the beginning.

<span id="xix.xxi-p9"></span>3. These are our philosophers, and theirs
the best philosophy, exhibiting their virtue not by their outward
appearance, but by their mind. The pagan philosophers are in character
no wise better than those who are engaged on the stage, and in the
sports of actors; and they have nothing to shew beyond the threadbare
cloak, the beard, and the long robe! But these, quite on the contrary,
bidding farewell to staff and beard, and the other accoutrements, have
their souls adorned with the doctrines of the true philosophy, and not
only with the doctrines, but also with the real practice. And were you
to question any one of these, who live a rustic life at the spade and
plough, as to the dogmas respecting which the pagan philosophers have
discoursed an infinite deal, and have expended a multitude of words,
without being able to say any thing sound; one of these would give you
an accurate reply from his store of wisdom. And not only is this to be
wondered at, but that they confirm the credibility of these doctrines by
their actions. For of the fact that we have an immortal soul, and that
we shall hereafter render an account of what we have done here, and
stand before a fearful Tribunal, their minds are at once thoroughly
persuaded, and they have also regulated their whole course of life by
such hopes as these; and have become superior to all worldly show,
instructed as they have been by the sacred Scriptures, that “all is
vanity, yea, vanity of vanities,” <span
id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759) and they do not greedily long for
any of those things which seem to be so splendid.

<span id="xix.xxi-p11"></span>4. These too know how to philosophize
concerning God, even as God hath determined; and if, taking one of them,
you were now to bring forward some pagan philosopher;—or rather, now you
could not find one! <span id="fr_1760"></span>[1761](#fn_1760) —But if
you were to take one of these, and then open the books of their ancient
philosophers, and go through them, and institute an enquiry by way of
parallel as to what these now answer, and the others in their day
philosophically advanced; you would see how much wisdom belonged to the
former, and how much folly to the latter. For whilst some of those would
aver, that the things existing were destitute of a providence, and that
the creation had not its origin from God; that virtue was not sufficient
for itself, but stood in need of wealth, and nobility, and external
splendour, and other things still more ridiculous; and whilst these, on
the other hand, would discourse wisely respecting Providence, respecting
the future Tribunals of judgment, respecting the creative power of God,
bringing forth all things out of nothing, as well as respecting all
other points, although at the same time they were entirely destitute of
worldly schooling; who could but learn from hence the power of Christ,
which hath proved these unlearned and simple persons to be as much wiser
than those, who make so much boast of their wisdom, as men of discretion
are seen to be in comparison of little children? For what harm can
result to them from their simplicity in regard to learning, when their
thoughts are full of much wisdom? And what advantage have those
philosophers from this learning, when the understanding is devoid of
right thoughts? It were just as if one should have a sword that had its
hilt of silver, whilst the blade was weaker than the vilest lead. For
truly these philosophers have their tongue decked out with words and
names, but their understanding is full of mere weakness and good for
nothing. Not so with these philosophers, but quite the reverse. Their
understanding is full of spiritual wis<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>
<span id="xix.xxi-Page_466"></span>dom <span
id="fr_1761"></span>[1762](#fn_1761) and their mode of life is a
transcript of their doctrines. Amongst these there are no luxurious
women; there are no ornaments of dress, nor colours, nor paints; but all
such corruption of manners is discountenanced. Hence the population
under their charge are the more readily trained to sobriety, and the law
which Paul gave, when he directed that food and covering should be had,
and nothing more be sought after, they most rigidly observe. <span
id="fr_1762"></span>[1763](#fn_1762) Amongst them, there are no perfumed
unguents to fascinate the senses; <span
id="fr_1763"></span>[1764](#fn_1763) but the earth bringing forth herbs,
prepares for them a varied fragrance of flowers, above all the skill of
perfumers. For this reason, their bodies as well as souls enjoy a sound
state of health, inasmuch as they have banished all luxury of diet, and
driven off all the evil floods of drunkenness; and they eat just as much
as suffices for subsistence. Let us then not despise them because of
their outward appearance, but let us admire their mind. For of what
advantage is the external habit, when the soul is more wretchedly clad
than any beggar! The man ought to be praised and admired, not for dress,
nay more, not for his bodily form, but for his soul. Lay bare the soul
of these men, and you will see its beauty and the wealth it possesses,
in their words, in their doctrines, and in the whole system of their
manners!

<span id="xix.xxi-p16"></span>5. Let the Gentiles then be ashamed, let
them hide their heads, and slink away on account of their philosophers,
and their wisdom, wretched as it is beyond all folly! For the
philosophers that have been amongst them in their lifetime have hardly
been able to teach their doctrines to a very few, who can easily be
numbered; and when any trifling peril overtook them, they lost even
these. But the disciples of Christ, the fishermen, the publicans, and
the tent-makers, in a few years brought over the whole world to the
truth; and when from that time, ten thousand perils have been constantly
arising, the preaching of the Gospel was so far from being put down,
that it still flourishes and increases; and they taught simple people,
tillers of the ground, and occupied with cattle, to be lovers of wisdom.
Such are the persons, who beside all the rest having deeply rooted in
them that love which is the source of all good things, <span
id="fr_1764"></span>[1765](#fn_1764) have hastened to us, undertaking so
long a journey, that they might come and embrace their fellow-members.

<span id="xix.xxi-p18"></span>6. Come then, and in return for these
favours, (I speak of their love and kind feeling), let us give them a
provision, and so send them home; and let us again raise the question
concerning oaths; that from the minds of all we may pluck up by the
roots this evil custom. But first, I desire to put you a little in mind
to-day of the things we spoke of lately. <span
id="fr_1765"></span>[1766](#fn_1765)

<span id="xix.xxi-p20"></span>When the Jews, having been released from
Persia, and set free from that tyranny, were returned back to their own
county, “I saw,” saith one, “a flying sickle, twenty cubits in length,
and ten cubits broad.” <span id="fr_1766"></span>[1767](#fn_1766) They
heard also the Prophet giving them this instruction, “This is the curse,
that goeth forth over the face of the whole land, and entereth into the
house of him that sweareth falsely; and it shall rest in the midst
thereof, and throw down the timber and all the stones.” When we had read
this passage, we also enquired then why it was, that it should destroy
not the swearer only, but also his house, and we stated this to be the
reason; that God will have the punishments of the most grievous sins to
remain continually visible; that all may afterwards learn prudence.
Inasmuch then as it was necessary that the perjurer when dead should be
buried, and committed to the bosom of the earth; in order that his
wickedness might not be buried along with him, his house was made a
heap, so that all who passed by, beholding it, and learning the reason
of the overthrow, might avoid imitating the sin.

<span id="xix.xxi-p22"></span>7. This also happened at Sodom. For when
they burned in their lust one towards another, then too the very earth
itself was burned up, being kindled by the fire from above. For He
designed, that the vengeance of this sin should permanently remain.

<span id="xix.xxi-p23"></span>And observe the mercy of God! Those who
had sinned, He caused not to continue burning to the present day, but
when they had been for once in flames, He buried them; and burning up
the face of the ground, He placed it visibly before all who after should
desire to look at these things; and now the sight of the land, through
all the generations since, hath given an admonition beyond all powers of
speech, crying out as it were, and saying, “Dare not to do the deeds of
Sodom, lest ye suffer the lot of Sodom!” For precept commonly makes not
so deep an impression upon the mind as a fearful spectacle does, which
bears upon it the vestiges of calamity though all time. And persons that
have visited these places bear witness, who <span id="page_467">p.
467</span> <span id="xix.xxi-Page_467"></span>often, when they hear the
Scripture discoursing of these things, are not much terrified; but when
they have gone and stood upon the site, and see the whole surface of it
disfigured, and have witnessed the effects of the fire, with soil no
where visible, but every thing dust and ashes, they come away astonished
with the sight, and taking with them a strong lesson of chastity. For
truly, the very nature of the punishment was a pattern of the nature of
the sin! Even as they devised a barren intercourse, not having for its
end the procreation of children, so did God bring on them such a
punishment, as made the womb of the land ever barren, and destitute of
all fruits! For this reason also He threatened to destroy the dwellings
of the swearers, in order that by their punishments, they may make
others to be more self-controlled.

<span id="xix.xxi-p24"></span>8. But I am ready to shew to-day, not the
destruction of one, two, or three houses in consequence of oaths, but
that of a whole city and of a people beloved of God; of a nation that
had always enjoyed much of the divine care; and of a race that had
escaped many dangers. <span id="fr_1767"></span>[1768](#fn_1767) For
Jerusalem herself, the city of God, which had the holy ark, and all that
divine service;—where there were once prophets, and the grace of the
Spirit, and the ark; and the tables of the covenant, and the golden
pot;—where angels were frequent visitors;—this city, I say, when a
multitude of wars took place, and many foreign nations made attacks upon
it, as if girt by a wall of adamant, ever laughed them all to scorn, and
whilst the land was utterly destroyed, sustained no injury! And not only
is this to be wondered at, but that frequently in driving out its
enemies, it inflicted upon them a heavy blow, and enjoyed so much of the
providential care of God, that God Himself said, “I found Israel as a
bunch of grapes in the desert; and I beheld your fathers as the earliest
fruit on the fig tree.” <span id="fr_1768"></span>[1769](#fn_1768) And
again, of the city itself: “As olive berries on the extremity of the
highest bough, and they shall say, Do them no harm.” <span
id="fr_1769"></span>[1770](#fn_1769) Nevertheless, the city beloved of
God; that had escaped so many perils; that had been favoured with
pardon, amidst the multitude of its sins; that alone had been able to
avoid captivity, whilst all the rest were carried away, not once or
twice, but very often; was ruined solely by an oath. But how, I proceed
to state.

<span id="xix.xxi-p28"></span>9. One of their kings was Zedekiah. This
Zedekiah took an oath to Nebuchadnezzar, king of the barbarians, that he
would remain in alliance with him. Afterwards he revolted, and went over
to the king of Egypt, disdaining the obligation of his oath, and
suffered the things of which ye shall hear presently. But first, it is
necessary to mention the parable of the prophet, in which he
enigmatically represented all these matters: “The word of the Lord,”
saith he, “came to me, saying, Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak
a parable, and say, Thus saith the Lord God: A great eagle, with great
wings, and long extended, full of claws.” <span
id="fr_1770"></span>[1771](#fn_1770) Here he calls the king of the
Babylonians an eagle, and speaks of him as being “great, and
long-winged;” and he calls him long-extended and “full of claws,” on
account of the multitude of his army, and the greatness of his power,
and the swiftness of his invasion. For just as the wings and claws of
the eagle are his armour, so are horses and soldiers to kings. This
eagle, he goes on to say, “hath the leading <span
id="fr_1771"></span>[1772](#fn_1771) to enter into Lebanon.” What is
meant by the “leading?” Counsel—design. And Judæa is called Lebanon,
because of its situation near that mountain. Afterwards, intending to
speak of the oaths and treaties, “He took,” saith he, “of the seed of
the land, and planted it in a fruitful field, that it might take root by
great waters. He placed it to be looked upon; and it grew, and became a
weak vine, and of small stature, and it stretched out its branches
towards him, and its roots were under him.” <span
id="fr_1772"></span>[1773](#fn_1772) Here he calls the city of
Jerusalem <span id="fr_1773"></span>[1774](#fn_1773) a vine; but in
saying that it stretched out its branches towards the eagle, and that
its roots were under him, he refers to the treaties and alliances made
with him; and that it cast itself upon him. Next, purposing to declare
the iniquity of this, he saith, “And there was another great eagle,”
(speaking of the Egyptian king), “with great wings, and having many
claws; <span id="fr_1774"></span>[1775](#fn_1774) and the vine did bend
itself toward him, and its tendril toward him, and shot out its
branches, that it might be watered. Therefore, I said, Thus saith the
Lord God: Shall it prosper?” <span id="fr_1775"></span>[1776](#fn_1775)
That is to say, “after having broken the oath, and the treaties, shall
it be able to remain, or to be safe, or to avoid falling?” Presently,
for the purpose of shewing that this is not to happen, but that it is
certainly to be destroyed on account of the oath, he discourses
concerning its punishment, and alleges the cause. “For its tender roots
and <span id="page_468">p. 468</span> <span
id="xix.xxi-Page_468"></span>its fruits shall become corrupt, and all
which springs therefrom shall be withered.” <span
id="fr_1776"></span>[1777](#fn_1776) And for the purpose of shewing that
it will not be destroyed by human strength, but because it hath made God
its enemy by means of these oaths, he subjoins, “Not by a mighty arm,
nor by much people, to pluck it up by its roots.” Such indeed is the
parable, but the prophet again explains it, when he says, “Behold, the
king of Babylon cometh against Jerusalem.” <span
id="fr_1777"></span>[1778](#fn_1777) And then, after saying some other
things between, he mentions the oaths and the treaties. “For” saith he,
“he shall make a covenant with him;” <span
id="fr_1778"></span>[1779](#fn_1778) and presently, speaking of the
departure from it, he goes on to say, “And he will depart from him, by
sending messengers into Egypt, that they might give him horses and much
people.” And then he proceeds to shew that it is on account of the oath
that all this destruction is to take place. “Surely in the place where
the king dwelleth that made him king, he who hath despised My curse, and
hath transgressed My covenant, in the midst of Babylon he shall die; and
not by great power nor by multitude, because he despised the oath in
transgressing this My covenant; I will surely recompense upon his own
head this My oath which he hath dishonoured, and My covenant which he
hath broken; and I will spread My net upon him.” <span
id="fr_1779"></span>[1780](#fn_1779) Seest thou, that not once, or
twice, but repeatedly, it is said that because of the oath he was to
suffer all these things. For God is inexorable when oaths are treated
contemptuously. Nor merely from the punishment which was brought upon
the city by the oath, but also from the delay, and the postponement, may
it be seen how much God is concerned for the inviolability of oaths.
“For it came to pass,” we are told, “in the ninth year of the reign of
Zedekiah, on the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadnezzar the king of
Babylon came, and all his host, against Jerusalem, and pitched against
it, and built a wall against it round about, and the city was besieged
until the eleventh year of king Zedekiah, and the ninth day of the
month, <span id="fr_1780"></span>[1781](#fn_1780) and there was no bread
for the people to eat, and the city was broken up.” <span
id="fr_1781"></span>[1782](#fn_1781) He might indeed, at once from the
first day, have delivered them up, and have given them into the hands of
their enemies; but He permitted that they should first be wasted for the
space of three years, and experience a most distressing siege; to the
end that during this interval, being humbled by the terror of the forces
without, or the famine that oppressed the city within, they might compel
the king, however unwillingly, to submit to the barbarian; and some
alleviation might be obtained for the sin committed. And to prove that
this is true, and no conjecture of my own, hear what He saith to him by
the prophet: “If thou shalt go forth to the king of Babylon’s princes,
then thy soul shall live, and this city shall not be burned with fire;
and thou shalt live, and thine house. But if thou wilt not go forth to
the king of Babylon’s princes, then shall this city be given into the
hand of the Chaldeans; and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt
not escape out of their hand. And the king said, I am afraid of the Jews
that are fallen to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hands
and they mock me. But Jeremiah said, They shall not deliver thee. Obey,
I beseech thee, the word of the Lord, which I speak unto thee; so shall
it be better for thee, and thy soul shall live. But if thou refuse to go
forth, this is the word that the Lord hath shewed me. All the women that
are left in the king of Judah’s house, shall be brought forth to the
king of Babylon’s princes; and those shall say, The men who are at peace
with thee have deceived thee, and have prevailed over thee; they shall
prevail when thy feet slip; they are turned away from thee, and they
shall bring out all thy wives, and thy children to the Chaldeans, and
thou shalt not escape out of their hand, for thou shalt be taken by the
hand of the king of Babylon, and this city shall be burned with
fire.” <span id="fr_1782"></span>[1783](#fn_1782)

<span id="xix.xxi-p42"></span>10. But when He did not prevail with him
by this address, but he remained in his sin and transgression, after
three years, God delivered up the city, displaying at once His own
clemency and the ingratitude of that king. And entering in with the
utmost ease, they “burnt the house of the Lord, and the king’s house,
and the houses of Jerusalem, and every great house, the captain of the
guard <span id="fr_1783"></span>[1784](#fn_1783) burnt, and overthrew
the wall of Jerusalem;” <span id="fr_1784"></span>[1785](#fn_1784) and
everywhere there was the fire of the barbarian, the oath being the
conductor of the conflagration, and carrying about the flame in all
directions. “And the captain of the guard carried away the rest of the
people that were left in the city, and the fugitives that fell away to
the king of Babylon. <span id="fr_1785"></span>[1786](#fn_1785) And the
pillars of brass that were in the house of the Lord the Chaldeans brake
up, and the bases, and the brazen sea that was in the house of the Lord,
did the Chaldees break in <span id="page_469">p. 469</span> <span
id="xix.xxi-Page_469"></span>pieces. And the pots, and the flesh-hooks,
and the bowls, and the censers, and all the vessels of brass wherewith
they ministered, took they away. And the firepans, and all the golden
and silver bowls they took away. Moreover, Nebuzaradan, the captain of
the guard, took away the two pillars, and the bases, and the sea which
Solomon had made in the house of the Lord. And they took away Seraiah
the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers
of the door; and out of the city one eunuch that was set over the men of
war; and five men that were in the king’s presence; and Shaphan the
chief captain, and the principal scribe, and threescore men. And he took
these, and brought them to the king of Babylon, and the king smote them,
and slew them.” <span id="fr_1786"></span>[1787](#fn_1786)

<span id="xix.xxi-p47"></span>11. Be mindful therefore, I pray, now of
the “flying sickle” that “resteth in the swearer’s house;” and
“destroyeth the walls and the timber and the stones.” Be mindful, I
pray, how this oath entered into the city, and overturned houses, and
temple, and walls, and splendid buildings, and made the city an heap;
and that neither the Holy of Holies, nor the sacred vessels, nor any
thing else could ward off that punishment and vengeance, for that the
oath had been transgressed! The city, indeed, was thus miserably
destroyed. But the king endured what was still more wretched and
deplorable. <span id="fr_1787"></span>[1788](#fn_1787) And as the flying
sickle overthrew the buildings, so did it also cut him down in his
flight. For “the king,” it says, “went forth by night, by way of the
gate, and the Chaldeans encompassed the city, and the army of the
Chaldeans pursued after the king and overtook him, and they took the
king, and brought him to the king of Babylon, and the king of Babylon
gave judgment <span id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788) upon Zedekiah,
and slew his sons before his face, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and
bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.” What is meant by
the expression, “he spake judgment with him?” He demanded of him an
account of his conduct, he pleaded against him; and first he slew his
two sons, that he might be a spectator of the calamity of his house, and
might behold <span id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789) that deplorable
tragedy; and then he put out his own eyes. For what reason, I ask again,
did this occur? In order that he might go as a teacher to the
barbarians, and too the Jews who dwelt among them; and that they who had
eyes might discern by him who was bereft of sight, how great an evil is
an oath! Nor only these; but all who dwelt by the way, beholding the man
fettered and blinded, might learn by his calamity the greatness of his
sin. Therefore one of the prophets declares, “He shall not see
Babylon.” <span id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790) And another, “He
shall be carried away to Babylon.” <span
id="fr_1791"></span>[1792](#fn_1791) And the prophecy seems, indeed, to
be contradictory. But it is not so; for both of these are true. For he
saw not Babylon, though he was carried away to Babylon. How then did he
not see Babylon? Because it was in Judæa he had his eyes put out; for
where the oath had been set at nought, there also was it vindicated, and
he himself subjected to punishment. And how was he carried away to
Babylon? In a state of captivity. For since the punishment was twofold,
deprivation of sight and captivity, the prophets took them severally.
The one saith, “He shall not see Babylon,” speaking of the loss of his
eyes; the other saith, “He shall be carried away to Babylon,” signifying
his captivity.

<span id="xix.xxi-p53"></span>12. Knowing these things, then, brethren,
and gathering up what has been now advanced, as well as what has been
said before; let us at last desist from this evil custom, yea, I pray
and beseech you all! For if in the old dispensation, when the Jews had
not the strictest moral wisdom required of them, but much condescension
was extended to them, such wrath was the effect of one oath; such
capture and captivity; what punishment is it likely that those who swear
should now be subjected to, after an express law forbidding the
practice, and so large an addition of precepts. Is it, indeed, all that
is required, that we come to the assembly, and hear what is spoken? Why
truly it is a reason for greater condemnation, and for more inevitable
punishment, that we are continually hearing, and yet do not what is
bidden! What excuse shall we have, or what pardon, if assembling here
from earliest youth to latest old age, and enjoying the advantage of so
much instruction, we remain just like them, and do not take pains to
correct a single defect. Let no one henceforth allege custom. For this
is the very thing at which I am indignant and provoked, that we are not
able to get the better of custom. And, pray, if we do not get the better
of custom, how can we get the better of concupiscence, which hath its
root even in the principles of our nature; for it is natural to feel
desire; but to desire wickedly, comes after of choice. But this practice
of swearing takes not even its first <span id="page_470">p. 470</span>
<span id="xix.xxi-Page_470"></span>principle from nature, <span
id="fr_1792"></span>[1793](#fn_1792) but from mere negligence.

<span id="xix.xxi-p55"></span>13. And that thou mayest learn that not
from the difficulty of the thing, but through our inattention, this sin
has advanced to such a pitch, let us call to mind how many things far
more difficult than these, men accomplish; and that too without
expecting any recompense therefrom. Let us think what services the Devil
imposes; how laborious, how troublesome they are; and yet, the
difficulty has not become an obstacle to these services. For what can be
more difficult, I ask, than when any young person delivering himself up
to those, who undertake to make his limbs supple and pliant, uses his
most strenuous exertion to bend his whole body into the exact shape of a
wheel, and to turn over upon the pavement; his powers being tasked at
the same time through the eyes, and through the movement of the hands,
as well as other convolutions for the purpose of being transformed into
the likeness of woman-kind. <span id="fr_1793"></span>[1794](#fn_1793)
Yet neither the difficulty of these feats, nor the degradation arising
from them, are thought of. And again, those who are dragged upon the
dancing-stage, and use the members of the body as though they were
wings, who that beholds them can help being struck with wonder? So too
they who toss knives aloft in the air one after another, and catch them
all by the handle, whom might they not put to shame of those who refuse
to undergo any labour for the sake of virtue? And what can any one say
of those men, who balancing a pole on the forehead, keep it just as
steady as a tree rooted in the ground? And this is not the only
marvellous part of the affair but that they set little children to
wrestle with one another on the top of the tree; and neither the hands,
nor any other part of the body assisting, the forehead alone sustains
the pole unshaken, and with more steadiness than any kind of fastening.
Again: another walks on the slenderest rope, with the same fearlessness
as men do when they run over level plains. Nevertheless these things,
which even in thought seem impracticable, have become possible by art.
What like this have we, I ask, to allege concerning oaths? What kind of
difficulty? what toil? what art? what danger? There is only needed on
our part a little earnestness, and the whole of our task will be quickly
performed.

<span id="xix.xxi-p57"></span>14. And do not tell me, “I have
accomplished the greater part of it;” but if thou hast not accomplished
the whole, consider that thou hast not as yet done any thing; for this
little, if neglected, is destruction to all the rest. Often indeed when
men have built a house, and put on the roof, they have destroyed the
whole fabric, by not making any concern of a single tile that has been
shaken off from it. And one may see the same thing occur with respect to
garments; for there too if a small hole is made, and not repaired, a
large rent is the consequence. And this also is frequently the case in
regard to floods; for these, if they find but a small entrance, let in
the whole torrent. Thou also, then, even if thou hast fortified thyself
all around, and but a small part be left still unfortified, yet block up
this also against the devil, that thou mayest be made strong on all
sides! Thou hast seen the sickle! Thou hast seen the head of John! Thou
hast heard the history pertaining to Saul! Thou hast heard the manner of
the Jewish captivity! And beside all these, thou hast heard the sentence
of Christ declaring, that not only to commit perjury, but to swear in
any way, is a diabolical thing, and the whole a device of the evil
one. <span id="fr_1794"></span>[1795](#fn_1794) Thou hast heard that
every where perjuries follow oaths. Putting all these things then
together, write them upon thy understanding. Dost thou not see how women
and little children suspend Gospels <span
id="fr_1795"></span>[1796](#fn_1795) from their necks as a powerful
amulet, and carry them about in all places wherever they go. Thus do
thou write the commands of the Gospel and its laws upon thy mind. Here
there is no need of gold or property, or of buying a book; but of the
will only, and the affections of the soul awakened, and the Gospel will
be thy surer guardian, carrying it as thou wilt then do, not outside,
but treasured up within; yea, in the soul’s secret chambers. When thou
risest up then from thy bed, and <span id="page_471">p. 471</span> <span
id="xix.xxi-Page_471"></span>when thou goest out of thine house, repeat
this law: “I say unto you, Swear not at all.” <span
id="fr_1796"></span>[1797](#fn_1796) And the saying will be to thee a
discipline; for there is no need of much labour, but only of a moderate
degree of attention. And that this is true, may thus be proved. Call thy
son, and frighten him, and threaten to lay a few stripes upon him, if he
does not duly observe this law; and thou wilt see, how he will forthwith
abstain from this custom. Is it not therefore truly absurd, that little
children, out of the fear we inspire, should perform this commandment,
and that we should not fear God as our sons fear us?

<span id="xix.xxi-p61"></span>15. What then I said before this, I now
again repeat. Let us lay down a law for ourselves in this matter; not to
meddle either with public or private affairs until we have fulfilled
this law; and then surely under the pressure of this obligation we shall
easily conquer, and we shall at once adorn ourselves, and decorate our
city. For consider what a thing it would be to have it said every where
throughout the world, “A practice becoming Christians is established at
Antioch, and you will hear no one giving utterance to an oath, even
though the greatest necessity is laid upon him!” This is what the
neighbouring cities will certainly hear; nay, not the neighbouring
cities only, but even to the ends of the earth will the report be
conveyed. For it is indeed probable that both the merchants who mix with
you, and others who arrive from this place, will report all these
matters. When, therefore, many persons in the way of encomium mention
the harbours of other cities, or the markets, or the abundance of wares,
enable those who come from hence to say, that there is that at Antioch,
which is to be seen in no other city; for that the men who dwell there
would sooner have their tongues cut out, than suffer an oath to proceed
from their mouths! This will be your ornament and defence, and not only
so, but it will bring an abundant reward. For others also will certainly
emulate, and imitate you. But if, when a person has gained but one or
two, <span id="fr_1797"></span>[1798](#fn_1797) he shall receive so
great a reward from God; what recompense shall ye not receive when ye
are the instructors of the whole world. It is your duty then to bestir
yourselves, to be watchful, and to be sober; knowing that not only from
our own personal good works, but from those we have also wrought in
others, shall we receive the best recompense, and enjoy much favour with
God, which may He grant us all continually to enjoy, and hereafter to
obtain the kingdom of heaven, in Christ Jesus our Lord; to Whom with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, be glory and power both now and ever, and
world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1755"></span>[464:1756](1090112.htm#fr_1755) <span
id="xix.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p3"></span> Τῆς ̓Επισωζομ™νης. The Sunday *before*
Ascension Day, which, according to Allatius, was called Episozomene by
the Cappadocians; but little seems to be certainly known on the subject.
The Homily is placed here on account of the argument continued in it.
See Montf. Pref. The philosophers may not have returned, or he may refer
to the superiority of the ancients.

<span id="fn_1756"></span>[464:1757](1090112.htm#fr_1756) <span
id="xix.xxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p5"></span> Flavian, who had returned before Easter.

<span id="fn_1757"></span>[464:1758](1090112.htm#fr_1757) <span
id="xix.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p7"></span> It seems that they spoke not the Greek,
but the Syriac language.

<span id="fn_1758"></span>[465:1759](1090112.htm#fr_1758) <span
id="xix.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p8"></span> τὸ ἱερον βῆμα. The whole of the raised
part of the Church, entered by none but the clergy, was so called. On
the cases in which secular occupations were allowed to the clergy, see
Bingham, b. vi. c. iv. sec. 13.

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[465:1760](1090112.htm#fr_1759) <span
id="xix.xxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p10"></span> [Eccl. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002)<span id="xix.xxi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1760"></span>[465:1761](1090112.htm#fr_1760) <span
id="xix.xxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p12"></span> St. Chrysostom here satirically alludes
to the flight of the philosophers from the city during the panic
succeeding the sedition. See Homily XVII.

<span id="fn_1761"></span>[466:1762](1090112.htm#fr_1761) <span
id="xix.xxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p13"></span> From the marg. reading, al. “philosophy.”

<span id="fn_1762"></span>[466:1763](1090112.htm#fr_1762) <span
id="xix.xxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p14"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008)<span id="xix.xxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1763"></span>[466:1764](1090112.htm#fr_1763) <span
id="xix.xxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p15"></span> Comp. *Georg*. ii. 466.

<span id="fn_1764"></span>[466:1765](1090112.htm#fr_1764) <span
id="xix.xxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p17"></span> [Eph. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span id="xix.xxi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1765"></span>[466:1766](1090112.htm#fr_1765) <span
id="xix.xxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p19"></span> Bingham asserts, that this Homily and
Homily XV. appear to have been preached on the same day, *Antiquities*,
b. 14, c. 4, sec. 8, vol. 4. The opening of the Homily disproves this.
Bingham’s mistake is easily accounted for, by the wording of this
passage in the Greek.

<span id="fn_1766"></span>[466:1767](1090112.htm#fr_1766) <span
id="xix.xxi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p21"></span> [Zech.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#002)<span id="xix.xxi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1767"></span>[467:1768](1090112.htm#fr_1767) <span
id="xix.xxi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p25"></span> St. Chrysostom here carries on the
argument against the use of oaths, which he had broken off in Homily
XIV., after ending the history of Saul and Jonathan.

<span id="fn_1768"></span>[467:1769](1090112.htm#fr_1768) <span
id="xix.xxi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p26"></span> [Hosea ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010)<span id="xix.xxi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1769"></span>[467:1770](1090112.htm#fr_1769) <span
id="xix.xxi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p27"></span> [Isa. lxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008)<span id="xix.xxi-p27.1"></span>, not
exactly as LXX.

<span id="fn_1770"></span>[467:1771](1090112.htm#fr_1770) <span
id="xix.xxi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p29"></span> [Ezek.
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003)<span id="xix.xxi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1771"></span>[467:1772](1090112.htm#fr_1771) <span
id="xix.xxi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p30"></span> τὸ ἥγημα, literally the *generalship*, as
that of an army.

<span id="fn_1772"></span>[467:1773](1090112.htm#fr_1772) <span
id="xix.xxi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p31"></span> [Ezek.
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#006)<span id="xix.xxi-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1773"></span>[467:1774](1090112.htm#fr_1773) <span
id="xix.xxi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p32"></span> Rather the king, who was of the seed
(royal) of the land, but made king by Nebuchadnezzar, [2 Kings xxiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#017)<span id="xix.xxi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1774"></span>[467:1775](1090112.htm#fr_1774) <span
id="xix.xxi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p33"></span> In this expression of *many claws*, and
in some others, the LXX. differs from the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_1775"></span>[467:1776](1090112.htm#fr_1775) <span
id="xix.xxi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p34"></span> [Ezek.
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#008)<span id="xix.xxi-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1776"></span>[468:1777](1090112.htm#fr_1776) <span
id="xix.xxi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p35"></span> [Ezek. xvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#009)<span id="xix.xxi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1777"></span>[468:1778](1090112.htm#fr_1777) <span
id="xix.xxi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p36"></span> [Ezek. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#012)<span id="xix.xxi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1778"></span>[468:1779](1090112.htm#fr_1778) <span
id="xix.xxi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p37"></span> [Ezek. xvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#014)<span id="xix.xxi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1779"></span>[468:1780](1090112.htm#fr_1779) <span
id="xix.xxi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p38"></span> [Ezek. xvii.
16-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#016)<span id="xix.xxi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1780"></span>[468:1781](1090112.htm#fr_1780) <span
id="xix.xxi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p39"></span> The *fourth*, [Jer.
39:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#002), [Jer.
52:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#006)<span id="xix.xxi-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1781"></span>[468:1782](1090112.htm#fr_1781) <span
id="xix.xxi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p40"></span> [2 Kings xxv.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001)<span id="xix.xxi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1782"></span>[468:1783](1090112.htm#fr_1782) <span
id="xix.xxi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p41"></span> [Jer. xxxviii.
17-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#017)<span id="xix.xxi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1783"></span>[468:1784](1090112.htm#fr_1783) <span
id="xix.xxi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p43"></span> LXX., ‡ρχιμ€γειρος, *chief of the cooks*,
the Hebrew is literally *of the slaughterers*.

<span id="fn_1784"></span>[468:1785](1090112.htm#fr_1784) <span
id="xix.xxi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p44"></span> [2 Kings
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#009), [Jer.
39:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#008)<span id="xix.xxi-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1785"></span>[468:1786](1090112.htm#fr_1785) <span
id="xix.xxi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p45"></span> [Jer. xxxix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#009)<span id="xix.xxi-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1786"></span>[469:1787](1090112.htm#fr_1786) <span
id="xix.xxi-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p46"></span> [2 Kings xxv.
13-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#013)<span id="xix.xxi-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1787"></span>[469:1788](1090112.htm#fr_1787) <span
id="xix.xxi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p48"></span> [2 Kings xxv.
4-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004)<span id="xix.xxi-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[469:1789](1090112.htm#fr_1788) <span
id="xix.xxi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p49"></span> Lit. *spake judgment with him*, as E.V.
mar.

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[469:1790](1090112.htm#fr_1789) <span
id="xix.xxi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p50"></span> The last Par. Ed. adopts ἴδῃ from Savile,
and so M. and three <span class="c12"><span
id="xix.xxi-p50.1"></span>mss</span>. at Venice. Ben. ¹δε, N.R. and Lat.
εἶδε.

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[469:1791](1090112.htm#fr_1790) <span
id="xix.xxi-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p51"></span> [Ezek. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013)<span id="xix.xxi-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1791"></span>[469:1792](1090112.htm#fr_1791) <span
id="xix.xxi-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p52"></span> [Jer. xxxii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#005)<span id="xix.xxi-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1792"></span>[470:1793](1090112.htm#fr_1792) <span
id="xix.xxi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p54"></span> This is the reading in some <span
class="c12"><span id="xix.xxi-p54.1"></span>mss</span>. adopted by
Savile, but the Benedictine readsἐκ τῆς τροαιρ›σεως “from moral choice,”
or “purpose,” *i.e*., aiming at something supposed to be good.

<span id="fn_1793"></span>[470:1794](1090112.htm#fr_1793) <span
id="xix.xxi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p56"></span> Xenophon, in his Symposium, describes a
dancing girl as performing tricks of this kind, “turning over backwards,
bent into the form of a wheel,” and “reading and writing while whirled
on a potter’s wheel,” &c. (on which Socrates takes occasion to say how
much women might learn). Wilkinson observes, that this bears some
resemblance to a feat indicated in Egyptian paintings, not less than
1300 years before the age of Socrates. See Manners and Customs of the
Ancient Egyptians, vol. ii. p. 415. Of the degradation attached to such
feats, see Herodotus, b. vi. c. 129.

<span id="fn_1794"></span>[470:1795](1090112.htm#fr_1794) <span
id="xix.xxi-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p58"></span> So *cometh of evil* may be understood.
St. Chrysostom scarcely allows an oath in any case, unless perhaps as
quoted on [Eph. i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)<span
id="xix.xxi-p58.1"></span>. His words are sometimes marked as *caute
legenda*. Other Fathers, and the usual practice, allowed them on *just
occasions*. See Bingham, xvi. c. vii. sec. 4. Where, however, St.
Athanasius uses a qualified form of putting an oath. See also his
Comment on [Ps. lxiii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#011)<span
id="xix.xxi-p58.2"></span>, he speaks almost as strongly as St.
Chrysostom, as does also St. Basil, still using himself an affirmation
before God, and discussing questions of obligation by oath.

<span id="fn_1795"></span>[470:1796](1090112.htm#fr_1795) <span
id="xix.xxi-p58.3"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p59"></span> Texts or extracts from the Gospels. On [1
Cor. xvi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#009)<span
id="xix.xxi-p59.1"></span>, Hom. XLIII., he notices a like practice.
Bingham says, b. xvi. c. v. sec. 6, that he, and St. Basil, and St.
Epiphanius, *complain* of it, but the passages he quotes do not do so.
St. Chrys. tolerates this, seemingly, but expressly denies its efficacy
as a mere charm. On the use of charms he is severe, though used by
Christians, and containing nothing of decidedly heathenish import. He
considers making the sign of the cross as *opposed* to these, and an act
of faith. See on Ep. to Col. Hom. VIII. Suicer in Εὐαγγ™λιον, and St.
Chrys. in Matt. Hom. LXXII.

<span id="fn_1796"></span>[471:1797](1090112.htm#fr_1796) <span
id="xix.xxi-p59.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p60"></span> [Matt. v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)<span id="xix.xxi-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1797"></span>[471:1798](1090112.htm#fr_1797) <span
id="xix.xxi-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p62"></span> [Jas. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020)<span id="xix.xxi-p62.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XX](1090113)
