[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090010)  [Next](1090012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX</span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.ix-p1.2"></span>.—*Chrysostom and Eudoxia. His Second
Banishment, <span class="c12"><span id="iii.ix-p1.3"></span>a.d</span>.
403.*</span>

<span id="iii.ix-p2"></span>The restored patriarch and the repentant
empress seemed reconciled, and vied with one another in extravagant
laudations for two months, when the feud broke out afresh and ended in
perpetual exile and death.

<span id="iii.ix-p3"></span>Eudoxia was a beautiful, imperious,
intriguing and revengeful woman, who despised her husband and indulged
her passions. Not content with the virtual rule of the Roman empire, she
aspired to semi-divine honors, which used to be paid to the heathen
Cæsars. A column of porphyry with her silver statue for public adoration
was erected in September, 403, on the forum before the church of St.
Sophia, and dedicated amid boisterous and licentious revelry, which
disturbed the sacred services.

<span id="iii.ix-p4"></span>Chrysostom ascended the pulpit on the
commemoration day of the martyrdom of John the Baptist, and thundered
his righteous indignation against all who shared in these profane
amusements, the people, the prefect, and the haughty woman on the
throne. In the heat of his zeal the imprudent words are said to have
escaped his lips: “Again Herodias is raging, again she is dancing, again
she demands the head of John on a platter.” <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md) The comparison of Eudoxia with Herodias,
and himself (John) with John the Baptist was even more directly personal
than his former allusion to the relation of Jezebel and Elijah. Whether
he really spoke these or similar words is at least doubtful, but they
were reported to Eudoxia, who as a woman and an empress could never
forgive such an insult. She demanded from the emperor signal redress. In
the conflict of imperial and episcopal authority the former achieved a
physical and temporary, the latter a moral and enduring victory.

<span id="iii.ix-p6"></span>The enemies of Chrysostom flocked like
vultures down to their prey. Theophilus directed the plot from a safe
distance. Arcadius was persuaded to issue an order for the removal of
Chrysostom. He continued to preach and refused to leave the church over
which God had placed him, but had to yield to armed force. He was
dragged by imperial guards from the cathedral on the vigil of the
resurrection in 404, while the sacrament of baptism was being
administered to hundreds of catechumens. “The waters of regeneration,”
says Palladius, “were stained with blood.” The female candidates, half
dressed, were driven by licentious soldiers into the dark streets. The
eucharistic elements were profaned by pagan hands. The clergy in their
priestly robes were ejected and chased through the city. The horrors of
that night were long afterwards remembered with a shudder. During the
greater part of the Easter week the city was kept in a state of
consternation. Private dwellings were invaded, and <span id="page_15">p.
15</span> <span id="iii.ix-Page_15"></span>suspected Joannites—the
partisans of Chrysostom—thrown into prison, scourged and tortured.
Chrysostom, who was shut up in his episcopal palace, twice narrowly
escaped assassination.

<span id="iii.ix-p7"></span>At last on June 5, 404, the timid and long
hesitating Arcadius signed the edict of banishment. Chrysostom received
it with calm submission, and after a final prayer in the cathedral with
some of his faithful bishops, and a tender farewell to his beloved
Olympias and her attendant deaconesses, he surrendered himself to the
guards and was conveyed at night to the Asiatic shore. He had scarcely
left the city, when the cathedral was consumed by fire. The charge of
incendiarism was raised against his friends, but neither threats, nor
torture and mutilation could elicit a confession of guilt. He refused to
acknowledge Arsacius and Atticus as his successors; and this was made a
crime punishable with degradation, fine and imprisonment. The clergy who
continued faithful to him were deposed and banished. Pope Innocent of
Rome was appealed to, pronounced the synod which had condemned
Chrysostom irregular, annulled the deposition, and wrote him a letter of
sympathy, and urged upon Arcadius the convocation of a general council,
but without effect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[14:18](1090011.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p5"></span> According to the report of <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.ix-p5.1"></span>Socrates</span>, VI. 18, and
<span class="c12"><span id="iii.ix-p5.2"></span>Sozomenus</span>, VIII.
20. A homily which begins with this exordium: π€λιν ̔Ηρωδίας μαίνεται,
π€λιν ταρ€σσεται, π€λιν ὀρχεῖται, π€λιν ἐπὶ πίνακι τὴν κεφαλὴν τοῦ
'Ιω€ννου ξητεῖ λαβεῖν (comp. [Mark vi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#025)<span id="iii.ix-p5.3"></span>.md), is
unworthy of his pen and rejected as spurious by Tillemont, Savile and
Montfaucon. But it is quite probable that Chrysostom made some allusion
to Eudoxia which might be construed by his enemies in that way. See
<span class="c12"><span id="iii.ix-p5.4"></span>Neander</span>, II. 177
sq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chrysostom in Exile. His Death. A.D. 404–407.](1090012.md)
