[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090085)  [Next](1090087.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.ii"></span> <span id="page_307">p. 307</span> <span
id="xviii.ii-Page_307"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>INTRODUCTION TO THE CORRESPONDENCE OF ST.
CHRYSOSTOM, AND THE CHURCH AT CONSTANTINOPLE, WITH INNOCENT, BISHOP OF
ROME.</span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="xviii.ii-p2.1"></span>Of</span> these four letters the last three
were written during the final exile of St. Chrysostom from
Constantinople. The first was written a few weeks before his departure.
The complication of events which led to that exile cannot be unfolded
here. The student will find a full account of them in most historians of
this period of the Church, both ancient and modern, and in the Life of
St. Chrysostom by the editor of this volume chapters XVI–XIX. It must
suffice to say here that Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria having been
summoned by an imperial mandate to Constantinople to be tried on the
charge of having cruelly ill-treated certain Egyptian monks, formed a
cabal amongst the enemies of St. Chrysostom, and artfully contrived to
change his own position from that of the accused into that of the
accuser. His devices were in the end only too successful, and in the
summer of the year 404 St. Chrysostom was driven from his see, never to
return.

<span id="xviii.ii-p3"></span>The first letter of St. Chrysostom seems
to have been written soon after Easter 404 and refers to the events
immediately preceding his expulsion.

<span id="xviii.ii-p4"></span>The second was written, as we learn from
the letter itself, after he had entered the third year of his exile,
probably near the close of the year 406.

<span id="xviii.ii-p5"></span>Copies of the first letter were addressed
also to Venerius Bishop of Milan, and Chromatius Bishop of Aquileia. It
is interesting therefore as indicating the relation between the Eastern
and Western branches of the Church at the beginning of the fifth
century. On the one hand it illustrates the growing tendency of
Christendom to appeal to the authority of the Western Church, especially
of the Bishop of Rome, on questions of ecclesiastical discipline. The
law-making, law-protecting spirit of the West is invoked to restrain the
turbulence and licentiousness of the East. No jealousy is entertained of
the Patriarch of the old Rome by the Patriarch of the new. But on the
other hand it is to be noted that the Bishop of Rome is in no sense
addressed as a supreme arbitrator: aid and sympathy are solicited from
him as from an elder brother, and two other prelates of Italy are joint
recipients with him of the appeal.

<span id="xviii.ii-p6"></span>To Chrysostom Innocent writes, as friend
to friend and bishop to brother bishop, a letter of Christian
consolation and encouragement, not entering into the legal questions of
the case, and not pledging himself to decisive action of any kind. In
his letter to the Church of Constantinople he denounces the illegality
of the late proceedings of Theophilus and his accomplices, in the
strongest terms; but insists upon the necessity of convoking an
œcumenical council as the only means of allaying the tempest. And it
must be allowed that he did his best to accomplish this object. He wrote
a letter to Honorius, the Emperor of the Western Empire, who resided at
Ravenna, describing the pitiable condition of the Church at
Constantinople. The Emperor issued an order for the convention of an
Italian synod, and the synod, swayed no doubt by Innocent, requested
Honorius to write to his brother Arcadius the Eastern Emperor urging the
convention of a general council to be held <span id="page_308">p.
308</span> <span id="xviii.ii-Page_308"></span>in Thessalonica which
would be a convenient meeting-point for the prelates of East and West.
Honorius complied, and the letter was despatched under the care of a
deputation from the Italian Church, consisting of five bishops, two
priests and a deacon. They were the bearers also of letters from
Innocent, and the Bishops of Milan and Aquileia, and of a memorial from
the Italian synod, recommending that Chrysostom should be reinstated in
his see before he was required to take his trial before the Council. The
party hostile to Chrysostom however had now such complete sway over the
court at Constantinople that the deputation never succeeded in getting
an audience with the Emperor, and after suffering many insults and
indignities, returned to Italy without having accomplished anything.

<span id="xviii.ii-p7"></span>The letters of Innocent were probably
written in Latin, and afterwards translated into Greek. The Greek
version is in several passages clumsy and obscure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter from St. John Chrysostom to Innocent, Bishop of
Rome.](1090087.md)
