[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090101)  [Next](1090103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.xi"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="xix.xi-p1.1"></span>Homily IX.</span>

<span id="xix.xi-p2"></span>Commendation of those who had laid aside the
practice of swearing. It is shown that no one need scruple about hearing
the divine oracles in the Church after a meal. Answer to the question,
Why it was so long before the Holy Scriptures were given? Comment on the
passage, “The heavens declare the glory of God,” with a description of
the natural world. And finally, an admonition against swearing.

<span id="xix.xi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="xix.xi-p3.1"></span>It</span> was but lately that I spoke to you as
I do now to you again! And O that I could be always with you,—yea,
rather am I always with you, though not by bodily presence, yet by the
power of love! For I have no other life but <span
id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393) you, and the care of your
salvation. As the husbandman hath no other anxiety, but about his seeds
and his harvests; and the pilot about the waves and the harbours; so the
preacher is anxious with respect to his auditors and their progress,
even as I am at the present time! Wherefore I bear you all upon my mind,
not only here, but also at home. For if the multitude be great, and the
measure of my heart be narrow, yet love is wide; and “ye are not
straitened in us.” I will not add what follows next, <span
id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394) for neither are we straitened with
you. Whence is this apparent? Because I have met with many who have
said, “We have performed the precept, by making rules for each other,
defining penalties for those who swear, and enforcing punishment upon
those who transgress this law.” A punishment which is indeed well
becoming you, <span id="fr_1395"></span>[1396](#fn_1395) and which is a
sign of the greatest charity. For I am not ashamed of making myself busy
in these matters, since this love of interference does not proceed from
idle curiosity but from tender care. <span
id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396) For if it be no reproach to the
physician to make enquiry concerning the patient, neither is it any
fault in us to be ever asking about your salvation; since thus being
informed what has been accomplished, and what has been left undone, we
shall be able to apply the further remedies with the requisite
knowledge. <span id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397) These things we
have ascertained by enquiry; and we give thanks to God that we have not
sown our seed upon rocks, nor dropped it amidst thorns; and that we have
neither needed much time, nor long delay, in order that we might reap
the harvest. On this account I have you continually upon my heart. On
this account I do not feel the labours of teaching, being eased of the
burden by the profit of the hearer. This reward is, indeed, sufficient
to recruit our strength, to give us wings, to elevate us, and to
persuade us to undergo the utmost toil on your behalf.

<span id="xix.xi-p9"></span>2. Since therefore ye have manifested much
generosity of feeling, suffer us to discharge the further debt of which
we gave a promise the other day; although indeed I see not all
present <span id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398) who were here when I
made the <span id="page_400">p. 400</span> <span
id="xix.xi-Page_400"></span>promise. What, I would ask, can be the cause
of this? What hath repelled them from our table? He that hath partaken
of a bodily meal, it would seem, has thought it an indignity after
receiving material food, to come to the hearing of the divine oracles.
But not rightly do they think thus. For if this were improper, Christ
would not have gone through His large and long discourses after that
mystic supper; and if this had been unsuitable, He would not, when He
had fed the multitude in the desert, have communicated His discourses to
them after that meal. For (if one must say something startling on this
point), the hearing of the divine oracles at that time is especially
profitable. For when thou hast made up thy mind that after eating and
drinking thou must repair also to the assembly, thou wilt assuredly be
careful, though perchance with reluctance, of the duty of sobriety; and
wilt neither be led away at any time into excess of wine, or gluttony.
For the thought, and the expectation of entering the church, schools
thee to partake of food and drink with becoming decency; lest, after
thou hast entered there, and joined thy brethren, thou shouldest appear
ridiculous to all present, by smelling of wine, and unmannerly
eructation. <span id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399) These things I
now speak not to you who are now present, but to the absent; that they
may learn them through your means. For it is not having eaten that
hinders one’s hearing, but listlessness. But thou whilst deeming it to
be a condemnation not to fast, then addest another fault, which is far
greater and heavier, in not being a partaker of this sacred food; <span
id="fr_1400"></span>[1401](#fn_1400) and having nourished the body, thou
consumest the soul with famine. Yet what kind of apology hast thou for
doing this? For in the matter of fasting thou hast, perhaps, bodily
weakness to plead, but what hast thou to say with respect to hearing?
For surely weakness of body is no impediment to thy partaking of the
divine oracles! If I had said, “Let no one who has breakfasted <span
id="fr_1401"></span>[1402](#fn_1401) mix with us;” “let no one who has
eaten be a hearer,” thou wouldest have had some kind of excuse; but now,
when we would fain drag, entice, and beseech you to come, what apology
can ye have for turning away from us? The unfit hearer is not he that
hath eaten and drunk; but he who gives no heed to what is said, who
yawns, and is slack in attention, having his body here, but his mind
wandering elsewhere, and such a one, though he may be fasting, is an
unprofitable hearer. On the other hand, the man who is in earnest, who
is watchful and keeps his mind in a state of attention, though he may
have eaten and drunk, will be our most suitable hearer of all. For this
rule, indeed, very properly prevails with relation to the secular
tribunals and councils. Inasmuch as they know not how to be spiritually
wise, therefore they eat not to nourishment, but to bursting; and they
drink often to excess. For this reason, as they render themselves unfit
for the management of their affairs, they shut up the court-houses and
council-chambers in the evening and at midday. <span
id="fr_1402"></span>[1403](#fn_1402) But here there is nothing of this
sort,—God forbid! But he who has eaten will rival him who fasts, as far
as regards sobriety of soul; for he eats and drinks, not so as to
distend the stomach, or to darken the reason, but in such a way as to
recruit the strength of the body when it has become weakened.

<span id="xix.xi-p15"></span>3. But enough of this admonition. It is
time now to deal with our subject; although our mind holds back and
shrinks from giving this instruction, on account of those who are not
come. And just as an affectionate mother when she is about to spread out
her table, grieves and laments when all her children are not there, thus
also do I now suffer; and when I think of the absence of our brethren, I
am reluctant to discharge my debt. But ye have it in your power to rid
me of this tardiness. For if ye promise me that ye will convey to them
an exact report of all I say, we shall readily pay you down the
whole; <span id="fr_1403"></span>[1404](#fn_1403) for thus the
instructions, charitably afforded on your part, will make up to them for
their absence; and ye will hear me the more attentively, knowing that
you must necessarily give an account of these things to others. In order
then that our subject may be made the clearer, let us take it up and
repeat it from the beginning. We were enquiring, then, the other day,
“On what account the Scriptures were delivered after so many years. For
this Book was delivered neither in the time of Adam, nor of Noah, nor of
Abraham, but in that of Moses. And I hear many who say, that if the Book
was profitable, it ought to <span id="page_401">p. 401</span> <span
id="xix.xi-Page_401"></span>have been delivered from the very beginning;
but if it was useless, it ought not to have been delivered afterwards.
But this is an obsolete argument; for it is not quite true that anything
which is profitable ought to have been delivered from the beginning, nor
if anything was delivered from the beginning, is it quite necessary that
the same should continue afterwards. <span
id="fr_1404"></span>[1405](#fn_1404) For example; Milk is useful, yet it
is not always given; but it is given to us only when we are children;
and solid food is useful; but no one ever gives it us in the beginning
of our life, but when we have passed out of the age of childhood. Again,
the summer season is useful; but it does not show itself constantly; and
the winter season is advantageous; yet this too makes room for others.
What then? Do they say that the Scriptures are not useful? I reply; they
are most useful and most necessary. And if so useful, for what reason
then, say they, were they not delivered to us from the beginning? It was
because God was desirous of instructing the nature of man, not by
letters, but by things. <span id="fr_1405"></span>[1406](#fn_1405) But
what does the expression “by things” signify? By means of the Creation
itself.

<span id="xix.xi-p19"></span>4. Observe then, how the Apostle, alighting
upon this same topic, and directing himself to those very Greeks who
said, that they had not from the beginning learnt the knowledge of God
from the Scriptures, frames his answer. Having said that, “the wrath of
God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness
of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness;” <span
id="fr_1406"></span>[1407](#fn_1406) when he saw that he was met by an
objection; and that many would still enquire, from whence the Gentiles
knew the truth of God, he goes on to add, “Because that which may be
known of God is manifest in them.” But how is it manifest in them? How
were they able to know God, and who hath shewed? Declare this. “God,”
saith he, “hath shewed it unto them.” In what manner? By the sending of
what kind of prophet? what evangelist? what kind of teacher? if the holy
Scriptures were not yet given. “The invisible things of Him,” says he,
“from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made, even His eternal Power and Godhead.” <span
id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407) But what he means is just this, He
hath placed His Creation in the midst, before the eyes of all men; in
order that they may guess at the Creator from His works; which, indeed,
another writer has referred to; “For from the greatness and beauty of
the creatures, proportionably the Maker of them is seen.” <span
id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408) Seest thou the greatness? Marvel at
the power of Him that made it! Seest thou the beauty? be astonished at
the wisdom which adorned it! This it was which the prophet signified
when he said, “The heavens declare the glory of God.” <span
id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409) How then, tell me, do they declare
it? Voice they have none; mouth they possess not; no tongue is theirs!
how then do they declare? By means of the spectacle itself. For when
thou seest the beauty, the breadth, the height, the position, the form,
the stability thereof during so long a period; hearing as it were a
voice, and being instructed by the spectacle, thou adorest Him who
created a body so fair and strange! The heavens may be silent, but the
sight of them emits a voice, that is louder than a trumpet’s sound;
instructing us not by the ear, but through the medium of the eyes; for
the latter is a sense which is more sure and more distinct than the
former.

<span id="xix.xi-p24"></span>5. For if God had given instruction by
means of books, and of letters, he who knew letters would have learnt
what was written; but the illiterate man would have gone away without
receiving any benefit from this source, unless some one else had
introduced him to it; and the wealthy man would have purchased the
Bible, but the poor man would not have been able to obtain it. Again, he
who knew the language that was expressed by the letters, might have
known what was therein contained; but the Scythian, and the Barbarian,
and the Indian, and the Egyptian, and all those who were excluded from
that language, would have gone away without receiving any instruction.
This however cannot be said with respect to the heavens; but the
Scythian, and Barbarian, and Indian, and Egyptian, and every man that
walks upon the earth, shall hear this voice; for not by means of the
ears, but through the sight, it reaches our understanding. And of the
things that are seen, there is one uniform perception; and there is no
difference, as is the case with respect to languages. Upon this volume
the unlearned, as well as the wise man, shall be alike able to look; the
poor man as well as the rich man; and wherever any one may chance to
come, there looking upwards towards the heavens, he will receive a
sufficient lesson from the view of them: and the <span id="page_402">p.
402</span> <span id="xix.xi-Page_402"></span>prophet himself intimated
and indicated this fact, that the creation utters this voice so as to be
intelligible to barbarians, and to Greeks, and to all mankind without
exception, when he spoke on this wise; “There is no speech, nor
language, where there voice is not heard.” <span
id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410) What he means is to this effect,
that there is no nation or tongue which is unable to understand this
language; but that such is their utterance, that it may be heard of all
mankind. And that not merely of the heavens, but of the day and night.
But how of the day and night? The heavens, indeed, by their beauty and
magnitude, and by all the rest, astonish the beholder, and transport him
to an admiration of the Creator; but as to the day and night, what can
these show us of the same kind? Nothing certainly of the same kind, but
other things which are not inferior to them; as for example; the
harmony, and the order which they so accurately observe. For when thou
considerest how they distribute between them the whole year, and
mutually divide the length of the whole space, even as if it were by a
beam and scales, thou wilt be astonished at Him who hath ordered them!
For just as certain sisters dividing their father’s inheritance among
themselves with much affection, and not insulting one another in the
smallest degree, even so too the day and the night distribute the year
with such an equality of parts, with the utmost accuracy; <span
id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411) and keep to their own boundaries,
and never push one another aside. Never hath the day been long in
winter; and in like manner never hath the night been long in summer,
whilst so many generations have passed away; but during so great an
interval and length of time one hath not defrauded the other even in the
smallest degree; not of half an hour’s space, no, nor of the twinkling
of an eye!

<span id="xix.xi-p27"></span>6. Therefore also the Psalmist, <span
id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412) struck with astonishment at the
equality of this distribution, exclaimed, “Night unto night sheweth
knowledge.” If thou knowest how to meditate wisely on these matters,
thou wilt admire the Being who fixed these immoveable boundaries even
from the beginning. Let the avaricious hear these things; and those who
are coveting the wealth of others; and let them imitate the equality of
the day and night. Let those who are puffed up and high-minded also
hear; and those who are unwilling to concede the first places to others!
The day gives place to the night, and does not invade the territory of
others! But thou, whilst always enjoying honour, canst thou not bear to
share it with thy brethren? Consider also with me the wisdom of the
Lawgiver. In winter He hath ordered that the night should be long; when
the germs <span id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413) are tender, and
require more coolness; and are unable to sustain the hotter rays of the
sun; but when they are somewhat grown, the day again increases with
them, and becomes then the longest, when the fruit has now attained
ripeness. And this is a beneficial arrangement not only for seeds, but
for our bodies. For since during winter, the sailor, and the pilot, and
the traveller, and the soldier, and the farmer, sit down for the most
part at home, fettered by the frost; and the season is one of idleness;
God hath appointed that the greater part of this time should be consumed
in night, in order that the length of the day might not be superfluous,
when men were unable to do anything. Who can describe the perfect order
of the seasons; and how these, like some virgins dancing in a circle,
succeed one another with the happiest harmony; and how those who are in
the middle cease not to pass over to the opposite ones with a gradual
and noiseless transition? Therefore, neither are we overtaken by the
summer immediately after winter; nor by the winter immediately after the
summer; but mid-way the spring is interposed; that while we gently and
gradually take up one season after the other, we may have our bodies
hardened to encounter the summer heat without uneasiness. For since
sudden changes to opposite extremes are productive of the worst injury
and disease, God hath contrived that after winter we should take up the
spring, and after the spring the summer; and after the summer the
autumn; and thus transport us to winter, so that these changes from
seasons which are opposite, should come upon us harmlessly and by
degrees, through the aid of intermediate ones. Who then is so wretched
and pitiable, that beholding the heavens; and beholding sea, and land;
and beholding this exact adjustment of the seasons, and the unfailing
order of day and night, he can think that these things happen of their
own accord, instead of adoring Him who hath arranged them all with a
corresponding wisdom!

<span id="xix.xi-p30"></span>7. But I have yet somewhat more to say on
this head. For not only, indeed, does the magnitude and beauty of the
creation, but <span id="page_403">p. 403</span> <span
id="xix.xi-Page_403"></span>also the very manner of it, display a God
who is the artificer of the universe. For since we were not present at
the beginning, whilst he was engaged in the work of forming and creating
all things; nor had we been present, could we have known how they came
into being, <span id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414) the power that
disposed them being invisible; He hath made the mode of this creation to
become our best teacher, by compounding all things in a manner which
transcends the course of nature. Perhaps what I have said, is not
sufficiently clear. Therefore it is necessary that I should again repeat
it in a clearer manner. All men, then, must admit that it is the course
of nature for water to be supported on the earth, and not the earth on
the waters. For the earth being a certain dense, hard, unyielding, and
solid substance, is easily able to support the nature of water; but the
water, which is fluid, and rare, and soft, and diffusive, and giving way
to all it meets with, must be unable to support any solid body, though
it were of the lightest kind. Often indeed when a small pebble fails
upon it, it yields, and makes way, and sends it down to the bottom. When
therefore thou beholdest not a small pebble, but the whole earth borne
upon the waters, and not submerged, admire the power of Him who wrought
these marvellous things in a supernatural manner! And whence does this
appear, that the earth is borne upon the waters? The prophet declares
this when he says, “He hath founded it upon the seas, and prepared it
upon the floods.” <span id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415) And again:
“To him who hath founded the earth upon the waters.” <span
id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416) What sayest thou? The water is not
able to support a small pebble on its surface, and yet bears up the
earth, great as it is; and mountains, and hills, and cities, and plants,
and men, and brutes; and it is not submerged! What do I say? Is not
submerged? How comes it to pass, that since the water has been in close
contact with it below, during so long a period, it has not been
dissolved, and the whole of it become mud? For the substance of wood,
when soaked in water but a little time, is rotted and dissolved; and why
do I say of wood? What can be firmer than iron? yet often this is
softened, when it remains a long time in water; and well it may. For it
derives its substance from the earth. Therefore many run-away servants,
when they make their escape, dragging their shackles and chains along
with them, go to brooks of water, and thrust their shackled feet
therein, and after making the iron softer by this means, they easily
break it by striking it with a stone. Iron, forsooth, is softened, and
wood is rotted, and stones are worn away by the nature of water; yet so
great a mass as the earth hath remained such a length of time lying upon
the waters, without being either submerged, or dissolved, and
destroyed! <span id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417)

<span id="xix.xi-p35"></span>8. And who is there that must not feel
astonished and amazed at these things; and confidently pronounce that
they are not the works of nature, but of that Providence which is above
nature? Therefore one speaks thus: “Who hangeth the earth upon
nothing.” <span id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418) And another
observes, “In His hands are the corners of the earth.” <span
id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419) And again: “He hath laid the
foundation of it upon the seas.” <span
id="fr_1420"></span>[1421](#fn_1420) And these declarations, though they
seem contrary to one another, have yet an entire agreement. For he that
said, “He hath laid the foundation of it upon the seas,” meant the same
thing as he did who declared, “He hath hung it upon nothing.” For its
standing upon the waters is just the same thing as hanging upon nothing.
Where then is it suspended and placed? Hear the same one saying, “In His
hands are the corners of the earth.” Not that God hath hands, but that
thou mayest know that His power it is, providing for all things which
holds together <span id="fr_1421"></span>[1422](#fn_1421) and supports
the body of the earth! But if thou believest not what I now say, believe
what thou beholdest! for even in another element it is possible to find
this admirable workmanship. For it is the nature of fire to tend
upwards, <span id="fr_1422"></span>[1423](#fn_1422) and to be always
mounting aloft; and although you force and constrain it never so much,
it cannot submit to have its course directed downwards. For often, when
we are carrying a lighted torch, although we incline its head downwards,
we cannot compel the force of the flame to direct <span id="page_404">p.
404</span> <span id="xix.xi-Page_404"></span>itself to the ground; but
still it turns upward, and passes from below toward that which is above.
But with respect to the sun, God hath made it quite the contrary. For He
hath turned his beams toward the earth, and made his light to direct
itself downward, all but saying to him by the very shape (of the
heavens), “Look downward.—Shine upon men, for thou wert made for them!”
The light, indeed, of a candle cannot be made to submit to this; but
this star, great and marvellous as it is, bends downward, and looks
toward the earth, which is contrary to the nature of fire; owing to the
power of Him who hath commanded it. Wouldest thou have me speak of
another thing of the like kind? Waters embrace the back of the visible
heaven <span id="fr_1423"></span>[1424](#fn_1423) on all parts; and yet
they neither flow down, nor are moved out of their place, although the
nature of water is not of this kind. For it easily runs together into
what is concave; but when the body is of a convex form, it glides away
on all sides; and not even a small portion <span
id="fr_1424"></span>[1425](#fn_1424) is capable of standing upon such a
figure. <span id="fr_1425"></span>[1426](#fn_1425) But, lo! this wonder
is found to exist in the heavens; and the prophet, again, to intimate
this very circumstance, observes, “Praise the Lord, ye waters that are
above the heavens.” <span id="fr_1426"></span>[1427](#fn_1426) Besides,
the water hath not quenched the sun; nor hath the sun, which hath gone
on his way beneath for so long a time, dried up the water that lies
above.

<span id="xix.xi-p45"></span>9. Dost thou desire that we should lead
thee down again to the earth, and point out the marvel? Seest thou not
this sea abounding with waves, and fierce winds; yet this sea, spacious,
and large, and furious as it is, is walled in with a feeble sand! Mark
also the wisdom of God, He permitted it not to be at rest, nor tranquil,
lest thou shouldest suppose its good order to be of mere natural
regulation; but remaining within its limits, it lifts up its voice, and
is in tumult, and roars aloud, and raises its waves to a prodigious
height. But when it comes to the shores, and beholds the sand, it breaks
up, and returns back again within itself; teaching thee, by both these
things, that it is not the work of nature that it remains within its
boundaries, but the work of Him whose power restrains it! For this cause
accordingly He hath made the wall feeble; and hath not encompassed these
shores with wood, or stone, or mountains, lest thou shouldest impute the
regulation of the elements to such things. And, therefore, God Himself,
upbraiding the Jews with this very circumstance, said, “Fear ye not Me,
which have placed the sand for the bound of the sea that it cannot pass
it.” <span id="fr_1427"></span>[1428](#fn_1427) But the marvellous thing
is not this only, that He hath made a great and admirable world; and
that He hath compacted it in a way above the usual course of nature; but
that He hath also constituted it out of opposite things; such as hot and
cold, dry and moist, fire and water, earth and air, and that these
contrary elements, of which this whole universe consists, though
continually at strife one with another, are not consumed of one another.
The fire hath not overrun and burnt up all things; the water hath not
overflowed and drowned the whole earth. With respect to our bodies,
however, these effects really take place; and upon the increase of the
bile, fever is generated; and the whole animal frame sustains an injury;
and when there is a superabundance of phlegm, many diseases are produced
which destroy the animal. But in the case of the universe, nothing of
this kind happens; but each thing remains held as it were by a kind of
bridle and band; preserving, by the will of the Creator, its own
boundaries; and their strife becomes a source of peace to the whole. Are
not these things evident even to a blind man? and are not even the
simple easily able to comprehend, that they were made, and are upheld,
by some Providence? For who is so silly and senseless, that beholding
such a mass of substances, such beauty, such combination, the continual
strife of such vast elements, their opposition, and yet durability,
would not reason with himself and say, “If there were not some
Providence to uphold the mass of these bodies, not permitting the
universe to fall to pieces, it could not remain; it could not have been
lasting. So perfect is the order of the seasons, such the harmony of the
day and night, so many the kinds of brute animals, and plants, and
seeds, and herbs, that preserve their course, and yet, to the present
day, none has ever fallen into decay or sudden dissolution.

<span id="xix.xi-p47"></span>10. We might continue to speak not only of
these things, but also of many others, which are even more profound; and
might moralise even upon the Creation itself; but <span id="page_405">p.
405</span> <span id="xix.xi-Page_405"></span>reserving these subjects
for the morrow, <span id="fr_1428"></span>[1429](#fn_1428) let us
earnestly endeavour to retain what has been said, and to convey it to
the rest. <span id="fr_1429"></span>[1430](#fn_1429) I know indeed, that
the abstruseness of these speculations has seemed strange to your ears;
but if we be a little vigilant, and accustom ourselves to them, we shall
easily be able to teach others. Meanwhile, it is necessary farther to
say this to your Charity. Even as God hath given us glory by means of
this great creation, so let us also glorify Him by a pure conversation!
“The heavens declare the glory of God,” though only seen; and we
therefore should declare God’s glory <span
id="fr_1430"></span>[1431](#fn_1430) not only in speaking, but in
silence, and in astonishing all men by the brightness of our life. For
He saith, “Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.” <span
id="fr_1431"></span>[1432](#fn_1431) For when an unbeliever beholds
thee, who art a believer, subdued, modest, and orderly in manners, he
will wonder and say, “Truly great is the God of the Christians! What
manner of men hath He formed? What, and from what hath He made them?
Hath He turned them from men into angels? If any one treats them
contemptuously, they revile not! If any one beats them, they are not
enraged! If any one does them an injury, they pray for him who has put
them in pain! They have no enemy! They know nothing of cherishing
malice! They are guiltless of vain babbling! They have not learnt to
utter a falsehood! They cannot endure a false oath, or rather, they
swear not at all, but would prefer to have their tongue cut out, rather
than to let an oath proceed out of their mouth!” Such are the things
which we should give them cause to say of us; and we should exterminate
our evil habit of oaths, and pay at least as much honour to God, as we
do to our more valuable garments. For how truly absurd is it, that when
we have one garment better than the rest, we do not suffer ourselves to
be continually wearing it; and yet everywhere we draggle about the name
of God without concern, or ceremony! Let us not, I earnestly pray and
beseech you, let us not thus despise our own salvation; but the care
which we have used respecting this precept from the beginning, let us
carry on even to the end. For I thus continually exhort you on the
subject of oaths, not as though condemning you of listlessness, but
inasmuch as I have seen that ye are for the most part reformed, I press
you, and am urgent, that the whole work should be finished off, and come
to its perfection. Even so act the spectators of public games. They
excite those who are near the prize, with the more vehemence. Let us,
then, by no means become weary; for we have nearly reached the
completion of this amendment; and the difficulty was at the beginning.
But now that the greater part of the evil habit has been cut away, and
less remains to correct, no labour is necessary, but we only need a
moderate degree of watchfulness, and diligence for some short time, in
order that we ourselves being amended, may also become instructors to
others; and that we may behold the Holy Passover with much confidence,
and that with much pleasure we may reap a double or treble measure of
the customary gladness of the festival. For not so much does it delight
us to be delivered from the toil and fatigue of fasting, as to meet that
holy season with an illustrious and well-earned crown; a crown indeed
that is never to fade!

<span id="xix.xi-p52"></span>11. But in order that the amendment may
take place the more quickly, do this which I tell thee. Inscribe upon
the wall of thy house, and upon the wall of thy heart, that “flying
sickle;” <span id="fr_1432"></span>[1433](#fn_1432) and think that it is
flying forth on occasion of the curse, and constantly remember it. And
if thou observest another person swearing, restrain, forbid, and be
careful for him, and be careful for thine own domestics. For if we would
look to this, that we might not merely correct ourselves, but also bring
others to the same point, we shall ourselves quickly arrive at the goal;
since while we undertake to instruct others, we shall be ashamed and
blush, should we in our own case seem to leave those things unperformed,
which we enjoin upon them. There is no need to say more; for much has
been already spoken on these matters; and these things are now said only
by way of remembrance. But may God, who is more sparing of our souls
than we are, make us perfect in this, and every good work; that so
having completed the whole fruit of righteousness, we may be found
worthy of the kingdom of heaven, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom, and with Whom, to the Father, with
the Holy Ghost, be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[399:1394](1090102.htm#fr_1393) <span
id="xix.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p4"></span> Comp. [Phil. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024)<span id="xix.xi-p4.1"></span>,
Country Parson, c. 7.

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[399:1395](1090102.htm#fr_1394) <span
id="xix.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p5"></span> Alluding to the passage, [2 Cor.
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#012)<span id="xix.xi-p5.1"></span>. *Ye
are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your own bowels*.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[399:1396](1090102.htm#fr_1395) <span
id="xix.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p6"></span> He seems to mean those who voluntarily
submitted to it. He had recommended masters to punish themselves, as
well as their dependents. See above.

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[399:1397](1090102.htm#fr_1396) <span
id="xix.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p7"></span> Country Parson, c. 32.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[399:1398](1090102.htm#fr_1397) <span
id="xix.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p8"></span> Country Parson, c. 34.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[399:1399](1090102.htm#fr_1398) <span
id="xix.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p10"></span> This Homily is placed by Montfaucon on the
Monday after the last; it is difficult to find any especial reason for
the circumstance here referred to; there was the same impediment when
the following Homily was delivered. Perhaps the most probable account
is, that some persons began the fast with a strictness from which they
afterwards fell off. The meal spoken of was an early dinner. Eumæus
takes his ˆριστον at daybreak, Od. xvi. 2. But Athenæus, l. i. c. 9 and
10, says that in his day such a meal was called ‡κρ€τισμα, and the
δεῖπνον of the ancients, at mid-day, ˆριστον(quoted by Perizonius on
*Ælian*. V. H. ix. 19).

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[400:1400](1090102.htm#fr_1399) <span
id="xix.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p11"></span> πολλ€κις. But Sav. and M. πολλῆς, making
the sense, “thou wilt assuredly, even if unwilling, observing great
sobriety.”

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[400:1401](1090102.htm#fr_1400) <span
id="xix.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p12"></span> *i.e*., the oracles of Scripture explained
at church. (See Hom. II. 12.) The Holy Communion was always received
fasting.

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[400:1402](1090102.htm#fr_1401) <span
id="xix.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p13"></span> ἠριστηκὼς.

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[400:1403](1090102.htm#fr_1402) <span
id="xix.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p14"></span> A canon of Isaac Lingonensis (in the
eighth century), Tit. viii.<span id="xix.xi-p14.1"></span> cap. 2, Labbe
viii. 620, forbids any one to take an oath except fasting. The Athenian
courts did not sit after sunset, and the great time for forensic
business was the forenoon. Goeller on Thuc. viii. 92. Ælian, V. H. xii.
30, says that the luxurious Tarentines would be drunk even when the
forum is fullest, περὶ πλήθουσαν ‡γορ€ν. v. [Act. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#015)<span id="xix.xi-p14.2"></span>;
Perizonius on Ælian, cites *Dio Chrys. Or*. 67, *de Glor*. 2, who shews
it was about that time.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[400:1404](1090102.htm#fr_1403) <span
id="xix.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p16"></span> *i.e*, the promise of explaining that
subject which had been proposed in the two foregoing Homilies; namely,
the reason why the gift of Holy Scripture was so long delayed.

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[401:1405](1090102.htm#fr_1404) <span
id="xix.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p17"></span> See Butler’s *Analogy*, p. ii. c. 6, where
the somewhat similar objection, “that Christianity is not universal,” is
discussed.

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[401:1406](1090102.htm#fr_1405) <span
id="xix.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p18"></span> An enlarged view of this principle is
given in Butler’s *Analogy*, p. ii. c. 7, applying it further to the
facts recorded in Holy Scripture. “The general design of Scripture,
which contains in it this revelation, thus considered as historical, may
be said to be, to give us an account of the world, in this one single
view, *as God’s world*.”

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[401:1407](1090102.htm#fr_1406) <span
id="xix.xi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p20"></span> [Rom. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)<span id="xix.xi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[401:1408](1090102.htm#fr_1407) <span
id="xix.xi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p21"></span> [Rom. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="xix.xi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[401:1409](1090102.htm#fr_1408) <span
id="xix.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p22"></span> [Wisd. xiii.
5](../../../bib/apo/wis013.htm#005)<span id="xix.xi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[401:1410](1090102.htm#fr_1409) <span
id="xix.xi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p23"></span> [Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="xix.xi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[402:1411](1090102.htm#fr_1410) <span
id="xix.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p25"></span> [Ps. xix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003)<span id="xix.xi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[402:1412](1090102.htm#fr_1411) <span
id="xix.xi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p26"></span> The diurnal motion of the earth, or, as
they called it, of the heavens, was taken by Plato for the very type of
stability. The exactness of its rate is far greater than the ancients
had means to appreciate, as is proved by constant observations, as well
as by the oldest eclipses.

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[402:1413](1090102.htm#fr_1412) <span
id="xix.xi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p28"></span> ψαλμῳδὸς: St. Chrys. usually says “the
prophet.”

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[402:1414](1090102.htm#fr_1413) <span
id="xix.xi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p29"></span> σπ™ρματα. He seems to mean the young
blade. These remarks are adapted to a climate in which the harvest is
over before midsummer.

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[403:1415](1090102.htm#fr_1414) <span
id="xix.xi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p31"></span> See [Job xxxviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#004)<span id="xix.xi-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[403:1416](1090102.htm#fr_1415) <span
id="xix.xi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p32"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002)<span id="xix.xi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[403:1417](1090102.htm#fr_1416) <span
id="xix.xi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p33"></span> [Ps. cxxxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="xix.xi-p33.1"></span>.
Among the variety of opinions that anciently prevailed respecting the
earth’s form and situation, one of the principal was, that the heavens
and earth above this ocean was the only visible universe; and that all
beneath the ocean was Hades, or the invisible world. Hence when the sun
set, he was said, *tingere se oceano*; and when any went to Hades, they
must first pass the ocean. Of this opinion were not only the ancient
poets, but some of the Christian Fathers, particularly Lactantius, and
St. Augustin, and others, who thought their opinion was favoured by the
Psalmist, in [Ps. 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002), [Ps.
136:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#006)<span id="xix.xi-p33.2"></span>.
Derham’s *Physico-Theology*, p. 41. St. Chrysostom must evidently have
adopted the same opinion. St. Greg. Nyss. *in Hexæm*. t. l., p. 22e.,
speaks of the earth’s conical shadow. See Plin. ii. 11. St. Bas. *in
Hex*. i. c. 9, explains the “founding on the waters,” of their being
spread all round: ix. c. 1, he speaks of various opinions as to its
shape, and some who thought it to be 180,000 stadia round. See St. Greg.
Naz. *Or*. xxviii. al. xxxiv. c. 28, and Philoponus *de Mund. Cr.* iii.
6–13; Galland, xii. p. 525.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[403:1418](1090102.htm#fr_1417) <span
id="xix.xi-p33.3"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p34"></span> This line of argument, from arrangements
above the course of nature, is a dangerous one; and it would be less
difficult than invidious, to search out instances of fallacy in modern
writers. It always brings men’s *ignorance* into play.

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[403:1419](1090102.htm#fr_1418) <span
id="xix.xi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p36"></span> [Job xxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#007)<span id="xix.xi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[403:1420](1090102.htm#fr_1419) <span
id="xix.xi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p37"></span> [Ps. xcv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#004)<span id="xix.xi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[403:1421](1090102.htm#fr_1420) <span
id="xix.xi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p38"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002)<span id="xix.xi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[403:1422](1090102.htm#fr_1421) <span
id="xix.xi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p39"></span> συγκρατοῦσα, but Sav. συγκροτοῦσα. There
is constant variation of reading wherever these words occur.

<span id="fn_1422"></span>[403:1423](1090102.htm#fr_1422) <span
id="xix.xi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p40"></span> See in Bacon’s *Novum Organum*, his
*Vindemiatio prima de forma calidi*, L. II. Aph. 20, Diff. 2, he says,
“the motion of heat is at once expansive, and a tendency upwards.”

<span id="fn_1423"></span>[404:1424](1090102.htm#fr_1423) <span
id="xix.xi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p41"></span> In accordance with the notions of his age,
St. Chrysostom supposed that the firmament was something solid; and it
seems to have been entirely a notion of modern times, that the visible
heavens are formed of a subtle ether. Thus Homer terms them χ€λκεον
οὐρανὸν, and χαλκοβατῆ δώματα; and sometimes σιδήρειον οὐρανόν. The
notion of St. Chrysostom seems to have been similar. He supposes a solid
spherical arch, which he terms the visible heaven, which divided the
waters above from those below it. See [Gen. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#007)<span id="xix.xi-p41.1"></span>. A
similar idea seems to have prevailed among those who translated the
Bible into English, from the use of the word *firmament*, which was
however a mere copying of the Vulgate, and the Greek στερεωμα. It is
remarkable that this idea is defended by Drusius in his *Loca
Difficiliora Pentateuchi*, and in Sylvester’s translation of Du Bartas’s
*Weeks and Days*.

<span id="fn_1424"></span>[404:1425](1090102.htm#fr_1424) <span
id="xix.xi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p42"></span> Sav. and M., of it.

<span id="fn_1425"></span>[404:1426](1090102.htm#fr_1425) <span
id="xix.xi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p43"></span> σχήματος.

<span id="fn_1426"></span>[404:1427](1090102.htm#fr_1426) <span
id="xix.xi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p44"></span> [Ps. cxlviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#004)<span id="xix.xi-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1427"></span>[404:1428](1090102.htm#fr_1427) <span
id="xix.xi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p46"></span> [Jer. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022)<span id="xix.xi-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1428"></span>[405:1429](1090102.htm#fr_1428) <span
id="xix.xi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p48"></span> Or the next day of preaching.

<span id="fn_1429"></span>[405:1430](1090102.htm#fr_1429) <span
id="xix.xi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p49"></span> See his request.

<span id="fn_1430"></span>[405:1431](1090102.htm#fr_1430) <span
id="xix.xi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p50"></span> See on [Rom. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006)<span id="xix.xi-p50.1"></span>, Hom.
XVIII.

<span id="fn_1431"></span>[405:1432](1090102.htm#fr_1431) <span
id="xix.xi-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p51"></span> [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="xix.xi-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1432"></span>[405:1433](1090102.htm#fr_1432) <span
id="xix.xi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p53"></span> Flying hook, or sickle. See [Zech. v.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001)<span id="xix.xi-p53.1"></span>. *A
flying roll*, is the version given in the present translation of the
Bible, which follows the Hebrew as well as the Vulgate, the Targum, and
the Syriac. (See St. Jerome on the place, who adds Aquila, Theodotion,
and Symmachus.) The Septuagint, which St. Chrysostom usually follows,
instead of הלגִמ, probably read לנמ, which signifies a reap-hook, or
sickle; in this, as in some other instances, the final letter having
been dropped through the carelessness of transcribers. See Homily XV.,
conclusion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily X](1090103)
