[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090003)  [Next](1090005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II</span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.ii-p1.2"></span>.—*Chrysostom’s Youth and Training, <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.ii-p1.3"></span>a.d</span>. 347–370.*</span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span>“Almighty God, who hast given us grace at
this time with one accord to make our common supplications unto Thee;
and doest promise, that when two or three are gathered together in Thy
name Thou wilt grant their requests: fulfil now, O Lord, the desires and
petitions of Thy servants, as may be most expedient for them; granting
us in this world knowledge of Thy truth, and in the world to come life
everlasting, Amen.” <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span>This beautiful and comprehensive prayer,
which is translated from the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom, has made his
name a household word wherever the Anglican Liturgy is known and used.

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p5.1"></span>John</span>, surnamed <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p5.2"></span>Chrysostom</span> (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p5.3"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p5.4"></span>Ιω€ννης Χρυσόστομος</span>) is the greatest
pulpit orator and commentator of the Greek Church, and still deservedly
enjoys the highest honor in the whole Christian world. No one of the
Oriental Fathers has left a more spotless reputation; no one is so much
read and so often quoted by modern preachers and commentators. An
admiring posterity, since the close of the fifth century, has given him
the surname <span class="c12"><span id="iii.ii-p5.5"></span>Chrysostom
(the Golden Mouth)</span>, which has entirely superseded his personal
name <span class="c12"><span id="iii.ii-p5.6"></span>John</span>, and
which best expresses the general estimate of his merits.

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span>His life may be divided into five periods:
(1) His youth and training till his conversion and baptism, A.D.
347–370. (2) His ascetic and monastic life, 370–381. (3) His public life
as priest and preacher at Antioch, 381–398. (4) His episcopate at
Constantinople, 398–404. (5) His exile to his death, 404–407.

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span>John (the name by which alone he is known
among contemporary writers and his first biographers) was born in
347, <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) at Antioch, the capital of Syria,
and the home of the mother church of Gentile Christianity, where the
disciples of Jesus were first called “Christians.”

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span>His father, Secundus, was a distinguished
military officer (*magister militum*) in the imperial army of Syria, and
died during the infancy of John, without professing Christianity, as far
as we know. His mother, Anthusa, was a rare woman. Left a widow at the
age of twenty, she refused all offers of marriage, and devoted herself
exclusively to the education of her only son and his older sister. She
was probably from principle averse to a second marriage, according to a
prevailing view of the Fathers. She shines, with Nonna and Monica, among
the most pious mothers of the fourth century, who prove the ennobling
influence of Christianity on the character of woman, and through her on
all the family relations. Anthusa gained general esteem by her exemplary
life. The famous advocate of heathenism, Libanius, on hearing of her
consistency and devotion, felt constrained to exclaim: “Bless me! what
wonderful women there are among the Christians.” <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md)

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span>She gave her son an admirable education,
and early planted in his soul the germs of piety, which afterwards bore
the richest fruits for himself and the church. By her admonitions and
the teachings of the Bible, he was secured against the seductions of
heathenism.

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span><span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="iii.ii-Page_6"></span>Yet he was not baptized till he had reached
the age of maturity. In that age of transition from heathenism to
Christianity, the number of adult baptisms far exceeded that of infant
baptisms. Hence the large baptisteries for the baptism of crowds of
converts; hence the many sermons and lectures of Chrysostom, Cyril of
Jerusalem and other preachers to catechumens, and their careful
instruction before baptism and admission to the Missa Fidelium or the
holy communion. Even Christian parents, as the father and mother of
Gregory Nazianzen, the mother of Chrysostom, and the mother of Augustin,
put off the baptism of their offspring, partly no doubt from a very high
conception of baptism as the sacrament of regeneration, and the
superstitious fear that early baptism involved the risk of a forfeiture
of baptismal grace. This was the argument which Tertullian in the second
century urged against infant baptism, and this was the reason why many
professing Christians put off their baptism till the latest hour; just
as now so many from the same motive delay repentance and conversion to
their death-bed. Chrysostom often rebukes that custom. The Emperor
Constantine who favored Christianity as early as 312, and convened the
Council of Nicæa in 325, postponed baptism till 337, shortly before his
death. The orthodox Emperor Theodosius the Great was not baptized till
the first year of his reign (380), when attacked by a serious illness.

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span>Chrysostom received his literary training
chiefly from Libanius, the admirer and friend of Julian the Apostate,
and the first classical scholar and rhetorician of his age, who after a
long career as public teacher at Athens and Constantinople, returned to
his native Antioch and had the misfortune to outlive the revival of
heathenism under Julian and to lament the triumph of Christianity under
his successors. He was introduced by him into a knowledge of the Greek
classics and the arts of rhetoric, which served him a good purpose for
his future labors in the church. He was his best scholar, and when
Libanius, shortly before his death (about 393), was asked whom he wished
for his successor, he replied: “John, if only the Christians had not
stolen him from us.” <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md)

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span>After the completion of his studies
Chrysostom became a rhetorician, and began the profitable practice of
law, which opened to him a brilliant political career. The amount of
litigation was enormous. The display of talent in the law-courts was the
high-road to the dignities of vice-prefect, prefect, and consul. Some of
his speeches at the bar excited admiration and were highly commended by
Libanius. For some time, as he says, he was “a never-failing attendant
at the courts of law, and passionately fond of the theatre.” But he was
not satisfied. The temptations of a secular profession in a corrupt
state of society discouraged him. To accept a fee for making the worse
cause appear the better cause, seemed to him to be taking Satan’s wages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[5:1](1090004.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span> See the Greek original of this collect in
Chrysostom’s Liturgy, in <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p3.1"></span>Migne’s</span> edition, Tom. xii. 908; <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.ii-p3.2"></span>Daniel’s</span> *Codex
Liturgicus*, tom. iv.; <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p3.3"></span>Fasc</span>. II. p. 343 (comp. the foot-note in
tom. iii. 358); and <span class="c12"><span id="iii.ii-p3.4"></span>Fr.
Procter’s</span> *History of the Book of Common Prayer* (11th ed. 1874),
p. 245 sq. The precise origin of this prayer is uncertain. It does not
occur in the oldest <span class="c12"><span id="iii.ii-p3.5"></span>
mss</span>. of Chrysostom’s Liturgy, but in those of the Liturgy of St.
Basil. It precedes the third anthem in the communion service, and was
used since the ninth century or earlier in the exarchate of Cæsarea and
the patriarchate of Constantinople. In the Oriental churches the prayer
is said silently by the priest. See <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p3.6"></span>Bjerring</span>, *The Offices of the Oriental
Church*, p. 43. In the Anglican Church, it was placed at the end of the
Litany (by Cranmer), in 1544, and at the close of the daily Morning and
Evening Prayer in 1661. In the English Homilies (*Hom*. I.), Chrysostom
is called “that godly clerk and great preacher.”

<span id="fn_1"></span>[5:2](1090004.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span> So <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p8.1"></span>Montfaucon</span>, <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p8.2"></span> Tillemont</span>, <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p8.3"></span>Neander</span>, <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p8.4"></span>Stephens</span>, <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p8.5"></span>Venables</span>, and others. <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.ii-p8.6"></span>Baur</span> (*Vorlesungen über
die Dogmengeschichte*, Bd. I. Abthlg. II., p. 50) and others erroneously
state the year 354 or 355, <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p8.7"></span> Villemain</span> assigns the year 344 as that
of his birth.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[5:3](1090004.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span> Βαβαὶ, οἷαι παρὰ χριστιανοῖς γυναῖκ™ς
εἰσι. Chrysostom himself relates this of his heathen teacher (by whom,
undoubtedly, we are to understand Libanius), though, it is true, with
immediate reference only to the twenty years’ widowhood of his mother,
and adds: “Such is the praise and admiration of widowhood not only with
us, but even with the heathen.” *Ad viduam juniorem* (*Opera*, Bened.
ed. Tom. i. 340; in <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p10.1"></span>Migne’s</span> ed. Tom. i., P. II., 601).

<span id="fn_3"></span>[6:4](1090004.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.ii-p14.1"></span>Sozomen</span>, *Ch. Hist*., VIII. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His Conversion and Ascetic Life.](1090005.md)
