[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090015)  [Next](1090017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xiv-p1.2"></span>.—*Chrysostom as a Preacher.*</span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p2"></span>The crowning merit of Chrysostom is his
excellency as a preacher. He is generally and justly regarded as the
greatest pulpit orator of the Greek church. Nor has he any superior or
equal among the Latin Fathers. He remains to this day a model for
preachers in large cities. He was trained in the school of Demosthenes
and Libanius, and owed much of his literary culture to the classics. He
praises “the polish of Isocrates, the gravity of Demosthenes, the
dignity of Thucydides, and the sublimity of Plato.” He assigns to Plato
the first rank among the philosophers, but he places St. Paul far above
him, and glories in the victory of the tent-maker and fishermen over the
wisdom of the Greeks. <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md)

<span id="iii.xiv-p4"></span>He was not free from the defects of the
degenerate rhetoric of his age, especially a flowery exuberance of style
and fulsome extravagance in eulogy of dead martyrs and living men. But
the defects are overborne by the virtues: the fulness of Scripture
knowledge, the intense earnestness, the fruitfulness of illustration and
application, the variation of topics, the command of language, the
elegance and rhythmic flow of his Greek style, the dramatic vivacity,
the quickness and ingenuity of his turns, and the magnetism of sympathy
with his hearers. He knew how to draw in the easiest manner spiritual
nourishment and lessons of practical wisdom from the Word of God, and to
make it a divine voice of warning and comfort to every hearer. He was a
faithful preacher of truth and righteousness and fearlessly told the
whole duty of man. If he was too severe at times, he erred on virtue’s
side. He preached morals rather than dogmas, Christianity rather than
theology, active, practical Christianity that proves itself in holy
living and dying. He was a martyr of the pulpit, for it was chiefly his
faithful preaching that caused his exile. The effect of his oratory was
enhanced by the magnetism of his personality, and is weakened to the
reader of a translation or even the Greek original. The living voice and
glowing manner are far more powerful than the written and printed
letter.

<span id="iii.xiv-p5"></span>Chrysostom attracted large audiences, and
among them many who would rather have gone to the theatre than hear any
ordinary preacher. He held them spell-bound to the close. Sometimes they
manifested their admiration by noisy applause, and when he rebuked them
for it, they would applaud his rebuke. “You praise,” he would tell them,
“what I have said, and receive my exhortation with tumults of applause;
but show your approbation by obedience; that is the only praise I seek.”

<span id="iii.xiv-p6"></span>The great mediæval poet assigns to
Chrysostom a place in Paradise between Nathan the prophet and Anselm the
theologian, probably because, like Nathan, he rebuked the sins of the
court, and, like Anselm, he suffered exile for his conviction. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md) The best French pulpit orators—Bossuet,
Massilon, Bourdaloue—have taken him for their model, even in his faults,
the flattery of living persons. Villemain praises him as the greatest
orator who combined all the attributes of eloquence. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md) Hase calls his eloquence “Asiatic,
flowery, full of spirit <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span
id="iii.xiv-Page_23"></span>and of the Holy Spirit, based on sound
exegesis, and with steady application to life.” <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md) English writers compare him to Jeremy
Taylor. Gibbon (who confesses, however, to have read very few of his
Homilies) attributes to him “the happy art of engaging the passions in
the service of virtue, and of exposing the folly as well as the
turpitude of vice, almost with the truth and spirit of a dramatic
representation.” Dean Milman describes him as an “unrivalled master in
that rapid and forcible application of incidental occurrences which
gives such life and reality to eloquence. He is at times, in the highest
sense, dramatic in manner.” Stephens thus characterizes his
sermons: <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md)

<span id="iii.xiv-p14"></span>“A power of exposition which unfolded in
lucid order, passage by passage, the meaning of the book in hand; a
rapid transition from clear exposition, or keen logical argument, to
fervid exhortation, or pathetic appeal, or indignant denunciation; the
versatile ease with which he could lay hold of any little incident of
the moment, such as the lighting of the lamps in the church, and use it
to illustrate his discourse; the mixture of plain common sense, simple
boldness, and tender affection, with which he would strike home to the
hearts and consciences of his hearers—all these are not only general
characteristics of the man, but are usually to be found manifested more
or less in the compass of each discourse. It is this rare union of
powers which constitutes his superiority to almost all other Christian
preachers with whom he might be, or has been, compared. Savonarola had
all, and more than all, his fire and vehemence, but untempered by his
sober, calm good sense, and wanting his rational method of
interpretation. Chrysostom was eager and impetuous at times in speech as
well as in action, but never fanatical. Jeremy Taylor combines, like
Chrysostom, real earnestness of purpose with rhetorical forms of
expression and florid imagery; but, on the whole, his style is far more
artificial, and is overlaid with a multifarious learning, from which
Chrysostom’s was entirely free. Wesley is almost his match in simple,
straightforward, practical exhortation, but does not rise into flights
of eloquence like his. The great French preachers, again, resemble him
in his more ornate and declamatory vein, but they lack that simpler
common-sense style of address which equally distinguished him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[22:37](1090016.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="iii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p3"></span> *De Sacerd*., IV. 6.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[22:38](1090016.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="iii.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p7"></span> *Paradiso*, XII. 136–139:

<span id="iii.xiv-p8"></span>“*Natan profeta e il metropolitano*

<span id="iii.xiv-p9"></span>Chrisostomo, ed Anselmo, e quel Donato,

<span id="iii.xiv-p10"></span>*Che alla prim’ arte degnò poner mano*.”

<span id="fn_38"></span>[22:39](1090016.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="iii.xiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p11"></span> *Tableau*, etc., p. 154: “*Ce sont ces
qualités plus hautes, ou plutot c’est la réunion de tous les attributs
oratoires, le naturel, le pathétique et la grandeur, qui’ ont fait de
saint Jean Chrysostome le plus grande orateur de l’église primitive, le
plus éclatant interprète de cette mémorable époque*.”

<span id="fn_39"></span>[23:40](1090016.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="iii.xiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p12"></span> “*Seine Beredtsamkeit ist asiatisch,
bilderreich, geistvoll und H. Geistes voll, auf gesunder
Schriftauslegung, mit steter Anwendung auf’s Leben, in seinen
Forderungen an Andere sittlich ernst ohne asketische
Ueberspannung*.”—*Kirchengeschichte*, I. 511.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[23:41](1090016.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="iii.xiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p13"></span> *St. Chrysostom*, p. 426 sq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Treatise Concerning the Christian Priesthood.](1090017.md)
