[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090049)  [Next](1090051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii"></span> <span id="page_177">p. 177</span> <span
id="x.ii-Page_177"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span><span class="c30"><span
id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>three homilies concerning the power of
demons.</span>

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span><span class="c34"><span
id="x.ii-p3.1"></span>introduction by rev. w. r. w. stephens.</span>

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="x.ii-p4.1"></span>The</span> three following Homilies are closely
connected in subject, and the opening sentence of the third clearly
proves that it was delivered two days after the second; but it is
impossible to say whether that which is placed first was really
delivered before the other two. It must however have been spoken at
Antioch, since Chrysostom refers at the beginning of it to his sermons
“on the obscurity of prophecies” in which passages occur which clearly
imply that he was not then a Bishop. The second of the three homilies
here translated was delivered in the presence of a Bishop, as is clearly
indicated by the commencement, and as the third was as already mentioned
delivered two days after the second we may safely affirm that they were
all spoken at Antioch when Chrysostom was a presbyter there under the
Episcopate of Flavian.

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span>They deal with errors against which Chrysostom
throughout his life most strenuously contended. In an age of great
depravity there seem to have been many who tried to excuse the weak
resistance which they made to evil, both in themselves, and in others,
by maintaining that the world was abandoned to the dominion of devils,
or to the irresistible course of fate. To counteract the disastrous
effects of such philosophy, which surrendered man to the current of his
passions, it was necessary to insist very boldly and resolutely on the
essential freedom of the will, on moral responsibility, and the duty of
vigorous exertion in resisting temptation. And Chrysostom did this to an
extent which some thought carried him perilously near the errors of the
Pelagian heresy. No one however has described in more forcible language
the powerful hold of sin upon human nature, and the insufficiency of man
to shake it off without the assistance of divine grace. What he does
most earnestly combat, both in the following homilies and very many
others, is the doctrine that evil was an original integral part of our
nature: he maintains that it is not a substantial inherent force (<span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii-p5.1"></span>δύναμις ἐνυπόστατος</span>).
If evil was a part of our nature in this sense it would be no more
reprehensible than natural appetites and affections. We do not try to
alter that which is by nature (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii-p5.2"></span>φύσει</span>): sin therefore is not by nature,
because by means of education, laws, and punishments we do seek to alter
that. Sin comes through defect in the moral purpose (<span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii-p5.3"></span>προαίρεσις</span>). Our first
parents fell through indolence of moral purpose (<span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii-p5.4"></span>ῥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii-p5.5"></span>‹</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii-p5.6"></span>θυμία</span>) and this is the
principal cause of sin now. They marked out a path which has been
trodden ever since: the force of will has been weakened in all their
posterity: so that though evil is not an inherent part of man’s nature
yet he is readily inclined to it (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii-p5.7"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii-p5.8"></span>ξυρῥεπὴς πρὸς κακι€ν</span>); and this tendency
must be perpetually counteracted by vigorous exertion, and a bracing up
of the moral purpose, with the aid of divine grace. Profoundly convinced
therefore on the one hand of a strong and universal tendency to sin, but
on the other of an essential freedom of the will, Chrysostom sounds
alternately the note of warning and encouragement,—warning against <span
id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span id="x.ii-Page_178"></span>that
weakness, indolence, languor of moral purpose which occasions a
fall,—encouragement to use to the full all the powers with which man is
gifted, in reliance on God’s forbearance and love, and on His
willingness to help those who do not despair of themselves. Despair is
the devil’s most potent instrument for effecting the ruin of man; for it
is that which prevents him from rising again after he has fallen. St.
Paul repented, and, not despairing, became equal to angels: Judas
repenting, but despairing, rushed into perdition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily I. Against Those Who Say that Demons Govern Human
Affairs.](1090051)
