[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090009)  [Next](1090011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.viii-p1.2"></span>.—*Chrysostom and Theophilus. His First
Deposition and Banishment.*</span>

<span id="iii.viii-p2"></span>At this time Chrysostom became involved in
the Origenistic controversies which are among the most violent and most
useless in ancient church history, and full of personal invective and
calumny. <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) The object in dispute was
the orthodoxy of the great Origen, which long after his death was
violently defended and as violently assailed.

<span id="iii.viii-p4"></span>Theophilus of Alexandria, an able and
vigorous but domineering, contentious and unscrupulous prelate, was at
first an admirer of Origen, but afterwards in consequence of a personal
quarrel joined the opponents, condemned his memory and banished the
Origenistic monks from Egypt. Some fifty of them, including the four
“Tall Brethren,” so-called on account of their extraordinary stature,
fled to Constantinople and were hospitably received by Chrysostom (401).
He had no sympathy with the philosophical speculations of Origen, but
appreciated his great merits, and felt that injustice was done to the
persecuted monks. He interceded in their behalf with Theophilus, who
replied with indignant remonstrance against protecting heretics and
interfering in another diocese.

<span id="iii.viii-p5"></span>Theophilus, long desirous of overthrowing
Chrysostom, whom he had reluctantly consecrated, set every instrument in
motion to take revenge. He sent the octogenarian bishop Epiphanius of
Salamis, a well-meaning and learned but bigoted zealot for orthodoxy, to
Constantinople, as a tool of his hierarchical plans (402); but
Epiphanius soon returned and died on the ship (403). Theophilus now
traveled himself to Constantinople, accompanied by a body-guard of rough
sailors and provided with splendid presents. He appeared at once as
accuser and judge, aided by Eudoxia and the disaffected clergy. He held
a secret council of thirty-six bishops, all of them Egyptians except
seven, in a suburb of Chalcedon on the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus,
and procured in this so-called synod at the Oak, the deposition and
banishment of Chrysostom, on false charges of immorality and high
treason (403). Among the twenty-nine charges were these: that Chrysostom
had called the saintly Epiphanius a fool and a demon, that he abused the
clergy, that he received females without witnesses, that he ate
sumptuously alone and bathed alone, that he had compared the empress to
Jezebel.

<span id="iii.viii-p6"></span>The innocent bishop refused to appear
before a packed synod of his enemies, and appealed to a general council.
As the sentence of banishment for life became known, the indignation of
the people was immense. A single word from him would have raised an
insurrection; but he surrendered himself freely to the imperial
officers, who conveyed him in the dark to the harbor and put him on
board a ship destined for Hieron at the mouth of the Pontus. Theophilus
entered the city in triumph and took vengeance on Chrysostom’s friends.

<span id="iii.viii-p7"></span>The people besieged the palace and
demanded the restoration of their bishop. Constantinople was almost in a
state of insurrection. The following night the city was convulsed by an
earthquake, which was felt with peculiar violence in the bedroom of
Eudoxia and frightened her into submission. She implored the emperor to
avert the wrath of God by recalling Chrysostom. Messengers were
despatched with abject apologies to bring him back. A whole fleet of
barks put forth to greet him, the Bosphorus blazed with torches and
resounded with songs of rejoicing. On passing the gates he was borne
aloft by the people to the church, seated in the episcopal chair and
forced to make an address. His triumph was complete, <span
id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span id="iii.viii-Page_14"></span>but of
short duration. Theophilus felt unsafe in Constantinople and abruptly
sailed in the night for Alexandria. The feelings with which Chrysostom
went into his first and second exile, he well describes in a letter to
Bishop Cyriacus: “when I was driven from the city, I felt no anxiety,
but said to myself: If the empress wishes to banish me, let her do so;
‘the earth is the Lord’s.’ If she wants to have me sawn asunder, I have
Isaiah for an example. If she wants me to be drowned in the ocean, I
think of Jonah. If I am to be thrown into the fire, the three men in the
furnace suffered the same. If cast before wild beasts, I remember Daniel
in the lion’s den. If she wants me to be stoned, I have before me
Stephen, the first martyr. If she demands my head, let her do so; John
the Baptist shines before me. Naked I came from my mother’s womb, naked
shall I leave this world. Paul reminds me, ‘If I still pleased men, I
would not be the servant of Christ.’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[13:17](1090010.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p3"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.viii-p3.1"></span>Schaff</span>, *Church History*, III. 698 sqq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chrysostom and Eudoxia. His Second Banishment, A.D.
403.](1090011.md)
