[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090008)  [Next](1090010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vii-p1.2"></span>.—*Chrysostom as Patriarch of
Constantinople<span class="c12"><span id="iii.vii-p1.3"></span>.
a.d.</span> 398–404.*</span>

<span id="iii.vii-p2"></span>After the death of Nectarius (successor to
Gregory Nazianzen), towards the end of the year 397, Chrysostom was
chosen, entirely without his own agency and even against his
remonstrance, archbishop of Constantinople. He was hurried away from
Antioch by a military escort, to avoid a commotion in the congregation
and to make resistance useless. He was consecrated Feb. 26, 398, by his
enemy Theophilus, patriarch of Alexandria, who reluctantly yielded to
the command of the Emperor Arcadius or rather his prime minister, the
eunuch Eutropius, and nursed his revenge for a more convenient season.

<span id="iii.vii-p3"></span>Constantinople, built by Constantine the
Great in 330, on the site of Byzantium, assumed as the Eastern capital
of the Roman empire the first position among the episcopal sees of the
East, and became the centre of court theology, court intrigues, and
theological controversies. The second œcumenical council, which was held
there in 381, under Theodosius the Great, the last Roman emperor worthy
of the name (d. 395), decided the victory of Nicene orthodoxy over the
Arian heresy, and gave the bishop of Constantinople a primacy of honor,
next in rank to the bishop of old Rome—a position which was afterwards
confirmed by the Council of Chalcedon in 451, but disputed by Pope Leo
and his successors.

<span id="iii.vii-p4"></span>Chrysostom soon gained by his eloquent
sermons the admiration of the people, of the weak Emperor Arcadius, and,
at first, even of his wife Eudoxia, with whom he afterwards waged a
deadly war. He extended his pastoral care to the Goths who were becoming
numerous in Constantinople, had a part of the Bible translated for them,
often preached to them himself through an interpreter, and sent
missionaries to the Gothic and Scythian tribes on the Danube. He
continued to direct by correspondence those missionary operations even
during his exile. For a short time he enjoyed the height of power and
popularity.

<span id="iii.vii-p5"></span>But he also made enemies by his
denunciations of the vices and follies of the clergy and aristocracy. He
emptied the episcopal palace of its costly plate and furniture and sold
it for the benefit of the poor and the hospitals. He introduced his
strict ascetic habits and reduced the luxurious household of his
predecessors to the strictest simplicity. He devoted his large income to
benevolence. He refused invitations to banquets, gave no dinner parties,
and ate the simplest fare in his solitary chamber. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) He denounced unsparingly luxurious habits
in eating and dressing, and enjoined upon the rich the duty of
almsgiving to an extent that tended to increase rather than diminish the
number of beggars who swarmed in the streets and around the churches and
public baths. He disciplined the vicious clergy and opposed the perilous
and immoral habit of unmarried priests of living under the same roof
with “spiritual Sisters” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii-p6.2"></span>συνείσακται</span>). This habit dated from an
earlier age, and was a reaction against celibacy. Cyprian had raised his
protest against it, and the Council of Nicæa forbade unmarried priests
to live with any females except close relations. Chrysostom’s
unpopularity was increased by his irritability and obstinacy, and his
subservience to a proud and violent archdeacon, Serapion. The Empress
Eudoxia was jealous of his influence over Arcadius and angry at his
uncompromising severity against sin and vice. She became the chief
instrument of his downfall.

<span id="iii.vii-p7"></span>The occasion was furnished by an
unauthorized use of his episcopal power beyond the lines of his diocese,
which was confined to the city. At the request of the clergy of Ephesus
and the neighboring bishops, he visited that city in January, 401, held
a synod and deposed six bishops convicted of shameful simony. During his
absence of several months he left the <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>
<span id="iii.vii-Page_13"></span>episcopate of Constantinople in the
hands of Severian, bishop of Gabala, an unworthy and adroit flatterer,
who basely betrayed his trust and formed a cabal headed by the empress
and her licentious court ladies, for the ruin of Chrysostom. On his
return he used unguarded language in the pulpit, and spoke on Elijah’s
relation to Jezebel in such a manner that Eudoxia understood it as a
personal insult. The clergy were anxious to get rid of a bishop who was
too severe for their lax morals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[12:16](1090009.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p6"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.vii-p6.1"></span>Socrates</span> (VI. 5) says that some
justified this habit by his delicate stomach and weak digestion, others
attributed it to his rigid abstinence. His enemies construed it as
pride, and based upon it a serious accusation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chrysostom and Theophilus. His First Deposition and
Banishment.](1090010.md)
