[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090012)  [Next](1090014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="iii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI</span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xi-p1.2"></span>.—*His Character.*</span>

<span id="iii.xi-p2"></span>Chrysostom was one of those rare men who
combine greatness and goodness, genius and piety, and continue to
exercise by their writings and example a happy influence upon the
Christian church. He was a man for his time and for all times. But we
must look at the spirit rather than the form of his piety, which bore
the stamp of his age.

<span id="iii.xi-p3"></span>He took Paul for his model, but had a good
deal of the practical spirit of James, and of the fervor and loveliness
of John. The Scriptures were his daily food, and he again and again
recommended their study to laymen as well as ministers. He was not an
ecclesiastical statesman, like St. Ambrose, not a profound divine like
St. Augustin, but a pure man, a practical Christian, and a king of
preachers. “He carried out in his own life,” says Hase, “as far as
mortal man can do it, the ideal of the priesthood which he once
described in youthful enthusiasm.” He considered it the duty of every
Christian to promote the spiritual welfare of his fellowmen. “Nothing
can be more chilling,” he says in the 20th Homily on Acts, “than the
sight of a Christian who makes no effort to save others. Neither
poverty, nor humble station, nor bodily infirmity can exempt men and
women from the obligation of this great duty. To hide our light under
pretense of weakness is as great an insult to God as if we were to say
that He could not make His sun to shine.”

<span id="iii.xi-p4"></span>It is very much to his praise that in an age
of narrow orthodoxy and doctrinal intolerance he cherished a catholic
and irenical spirit. He by no means disregarded the value of theological
soundness, and was in hearty agreement with the Nicene creed, which
triumphed over the Arians during his ministry in Antioch; he even
refused a church in Constantinople which the Arian Goths claimed. But he
took no share in the persecution of heretics, and even sheltered the
Origenistic monks against the violence of Theophilus of Alexandria. He
hated sin more than error, and placed charity above orthodoxy.

<span id="iii.xi-p5"></span>Like all the Nicene Fathers, he was an
enthusiast for ascetic and monastic virtue, which shows itself in
seclusion rather than in transformation of the world and the natural
ordinances of God. He retained as priest and bishop his cloister habits
of simplicity, abstemiousness and unworldliness. He presents the most
favorable aspect of that mode of life, which must be regarded as a
wholesome reaction against the hopeless corruption of pagan society. He
<span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span id="iii.xi-Page_17"></span>thought
with St. Paul that he could best serve the Lord in single life, and no
one can deny that he was unreservedly devoted to the cause of
religion. <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22)

<span id="iii.xi-p7"></span>He was not a man of affairs, and knew little
of the world. He had the harmlessness of the dove without the wisdom of
the serpent. He knew human nature better than individual men. In this
respect he resembles Neander, his best biographer. Besides, he was
irritable of temper, suspicious of his enemies, and easily deceived and
misled by such men as Serapion. He showed these defects in his quarrel
with the court and the aristocracy of Constantinople. With a little more
worldly wisdom and less ascetic severity he might perhaps have
conciliated and converted those whom he repelled by his pulpit
fulminations. Fearless denunciation of immorality and vice in high
places always commands admiration and respect, especially in a bishop
and court preacher who is exposed to the temptations of flattery. But it
is unwise to introduce personalities into the pulpit and does more harm
than good. His relation to Eudoxia reminds one of the attitude of John
Knox to Mary Stuart. The contrast between the pure and holy zeal of the
preacher and the reformer and the ambition and vanity of a woman on the
throne is very striking and must be judged by higher rules than those of
gallantry and courtesy. But after all, the conduct of Christ, the purest
of the pure, towards Mary Magdalene and the woman taken in adultery is
far more sublime.

<span id="iii.xi-p8"></span>The conflict of Chrysostom with Eudoxia
imparts to his latter life the interest of a romance, and was over-ruled
for his benefit. In his exile his character shines brighter than even in
the pulpit of Antioch and Constantinople. His character was perfected by
suffering. The gentleness, meekness, patience, endurance and devotion to
his friends and his work which he showed during the last three years of
his life are the crowning glory of his career. Though he did not die a
violent death, he deserves to be numbered among the true martyrs, who
are ready for any sacrifice to the cause of virtue and piety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[17:23](1090013.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p6"></span> Luther’s intense aversion to monkery,
although he himself passed through its discipline, must be taken into
account in his unfavorable judgments of Chrysostom, Jerome and other
Fathers except St. Augustin, whom he esteemed very highly. Of Chrysostom
he must have read very little, or he could not have called him a
“rhetorician full of words and empty of matter.” He spoke well, however,
of Theodoret’s commentaries on the Pauline Epistles, which is an
indirect testimony in favor of Chrysostom’s exegesis. See <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.xi-p6.1"></span>Schaff</span>, *Church Hist*.
vol. VI. 536.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Writings of Chrysostom.](1090014)
