[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090097)  [Next](1090099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.vii"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p1"></span> <span id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span
id="xix.vii-Page_371"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="xix.vii-p1.1"></span>Homily V.</span>

<span id="xix.vii-p2"></span>The exhortation of the last Homily is
continued in this. The people are exhorted to bear with fortitude the
impending wrath of the Emperor. The cases of Job and the Ninevites are
referred to as examples. It is shewn that men ought not to fear death,
but sin. What it is to die miserably is explained; and the Homily
concludes with an earnest dissuasive against the use of oaths.

<span id="xix.vii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="xix.vii-p3.1"></span>The</span> discourse concerning the three young
men, and the Babylonian furnace, did, as it would seem, yesterday give
no small comfort to your Charity; and still more the example in the case
of Job, and that dunghill more to be venerated than any kingly throne.
For from seeing a royal throne no advantage results to the spectators,
but only a temporary pleasure, which has no profit; but from the sight
of Job’s dunghill, one may derive every kind of benefit, yea, much
divine wisdom and consolation, in order to patience. Therefore to this
day many undertake a long pilgrimage, <span
id="fr_1226"></span>[1227](#fn_1226) even across the sea, hastening from
the extremities of the earth, as far as Arabia, that they may see that
dunghill; and having beheld it, may kiss the land, which contained the
wrestling-ground <span id="fr_1227"></span>[1228](#fn_1227) of such a
victor, and received the blood that was more precious than all gold! For
the purple shines not so brilliantly, as did that body when dyed <span
id="fr_1228"></span>[1229](#fn_1228) not in another’s blood, but in its
own! Even those very wounds were more precious than all manner of
jewels! For the nature of pearls is of no help to our life; nor do they
satisfy any necessary want on the part of those who have them. But those
wounds are a consolation for all sadness; and that thou mayest learn
this to be the truth, suppose any one were to lose a beloved and only
son. Shew him ten thousand pearls, and you will not console his grief,
or lighten his anguish; but recall to his mind the wounds of Job, and
thou wouldest easily be able to minister comfort by speaking thus: “Why
sorrowest thou, O man? Thou hast lost one son; but that blessed man,
after he had been bereaved of the whole family of his children, both
received a plague in his own flesh, and sat down naked upon the
dunghill, streaming with gore from every part, and his flesh gradually
wasting away; even he who was just, and true, so devout a man, who
stained from every evil deed, and had even God for a witness to his
virtue.” By speaking thus thou wouldest extinguish all the sufferer’s
sadness, and remove all his distress. Thus the wounds of the just man
become more useful than pearls!

<span id="xix.vii-p7"></span>2. Figure to yourselves then this wrestler;
and imagine that you see that dunghill, and himself sitting in the midst
of it! That golden statue! set with gems! I know not how to express it:
for I am unable to find any material so precious as to compare it with
that body stained with blood! So far above every substance, however
costly, was the nature of that flesh, beyond all comparison more
precious, and those wounds more splendid than the sun’s beams; for these
illumine the eyes of the body; but those enlighten the eyes of the mind!
those struck the devil with utter blindness! Therefore it was, that
after that blow, he started back and appeared no more. And do thou, O
beloved, learn thence too what advantage there is in tribulation! For
when the just man was rich, and enjoyed ease, he had the means of
accusing him. However falsely, yet still he had it in his power to say,
“Doth Job serve thee for nought?” But after he had stripped him and made
him poor, he dared not even open his mouth any more. When he was
wealthy, he prepared to wrestle with him, and threatened to overthrow
him; but when he had made him poor, and taken away all he had, and
thrown him into the deepest distress, then he started back. When indeed
his body was sound, he lifted up his hands against him, <span
id="fr_1229"></span>[1230](#fn_1229) but when he had battered his flesh,
then he fled,—defeated! Seest thou how to the vigilant, poverty is much
better and more beneficial than riches; and infirmity and sickness, than
health; and trial, than tranquillity; inasmuch as it makes the
combatants more illustrious and vigorous?

<span id="xix.vii-p9"></span>3. Who hath seen or heard of such an
astonishing contest? The fighters in worldly contests, when they have
battered the heads of their adversaries, are then victorious, and are
crowned! But this adversary, when he <span id="page_372">p. 372</span>
<span id="xix.vii-Page_372"></span>had battered the body of the just
man, perforating it with ulcers of every kind, and had reduced him to
great weakness, was then conquered, and drew back. Even when he had
pierced his ribs in every direction, he was no gainer thereby; for he
spoiled him not of his hidden treasure, but he made him more conspicuous
to us; and through that piercing he gave to all the privilege to look
into his interior, and to discern completely the whole of his wealth!
When he expected to prevail, then he withdrew with much ignominy, and
never again uttered a syllable! What is the matter, O devil? For what
cause withdrawest thou? Was not everything done that thou chosest? Hast
thou not taken away his flocks, his herds, his droves of horses and of
mules? Hast thou not also destroyed his troop of children? and battered
his flesh to pieces. For what reason withdrawest thou? “Because,” saith
he, “every thing I chose <span id="fr_1230"></span>[1231](#fn_1230) is
come to pass, and yet that which I most desired should come to pass, and
for which I did all those things, is not come to pass; he hath not
blasphemed! For it was in order to this, continues he, that I was doing
all those things; and as this is not come to pass, I am no gainer by
having deprived him of his wealth; or by the destruction of his
children; or by the plague inflicted upon his body; but the reverse of
what I purposed hath come to pass; I have made my enemy more
illustrious; I have added lustre to his reputation.” Perceivest thou, O
beloved, how great was the reward of tribulation? His body was fair and
sound before, but it became more venerable, when pierced through and
through by these wounds! And thus wool, fair as it is before the dyeing,
when it becomes purple, takes an indescribable beauty, and an additional
grace. But if he had not stripped him, we should not have known the good
condition <span id="fr_1231"></span>[1232](#fn_1231) of the victor; if
he had not pierced the body with ulcers, the rays within would not have
shone forth. If he had not made him sit down upon a dunghill, we should
not have known his wealth. For a king sitting on a throne is not so
illustrious, as this man was notable and conspicuous, whilst sitting
upon his dunghill! For after the royal throne, comes death; but after
that dunghill, the kingdom of heaven!

<span id="xix.vii-p12"></span>4. Collecting then all these reasons, let
us raise ourselves from the dejection which oppresses us. For I have
laid these histories before you, not that ye may applaud what is spoken,
but that ye may imitate the virtue and the patience of such noble men;
that ye may learn from the very facts, that there is nothing of human
ills to be dreaded, save sin only; neither poverty, nor disease, nor
insult, nor malicious treatment, nor ignominy, nor death, which is
accounted the worst of all evils. To those who love spiritual wisdom,
such things are only the names of calamities; names which have no
substantial reality. But the true calamity consists in offending God,
and in doing aught which is displeasing to Him. For tell me, what is
there in death which is terrible? Is it because it transports thee more
quickly to the peaceful haven, and to that life which is free from
tumult? Although man should not put thee to death, will not the very law
of nature, at length stealing upon thee, separate the body from the
soul; and if this event which we fear does not happen now, it will
happen shortly.

<span id="xix.vii-p13"></span>5. I speak thus, not anticipating any
dread or melancholy event: <span id="fr_1232"></span>[1233](#fn_1232)
God forbid! But because I am ashamed for those who are afraid of death.
Tell me, whilst expecting such good things as “eye hath not seen, nor
ear heard, nor have entered the heart of man,” <span
id="fr_1233"></span>[1234](#fn_1233) dost thou demur about this
enjoyment, and art negligent and slothful; and not only slothful, but
fearful and trembling? And is it not shameful that thou art distressed
on account of death, whereas Paul groaned on account of the present
life, and writing to the Romans said, “The creation groaneth together,
and ourselves also which have the first fruits of the Spirit do
groan.” <span id="fr_1234"></span>[1235](#fn_1234) And he spoke thus,
not as condemning the things present, but longing for the things to
come. “I have tasted,” saith he, “of the grace, and I do not willingly
put up with the delay. <span id="fr_1235"></span>[1236](#fn_1235) I have
the first fruits of the Spirit, and I press on towards the whole. I have
ascended to the third heaven; I have seen that glory which is
unutterable; I have beheld the shining palaces; I have learnt what joys
I am deprived of, while I linger here, and therefore do I groan.” For
suppose any one had conducted thee into princely halls, and shewn thee
the gold everywhere glittering on the walls, and all the rest of the
glorious show; if from thence he had led thee back afterward to a poor
man’s hut, and promised that in a short time he would bring thee back to
those palaces, and would there give thee a perpetual mansion; tell me,
wouldest thou not indeed languish with desire, and feel impatient, even
at these few days? Thus think <span id="page_373">p. 373</span> <span
id="xix.vii-Page_373"></span>then of heaven, and of earth, and groan
with Paul, not because of death, but because of the present life!

<span id="xix.vii-p18"></span>6. But grant me, saith one, to be like
Paul, and I shall never be afraid of death. Why, what is it that forbids
thee, O man, to become like Paul? Was he not a poor man? Was he not a
tent maker? Was he not a man of humble position? For if he had been rich
and high born, the poor, when called upon to imitate his zeal, would
have had their poverty to plead; but now thou canst say nothing of this
sort. For this man was one who exercised a manual art, and supported
himself too by his daily labours. And thou, indeed, from the first hast
inherited true religion from thy fathers; and from thy earliest age hast
been nourished in the study of the sacred writings; but he was “a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious,” <span
id="fr_1236"></span>[1237](#fn_1236) and ravaged the Church!
Nevertheless, he so changed all at once, as to surpass all in the
vehemence of his zeal, and he cries out, saying, “Be ye imitators of me,
even as I also am of Christ.” <span id="fr_1237"></span>[1238](#fn_1237)
He imitated the Lord; and wilt not thou who hast been educated in piety
from the first, imitate a fellow-servant; one who by conversion was
brought to the faith at a later period of life? Knowest thou not, that
they who are in sins are dead whilst they live; and that they who
live <span id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238) in righteousness,
although they be dead, yet they live? <span
id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239) And this is not my word. It is the
declaration of Christ speaking to Martha, “He that believeth in me
though he were dead yet shall he live.” <span
id="fr_1240"></span>[1241](#fn_1240) Is our doctrine, indeed, a fable?
If thou art a Christian, believe in Christ; if thou believest in Christ,
shew me thy faith by thy works. <span
id="fr_1241"></span>[1242](#fn_1241) But how mayest thou shew this? By
thy contempt of death: for in this we differ from the unbelievers. They
may well fear death; since they have no hope of a resurrection. But
thou, who art travelling toward better things, and hast the opportunity
of meditating on the hope of the future; what excuse hast thou, if
whilst assured of a resurrection, thou are yet at the same time as
fearful of death, as those who believe not the resurrection?

<span id="xix.vii-p25"></span>7. But I have no fear of death, says one,
nor of the act of dying, but of a miserable death, of being beheaded.
Did John then, I ask, die miserably? for he was beheaded. Or did Stephen
die miserably? for he was stoned; and all the martyrs have thus died
wretchedly, according to this objection: since some have ended their
lives by fire; and others by the sword; and some cast into the ocean;
others down a precipice; and others into the jaws of wild beasts, have
so come by their death. To die basely, O man, is not to come to one’s
end by a violent death, but to die in sin! Hear, at least, the prophet
moralising on this very matter, and saying, “The death of sinners is
evil.” <span id="fr_1242"></span>[1243](#fn_1242) He does not say that a
violent death is evil; but what then? “The death of sinners is
evil.” <span id="fr_1243"></span>[1244](#fn_1243) And justly so; for
after the departure from this life, there is an intolerable punishment;
undying vengeance, the envenomed worm; the fire unquenchable, the outer
darkness, the chains indissoluble; the gnashing of teeth, the
tribulation, and the anguish, and the eternal justice. <span
id="fr_1244"></span>[1245](#fn_1244)

<span id="xix.vii-p29"></span>8. Since therefore such evils await
sinners, what advantage can it be to them, though they should end their
days at home, and in their bed? Even so, on the other hand, it can do no
harm to the righteous to lay down the present life through sword, or
steel, or fire, when they are to depart to the good things that are
immortal. Truly “the death of sinners is evil.” Such a death was that of
the rich man, who despised Lazarus. He, when he had terminated his life
by a natural end, at home and on his bed, and with his relatives about
him, experienced after his departure to the other world a fiery torment;
nor was he able to obtain there even a little comfort, out of all the
pleasure he had enjoyed in the present life! But not so was it with
Lazarus; for when lying upon the pavement, while the dogs came and
licked his sores, he had suffered a violent death (for what could be
more painful than hunger?), but on his departing hence he enjoyed
eternal blessings, luxuriating in the bosom of Abraham! In what respect,
then, did it injure him that he died a violent death? or what did it
profit the rich man, that he died not with violence?

<span id="xix.vii-p30"></span>9. But, says some one, “We have no fear of
dying by violence, but of dying unjustly; and of being punished in a
similar way with the guilty,—we who have had nothing to do with the
crimes of which we are suspected.” What sayest thou, tell me? Art thou
afraid <span id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span
id="xix.vii-Page_374"></span>of dying unjustly, and wouldest thou wish
to die justly. But who is there so wretched and miserable, that when he
had the alternative of dying unjustly, would rather depart by an act of
justice? For if it be necessary to fear death, it is necessary to fear
it when it comes upon us justly; since he indeed who dies unjustly, is
by this very means made a partaker with all the saints. For many of
those who were approved and distinguished by God, have been subjected to
an unjust end; and first of all Abel. For it was not that he had sinned
against his brother, or done Cain any harm; but inasmuch as he had
honoured God, therefore was he slaughtered. But God permitted it. Was
it, think you, because He loved him, or because He hated him? Most
clearly, because He loved him, and wished to make his crown the
brighter, by that most unjust murder. Seest thou then, that it becomes
us not to be afraid of dying by violence; nor yet of dying unjustly; but
of dying in a state of sin? Abel died unjustly. Cain lived, groaning and
trembling! Which then, I would ask, was the more blessed of the two; he
who went to rest in righteousness, or he who lived in sin; he who died
unjustly, or he who was justly punished? Would you have me declare unto
your Charity, whence it is that we are afraid of death? The love of the
kingdom hath not penetrated us, nor the desire of things to come
inflamed us: otherwise we should despise all present things, even as the
blessed Paul did. Add to this, on the other hand, that we do not stand
in awe of hell; therefore death is terrible. We are not sensible of the
unsufferable nature of the punishment there; therefore, instead of sin,
we fear death; since if the fear of the one held possession of our
souls, the fear of the other would not be able to enter.

<span id="xix.vii-p31"></span>10. And this I will endeavour to make
manifest, not from anything of a remote nature, but from what is at our
own doors; and from the events which have happened among us in these
days. For when the Emperor’s letter came, ordering that tribute to be
imposed which was thought to be so intolerable, all were in a tumult;
all quarrelled with it; thought it a sore grievance, resented it; and
when they met one another said, “Our life is not worth living, the city
is undone;—no one will be able to stand under this heavy burden;” and
they were distressed as if placed in the extremest danger. After this,
when the rebellion was actually perpetrated, and certain vile, yea,
thoroughly vile persons, trampling under foot the laws, threw down the
statues, and involved all in the utmost peril; and now that we are in
fear for our very lives, through the indignation of the Emperor, this
loss of money no longer stings us. But instead of such complaints, I
hear from all a language of a different kind. “Let the Emperor take our
substance, we will gladly be deprived of our fields and possessions, if
any one will but ensure us safety for the bare body.” As therefore,
before the fear of death pressed upon us, the loss of our wealth
tormented us; and after these lawless outrages had been perpetrated, the
fear of death succeeding, expelled the grief for that loss; so if the
fear of hell had held possession of our souls, the fear of death would
not have possessed them. But even as it is with the body, when two kinds
of pain seize upon us, the more powerful usually overshadows the weaker
one, so also would it now happen; if the dread of future punishment
remained in the soul, that would overshadow all human fear. So that if
any one endeavours always to have the remembrance of hell, he will
deride every kind of death; and this will not only deliver him from the
present distress, but will even rescue him from the flame to come. For
he who is always afraid of hell, will never fall into the fire of hell;
being made sober by this continual fear!

<span id="xix.vii-p32"></span>11. Permit me, that I now say to you at a
fitting time, “Brethren, be not children in understanding; howbeit in
malice be ye children.” <span id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245) For
this is a childish terror of ours, if we fear death, but are not fearful
of sin. Little children too are afraid of masks, but fear not the fire.
On the contrary, if they are carried by accident near a lighted candle,
they stretch out the hand without any concern towards the candle and the
flame; yet a mask which is so utterly contemptible terrifies them;
whereas they have no dread of fire, which is really a thing to be afraid
of. Just so we too have a fear of death, which is a mask that might well
be despised; but have no fear of sin, which is truly dreadful; and, even
as fire, devours the conscience! And this is wont to happen not on
account of the nature of the things, but by reason of our own folly; so
that if we were once to consider what death is, we should at no time be
afraid of it. What then, I pray you, is death? Just what it is to put
off a garment. For the body is about the soul as a garment; and after
laying this aside for a short time by means of death, we shall resume it
again with the more splendour. What is death at most? It is a journey
for a season; a sleep longer than usual! So that if thou fearest <span
id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span id="xix.vii-Page_375"></span>death,
thou shouldest also fear sleep! If for those who are dying thou art
pained, grieve for those too who are eating and drinking, for as this is
natural, so is that! Let not natural things sadden thee; rather let
things which arise from an evil choice make thee sorrowful. Sorrow not
for the dying man; but sorrow for him who is living in sin!

<span id="xix.vii-p34"></span>12. Would you have me mention another
reason on account of which we fear death? We do not live with
strictness, nor keep a clear conscience; for if this were the case
nothing would alarm us, neither death, nor famine, nor the loss of
wealth, nor anything else of this kind. For he who lives virtuously,
cannot be injured by any of these things, or be deprived of his inward
pleasure. For being supported by favourable hopes, nothing will be able
to throw him into dejection. What is there that any one can possibly
effect, by which he can cause the noble-minded man to become sorrowful?
Take away his riches? He has yet wealth that is in the heavens! Cast him
out of his country? He will take his journey to <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246) that city which is above! Load him
with fetters? He has still his conscience free, and is insensible to the
external chain! Put his body to death? Yet he shall rise again! And as
he who fights with a shadow, and beaten the air, will be unable to hit
any one; so he who is at war with the just man, is but striking at a
shadow, and wasting his own strength, without being able to inflict any
injury upon him. Grant me then to be sure of the kingdom of heaven; and,
if thou wishest, slay me this day. I shall be thankful to thee for the
slaughter; forasmuch as thou sendest me quickly to the possession of
those good things! “This, however,” says some one, “is what we
especially lament, that hindered as we are by the multitude of our sins,
we shall not attain to that kingdom.” Such being the case then, leave
off lamenting death, and lament thy sins, in order that thou mayest be
freed from them! Grief, indeed, hath had its existence, not that we
should sorrow for the loss of wealth, nor for death, nor for anything
else of that kind, but that we may employ it for the taking away of our
sins. <span id="fr_1247"></span>[1248](#fn_1247) And I will make the
truth of this evident by an example. Healing medicines <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[1249](#fn_1248) have been made for those diseases
only which they are able to remove; not for those which are in no
respect assisted by them. For instance (for I wish to make the matter
still plainer), the medicine which is able to benefit a malady of the
eyes only, and no other disease, one might justly say was made only for
the sake of the eyes; not for the stomach, nor for the hands, nor any
other member. Let us then transfer this argument to the subject of
grief; and we shall find, that in none of those things which happen to
us, is it of any advantage, except to correct sin; whence it is apparent
that it hath had its existence only for the destruction of this. Let us
now take a survey of each of those evils which befall us, and let us
apply despondency as a remedy, and see what sort of advantage <span
id="fr_1249"></span>[1250](#fn_1249) results from it.

<span id="xix.vii-p39"></span>13. Some one is mulcted in property: he
becomes sad, but this does not make good his loss. Some one hath lost a
son: he grieves, but he cannot raise the dead, nor benefit the departed.
Some one hath been scourged, beaten, and insulted; he becomes sorrowful.
This does not recall the insult. Some one falls into sickness, and a
most grievous disease; he is dejected. This does not remove his disease,
but only makes it the more grievous. Do you see that in none of these
cases does sadness answer any useful purpose? Suppose that any one hath
sinned, and is sad. He blots out the sin; he gets free from the
transgression. How is this shewn? By the declaration of the Lord; for,
speaking of a certain one who had sinned, He said, “Because of his
iniquity I made him sad for a while; and I saw that he was grieved, and
he went on heavily; and I healed his ways.” <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[1251](#fn_1250) Therefore also Paul saith, “Godly
sorrow worketh repentance unto salvation not to be repented of.” <span
id="fr_1251"></span>[1252](#fn_1251) Since then what I have said clearly
shews, that neither the loss of riches, nor insult, nor abuse, nor
stripes, nor sickness, nor death, nor any other thing of that kind can
possibly be relieved by the interference of grief, but sin only can it
blot out and do away, it is evident that this is the only reason why it
hath its existence. Let us therefore no more grieve for the loss of
wealth, but let us grieve only when we commit sin. For great in this
case is the gain that comes of sorrow. Art thou amerced? Be not
dejected, for thus thou wilt not be at all benefited. Hast thou sinned?
Then be sorry: for it is profitable; and consider the skill and wisdom
of God. Sin hath brought forth for us these two things, sorrow and
death. For “in the day thou eatest,” He saith, “thou shalt surely die;”
<span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span id="xix.vii-Page_376"></span>and
to the woman, “In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children.” <span
id="fr_1252"></span>[1253](#fn_1252) And by both of these things he took
away sin, and provided that the mother should be destroyed by her
offspring. For that death as well as grief takes away sin, is evident,
in the first place, from the case of the martyrs; <span
id="fr_1253"></span>[1254](#fn_1253) and it is plain too from what Paul
saith to those who had sinned, speaking on this wise, “For this cause
many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.” <span
id="fr_1254"></span>[1255](#fn_1254) Inasmuch, he observes, as ye have
sinned, ye die, so that ye are freed from sin by death. Therefore he
goes on to say, “For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be
judged. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world.” <span
id="fr_1255"></span>[1256](#fn_1255) And even as the worm is brought
forth from the wood, and devours the wood; and a moth consumes the wool,
from whence it originates; so grief and death were born of sin, and
devour sin.

<span id="xix.vii-p46"></span>14. Let us not then fear death, but let us
only fear sin, and grieve on account of this. And these things I speak,
not anticipating any thing fearful, God forbid! but wishing you when
alarmed to be always thus affected, and to fulfil the law of Christ in
very deed. For “he,” saith Christ, “that taketh not his cross, and
followeth after Me, is not worthy of Me.” <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[1257](#fn_1256) This He said, not that we should
bear the wood upon our shoulders, but that we should always have death
before our eyes. Even so as Paul, that is, died daily, and laughed at
death, and despised the present life. For indeed thou art a soldier, and
standest continually at arms; but a soldier who is afraid of death, will
never perform a noble action. Thus then neither will a Christian man, if
fearful of dangers, perform anything great or admirable; nay, besides
this, he will be apt to be easily vanquished. But not so is it with the
man who is bold and lofty minded. He remains impregnable and
unconquerable. As then the Three Children, when they feared not the
fire, escaped from the fire, so also we, if we fear not death, shall
entirely escape from death. They feared not the fire (for it is no crime
to be burnt), but they feared sin, for it is a crime to commit impiety.
Let us also imitate these and all such, and let us not be afraid of
dangers, and then we shall pass safely through them.

<span id="xix.vii-p48"></span>15. As for me, “I am not a prophet nor the
son of a prophet,” <span id="fr_1257"></span>[1258](#fn_1257) yet I
understand clearly thus much of the future, and I proclaim, both loudly
and distinctly, that if we become changed, and bestow some care upon our
souls, and desist from iniquity, nothing will be unpleasant or painful.
And this I plainly know from the love of God toward man, as well as from
those things which He hath done for men, and cities, and nations, and
whole populations. For He threatened the city of Nineveh, and said,
“There are yet three days, <span id="fr_1258"></span>[1259](#fn_1258)
and Nineveh shall be overthrown.” <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[1260](#fn_1259) What then, I ask, Was Nineveh
overthrown? Was the city destroyed? Nay, quite the contrary; it both
arose, and became still more distinguished; and long as is the time
which has elapsed, it has not effaced its glory, but we all still
celebrate and admire it even to this day. <span
id="fr_1260"></span>[1261](#fn_1260) For from that time it hath been a
sort of excellent haven for all who have sinned, not suffering them to
sink into desperation, but calling all to repentance; and by what it
did, and by what it obtained of God’s favour, persuading men never to
despair of their salvation, but exhibiting the best life they can, <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[1262](#fn_1261) and setting before them a <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262) good hope, to be confident of the
issue as destined in any wise to be favourable. For who would not be
stirred up on hearing of such an example, even if he were the laziest of
mortals?

<span id="xix.vii-p55"></span>16. For God even preferred that His own
prediction should fall to the ground, so that the city should not fall.
Or rather, the prophecy did not even so fall to the ground. For if
indeed while the men continued in the same wickedness, the sentence had
not taken effect, some one perhaps might have brought a charge against
what was uttered. But if when they had changed, and desisted from their
iniquity, God also desisted from His <span id="page_377">p. 377</span>
<span id="xix.vii-Page_377"></span>wrath, who shall be able any longer
to find fault with the prophecy, or to convict the things spoken of
falsehood. The same law indeed which God had laid down from the
beginning, publishing it to all men by the prophet, was on that occasion
strictly observed. What then is this law? “I shall speak a sentence,”
saith He, “concerning a nation or a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull
down, and to destroy it; and it shall be, that if they repent of their
evil, I will also repent of the wrath which I said I would do unto
them.” <span id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263) Guarding then this
law, he saved those who were converted and released from His wrath those
who desisted from their wickedness. He knew the virtue of the
barbarians; therefore He hastened the prophet thither. Thus was the city
agitated at the time, when it heard the prophet’s voice, but instead of
being injured it was benefited by fear. For that fear was the cause of
its safety. The threatening effected the deliverance from the peril. The
sentence of overthrow put a stop to the overthrow. O strange and
astonishing event! the sentence threatening death, brought forth life!
The sentence after it was published became cancelled; the very opposite
to that which takes place among temporal judges! for in their case the
proclamation of the sentence causes it to become valid, is fully to
ratify it; but on the contrary, with God, the publication of the
sentence, caused it to be cancelled. For if it had not been published,
the offenders would not have heard; and if they had not heard, they
would not have repented, and if they had not repented, <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[1265](#fn_1264) they would not have warded off the
punishment, nor would they have obtained that astonishing deliverance.
For how is it less than astonishing, when the judge declares sentence,
and the condemned discharge the sentence by their repentance! They,
indeed, did not flee from the city as we are now doing, but remaining in
it they caused it to stand. It was a snare, and they made it a
fortification! It was a gulph, and a precipice, and they turned it into
a tower of safety! They had heard that the buildings would fall, and yet
they fled not from the buildings, but they fled from their sins. They
did not depart each from his house as we do now, but each departed from
his evil way; for, said they, “why should we think the walls have
brought forth the wrath? we are the causes of the wound; we then should
provide the medicine.” Therefore they trusted for safety, not to a
change of habitations, <span id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265) but of
habits. <span id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266)

<span id="xix.vii-p60"></span>17. Thus did the barbarians! and are we
not ashamed, and ought we not to hide our faces, whilst instead of
changing our habits, as they did, we change only our habitations;
privily removing our goods, and doing the deeds of men that are drunken?
Our Master is angry with us; and we, neglecting to appease His wrath,
carry about our household stuff from place to place, and run hither and
thither, seeking where we may deposit our substance; while we ought
rather to seek where we may deposit our soul in safety; or rather, it
behoveth us not to seek, but to entrust its safety to virtue and
uprightness of life. For when we were angry and displeased with a
servant, if he, instead of defending himself against our displeasure,
went down to his apartment, and collecting together his clothes, and
binding up together all his movables, meditated a flight, we could not
tamely put up with this contempt. Let us then desist from this
unseasonable endeavour, and let us each say to God, “Whither shall I go
from Thy Spirit, and whither shall I flee from Thy presence?” <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267) Let us imitate the spiritual wisdom
of the barbarians. They repented even on uncertain grounds! For the
sentence had no such clause, “If ye turn and repent, I will set up the
city;” but simply, “Yet three days, and Nineveh shall be
overthrown.” <span id="fr_1268"></span>[1269](#fn_1268) What then said
they? “Who knoweth whether God will repent of the evil He said He would
do unto us?” Who knoweth? They know not the end of the event, and yet
they do not neglect repentance! They are unacquainted with God’s method
of shewing mercy, and yet they change upon the strength of
uncertainties! For neither was it in their power to look at other
Ninevites who had repented and been saved; nor had they read prophets;
nor had they heard patriarchs; nor had they enjoyed counsel, or partaken
of admonition; nor had they persuaded themselves that they should
certainly propitiate God by repentance. For the threatening did not
imply this: but they were doubtful, and hesitating concerning it; and
yet they repented with all diligence. What reason then shall we have to
urge, when those, who had no ground for confidence as to the issue, are
seen to have exhibited so great a change; but thou who hast ground of
confidence in the mercy of God, and who hast frequently received many
pledges of His care, and hast heard prophets, and apostles, and hast
been instructed by actual events; <span id="page_378">p. 378</span>
<span id="xix.vii-Page_378"></span>hast yet no emulation to reach the
same measure of virtue as these did! Great assuredly was their virtue!
but greater by far was the mercy of God! and this may be seen from the
very greatness of the threat. For this reason God did not add to the
declaration, “But if ye repent. I will spare:” in order that by setting
forth a sentence without limitation, He might increase the fear and
having increased the fear, He might constrain them more speedily to
repentance.

<span id="xix.vii-p63"></span>18. The prophet is indeed ashamed,
foreseeing what the issue would be, and conjecturing that what he had
prophesied, would remain unaccomplished; God however is not ashamed, but
is desirous of one thing only, viz. the salvation of men, and corrects
His own servant. For when he had entered the ship, He straightway there
raised a boisterous sea; in order that thou mightest know that where sin
is, there is a tempest; where there is disobedience, there is the
swelling of the waves. <span id="fr_1269"></span>[1270](#fn_1269) The
city was shaken because of the sins of the Ninevites; and the ship was
shaken because of the disobedience of the prophet. The sailors therefore
threw Jonah in the deep, and the ship was preserved. Let us then drown
our sins, and our city will assuredly be safe! Flight will certainly be
no advantage to us; for it did not profit him; on the contrary, it did
him injury. He fled from the land indeed, but he fled not from the wrath
of God; he fled from the land, but he brought the tempest after him on
the sea; and so far was he from obtaining any benefit by his flight,
that he plunged those also who received him into the extremest peril.
And whilst he sat sailing in the ship, although the sailors, the pilots,
and all the necessary apparatus of the ship were there present, he was
placed in the utmost danger. After, however, having been thrown out into
the deep, and having put away his sin by means of the punishment, he had
been conveyed into that unstable <span
id="fr_1270"></span>[1271](#fn_1270) vessel, I mean, the whale’s belly,
he enjoyed great security. This was for the purpose of teaching thee,
that as no ship can be of any use to him who is living in sin, so him
who has put away his sin, the sea cannot drown, nor monsters destroy. Of
a truth, the waves received, but they did not suffocate him. The whale
received him, but did not destroy him; but both the animal and the
element gave back to God unhurt that, with which they were entrusted;
and by all these things the prophet was taught to be humane and
merciful; and not to be more cruel than wild beasts, or thoughtless
sailors, or unruly waves. For even the sailors did not immediately at
first give him up, but after much compulsion; and the sea and the
monster guarded him with great kindness; all these things being under
God’s direction.

<span id="xix.vii-p66"></span>19. Therefore he came back again; he
preached; he threatened; he persuaded; he preserved; he affrighted; he
amended; he established; by one, and that the first preaching! Many days
he needed not, nor continued counsel; but speaking these simple words
only, he brought all to repentance! On this account God did not lead him
directly from the ship into the city; but the sailors committed him to
the sea; the sea to the whale; the whale to God; God to the Ninevites;
and by this long circuit he brought back the fugitive, that he might
instruct all, that it is impossible to fly from the hands of God; that
whithersoever any one may roam, dragging his sin after him, he will have
to undergo a thousand evils; and though no mortal were present, yet on
every side the whole creation will rise up against him with the utmost
vehemence! Let us not then provide for our safety by flight, but by a
change of the moral character. Is it for remaining in the city that God
is angry with thee, that thou shouldest fly? It is because thou hast
sinned, that He is indignant. Lay aside therefore the sin, and where the
cause of thy wound lies, thence remove <span
id="fr_1271"></span>[1272](#fn_1271) the fountain of the evil. For the
physicians too give us directions to cure contraries by contraries. Is
fever, for instance, produced by a full diet? They subject the disease
to the regimen of abstinence. Does any one fall sick from sadness? They
say that mirth is the suitable medicine for it. Thus also it befits us
to act with respect to diseases of the soul. Hath listlessness excited
the wrath? let us shake this off by zeal, and let us manifest in our
conduct a great change. We have the fast, a very great auxiliary and
ally in our warfare; and besides the fast, we have the impending
distress, and the fear of danger. Now then, in season, let us be at work
on the soul; for we shall easily be able to persuade it to whatever we
choose; since he who is alarmed and trembling, and set free from all
luxury, and who lives in terror, is able to practise moral wisdom
without difficulty, and to receive the seeds of virtue with much
alacrity.

<span id="xix.vii-p68"></span>20. Let us therefore persuade it to make
<span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="xix.vii-Page_379"></span>this first change for the better, by the
avoidance of oaths; for although I spake to you yesterday, and the day
before, <span id="fr_1272"></span>[1273](#fn_1272) on this same subject;
yet neither to-day, nor to-morrow, nor the day after, will I desist
giving my counsel on this subject. And why do I say to-morrow and the
day following? Until I see that you are amended, I will not abstain from
doing so. If those, indeed, who transgress this law, are not ashamed,
far less should we who bid them not transgress it, feel this frequency
of the admonition to be a matter worthy of shame. For to be continually
reminding men of the same topics is not the fault of the speaker, but of
the hearers, needing as they do perpetual instruction, upon simple and
easily-observed precepts. What indeed is easier than not to swear? It is
only a good work of habit. It is neither labour of the body, nor
expenditure of wealth. Art thou desirous to learn how it is possible to
get the better of this infirmity, how it is possible to be set free from
this evil habit? I will tell thee of a particular method by which if
pursued thou wilt certainly master it. If thou seest either thyself or
any other person, whether it be one of thy servants, or of thy children,
or thy wife, ensnared in this vice; when thou hast continually reminded
them of it, and they are not amended, order them to retire to rest
supperless; <span id="fr_1273"></span>[1274](#fn_1273) and impose this
sentence upon thyself, as well as upon them, a sentence which will bring
with it no injury, but a gain. For such is the nature of spiritual acts;
they bring profit and a speedy reformation. The tongue when constantly
punished, when straitened by thirst. and pained by hunger, receives a
sufficient admonition, even whilst no one is its monitor; and though we
were the most stupid of mortals, yet when we are thus reminded by the
greatness of the punishment during a whole day, we shall need no other
counsel and exhortation.

<span id="xix.vii-p71"></span>21. Ye have applauded what I have spoken.
But still shew me your applause too by deeds. Else what is the advantage
of our meeting here? Suppose a child were to go to school every day, yet
if he learnt nothing the more for it, would the excuse satisfy us that
he every day went there? Should we not esteem it the greatest fault,
that going there daily, he did it to no purpose. Let us consider this
with ourselves, and let us say to ourselves, For so long a time have we
met together at church, having the benefit of a most solemn
Communion, <span id="fr_1274"></span>[1275](#fn_1274) which has in it
much profit; and should we return back again just as we came, with none
of our defects corrected, of what advantage is our coming here? For most
actions are done, not for themselves, but for the effects which follow
through their means; as, for example, the sower does not sow for the
mere sake of sowing, but in order that he may reap too; since if this
were not to follow, the sowing would be a loss, the seeds rotting
without any kind of advantage. The merchant doth not take a voyage
merely for sailing’s sake, but that he may increase his substance by
going abroad; since, if this be not attained beside, extreme mischief
will result, and the voyage of merchants were but for loss. Let us
indeed consider this in relation to ourselves. We also meet together in
the church, not for the mere purpose of spending time here, but in order
that we may return having gained a great and spiritual benefit. Should
we then depart empty, and without having received any advantage, this
our diligence becomes our condemnation! In order that this may not
occur, and extreme mischief result, on departing from this place, let
friends practise with one another; fathers with children; and masters
with servants; and train yourselves to perform the task assigned you; so
that when ye come back again, and hear us giving you counsel on the same
subjects, ye may not be put to shame by an accusing conscience, but may
rejoice and be glad, whilst ye perceive that ye have accomplished the
greatest part of the admonition.

<span id="xix.vii-p73"></span>22. Let us not moralize on these things
here only. For this temporary admonition does not suffice to extirpate
the whole evil; but at home also, let the husband hear of these things
from the wife, and the wife from the husband. And let there be a kind of
rivalry among all in endeavouring to gain precedence in the fulfilment
of this law; and let him who is in advance, and hath amended his
conduct, reproach him who is still loitering behind; to the end that he
may stir him up the more by these gibes. He who is deficient, and hath
not yet amended his conduct, let him look at him who hath outstripped
him, and strive with emulation to come up with him quickly. If we take
advice on these points, and are anxiously concerned about <span
id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span id="xix.vii-Page_380"></span>them, our
other affairs will speedily be well adjusted. Be thou solicitous about
God’s business, and he will take care of thine! And do not say to me,
“What if any one should impose upon us the necessity of taking oaths?
What if he should not believe us?” For assuredly, where a law is
transgressed, it is improper to make mention of necessity; forasmuch as
there is but one necessity which cannot be dispensed with, viz. that of
not offending God! This, however, I say further; cut off in the meantime
superfluous oaths, those that are taken uselessly, and without any
necessity; those to your own family, those to your friends, those to
your servants; and should you take away these, you will have no further
need of me for the others. For the very mouth that has been well
disciplined to dread and to avoid the frequent oath, should any one
constrain it a thousand times, would never consent to relapse again into
the same habit. On the contrary, as now, with much labor and vast
importunity, by alarming, threatening, exhorting, and counselling, we
have scarcely been able to bring it over to a different habit, so in
that case, although any one were to impose ever so great necessity, he
could not possibly persuade to a transgression of this law. And as a
person would never choose to take a particular poison, however urgent
the necessity might be, so neither would he to utter an oath!

<span id="xix.vii-p74"></span>23. Should this amendment then take place,
it will be an encouragement and inducement to the attainment of the
remaining parts of virtue. For he who has not accomplished anything at
all becomes listless, and quickly falls; but he who is conscious with
himself that he has fulfilled at least one precept, coming by this to
have a good hope, will go on with greater alacrity towards the rest; so
that, after he has reached one, he will presently come to another; and
will not halt until he has attained the crown of all. For if with regard
to wealth, the more any one obtains of it, the more he desires, much
rather may this be seen with reference to spiritual attainments.
Therefore I hasten, and am urgent that this work may take its
commencement, and that the foundation of virtue may be laid in your
souls. We pray and beseech, that ye will remember these words, not only
at the present time, but also at home, and in the market, and
wheresoever ye pass your time. Oh! that it were possible for me
familiarly to converse with you! <span
id="fr_1275"></span>[1276](#fn_1275) then this long harangue of mine
would have been unnecessary. But now since this may not be, instead of
me, remember my words: and while you are sitting at table, suppose me to
enter, and to be standing beside you, and dinning into you the things I
now say to you in this place. And wheresoever there may be any discourse
concerning me among you, above all things remember this precept, and
render me this recompense for my love toward you. If I see that you have
fulfilled it, I have received my full return, and have obtained a
sufficient recompense for my labours. In order then that ye may both
render us the more active, and that yourselves too may be in the
enjoyment of a good hope; and may provide for the accomplishment of the
remaining precepts with greater facility; treasure up this precept in
your souls with much care, and ye will then understand the benefit of
this admonition. And since a vestment broidered with gold is a beautiful
and conspicuous object, but seems much more so to us when it is worn
upon our own person; thus also the precepts of God are beautiful when
being praised, but appear far more lovely when they are rightly
practised. For now indeed ye commend what is spoken during a brief
moment of time, but if ye reduce it to practice, you will alike commend
both yourselves and us all day long, and all your lives long. And this
is not the grand point, that we shall praise one another; but that God
will accept us; and not only accept us, but will also reward us with
those gifts that are great and unspeakable! Of which may we all be
deemed worthy, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, through whom, and with whom, to the Father together with the
Holy Ghost, be glory, now and always, for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[371:1227](1090098.htm#fr_1226) <span
id="xix.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p4"></span> Comp. Hom. I. 23; Hom. XXXI. on [Rom. xvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#004)<span id="xix.vii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[371:1228](1090098.htm#fr_1227) <span
id="xix.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p5"></span> τὴν δεξαμ™νην τὰ σκ€μματα, see Hom. IV.,
this word can only mean the prepared place, not the spectators.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[371:1229](1090098.htm#fr_1228) <span
id="xix.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p6"></span> βαπτιζόμενον, perhaps rather “drenched,”
but the mention of the purple favors “dyed;” the present tense does not
admit “baptized,” though the allusion is well sustained in Ben.
*tinctum*.

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[371:1230](1090098.htm#fr_1229) <span
id="xix.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p8"></span> Or buffetted with him, χεῖρας ‡ντῇρεν.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[372:1231](1090098.htm#fr_1230) <span
id="xix.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p10"></span> ἠθ™λησα, desired is ἐβουλόμην. See Plat.
Gorg. where Socrates argues that a tyrant has no great power, since,
though he can do all he chooses, … δοκεῖ αὐτῷ, he cannot attain what he
wishes, … βούλεται.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[372:1232](1090098.htm#fr_1231) <span
id="xix.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p11"></span> εὐεξίαν. See Hom. I. 16.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[372:1233](1090098.htm#fr_1232) <span
id="xix.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p14"></span> *i.e*., as connected with the present
events.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[372:1234](1090098.htm#fr_1233) <span
id="xix.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p15"></span> [1 Cor.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009), [Isa.
64:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004)<span id="xix.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[372:1235](1090098.htm#fr_1234) <span
id="xix.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p16"></span> [Rom.
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span id="xix.vii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[372:1236](1090098.htm#fr_1235) <span
id="xix.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p17"></span> οὐ στ™γω. Cf. [1 Thess. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001)<span id="xix.vii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[373:1237](1090098.htm#fr_1236) <span
id="xix.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p19"></span> [1 Tim. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)<span id="xix.vii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[373:1238](1090098.htm#fr_1237) <span
id="xix.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p20"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#006)<span id="xix.vii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[373:1239](1090098.htm#fr_1238) <span
id="xix.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p21"></span> ζωντες, but Ben. Mar. ὄντες, who are.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[373:1240](1090098.htm#fr_1239) <span
id="xix.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p22"></span> [1 Tim. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span id="xix.vii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[373:1241](1090098.htm#fr_1240) <span
id="xix.vii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p23"></span> [John xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#005)<span id="xix.vii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[373:1242](1090098.htm#fr_1241) <span
id="xix.vii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p24"></span> [Jas. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#018)<span id="xix.vii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[373:1243](1090098.htm#fr_1242) <span
id="xix.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p26"></span> In this rendering of the Septuagint there
is a coincidence with that of the Targum, and the Vulgate, Æthiopic, and
Arabic versions. But the Syriac is conformable with the Hebrew. The
discrepancy may be accounted for by a slight difference in the reading
of the vowel points.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[373:1244](1090098.htm#fr_1243) <span
id="xix.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p27"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#021)<span id="xix.vii-p27.1"></span>.
This passage is quoted by Bishop Latimer at the close of a sermon upon
the epistle for the twenty-third Sunday after Trinity, preached A.D.
1552. His words are, *Mors peccatorum pessima*. “Death to sinners is the
worst thing that can happen unto them.” “What meaneth he by that? he
signifieth unto us, that the wicked be not enough punished here,
therefore it shall be worse with them after their death. So that it
shall be a change: they that have their pleasure here, and live
according to their desires, they shall come to afflictions in the other
world.”

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[373:1245](1090098.htm#fr_1244) <span
id="xix.vii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p28"></span> See Hom. III. on [Rom. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)<span id="xix.vii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[374:1246](1090098.htm#fr_1245) <span
id="xix.vii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p33"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)<span id="xix.vii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[375:1247](1090098.htm#fr_1246) <span
id="xix.vii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p35"></span> στελεῖ εἰς, al. τελεῖ εἰς, is free of.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[375:1248](1090098.htm#fr_1247) <span
id="xix.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p36"></span> ƒμαρτημ€των, see Hom. IV. 4.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[375:1249](1090098.htm#fr_1248) <span
id="xix.vii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p37"></span> Thus in Plat. Gorg. 78. Socrates argues
that it is best to be punished when one does wrong, comparing punishment
to medicine.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[375:1250](1090098.htm#fr_1249) <span
id="xix.vii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p38"></span> M. what is the advantage that.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[375:1251](1090098.htm#fr_1250) <span
id="xix.vii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p40"></span> [Isa. lvii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#017)<span id="xix.vii-p40.1"></span>.
The English version seems rather to give the sense of the Hebrew, and is
less pointedly apposite, though it too implies that trouble is given for
our good, and, as the context also implies, sorrow too.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[375:1252](1090098.htm#fr_1251) <span
id="xix.vii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p41"></span> [2 Cor. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)<span id="xix.vii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[376:1253](1090098.htm#fr_1252) <span
id="xix.vii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p42"></span> [Gen. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)<span id="xix.vii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[376:1254](1090098.htm#fr_1253) <span
id="xix.vii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p43"></span> Martyrdom was held to be a kind of second
baptism, or instead of baptism to those on whom it came before they
could be baptized. St. Cyr. *Cat*. iii. (7); St. Cypr. *Ex. to Mart*.;
Ep. 73<span id="xix.vii-p43.1"></span>, *ad Jud*., Ed. Ben. p. 136.
Tertullian says, “This is a baptism which will either supply the place
of water-baptism to one that has not received it, or will restore it to
one that has lost (or defaced) it. *De Bapt*. c. xvi., quoted by Wall on
*Inf. Bapt*. c. vi., t. ii., p. 190.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[376:1255](1090098.htm#fr_1254) <span
id="xix.vii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p44"></span> So St. Aug. *Serm. de Script*. cxlviii.
(al. 10, *de Div*.) on [Acts v. 4](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#004)<span
id="xix.vii-p44.1"></span>, Origen, xv. 15, on [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="xix.vii-p44.2"></span>,
Ed. Ben. iii. 673. C. thinks Ananias to have had this benefit, but he
supposes his death not to have been an immediate judgment, but the
effect of his feeling at the moment. Œcumenius speaks of [1 Cor. xi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031)<span id="xix.vii-p44.3"></span>, as
not merely threatening death, but future punishment. Photius, *Cat.
Cramer*, p. 223, speaks as St. Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[376:1256](1090098.htm#fr_1255) <span
id="xix.vii-p44.4"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p45"></span> [1 Cor.
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032)<span id="xix.vii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[376:1257](1090098.htm#fr_1256) <span
id="xix.vii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p47"></span> [Matt. x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038)<span id="xix.vii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[376:1258](1090098.htm#fr_1257) <span
id="xix.vii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p49"></span> [Amos vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#014)<span id="xix.vii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[376:1259](1090098.htm#fr_1258) <span
id="xix.vii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p50"></span> τρεῖς ἡμ™ραι. Thus it has always been
read in the Septuagint, even from the first ages of the Church (note in
Ed. Par. 1834). But this reading, it should be remarked, is not
supported by the Targum, or the Vulgate, or Syriac, which all read forty
days, as in the Hebrew copies. (St. Jerome on the passage corrects the
error, and Theodoret says that the Syriac, and Hebrew, and the
translations of Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, read forty. Origen,
Hom. XVI. on [Num. xxiii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019)<span
id="xix.vii-p50.1"></span>, Ed. Ben. ii. p. 330, d. corrects the LXX.
from the Hebrew.)

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[376:1260](1090098.htm#fr_1259) <span
id="xix.vii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p51"></span> [Jonah
iii](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#000)<span id="xix.vii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[376:1261](1090098.htm#fr_1260) <span
id="xix.vii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p52"></span> Nineveh was entirely ruined in the reign
of the Emperor Hadrian, and though it was afterwards rebuilt by the
Persians, and not finally destroyed till about the seventh century, it
seems probable that St. Chrysostom alludes here rather to its moral than
to its actual glory at that time.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[376:1262](1090098.htm#fr_1261) <span
id="xix.vii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p53"></span> βίον ˆριστον, “best life.” The article is
not used, and the words added seem nearly to express what is intended to
be understood.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[376:1263](1090098.htm#fr_1262) <span
id="xix.vii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p54"></span> Gr. The good hope, *i.e*., the hope of
the better alternative.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[377:1264](1090098.htm#fr_1263) <span
id="xix.vii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p56"></span> [Jer.
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#008)<span id="xix.vii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[377:1265](1090098.htm#fr_1264) <span
id="xix.vii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p57"></span> The clause, “and if they had not
repented,” inserted from Savile. Both the general sense, and the
parallel with [Rom. x. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span
id="xix.vii-p57.1"></span>, seem to require it.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[377:1266](1090098.htm#fr_1265) <span
id="xix.vii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p58"></span> τόπων.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[377:1267](1090098.htm#fr_1266) <span
id="xix.vii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p59"></span> τρόπων.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[377:1268](1090098.htm#fr_1267) <span
id="xix.vii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p61"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)<span id="xix.vii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[377:1269](1090098.htm#fr_1268) <span
id="xix.vii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p62"></span> [Jonah iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#009)<span id="xix.vii-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[378:1270](1090098.htm#fr_1269) <span
id="xix.vii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p64"></span> κλυδώνιον.

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[378:1271](1090098.htm#fr_1270) <span
id="xix.vii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p65"></span> ‡τερμ€τιστον, this word means “vast,”
“immeasurable,” and does not suit the sense: ‡νερμ€τιστον is undoubtedly
the right reading, unless indeed St. Chrysostom used one for the other,
as Suidas. Hesychius gives it “without ballast,” and so Aristotle
›ρματίζειν, but Il. i. 486, œρματα are props used on shore.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[378:1272](1090098.htm#fr_1271) <span
id="xix.vii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p67"></span> ‡ν€στειλον, divert as a stream. The
metaphor is explained by the sequel, the “wound” meaning an incision
made for surgical purposes.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[379:1273](1090098.htm#fr_1272) <span
id="xix.vii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p69"></span> This passage will serve to shew, that
during the season of Lent it was the practice to have sermons daily at
Antioch. Bingham has given a variety of quotations to the same effect.
B. xiv. c. iv., sec. 7, vol. iv. p. 536, New Ed.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[379:1274](1090098.htm#fr_1273) <span
id="xix.vii-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p70"></span> The supper, it should be remembered, was
the chief meal of the day among the Greeks and Romans. And with those
who observed the fast strictly the only meal: see Hom. VI. \[6\], and
Hom. IV. 12.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[379:1275](1090098.htm#fr_1274) <span
id="xix.vii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p72"></span> συν€ξεως φρικωδεστ€της. The word σύναξις
is of frequent occurrence in St. Chrysostom, but is of somewhat
ambiguous signification, and means commonly the service of the Church;
but here and in some other passages, it seems to mean the Communion
service. See a passage in Homily IX. on Penitence, where the same
expression receives a most striking commentary.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[380:1276](1090098.htm#fr_1275) <span
id="xix.vii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p75"></span> St. Chrysostom perhaps here refers to the
interruption of his private pastoral duties, which were occasioned by
the existing calamity. Possibly also to the numbers of his congregation.
See the end of the next Homily. In Hom. LXXXV. on St. Matt. near the
end, he estimates his congregation at 100,000. Ed. Ben. p. 810.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VI](1090099)
