[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090033)  [Next](1090035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii"></span> <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="vi.iii-Page_121"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span><span class="c30"><span
id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>letter to a young widow.</span>

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="vi.iii-p3.1"></span>That</span> you have sustained a severe blow,
and that the weapon directed from above has been planted in a vital part
all will readily admit, and none even of the most rigid moralists will
deny it; but since they who are stricken with sorrow ought not to spend
their whole time in mourning and tears, but to make good provision also
for the healing of their wounds, lest, if they be neglected their tears
should aggravate the wound, and the fire of their sorrow become
inflamed, it is a good thing to listen to words of consolation, and
restraining for a brief season at least the fountain of thy tears to
surrender thyself to those who endeavour to console thee. On this
account I abstained from troubling you when your sorrow was at its
height, and the thunderbolt had only just fallen upon you; but having
waited an interval and permitted you to take your fill of mourning, now
that you are able to look out a little through the mist, and to open
your ears to those who attempt to comfort you, I also would second the
words of your handmaids by some contributions of my own. For whilst the
tempest is still severe, and a full gale of sorrow is blowing, he who
exhorts another to desist from grief would only provoke him to increased
lamentations and having incurred his hatred would add fuel to the flame
by such speeches besides being regarded himself as an unkind and foolish
person. But when the troubled water has begun to subside, and God has
allayed the fury of the waves, then we may freely spread the sails of
our discourse. For in a moderate storm skill may perhaps play its part;
but when the onslaught of the wind is irresistible experience is of no
avail. For these reasons I have hitherto held my peace, and even now
have only just ventured to break silence because I have heard from thy
uncle that one may begin to take courage, as some of your more esteemed
handmaids are now venturing to discourse at length upon these matters,
women also outside your own household, who are your kinsfolk, or are
otherwise qualified for this office. Now if you allow them to talk to
you I have the greatest hope and confidence that you will not disdain my
words but do your best to give them a calm and quiet hearing. Under any
circumstances indeed the female sex is the more apt to be sensitive to
suffering; but when in addition there is youth, and untimely widowhood,
and inexperience in business, and a great crowd of cares, while the
whole life previously has been nurtured in the midst of luxury, and
cheerfulness and wealth, the evil is increased many fold, and if she who
is subjected to it does not obtain help from on high even an accidental
thought will be able to unhinge her. Now I hold this to be the foremost
and greatest evidence of God’s care concerning thee; for that thou hast
not been overwhelmed by grief, nor driven out of thy natural condition
of mind when such great troubles suddenly concurred to afflict thee was
not due to any human assistance but to the almighty hand the
understanding of which there is no measure, the wisdom which is past
finding out, the “Father of mercies and the God of all comfort.” <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333.md) “For He Himself” it is said “hath
smitten us, and He will heal us; He will strike, and He will dress the
wound and make us whole.” <span id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334.md)

<span id="vi.iii-p6"></span>For as long as that blessed husband of thine
was with thee, thou didst enjoy honour, and care and zealous attention;
in fact you enjoyed such as you might expect to enjoy from a husband;
but since God took him to Himself He has supplied his place to thee. And
this is not my saying but that of the blessed prophet David for he says
“He will take up the fatherless and the widow,” <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335.md) and elsewhere <span id="page_122">p.
122</span> <span id="vi.iii-Page_122"></span>he calls Him “father of the
fatherless and judge of the widow;” <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336.md) thus in many passages thou wilt see
that He earnestly considereth the cause of this class of mankind.

<span id="vi.iii-p9"></span>2. But lest the continual repetition of this
name of widow should upset thy soul, and disconcert thy reason, having
been inflicted on thee in the very flower of thy age, I wish first of
all to discourse on this point, and to prove to you that this name of
widow is not a title of calamity but of honour, aye the greatest honour.
For do not quote the erroneous opinion of the world as a testimony, but
the admonition of the blessed Paul, or rather of Christ. For in his
utterances Christ was speaking through him as he himself said “If ye
seek a proof of Christ who is speaking in me?” <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337.md) What then does he say? “Let not a
widow be enrolled under threescore years of age” and again “but the
younger widows refuse” <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338.md) intending
by both these sayings to indicate to us the importance of the matter.
And when he is making regulations about bishops he nowhere prescribes a
standard of age, but in this case he is very particular on the point,
and, pray, why so? not because widowhood is greater than priesthood, but
because widows have greater labour to undergo than priests, being
encompassed on many sides by a variety of business public and private.
For as an unfortified city lies exposed to all who wish to plunder it,
so a young woman living in widowhood has many who form designs upon her
on every side not only those who aim at getting her money but also those
who are bent upon corrupting her modesty. And besides these we shall
find that she is subjected to other conditions also likely to occasion
her fall. For the contempt of servants their negligence of business, the
loss of that respect which was formerly paid, the sight of
contemporaries in prosperity, and often the hankering after luxury,
induce women to engage in a second marriage. Some there are who do not
choose to unite themselves to men by the law of marriage, but do so
secretly and clandestinely. And they act thus in order to enjoy the
praise of widowhood; thus it is a state which seems to be not
reproached, but admired and deemed worthy of honour among men, not only
amongst us who believe, but even amongst unbelievers also. For once when
I was still a young man I know that the sophist who taught me <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339.md) (and he exceeded all men in his
reverence for the gods) expressed admiration for my mother before a
large company. For enquiring, as was his wont, of those who sat beside
him who I was, and some one having said that I was the son of a woman
who was a widow, he asked of me the age of my mother and the duration of
her widowhood, and when I told him that she was forty years of age of
which twenty had elapsed since she lost my father he was astonished and
uttered a loud exclamation, and turning to those present “Heavens!”
cried he “what women there are amongst the Christians.” So great is the
admiration and praise enjoyed by widowhood not only amongst ourselves,
but also a amongst those who are outside the Church. And being aware of
all this the blessed Paul said “Let not a widow be enrolled under
threescore years of age.” And even after this great qualification of age
he does not permit her to be ranked in this sacred society but mentions
some additional requisites “well reported of for good works, if she have
brought up children if she have lodged strangers if she have washed the
saints feet if she have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently
followed every good work.” <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340.md)
Heavens! what testing and scrutiny! how much virtue does he demand from
the widow, and how precisely does he define it! which he would not have
done, had he not intended to entrust to her a position of honour and
dignity. And “the younger widows” he says “refuse;” and then he adds the
reason: “for when they have waxed wanton against Christ they will
marry.” <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md) By this expression he
gives us to understand that they who have lost their husbands are wedded
to Christ in their stead. Observe how he asserts this by way of
indicating the mild and easy nature of this union; I refer to the
passage “when they have waxed wanton against Christ they will marry,” as
if He were some gentle husband who did not exercise authority over them,
but suffered them to live in freedom. Neither did Paul confine his
discourse on the subject to these remarks, but also in another place
again he has manifested great anxiety about it where he says “Now she
who liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth; but she who is a widow
indeed and desolate hath set her hope in God, and continueth in prayers
and supplications day and night.” <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342.md) And writing to the Corinthians he says
“But she is more blessed if she abide thus.” <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343.md) You see what great praise is bestowed
upon widowhood, and this in the New Testament, when the beauty of
virginity also was clearly brought to light. Nevertheless even the
lustre of this state could not obscure the glories of widowhood, which
shines on brightly all the same, keeping its own value. When then we
make mention of widowhood from time to time, do not be cast down, nor
consider the matter a reproach; for if this <span id="page_123">p.
123</span> <span id="vi.iii-Page_123"></span>be a matter of reproach,
far more so is virginity. But this is not the case; no! God forbid. For
inasmuch as we all admire and welcome women who live continently whilst
their husbands are yet alive must we not be delighted with those who
manifest the same good feeling concerning their husbands when they have
departed this, life, and praise them accordingly? As I was saying then,
as long as you lived with the blessed Therasius you enjoyed honour and
consideration such as is natural for a wife to receive from a husband;
but now in his place you have God who is the Lord of all, who hath of
old been thy protector and will be so now still more and with yet
greater earnestness; and as I have already said He hath displayed no
slight token of his providential care by having preserved thee whole and
unharmed in the midst of such a furnace of anxiety and sorrow, and not
suffering thee to undergo anything undesirable. Now if He has not
permitted any shipwreck to take place in the midst of so much rough
water, much more will He preserve thy soul in calm weather and lighten
the burden of thy widowhood, and the consequences of it which seem to be
so terrible.

<span id="vi.iii-p17"></span>3. Now if it is not the name of widow which
distresses you, but the loss of such a husband I grant you that all the
world over amongst men engaged in secular affairs there have been few
like him, so affectionate, so gentle, so humble, so sincere, so
understanding, so devout. And certainly if he had altogether perished,
and utterly ceased to be, it would be right to be distressed, and
sorrowful; but if he has only sailed into the tranquil haven, and taken
his journey to Him who is really his king, one ought not to mourn but to
rejoice on these accounts. For this death is not death, but only a kind
of emigration and translation from the worse to the better, from earth
to heaven, from men to angels, and archangels, and Him who is the Lord
of angels and archangels. For here on earth whilst he was serving the
emperor there were dangers to be expected and many plots arising from
men who bore ill-will, for in proportion as his reputation increased did
the designs also of enemies abound; but now that he has departed to the
other world none of these things can be suspected. Wherefore in
proportion as you grieve that God has taken away one who was so good and
worthy you ought to rejoice that he has departed in much safety and
honour, and being released from the trouble which besets this present
season of danger, is in great peace and tranquillity. For is it not out
of place to acknowledge that heaven is far better than earth, and yet to
mourn those who are translated from this world to the other? For if that
blessed husband of thine had been one of those who lived a shameful life
contrary to what God approved it would have been right to bewail and
lament for him not only when he had departed, but whilst he was still
living; but inasmuch as he was one of those who are the friends of God
we should take pleasure in him not only whilst living, but also when he
has been laid to rest. And that we ought to act thus thou hast surely
heard the words of the blessed Paul “to depart and to be with Christ
which is far better.” <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344.md) But
perhaps you long to hear your husband’s words, and enjoy the affection
which you bestowed upon him, and you yearn for his society, and the
glory which you had on his account, and the splendour, and honour, and
security, and all these things being gone distress and darken your life.
Well! the affection which you be stowed on him you can keep now just as
you formerly did.

<span id="vi.iii-p19"></span>For such is the power of love, it embraces,
and unites, and fastens together not only those who are present, and
near, and visible but also those who are far distant; and neither length
of time, nor separation in space, nor anything else of that kind can
break up and sunder in pieces the affection of the soul. But if you wish
to behold him face to face (for this I know is what you specially long
for) keep thy bed in his honour sacred from the touch of any other man,
and do thy best to manifest a life like his, and then assuredly thou
shalt depart one day to join the same company with him, not to dwell
with him for five years as thou didst here, nor for 20, or 100, nor for
a thousand or twice that number but for infinite and endless ages. For
it is not any physical relation, but a correspondence in the way of
living which qualifies for the inheritance of those regions of rest. For
if it was identity of moral constitution which brought Lazarus although
a stranger to Abraham into the same heavenly bosom with him, and
qualifies many from east and west to sit down with him, the place of
rest will receive thee also with the good Therasius, if thou wilt
exhibit the same manner of life as his, and then thou shalt receive him
back again no longer in that corporeal beauty which he had when he
departed, but in lustre of another kind, and splendour outshining the
rays of the sun. For this body, even if it reaches a very high standard
of beauty is nevertheless perishable; but the bodies of those who have
been well pleasing to God, will be invested with such glory as these
eyes cannot even look upon. And God has furnished us with certain
tokens, and obscure indications of these things both in the Old and in
the New <span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span
id="vi.iii-Page_124"></span>Dispensation. For in the former the face of
Moses shone with such glory as to be intolerable to the eyes of the
Israelites, and in the New the face of Christ shone far more brilliantly
than his. For tell me if any one had promised to make your husband king
of all the earth, and then had commanded you to withdraw for twenty
years on his account, and had promised after that to restore him to you
with the diadem and the purple, and to place you again in the same rank
with him, would you not have meekly endured the separation with due
self-control? Would you not have been well pleased with the gift, and
deemed it a thing worth praying for? Well then submit to this now, not
for the sake of a kingdom on earth, but of a kingdom in Heaven; not to
receive him back clad in a vesture of gold but robed in immortality and
glory such as is fitting for them to have who dwell in Heaven. And if
you find the trial very unbearable owing to its long duration, it may be
that he will visit you by means of visions and converse with you as he
was wont to do, and show you the face for which you yearn: let this be
thy consolation taking the place of letters, though indeed it is far
more definite than letters. For in the latter case there are but lines
traced with the pen to look upon, but in the former you see the form of
his visage, and his gentle smile, his figure and his movements, you hear
his speech and recognize the voice which you loved so well.

<span id="vi.iii-p20"></span>4. But since you mourn also over the loss
of security which you formerly enjoyed on his account, and perhaps also
for the sake of those great hopes of distinction which were dawning (for
I used to hear that he would speedily arrive at the dignity of præfect,
and this, I fancy, it is which more especially upsets and distresses thy
soul) consider I pray the case of those who have been in a higher
official position than his, and yet have brought their life to a very
pitiable end. Let me recall them to your memory: you probably know
Theodore of Sicily by reputation: <span
id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345.md) for he was one of the most
distinguished men; he surpassed all in bodily stature and beauty as well
as in the confidence which he enjoyed with the Emperor, and he had more
power than any member of the royal household, but he did not bear this
prosperity meekly, and having entered into a plot against the Emperor he
was taken prisoner and miserably beheaded; and his wife who was not a
whit inferior to thy noble self in education and birth and all other
respects was suddenly stripped of all her possessions, deprived even of
her freedom also, and enrolled amongst the household slaves, and
compelled to lead a life more pitiable than any bondmaid, having this
advantage only over the rest that owing to the extreme severity of her
calamity she moved to tears all who beheld her. And it is said also that
Artemisia who was the wife of a man of high reputation, since he also
aimed at usurping the throne, was reduced to this same condition of
poverty, and also to blindness; for the depth of her despondency, and
the abundance of her tears destroyed her sight; and now she has need of
persons to lead her by the hand, and to conduct her to the doors of
others that she may obtain the necessary supply of food. <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346.md) And I might mention many other
families which have been brought down in this way did I not know thee to
be too pious and prudent in disposition to wish to find consolation for
thy own calamity out of the misfortunes of others. And the only reason
why I mentioned those instances to which I referred just now was that
you might learn that human things are nothingness but that truly as the
prophet says “all the glory of man is as the flower of grass.” <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347.md) For in proportion to men’s elevation
and splendour is the ruin wrought for them, not only in the case of
those who are under rule, but also of the rulers themselves. For it
would be impossible to find any private family which has been immersed
in such great calamities as the ills in which the imperial house has
been steeped. For untimely loss of parents, and of husbands, and violent
forms of death, more outrageous and painful than those which occur in
tragedies, especially beset this kind of government.

<span id="vi.iii-p24"></span>Now passing over ancient times, of those
who have reigned in our own generation, nine in all, only two have ended
their life by a natural death; and of the others one was slain by a
usurper, <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348.md) one in battle, <span
id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349.md) one by a conspiracy of his household
guards, <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350.md) one by the very man who
elected him, and invested him with the purple, <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351.md) and of their wives some, as it is
reported, perished by poison, others died of mere sorrow; while of those
who still survive one, who has an orphan son, is trembling with alarm
lest any of those who are in power dreading what may happen in the
future should destroy him; <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352.md)
another has reluctantly yielded to much entreaty to return from the
exile into <span id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span
id="vi.iii-Page_125"></span>which she had been driven by him who held
the chief power. <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353.md) And of the
wives of the present rulers the one who has recovered a little from her
former calamities has much sorrow mingled with her joy because the
possessor of power is still young and inexperienced and has many
designing men on all sides of him; <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354.md) and the other is ready to die of fear,
and spends her time more miserably than criminals condemned to death
because her husband ever since he assumed the crown up to the present
day has been constantly engaged in warfare and fighting, and is more
exhausted by the shame and the reproaches which assail him on all sides
than by actual calamities. <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355.md) For
that which has never taken place has now come to pass, the barbarians
leaving their own country have overrun an infinite space of our
territory, and that many times over, and having set fire to the land,
and captured the towns they are not minded to return home again, but
after the manner of men who are keeping holiday rather than making war,
they laugh us all to scorn; <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356.md) and
it is said that one of their kings declared that he was amazed at the
impudence of our soldiers, who although slaughtered more easily than
sheep still expect to conquer, and are not willing to quit their own
country; for he said that he himself was satiated with the work of
cutting them to pieces. Imagine what the feelings of the Emperor and his
wife must be on hearing these words!

<span id="vi.iii-p36"></span>5. And since I have made mention of this
war, a great crowd of widows has occurred to me, who in past times
derived very great lustre from the honour enjoyed by their husbands, but
now are all arrayed in a dark mourning robe and spend their whole time
in lamentation. For they had not the advantage which was enjoyed by thy
dear self. For thou, my excellent friend, didst see that goodly husband
of thine lying on his bed, and didst hear his last words, and receive
his instructions as to what should be done about the affairs of the
family, and learn how by the provisions of his will they were guarded
against every kind of encroachment on the part of rapacious and
designing men. And not only this, but also when he was yet lying dead
thou didst often fling thyself upon the body, and kiss his eyes, and
embrace him, and wail over him, and thou didst see him conducted to
burial with much honour, and didst everything necessary for his
obsequies, as was fitting, and from frequent visits to his grave thou
hast no slight consolation of thy sorrow. But these women have been
deprived of all these things, having all sent out their husbands to war
in the hope of receiving them back again, instead of which it has been
their lot to receive the bitter tidings of their death. Neither has any
one come back to them with the bodies of their slain, or bringing
anything save a message describing the manner of their death. And some
there are who have not even been vouchsafed this record, or been enabled
to learn how their husbands fell, as they were buried beneath a heap of
slain in the thick of battle.

<span id="vi.iii-p37"></span>And what wonder if most of the generals
perished thus, when even the Emperor himself having been blockaded in a
certain village with a few soldiers did not dare to go out and oppose
the assailants, but remained inside and when the enemy had set fire to
the building was burnt to death together with all that were therein, not
men only, but horses, beams and walls, so that the whole was turned into
a heap of ashes? And this was the tale which they who departed to war
with the Emperor brought back to his wife in place of the Emperor
himself. <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357.md) For the splendours of
the world differ in no-wise whatever from the things which happen on the
stage, and the beauty of spring flowers. For in the first place they
flee away before they have been manifested; and then, even if they have
strength to last a little while, they speedily become ready to decay.
For what is more worthless than the honour and glory which is paid by
the multitude? what fruit has it? what kind of profit? what serviceable
end does it meet? And would that this only was the evil! but in fact
besides failing to get anything good from the possession, he who owns
this most cruel mistress is continually forced to bear much which is
painful and injurious; for mistress she is of those who own her, and in
proportion as she is flattered by her slaves does she exalt herself
against them, and ties them down by increasingly harsh commands; but she
would never be able to revenge herself on those who despise and neglect
her; so much fiercer is she than any tyrant and wild beast. For tyrants
and wild animals are often mollified by humouring, but her fury is
greatest when we are most complaisant to her, and if she finds any one
who will listen to her, and yield to her in everything there is no kind
of command from which in future she can be induced to abstain. <span
id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span id="vi.iii-Page_126"></span>Moreover
she has also another ally whom one would not do wrong to call her
daughter. For after she herself has grown to maturity and fairly taken
root amongst us, she then produces arrogance, a thing which is no less
able than herself to drive the soul of those who possess it into
headlong ruin.

<span id="vi.iii-p39"></span>6. Tell me then dost thou lament this that
God hath reserved thee from such a cruel bondage, and that He has barred
every avenue against these pestilential diseases? For whilst thy husband
was living they ceased not continually assaulting the thoughts of thy
heart, but since his death they have no starting point whence they can
lay hold of thy understanding. This then is a discipline which ought to
be practised in future—to abstain from lamenting the withdrawal of these
evils, and from hankering after the bitter tyranny which they exercise.
For where they blow a heavy blast they upset all things from the
foundation and shatter them to pieces; and just as many prostitutes,
although by nature ill favoured and ugly, do yet by means of enamels and
pigments excite the feelings of the youthful whilst they are still
tender, and when they have got them under their control treat them more
insolently than any slave; so also do these passions, vainglory and
arrogance, defile the souls of men more than any other kind of
pollution.

<span id="vi.iii-p40"></span>On this account also wealth has seemed to
the majority of men to be a good thing; at least when it is stripped of
this passion of vainglory it will no longer seem desirable. At any rate
those who have been permitted to obtain in the midst of their poverty
popular glory have no longer preferred wealth, but rather have despised
much gold when it was bestowed upon them. And you have no need to learn
from me who these men were, for you know them better than I do,
Epaminondas, Socrates, Aristeides, Diogenes, Krates who turned his own
land into a sheep walk. <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358.md) The
others indeed, inasmuch as it was not possible for them to get rich, saw
glory brought to them in the midst of their poverty, and straightway
devoted themselves to it, but this man threw away even what he
possessed; so infatuated were they in the pursuit of this cruel monster.
Let us not then weep because God has rescued us from this shameful
thraldom which is an object of derision and of much reproach; for there
is nothing splendid in it save the name it bears, and in reality it
places those who possess it in a position which belies its appellation,
and there is no one who does not laugh to scorn the man who does
anything with a view to glory. For it is only he who has not an eye to
this who will be enabled to win respect and glory; but he who sets a
great value on popular glory, and does and endures everything for the
sake of obtaining it is the very man who will fail to attain it, and be
subjected to all the exact opposites of glory, ridicule, and accusation,
scoffing, enmity and hatred. And this is wont to happen not only among
men, but also among you women, and indeed more especially in your case.
For the woman who is unaffected in mien, and gait, and dress, and seeks
no honour from any one is admired by all women, and they are ecstatic in
their praise and call her blessed, and invoke all manner of good things
upon her; but a vain-glorious woman they behold with aversion and
detestation, and avoid her like some wild beast and load her with
infinite execrations and abuse. And not only do we escape these evils by
refusing to accept popular glory, but we shall gain the highest
advantages in addition to those which have been already mentioned, being
trained gradually to loosen our hold of earth and move in the direction
of heaven, and despise all worldly things. For he who feels no need of
the honour which comes from men, will perform with security whatever
good things he does, and neither in the troubles, nor in the
prosperities of this life will he be very seriously affected; for
neither can the former depress him, and cast him down, nor can the
latter elate and puff him up, but in precarious and troubled
circumstances he himself remains exempt from change of any kind. And
this I expect will speedily be the case with your own soul, and having
once for all torn yourself away from all worldly interests you will
display amongst us a heavenly manner of life, and in a little while will
laugh to scorn the glory which you now lament, and despise its hollow
and vain mask. But if you long for the security which you formerly
enjoyed owing to your husband, and the protection of your property, and
immunity from the designs of any of those persons who trample upon the
misfortunes of others “Cast thy care upon the Lord and He will nourish
thee.” <span id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359.md) “For look,” it is said,
“to past generations and see, who ever placed his hope on the Lord and
was put to shame, or who ever called upon Him, and was neglected, or who
ever remained constant to His commandments and was forsaken?” <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360.md) For He who has alleviated this
intolerable calamity, and placed you even now in a state of tranquillity
will also avert impending evils; for that you will never receive another
blow more severe than this you would yourself admit. <span
id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span id="vi.iii-Page_127"></span>Having
then so bravely borne present troubles, and this when you were
inexperienced, you will far more easily endure future events should any
of the things contrary to our wishes, which God forbid, occur. Therefore
seek Heaven, and all things which conduce to life in the other world,
and none of the things here will be able to harm thee, not even the
world-ruler of darkness himself, if only we do not injure ourselves. For
if any one deprives us of our substance, or hews our body in pieces,
none of these things concern us, if our soul abides in its integrity.

<span id="vi.iii-p44"></span>7. Now, once for all, if you wish your
property to abide with you in security and yet further to increase I
will show thee the plan, and the place where none of those who have
designs upon it will be allowed to enter. What then is the place? It is
Heaven. Send away thy possessions to that good husband of thine and
neither thief, nor schemer, nor any other destructive thing will be able
to pounce upon them. If you deposit these goods in the other world, you
will find much profit arising from them. For all things which we plant
in Heaven yield a large and abundant crop, such as might naturally be
expected from things which have their roots in Heaven. And if you do
this, see what blessings you will enjoy, in the first place eternal life
and the things promised to those who love God, “which eye hath not seen,
nor ear heard, neither have they entered into the heart of man,” and in
the second place perpetual intercourse with thy good husband; and you
will relieve yourself from the cares and fears, and dangers, and
designs, and enmity and hatred which beset you here. For as long as you
are surrounded with this property there will probably be some to make
attempts upon it; but if you transfer it to Heaven, you will lead a life
of security and safety, and much tranquillity, enjoying independence
combined with godliness. For it is very irrational, when one wishes to
buy land, and is seeking for productive ground, if, Heaven being
proposed to him instead of earth, and the possibility presented of
obtaining an estate there he abides still on earth, and puts up with the
toils that are connected with it; for it often disappoints our hopes.

<span id="vi.iii-p45"></span>But since thy soul is grievously upset and
vexed on account of the expectation often entertained that thy husband
would attain the rank of prefect, and the thought that he was untimely
snatched away from that dignity consider first of all this fact, that
even if this hope was a very well grounded one nevertheless it was only
a human hope, which often falls to the ground; and we see many things of
this kind happening in life, those which were confidently expected
having remained unfulfilled, whereas those which never even entered the
mind have frequently come to pass, and this we constantly see occurring
everywhere in cases of governments and kingdoms, and inheritances, and
marriages. Wherefore even if the opportunity were very near at hand, yet
as the proverb says “between the cup and the lip there is many a slip”
and the Scripture saith “from the morning until the evening the time is
changed.” <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361.md)

<span id="vi.iii-p47"></span>So also a king who is here to-day is dead
tomorrow; and again this same wise man illustrating the reversal of
men’s hopes says “many tyrants have sat down upon the ground, and one
that was never thought of has worn the crown.” <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362.md) And it was not absolutely certain that
if he lived he would arrive at this dignity; for that which belongs to
the future is uncertain, and causes us to have various suspicions. For
on what grounds was it evident that had he lived he would have attained
that dignity and that things would not have turned out the other way,
and that he would have lost the office he actually held either from
falling a victim to disease, or from being exposed to the envy and ill
will of those who wished to excel him in prosperity, or from suffering
some other grievous misfortune. But let us suppose, if you please, that
it was perfectly evident that in any case had he survived he would have
obtained this high distinction; then in proportion to the magnitude of
the dignity would have been the increased dangers, and anxieties, and
intrigues which he must have encountered. Or put these even on one side,
and let us suppose him to traverse that sea of difficulties safely, and
in much tranquillity; then tell me what is the goal? not that which he
has now reached; no, not that, but something different, probably
unpleasant and undesirable. In the first place his sight of heaven, and
heavenly things would have been delayed, which is no small loss to those
who have put their trust in things to come; and in the next place, even
had he lived a very pure life yet the length of his life and the
exigencies of his high office would have prevented his departing in such
a pure condition as has now been the case. In fact it is uncertain
whether he might not have undergone many changes and given way to
indolence before he breathed his last. For now we are confident that by
the grace of God he has taken his flight to the region of rest, because
he had not committed himself to any of those deeds which exclude from
the kingdom of Heaven; but in that case after long contact with public
busi<span id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span
id="vi.iii-Page_128"></span>ness, he might probably have contracted
great defilement. For it is an exceedingly rare thing for one who is
moving in the midst of such great evils to hold a straight course, but
to go astray, both wittingly and against his will, is a natural thing,
and one which constantly occurs. But, as it is, we have been relieved
from this apprehension, and we are firmly persuaded that in the great
day he will appear in much radiance, shining forth near the King, and
going with the angels in advance of Christ and clad with the robe of
unutterable glory, and standing by the side of the King as he gives
judgment, and acting as one of His chief ministers. Wherefore desisting
from mourning and lamentation do thou hold on to the same way of life as
his, yea even let it be more exact, that having speedily attained an
equal standard of virtue with him, you may inhabit the same abode and be
united to him again through the everlasting ages, not in this union of
marriage but another far better. For this is only a bodily kind of
intercourse, but then there will be a union of soul with soul more
perfect, and of a far more delightful and far nobler kind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_333"></span>[121:334](1090034.htm#fr_333.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p4"></span> [2 Cor. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003.md)<span id="vi.iii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[121:335](1090034.htm#fr_334.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p5"></span> [Hosea vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002.md)<span id="vi.iii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[121:336](1090034.htm#fr_335.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p7"></span> [Ps. cxlvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009.md)<span id="vi.iii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[122:337](1090034.htm#fr_336.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p8"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005.md)<span id="vi.iii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[122:338](1090034.htm#fr_337.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p10"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003.md)<span id="vi.iii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[122:339](1090034.htm#fr_338.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p11"></span> [1 Tim.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011.md)<span id="vi.iii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[122:340](1090034.htm#fr_339.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p12"></span> Libanius.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[122:341](1090034.htm#fr_340.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p13"></span> [1 Tim. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010.md)<span id="vi.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[122:342](1090034.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p14"></span> [1 Tim. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011.md)<span id="vi.iii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[122:343](1090034.htm#fr_342.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p15"></span> [1 Tim.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005.md)<span id="vi.iii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[122:344](1090034.htm#fr_343.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p16"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#040.md)<span id="vi.iii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[123:345](1090034.htm#fr_344.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p18"></span> [Phil. i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#033.md)<span id="vi.iii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[124:346](1090034.htm#fr_345.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p21"></span> According to Ammianus Marcellinus, B.
xxxiv., this Theodore was a native of Gaul. He is probably called
Theodore of Sicily by Chrysostom because he attempted to make himself a
tyrant in that island. He was executed for treason in the year 371.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[124:347](1090034.htm#fr_346.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p22"></span> I have not been able to discover any
further information concerning Artemisia or her husband.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[124:348](1090034.htm#fr_347.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p23"></span> [Is. xl.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#005.md)<span id="vi.iii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[124:349](1090034.htm#fr_348.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p25"></span> Constans by Magnentius.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[124:350](1090034.htm#fr_349.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p26"></span> Constantine the younger.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[124:351](1090034.htm#fr_350.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p27"></span> Jovian: there were several other versions
of his death. See Gibbon, iv. 221 (Milman’s edition). Chrysostom repeats
this story in Homily XV., ad Philipp.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[124:352](1090034.htm#fr_351.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p28"></span> Gallus Cæsar (who never became Augustus)
by Constantius.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[124:353](1090034.htm#fr_352.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p29"></span> Widow of Jovian, whose son Varronianus had
been deprived of one eye (see Gibbon as above).

<span id="fn_353"></span>[125:354](1090034.htm#fr_353.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p30"></span> Doubtful, possibly first wife of
Valentinian I., divorced from him and sent into exile.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[125:355](1090034.htm#fr_354.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p31"></span> Constantia, wife of Gratian.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[125:356](1090034.htm#fr_355.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p32"></span> Flacilla, wife of Theodosius. The two
emperors who died natural deaths were Constantine the Great, and his son
Constantius. Compare this mournful list with the celebrated passage in
Shakespeare’s Richard II., act III. sc. 2.

<span id="vi.iii-p33"></span>“For Heaven’s sake let’s sit upon the
ground

<span id="vi.iii-p34"></span>And tell sad stories of the death of
kings,” etc.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[125:357](1090034.htm#fr_356.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p35"></span> See Introduction.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[125:358](1090034.htm#fr_357.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p38"></span> The best account of the destruction of the
Emperor Valens and his army in the battle of Hadrianople A.D. 378, is to
be found in Hodgkin’s “Italy and her Invaders,” vol. i. pp. 120–6
(Clarendon Press, Oxford).

<span id="fn_358"></span>[126:359](1090034.htm#fr_358.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p41"></span> Krates was a cynic philosopher, a disciple
of Diogenes. He flourished about 330 B.C. He was heir to a large
fortune, but bestowed the whole of it upon his native city Thebes.
Diogenes Laertius relates many curious stories about him.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[126:360](1090034.htm#fr_359.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p42"></span> [Ps. lv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023.md)<span id="vi.iii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[126:361](1090034.htm#fr_360.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p43"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
2.10](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#010.md)<span id="vi.iii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[127:362](1090034.htm#fr_361.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p46"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
18.26](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#026.md)<span id="vi.iii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[127:363](1090034.htm#fr_362.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p48"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
11.5](../../../bib/apo/sir011.htm#005.md)<span id="vi.iii-p48.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homilies on S. Ignatius and S. Babylas.](1090035.md)
