[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090042)  [Next](1090044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p1"></span> 1. When lately we made mention of the
Pharisee and the publican, and hypothetically yoked two chariots out of
virtue and vice; <span id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) we pointed out
each truth, how great is the gain of humbleness of mind, and how great
the damage of pride. For this, even when conjoined with righteousness
and fastings and tithes, fell behind; while that, even when yoked with
sin, out-stripped the Pharisee’s pair, even although the charioteer it
had was a poor one. For what was worse than the publican? But all the
same since he made his soul contrite, and called himself a sinner; which
indeed he was; he surpassed the Pharisee, who had both fastings to tell
of and tithes; and was removed from any vice. On account of what, and
through what? Because even if he was removed from greed of gain and
robbery, he had rooted over his soul <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) the mother of all evils—vain-glory and
pride. On this account Paul also exhorts and says “Let each one prove
his own work; and then he will have his ground of boasting for himself,
and not for the other.” Whereas he publicly came forward <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) as an accuser of the whole
world; <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) and said that he himself
was better than all living men. And yet even if he had set himself
before ten only, or if five, or if two, or if one, not even was this
endurable; but as it was, he not only set himself before the whole
world, but also accused all men. On this account he fell behind in the
running. And just as a ship, after having run through innumerable
surges, and having escaped many storms, then in the very mouth of the
harbour having been dashed against some rock, loses the whole treasure
which is stowed away in her—so truly did this Pharisee, after having
undergone the labours of the fasting, and of all the <span
id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span id="viii.iii-Page_148"></span>rest of
his virtue, since he did not master his tongue, in the very harbour
underwent shipwreck of his cargo. <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) For the going home from prayer, whence
he ought to have derived gain, having rather been so greatly damaged, is
nothing else than undergoing shipwreck in harbour.

<span id="viii.iii-p7"></span>2. Knowing therefore these things, beloved
even if we should have mounted to the very pinnacle of virtue, let us
consider ourselves last of all; having learned that pride is able to
cast down even from the heavens themselves him who takes not heed, and
humbleness of mind to bear up on high from the very abyss of sins him
who knows how to be sober. For this it was that placed the publican
before the Pharisee; whereas that, pride I mean and an overweening
spirit, surpassed even an incorporeal power, that of the devil; while
humbleness of mind and the acknowledgment of his own sins committed
brought the robber into Paradise before the Apostles. Now if the
confidence which they who confess their own sins effect for themselves
is so great, they who are conscious to themselves of many good
qualities, yet humble their own souls, how great crowns will they not
win. <span id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) For when sinfulness be put
together with humbleness of mind it runs with such ease as to pass and
out-strip righteousness combined with pride. If therefore thou have put
it to with righteousness, whither will it not reach? through how many
heavens will it not pass? By the throne of God itself surely it will
stay its course; <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) in the midst of
the angels, with much confidence. On the other hand if pride, having
been yoked with righteousness, by the excess and weight of its own
wickedness had strength enough to drag down *its* confidence; if it be
put together with sinfulness, into how deep a hell will it not be able
to precipitate him who has it? These things I say, not in order that we
should be careless of righteousness, but that we should avoid pride; not
that we should sin, but that we should be sober-minded. For humbleness
of mind is the foundation of the love of wisdom which pertains to us.
Even if thou shouldest have built a superstructure of things
innumerable; even if almsgiving, even if prayers, even if fastings, even
if all virtue; unless this have first been laid as a foundation, all
will be built upon it <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) to no
purpose and in vain; and it will fall down easily, like that building
which had been placed on the sand. <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) For there is no one, no one of our
good deeds, which does not need this; there is no one which separate
from this will be able to stand. But even if thou shouldest mention
temperance, even if virginity, even if despising of money, even if
anything whatever, all are unclean and accursed and loathsome,
humbleness of mind being absent. Everywhere therefore let us take her
with us, <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) in words, in deeds, in
thoughts, and with this let us build these (graces).

<span id="viii.iii-p13"></span>3. But the things belonging to humbleness
of mind have been sufficiently spoken of; not for the value of the
virtue; <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) for no one will be able
to celebrate it in accordance with its value; but for the intelligence
of your love. For well do I know that even from the few things that have
been said you will embrace it with much zeal. But since it is also
necessary to make clear and manifest the apostolic saying which has been
to-day read; seeming as it does to many to afford a pretext for
indolence; so that some may not, providing for themselves hence a
certain frigid defence, neglect their own salvation—to this let us
direct our discourse. What then is this saying? “Whether in pretence,”
it says, “or in sincerity, <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400)
Christ is preached.” <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) This many
wrest absolutely <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) and just as
happens, without reading what precedes and what comes after it; but
having cut it off from the sequence of the remaining members, to the
destruction of their own soul they put it forward to the more indolent.
For attempting to seduce them from the sound faith; then seeing them
afraid and trembling; on the ground of its not being without danger to
do this, <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) and desiring to relieve
their fears, they bring forward this apostolic declaration, saying, Paul
conceded this, by saying, “Whether in pretence or in sincerity, let
Christ be proclaimed.” But these things are not (true), they are not.
For in the first place he did not say “let him be proclaimed,” but “he
is proclaimed,” and the difference between this and that is wide. For
the saying “let him be proclaimed” belongs to a lawgiver; but the saying
“he is proclaimed” to one announcing the event. For that Paul does not
ordain a law that there should be heresies, but draws away all who
attended to him, hear what he says, “If any one preaches to you a gospel
besides what ye have received, let him be ana<span id="page_149">p.
149</span> <span id="viii.iii-Page_149"></span>thema, were it even I,
were it even an angel from the heavens.” <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) Now he would not have anathematized
both himself and an angel, if he had known the act to be without danger.
And again— “I am jealous of you with a jealousy of God,” he says; “for I
have betrothed you to one husband a chaste virgin: and fear lest at some
time, as the serpent beguiled Eve by his wiliness, so your thoughts
should be corrupted from the singleness that is towards Christ.” <span
id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) See, he both set down singleness, and
granted no allowance. For if there were allowance, there was no danger:
and if there was no danger Paul would not have feared: and Christ would
not also have commanded that the tares should be burned up, if it were a
thing indifferent to attend to this one or that or another: or to all
indiscriminately. <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406)

<span id="viii.iii-p22"></span>4. What ever then is what is meant? I
wish to narrate to you the whole history from a point a little
earlier; <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) for it is needful to
know in what circumstances Paul was when he was writing these things by
letter. In what circumstances therefore was he? In prison and chains and
intolerable perils. Whence is this manifest? From the epistle itself.
For earlier than this he says, “Now I wish you to know, brethren, that
the circumstances in which I am have come rather to the
furtherance <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) of the Gospel; so
that my bonds have become manifest in Christ in the whole Court, and to
all the others; and a good many <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409)
of the brethren, trusting to my bonds, the more exceedingly dare
fearlessly to speak the word.” <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410)
Now Nero had then cast him into prison. For just as some robber having
set foot in the house, while all are sleeping, when stealing every
thing, <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) if he see any one having
lit a lamp, both extinguishes the light and slays him who holds the
lamp, in order that he may be allowed in security to steal and rob the
property of others; so truly also the Cæsar Nero then, just as any
robber and burglar while all were sleeping a deep and unconscious
slumber; robbing the property of all, breaking into marriage
chambers, <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) subverting houses,
displaying every form of wickedness; when he saw Paul having lighted a
lamp throughout the world; (the word of his teaching;) and reproving his
wickedness, exerted himself both to extinguish what was preached, and to
put the teachers out of the way; in order that he might be allowed with
authority to do anything he pleased; and after binding that holy man,
cast him into prison. It was at that time then that the blessed Paul
wrote these things. Who would not have been astounded? who would not
have marvelled? or rather who could adequately have been astounded at
and admired that noble and heaven-reaching soul; in that, while bound in
Rome and imprisoned, at so great a distance as that, he wrote a letter
to the Philippians? For you know how great is the distance between
Macedonia and Rome. But neither did the length of the way, nor the
amount of time (required), nor the press of business, nor the peril and
the dangers coming one upon another, nor anything else, drive out his
love for and remembrance of the disciples; but he retained them all in
his mind; and not so strongly were his hands bound with the chains as
his soul was bound together and rivetted by his longing for the
disciples: <span id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) which very thing
itself indeed also declaring, in the preface of the Epistle he said, “On
account of my having you in my heart, both in my bonds, and in the
defence and confirmation of the Gospel.” <span
id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) And just as a King, having ascended
upon his throne at morning-tide and taken his seat in the royal courts,
immediately receives from all quarters innumerable letters; so truly he
also, just as in royal courts, seated in the dungeon, both received and
sent his letters in far greater number; the nations from all quarters
referring to his wisdom everything about <span
id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) what had taken place among themselves;
and he administered more business than the reigning monarch in
proportion to his having had a larger dominion entrusted to him. For in
truth God had brought and put into his hands not those who inhabited the
country of the Romans only, but also all the barbarians, both land and
sea. And by way of showing this he said to the Romans, “Now I would not
that ye should be ignorant, brethren, that ofttimes I have purposed to
come to you, and have been hindered until the present; in order that I
might have some fruit also among you, as among the rest of the Gentiles
too. Both to Greeks and barbarians, both to wise and those without
understanding I am a debtor.” <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416)
Every day therefore he was in anxious thought at one moment for
Corinthians, at another for Macedonians; how Philippians, how
Cappadocians, how Galatians, how Athenians, how they who inhabited
Pon<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_150"></span>tus, how all together were. But all the
same, having had the whole world put into his hands, he continually
cared not for entire nations only, but also for each single man; and now
indeed he despatched a letter on behalf of Onesimus, and now on behalf
of him who among the Corinthians had committed fornication. For neither
used he to regard this—that it was the individual who had sinned and
needed advocacy; but that it was a human being; a human being, the
living thing most precious to God; and for whose sake the Father had not
spared even the Only-begotten.

<span id="viii.iii-p33"></span>5. For do not tell me that this or that
man is a runaway slave, or a robber or thief, or laden with countless
faults, or that he is a mendicant and abject, or of low value and worthy
of no account; but consider that for his sake the Christ died; and this
sufficeth thee for a ground for all solicitude. Consider what sort of
person *he* must be, whom Christ valued at so high a price as not to
have spared even his own blood. For neither, if a king had chosen to
sacrifice himself on any one’s behalf, should we have sought out another
demonstration of his being some one great and of deep interest to the
King—I fancy not—for his death would suffice to show the love of him who
had died towards him. But as it is not man, not angel, not archangel;
but the Lord of the heavens himself, the only-begotten Son of God
himself having clothed himself with flesh, freely gave himself on our
behalf. Shall we not do everything, and take every trouble, so that the
men who have been thus valued may enjoy every solicitude at our hands?
And what kind of defence shall we have? what allowance? This at least is
the very thing by way of declaring which Paul also said, “Do not by thy
meat destroy him for whose sake Christ died.” <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) For desiring to shame, and to bring to
solicitude, and to persuade to care for their neighbours, those who
despise their brethren, and look down upon them as being weak, instead
of all <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) else he set down the
Master’s death.

<span id="viii.iii-p36"></span>Sitting then in the prison he wrote the
letter to the Philippians from that so great distance. For such as this
is the love that is according to God: <span
id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) it is interrupted by no one of human
things, since it has its roots from above in the heavens <span
id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) and its recompense. And what says he?
“Now I desire that ye should know, brethren.” <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) Seest thou solicitude for his
scholars? seest thou a teacher’s carefulness? Hear too of loving
affection of scholars towards their teacher, that thou mayest know that
this was what made them strong and unconquerable—the being bound
together with one another. For if “Brother helped by brother is as a
strong city;” <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422) far more so many
bound together by the bonds of love would have entirely repulsed the
plotting of the wicked demon. That indeed then Paul was bound up with
the disciples, requires not even any demonstration further nor argument
for us, since in truth even when in bonds he anxiously cared for them,
and each day, he was also dying for them, burning with his longing.

<span id="viii.iii-p41"></span>6. And that the disciples too were bound
up with Paul with all perfectness; <span
id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423) and that not men only, but women also,
hear what he says about Phœbe. “Now I commend <span
id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424) to you Phœbe the sister, being a
deaconess of the Church which is in Cenchreæ; that ye may receive her in
the Lord worthily of the saints, and stand by her, in whatever matter
she may require you, since <span id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425) she
has proved a helper <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426) of many; and
of me myself.” <span id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427) But in this
instance he bore witness to her of her zeal so far as help went
(only:) <span id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428) but Priscilla and
Aquilla went as far even as death for Paul’s sake; and about them he
thus writes, saying, “Aquila and Priscilla salute you, who for my life’s
sake laid down their own neck;” <span id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429)
for death clearly. And about another again writing to these very persons
he says, “Because he went as far as death; having counselled ill for his
life, in order that he might supply your deficiency in your service
towards me.” <span id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430) Seest thou how they
loved their teacher? how they regarded his rest <span
id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431) before their own life? On this account
no one surpassed them then. Now this I say, not that we may hear only,
but that we may also imitate; and not to the ruled only, but also to
those who rule is what we say addressed; in order that both scholars may
display much solicitude about their teachers, and the teachers may have
the same loving affection as Paul about those placed under them; not
those present only, but also those who are far off. For also Paul,
dwelling in the whole world just as in one house, thus <span
id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_151"></span>continually took thought for the salvation
of all; and having dismissed every thing of his own; bonds and troubles
and stripes and straits, watched over and inquired into each day, in
what state the affairs of the disciples were; and often for this very
purpose alone sent, now Timothy, and now Tychicus; and about him he
says, “That he may know your circumstances, and encourage your
hearts:” <span id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432) and about Timothy; “I
have sent him, being no longer able to contain myself; lest in some way
the tempter have tempted you.” <span id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433)
And Titus again elsewhere, and another to another place. For since he
himself, by the compulsion of his bonds being often detained in one
place, was unable to meet those who were his vitals, he met them through
the disciples.

<span id="viii.iii-p53"></span>7. And then therefore being in bonds he
writes to the Philippians, saying, “Now I desire that ye should know,
brethren,” <span id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434) calling the disciples
brethren. For such a thing as this is love; it casts out all inequality,
and knows not superiority and dignity; but even if one be higher than
all, he descends to the lowlier position of all; just what Paul also
used to do. But let us hear what it is that he desires they should know.
“That the things which happened unto me,” he says, “have fallen out
rather to the furtherance of the gospel.” <span
id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435) Tell me, how and in what way? Hast
thou then been released from thy bonds? hast thou then put off thy
chain? and dost thou with free permission preach in the city? hast thou
then, having gone into an assembly, drawn out many long discourses about
the faith, and departed after gaining many disciples? hast thou then
raised the dead and been made an object of wonder? hast thou then
cleansed lepers, and all were astounded? hast thou driven away demons,
and been exalted? No one of these things, he says. How then did the
furtherance of the gospel take place? tell me. “So that my bonds,” he
says, “have become openly known in the whole Court, and to all the
rest.” <span id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436) What sayest thou? this
then, this was the furtherance, this the advance, this the increase of
the proclamation—that all knew that thou wast bound. Yes, he says: Hear
at least what comes next, that thou mayest learn that the bonds not only
proved no hindrance, but also a ground of greater freedom of speech. “So
that several <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437) of the brethren in
the Lord, in reliance on my bonds, more abundantly dare fearlessly to
speak the word.” <span id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438) What sayest
thou, O Paul? have thy bonds inspired not anxiety but confidence? not
fear but earnest longing? The things mentioned have no
consistency. <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439) I too know it. For
neither did these things take place according to the consistency of
human affairs, he means, <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440) but
what came about was above nature, and the successes were of divine
grace. On this account what used to cause anxiety to all others, that to
him afforded confidence. For also if any one having taken the leader of
an army and confined him, have made this publicly known, he throws the
whole camp into flight; and if any one have carried a shepherd away from
the flock, the security with which he drives off the sheep is great. But
not in Paul’s case was it thus, but the contrary entirely. For the
leader of the army was bound, and the soldiers became more forward in
the spirit; and the confidence with which they sprung upon their
adversaries was greater: the shepherd was in confinement, and the sheep
were not consumed, nor even scattered.

<span id="viii.iii-p61"></span>8. Who ever saw, who ever heard of, the
scholars taking greater encouragement in the dangers of their teachers?
How was it that they feared not? how was it that they were not
terrified? how was it that they did not say to Paul, “Physician, heal
thyself,” <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) deliver thyself from
thy manifold perils, and then thou will be able to procure for us those
countless good things? How was it they did not say these things? How! It
was because they had been schooled, from the grace of the Spirit, that
these things took place not out of weakness, but out of the permission
of the Christ; in order that the truth might shine abroad more largely;
through bonds and imprisonments and tribulations and straits increasing
and rising, to a greater volume. Thus is the power of Christ in weakness
perfected. <span id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442) For indeed if his
bonds had crippled Paul <span id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443) and made
him cowardly; either himself or those belonging to him; one could not
but feel difficulty; but if rather they prepared him into greater
renown, one must be astounded and marvel, how through a thing involving
dishonour glory was procured for the disciple—through a thing inspiring
cowardice confidence and encouragement resulted to them all. For who was
not astounded at him then, seeing him encircled with a chain? Then
demons took to flight all the more, when they saw him spending his <span
id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span id="viii.iii-Page_152"></span>time in
a prison. For not so splendid does the diadem make a royal head, as the
chain his hands; not owing to their proper nature, but owing to the
grace that darted brightness on them. <span
id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444) On this account it was that great
encouragement resulted to the disciples. For also they saw his body
indeed bound, but his tongue not bound, his hands indeed tightly
manacled, <span id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445) but his voice
unshackled, and transversing the whole world more swiftly than the solar
ray. And this became to them an encouragement; learning as they did from
the facts that no one of present things is to be dreaded. For when the
soul has been genuinely imbued by divine longing and love, it pays
regard to no one of things present; but just as those who are mad
venture themselves against fire and sword and wild beasts and sea and
all else, so these too, maddened with a most noble and most spiritual
frenzy, a frenzy arising from sanity, <span
id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446) used to laugh at all things that are
seen. On this account, seeing their teachers bound, they the more
exulted, the more prided themselves; by facts giving to their
adversaries a demonstration that on all sides they were impregnable and
indomitable.

<span id="viii.iii-p68"></span>9. Then therefore, when matters were in
this state, some of the enemies of Paul, desiring to fan up the war to
greater vehemence, and to make the hatred of the tyrant, which was felt
towards him greater, pretended that they themselves also preached; (and
they did preach the right and sound faith,) for the sake of the doctrine
advancing more rapidly: and this they did, not with the desire to
disseminate the faith; but in order that Nero, having learnt that the
preaching was increasing and the doctrine advancing, might the sooner
have Paul led away to execution. <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447)
There were therefore two schools; that of Paul’s scholars and that of
Paul’s enemies; the one preaching out of sincerity, and the others out
of love of contention and the hatred they felt towards Paul. And by way
of declaring this he said, “Some indeed through envy and strife are
preaching Christ,” (pointing out those his enemies) “but some also
through good pleasure;” <span id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448) saying
this about his own scholars. <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449)
Then next about those; “Some indeed out of contentiousness,” (his
enemies,) not purely, not soundly, but, “thinking that they are thereby
bringing pressure upon my bonds; <span id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450)
but the others out of love;” (this again about his own brethren;)
“knowing that I am set <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451) for the
defence of the gospel.” For what? Nevertheless, in any way; whether in
pretence or in sincerity, Christ is being announced.” <span
id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) So that vainly and to no purpose is
this saying taken in reference to heresies. For those who then were
preaching were not preaching corrupt doctrine; but sound and right
belief. For if they were preaching corrupt doctrine, and were teaching
other things contrary to Paul, what they desired was certain not to
succeed to them. Now what did they desire? That the faith having grown,
and the disciples of Paul having become numerous, it should rouse Nero
to greater hostility. And if they were preaching different doctrines,
they would not have made the disciples of Paul numerous; and by not
doing so, <span id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453) they would not have
exasperated the tyrant. He does not therefore say this—that they were
bringing in corrupt doctrines—but that the motive from which they were
preaching, *this* was corrupt. For it is one thing to state the
pretext <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) of their preaching
itself was not sound. For the preaching does not become sound when the
doctrine is laden with deception; and the pretext does not become sound
when the preaching indeed is sound, but they who preach do not preach
for the sake of God, but either with a view of enmity, or with a view to
the favour of others.

<span id="viii.iii-p77"></span>10. He therefore does not say this—that
they were bringing in heresies; but that it was not from a right motive,
nor through piety <span id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) that they were
preaching what they did preach. For it was not they might increase the
gospel that they were doing this; but that they might wage war against
him, and throw him into greater danger—on this account he accuses them.
And see how with exactitude he laid it. <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456) “Thinking,” he says, “that they were
putting pressure upon my bonds.” <span id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457)
He did not say, putting, but “thinking they were putting upon,” that is
supposing, by way of pointing out that even if they so supposed, <span
id="page_153">p. 153</span> <span id="viii.iii-Page_153"></span>still he
himself was not in such a position; but that he even rejoiced on account
of the advance of the preaching. He added therefore saying, “But in this
I both rejoice and will rejoice:” <span
id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) whereas if he held their doctrines
deception, and they were bringing in heresies, Paul could not possibly
rejoice. But since the doctrine was sound and of genuine parentage, on
this account he says, “I rejoice and will rejoice.” For what if
they <span id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) are destroying themselves
by doing this out of contentiousness? Still, even unwillingly, they are
strengthening my cause. Seest thou how great is Paul’s power? how he is
caught by no one of the devil’s machinations? And not only is he not
caught; but also by these themselves he subdues him. For great indeed is
both the devil’s craftiness, <span id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460) and
the wickedness of those who minister to him; for under pretence of being
of the same mind, they desired to extinguish the proclamation. <span
id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461) But “he who seizes the cunning in
their craftiness” <span id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) did not permit
that this should take place then. By way of declaring this very thing at
least Paul said, “But the continuing in the flesh is the more necessary
for your sake; and this I confidently know, that I shall continue and
remain in company with you all.” <span id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463)
For those men indeed set their mind on casting me out of the present
life, and are ready to endure anything for this object: but God does not
permit it on your account.

<span id="viii.iii-p87"></span>11. These things therefore, all of them,
remember with exactness in order that you may be able with all wisdom to
correct those who use the Scriptures without reference to
circumstances <span id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) and at hap-hazard,
and for the destruction of their neighbours. And we shall be able both
to remember what has been said, and to correct others, if we always
betake ourselves to prayers as a refuge, and beseech the God who gives
the word of wisdom to grant both intelligence in hearing, and a careful
and unconquerable guardianship of this spiritual deposit in our hands.
For things which often we have not strength to perform successfully from
our own exertions, these we shall have power to accomplish easily
through prayers which are persevering. For always and without
intermission it is a duty to pray, both for him who is in affliction,
and him who is in dangers, and him who is in prosperity—for him who is
in relief and much prosperity, that these may remain unmoved and without
vicissitude, and may never change; and for him who is in affliction and
his many dangers, that he may see some favourable change brought about
to him, and be transported into a calm of consolation. Art thou in a
calm? Then beseech God that this calm may continue settled to thee. Hast
thou seen a storm risen up against thee? Beseech God earnestly <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) to cause the billow to pass, and to
make a calm out of the storm. Hast thou been heard? Be heartily thankful
for this; because thou hast been heard. Hast thou not been heard?
Persevere, <span id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) in order that thou
mayest be heard. For even if God at any time delay the giving, it is not
in hatred and aversion; <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) but from
the desire by the deferring of the giving perpetually to retain thee
with himself; just in the way also that affectionate fathers do; <span
id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) for they also adroitly manage the
perpetual and assiduous attendance of children who are rather indolent
by the delay of the giving. There is to thee no need of mediators in
audience with God; nor of that much canvassing; <span
id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) nor of the fawning upon others; but
even if thou be destitute, even if bereft of advocacy, alone, by
thyself, having called on God for help, thou wilt in any case
succeed. <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) He is not so wont to
assent when entreated by others on our behalf, as by ourselves who are
in need; even if we be laden with ten thousand evil deeds. For if in the
case of men, even if we have come into countless collisions with them,
when both at dawn and at mid-day and in the evening we show ourselves to
those who are aggrieved against us, by the unbroken continuance and the
persistent meeting and interview we easily demolish their enmity—far
more in the case of God would this be effected.

<span id="viii.iii-p95"></span>12. But thou art unworthy. Become worthy
by thy assiduity. For that it both is possible that the unworthy should
become worthy from his assiduity; and that God assents more when called
on by ourselves than by others; and <span id="page_154">p. 154</span>
<span id="viii.iii-Page_154"></span>that he often delays the giving, not
from the wish that we should be utterly perplexed, nor to send us
out <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) with empty hands; but in
order that he may become the author of greater good things to us—these
three points I will endeavour to make evident by the parable which has
to-day been read to you. The woman of Chanaan had come to Christ praying
on behalf of a daughter possessed by a demon, and crying out with much
earnestness <span id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) (it says, <span
id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) “Have pity on me, Lord, my daughter is
badly possessed by a demon.”) See, the woman of a strange nation, and a
barbarian, and outside of the Jewish commonwealth. For indeed what else
(was she) than a dog, <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) and
unworthy of the receiving her request? For “it is not,” he says, “good
to take the children’s bread, and to give it to the dogs.” But, all the
same, from her assiduity, she became worthy. For not only did he admit
her into the nobility of children, dog as she was; but also he sent her
off with that high encomium saying, “O woman great is thy faith; be it
done to thee as thou wilt.” <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475) Now
when the Christ says, “great is thy faith,” seek thou no other
demonstration of the greatness of soul which was in the woman. Seest
thou how, from her assiduity the woman, being unworthy, became worthy?
Desirest thou also to learn that we accomplish (our wish) by calling on
him by ourselves more than by others? She cried out, and the disciples
having come to him say, “Let her go away, for she is crying after
us:” <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476) and to them he says, “I am
not sent, unless to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” <span
id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) But when she had come to him by
herself and continued crying, and saying, “Yes, Lord, for even the dogs
eat from the table of their masters,” <span
id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478) then he granted the favour and says,
“Be it done unto thee as thou wilt.” Seest thou how, when they were
entreating him, he repelled; but when she who needed the gift herself
cried out, he assented? For to them he says, “I am not sent, unless to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel;” but to her <span
id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) he said, “Great is thy faith; be it
done unto thee as thou wilt.” Again, at the beginning and in the prelude
of her request he answered nothing; but when both once and twice and
thrice she had come to him, then he granted the boon; by the issue
making us believe that he had delayed the giving, not that he might
repel her <span id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480) but that he might
display to us all the woman’s endurance. For if he had delayed in order
that he might repel her, he would have not granted it even at the end;
but since he was waiting to display to all her spiritual wisdom, on this
account he was silent. <span id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481) For if he
had granted it immediately and at the beginning, we should not have
known the woman’s virtue. <span id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482) “Let
her go” <span id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483) it says, “because she is
clamouring behind us.” But what (says) the Christ? “Ye hear a voice, but
I see the mind: I know what she is going to say. I choose not to permit
the treasure hidden in her mind to escape notice; but I am waiting and
keeping silence; in order that having discovered it I may lay it down in
publicity, and make it manifest to all.

<span id="viii.iii-p109"></span>13. Having therefore learned all these
things, even if we be in sins, and unworthy of receiving, let us not
despair; knowing, that by assiduity of soul we shall be able to become
worthy of the request. Even if we be unaided by advocate and destitute,
let us not faint; knowing that it is a strong advocacy—the coming to God
one’s self by one’s self with much eagerness. Even if he delay and defer
with respect to the giving, let us not be dispirited; having learned
that the putting it off and delay is a sure proof of caring and love for
mankind. If we have thus persuaded ourselves; and with a soul deeply
pained and fervent, and thoroughly roused purpose; and such as that with
which the woman of Chanaan approached, we too come to him, even if we be
dogs; even if we have done anything whatever dreadful; we shall both
rebut <span id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484) our own crimes, and obtain
so great liberty of speech <span id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485) as
also to be advocates for others; in the way in which also this woman of
Chanaan not only herself enjoyed liberty of speech and ten thousand
encomiums but had power to snatch her dear daughter <span
id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486) out of her intolerable sufferings.
<span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_155"></span>For nothing—nothing is more powerful than
prayer when fervent and genuine. This both disperses present dangers,
and rescues from the penalties which take place at that hour. <span
id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487) That therefore we may both complete
our passage through the present life with ease, <span
id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488) and depart thither <span
id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489) with confidence, with much zeal and
eagerness let us perform this perpetually. For thus shall we be able
both to attain the good things which are laid up, and to enjoy those
excellent hopes; which God grant that we may all attain; by the grace
and loving kindness and compassion of our Lord Jesus Christ—with whom to
the Father together with the Holy Spirit be glory, honour, dominion, to
the ages of the ages. <span id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490) Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_389"></span>[147:390](1090043.htm#fr_389) <span
id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p2"></span> Chrysostom is referring to his Homily “on
the incomprehensible: against the Anomœans,” v. 6, 7. ῞<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p2.1"></span>Αρματα δύο πόιησον τῷ
λόγῳ, κ.τ.λ</span>.,” the Pharisee’s pair of horses being Righteousness
and Pride; the publican’s, Sin and Humility.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[147:391](1090043.htm#fr_390) <span
id="viii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p3.1"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p3.2"></span>Επὶ τῆς ψυχῆς</span> The fibres spreading and
entwining over it.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[147:392](1090043.htm#fr_391) <span
id="viii.iii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p4.1"></span>Παρῆλθεν</span>. The word used at Athens of
orators rising to speak. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p4.2"></span>Παρελθών δ™ žλεξε τοι€δε</span> *Thucyd*. ii.
59.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[147:393](1090043.htm#fr_392) <span
id="viii.iii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p5"></span> Fox said in parliament, “I cannot draw an
indictment against humanity.”

<span id="fn_393"></span>[148:394](1090043.htm#fr_393) <span
id="viii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p6"></span> This must be the sense; though there is
some little difficulty in the original.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[148:395](1090043.htm#fr_394) <span
id="viii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p8.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p8.2"></span>πιτεύξονται</span>, Lit. light upon: as on the
treasure of the parable, “hid in a field.”

<span id="fn_395"></span>[148:396](1090043.htm#fr_395) <span
id="viii.iii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p9"></span> Its race being ended; the goal won.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[148:397](1090043.htm#fr_396) <span
id="viii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p10"></span> That is on whatever foundation, other
than that which may have been laid.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[148:398](1090043.htm#fr_397) <span
id="viii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p11.1"></span>Οἰκοδομὴν τεθεῖσαν</span>. “'@<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p11.2"></span>Οὶ περι Δωδώνην
δυσχ™ιμερον:  οἰκι žθεντο</span>.” *Iliad*. B. 750.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[148:399](1090043.htm#fr_398) <span
id="viii.iii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p12.1"></span> Παραλαμβ€νωμεν</span>. Take her to dwell
with us. Comp. Chrysostom’s expression, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p12.2"></span>συζῆν ‡ρετῇ</span>.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[148:400](1090043.htm#fr_399) <span
id="viii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p14.1"></span> Κατόρθωμα</span>. The highest form of duty;
*Perfectum officium quod Græci*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p14.2"></span> κατόρθωμα</span>. *Cic. De Off.* i. 3.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[148:401](1090043.htm#fr_400) <span
id="viii.iii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p15.1"></span>‡</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p15.2"></span>λήθεια</span> here is that of Aristotle’s
Ethics: sincerity.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[148:402](1090043.htm#fr_401) <span
id="viii.iii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p16"></span> [Philip. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018)<span id="viii.iii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[148:403](1090043.htm#fr_402) <span
id="viii.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p17.1"></span>̔</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p17.2"></span>Απλῶς</span>. without reference to
circumstances.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[148:404](1090043.htm#fr_403) <span
id="viii.iii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p18.1"></span>τουτο ποιεῖν</span>*, i.e*., to be in that
state. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p18.2"></span>Ποιεῖν</span> is not seldom used where <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p18.3"></span>παθεῖν</span> might be
expected.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[149:405](1090043.htm#fr_404) <span
id="viii.iii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p19"></span> [Gal.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="viii.iii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[149:406](1090043.htm#fr_405) <span
id="viii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p20"></span> [2 Cor.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span id="viii.iii-p20.1"></span>.
'<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p20.2"></span>Απὸ τῆς ƒπλότητος
τῆς εἰς Χριστόν</span>. That is, from the singleness of affection and
fidelity which must be maintained towards Him in that relation. [Matt.
vi. 22-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#022)<span
id="viii.iii-p20.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[149:407](1090043.htm#fr_406) <span
id="viii.iii-p20.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p21.1"></span>̔</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p21.2"></span>Απλῶς</span>. Without reference to the truth
of their doctrine.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[149:408](1090043.htm#fr_407) <span
id="viii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p23"></span> As from a fountain, lying higher, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p23.1"></span>ˆ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p23.2"></span>νωθεν</span>; *ab
origine*.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[149:409](1090043.htm#fr_408) <span
id="viii.iii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p24.1"></span>Προκοπήν</span>, removal, clearing away, of
obstacles to its advance.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[149:410](1090043.htm#fr_409) <span
id="viii.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p25.1"></span>Τοὺς πλείονας</span>. In the Greek of that
day = <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p25.2"></span>
πλ™ιονας</span>: like Lat., *plures*, modified and weakened comparative.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[149:411](1090043.htm#fr_410) <span
id="viii.iii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p26"></span> [Philip. i.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012)<span
id="viii.iii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[149:412](1090043.htm#fr_411) <span
id="viii.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p27.1"></span>̔</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p27.2"></span>Υ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p27.3"></span>φαιρόυμενος</span>, lit. secretly taking for
himself. Lat. *surripio*, So, steal, stealth.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[149:413](1090043.htm#fr_412) <span
id="viii.iii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p28"></span> Comp. Cic. in Verr. 11, 1, 3, *non
adulterum, sed expugnatorem pudicitiæ.*

<span id="fn_413"></span>[149:414](1090043.htm#fr_413) <span
id="viii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p29.1"></span>Πόθῳ</span>, *desiderio*: absence being a
test of love.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[149:415](1090043.htm#fr_414) <span
id="viii.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p30"></span> [Philip. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#007)<span id="viii.iii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[149:416](1090043.htm#fr_415) <span
id="viii.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p31.1"></span>̔</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p31.2"></span>Υ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p31.3"></span>π™ρ</span>. As Lat. super. *Multa super
Priamo ragitans, super Hectore multa*. Virg. *Æn.* i. 750.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[149:417](1090043.htm#fr_416) <span
id="viii.iii-p31.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p32"></span> [Rom.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014)<span id="viii.iii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[150:418](1090043.htm#fr_417) <span
id="viii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p34"></span> [Rom. xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015)<span id="viii.iii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[150:419](1090043.htm#fr_418) <span
id="viii.iii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p35.1"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p35.2"></span>Αντὶ</span>. It may mean, as an equivalent,
in the balance; comprehending and out-weighing all other considerations.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[150:420](1090043.htm#fr_419) <span
id="viii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p37.1"></span>̔</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p37.2"></span>Η</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p37.3"></span>κατὰ Θεὸν ‡γ€πη</span>, “Ó <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p37.4"></span>γὰρ κ‹τὰ Θεὸν λύπη
μετ€νοιαν εἰς σωτηρίαν ἐργ€ζεται</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p37.5"></span>.”</span> [2 Cor. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)<span id="viii.iii-p37.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[150:421](1090043.htm#fr_420) <span
id="viii.iii-p37.7"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p38.1"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p38.2"></span>Εκ τῶν οὐρανῶν</span>. Chrysostom seems to
use ἐ<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p38.3"></span>κ</span> and
not <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p38.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p38.5"></span>ν</span>, in reference to
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p38.6"></span> ˆ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p38.7"></span>νωθεν</span> preceding.
This is the Greek idiom; <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p38.8"></span>‡</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p38.9"></span>υτου ἐνὶ Τροίη</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p38.10"></span>,</span> *Il*. B. 237,
but <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p38.11"></span>ˆ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p38.12"></span>υτόθεν ἐξ œδρης</span>,
T. 77.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[150:422](1090043.htm#fr_421) <span
id="viii.iii-p38.13"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p39"></span> [Philip. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012)<span id="viii.iii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[150:423](1090043.htm#fr_422) <span
id="viii.iii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p40"></span> [Prov. xviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#019)<span id="viii.iii-p40.1"></span>.
In our version it stands, “A brother offended is (harder to be won than)
a strong city.” Chrysostom quotes exactly from the <span
class="c12"><span id="viii.iii-p40.2"></span>LXX</span>. On the other
hand, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p40.3"></span>Βοηθ™ω</span>, as governing a dative, has no
passive voice, at least in classical Greek. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p40.4"></span> Βοηθόυμενος</span> may, as here, be used by
the Alexandrians.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[150:424](1090043.htm#fr_423) <span
id="viii.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p42.1"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p42.2"></span>Ακριβ™ιας</span>. As a chain accurately and
closely linked so as not to be severed asunder.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[150:425](1090043.htm#fr_424) <span
id="viii.iii-p42.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p43.1"></span>Συνίστημι</span>. Lit. establish, vouch for
her.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[150:426](1090043.htm#fr_425) <span
id="viii.iii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p44.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p44.2"></span>Η</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p44.3"></span>τις</span>, answering to Lat. *quæ* with
subjunctive, expressing the cause.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[150:427](1090043.htm#fr_426) <span
id="viii.iii-p44.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p45.1"></span>Προστ€τις</span>, patroness: a relation
well-known in Greece.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[150:428](1090043.htm#fr_427) <span
id="viii.iii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p46"></span> [Rom.
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#002)<span id="viii.iii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[150:429](1090043.htm#fr_428) <span
id="viii.iii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p47"></span> *i.e*., <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p47.1"></span> μόνον</span>; a common ellipsis in
Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[150:430](1090043.htm#fr_429) <span
id="viii.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p48"></span> [Rom.
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#004)<span id="viii.iii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[150:431](1090043.htm#fr_430) <span
id="viii.iii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p49"></span> [Philip. ii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#030)<span id="viii.iii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[150:432](1090043.htm#fr_431) <span
id="viii.iii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p50"></span> From trouble, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p50.1"></span>“</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p50.2"></span>ˆ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p50.3"></span>νεσιν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p50.4"></span>.”</span> Comp. [2 Cor. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005)<span id="viii.iii-p50.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[151:433](1090043.htm#fr_432) <span
id="viii.iii-p50.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p51"></span> [Ephes. vi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#022)<span id="viii.iii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[151:434](1090043.htm#fr_433) <span
id="viii.iii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p52"></span> [1 Thess. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#005)<span id="viii.iii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[151:435](1090043.htm#fr_434) <span
id="viii.iii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p54"></span> [Philip. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012)<span id="viii.iii-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[151:436](1090043.htm#fr_435) <span
id="viii.iii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p55"></span> [Philip. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012)<span id="viii.iii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[151:437](1090043.htm#fr_436) <span
id="viii.iii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p56"></span> [Philip. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013)<span id="viii.iii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[151:438](1090043.htm#fr_437) <span
id="viii.iii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p57.1"></span>Τοὺς πλεἰονας</span> again, *plures,
complures*, a good many.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[151:439](1090043.htm#fr_438) <span
id="viii.iii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p58"></span> [Philip. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#014)<span id="viii.iii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[151:440](1090043.htm#fr_439) <span
id="viii.iii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p59.1"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p59.2"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p59.3"></span>κολουθίαν</span>. Comp. Xen *Exped. Cyri*.
ii. iv. 19. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p59.4"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p59.5"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p59.6"></span>ὀυκ ‡κόλουθα žιη</span>; the two things were
incompatible.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[151:441](1090043.htm#fr_440) <span
id="viii.iii-p59.7"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p60.1"></span>Φησίν</span>. This word, so constantly used
by Chrysostom, is sometimes almost redundant; the nominative to it, if
any, being uncertain. It may be redundant here or it may be equivalent
to <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p60.2"></span>λ™γει</span>; he
means. He does not say it.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[151:442](1090043.htm#fr_441) <span
id="viii.iii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p62"></span> [Luke iv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#023)<span id="viii.iii-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[151:443](1090043.htm#fr_442) <span
id="viii.iii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p63.1"></span>Διαλ€μπη</span>. In Attic Greek the optative
would be used to express past time. But it may be noticed that
Chrysostom nearly always has the subjunctive, a usage probably of the
Alexandrian period of Greek literature. [2 Cor. xii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="viii.iii-p63.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[151:444](1090043.htm#fr_443) <span
id="viii.iii-p63.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p64.1"></span>̔</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p64.2"></span>Υ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p64.3"></span>πεσκ™λισε</span>. Lit. tripped up, causing a
fall.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[152:445](1090043.htm#fr_444) <span
id="viii.iii-p64.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p65.1"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p65.2"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p65.3"></span>πανθοῦσαν</span>. This properly is, dropping
its flowers as a plant, withering, *defloresco*. I strongly suspect that
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p65.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p65.5"></span>πανθοῦσαν</span> should
be read; which not only is just what is wanted, but gives a satisfactory
government to <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p65.6"></span>‡</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p65.7"></span>υτ‚ις</span>, which now it has not.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[152:446](1090043.htm#fr_445) <span
id="viii.iii-p65.8"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p66.1"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p66.2"></span>Εσφιγμ™νας</span>. Comp. the chaining of
Prometheus <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p66.3"></span>“</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p66.4"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p66.5"></span>Αρ€σσε μ‚λλον σφίγγε</span>.” Lat. *stringo,
constrictus*.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[152:447](1090043.htm#fr_446) <span
id="viii.iii-p66.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p67.1"></span>Σωφροσύνῃς</span>. Not in its ethical, but in
its etymological sense, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p67.2"></span>σῶοι τῄν φρ™να</span>, sound in mind. The
antithesis is doubtless intentional.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[152:448](1090043.htm#fr_447) <span
id="viii.iii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p69.1"></span>Τὀ Β€ραθρον</span>. The Athenian place and
mode of execution. It cannot be literally rendered. The Tarpeian rock
may be meant. *Dejicere a saxo cives*, Hor. Serm. This sentence proves
“‡<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p69.2"></span>λήθεια</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p69.3"></span>”</span> to be, not truth, but sincerity.
They preached “@<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p69.4"></span>ορθὴν καὶ ὑγιῆ πίστιν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p69.5"></span>.”</span>

<span id="fn_448"></span>[152:449](1090043.htm#fr_448) <span
id="viii.iii-p69.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p70"></span> That is, heartily.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[152:450](1090043.htm#fr_449) <span
id="viii.iii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p71"></span> [Philip. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#015)<span id="viii.iii-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[152:451](1090043.htm#fr_450) <span
id="viii.iii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p72"></span> Philip. v. 17<span
id="viii.iii-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[152:452](1090043.htm#fr_451) <span
id="viii.iii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p73.1"></span>Κεῖμαι</span>. Perhaps lit. “I am lying”—here
in prison.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[152:453](1090043.htm#fr_452) <span
id="viii.iii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p74"></span> [Philip. i.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#016)<span
id="viii.iii-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[152:454](1090043.htm#fr_453) <span
id="viii.iii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p75"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p75.1"></span>μὴ ποιοῦντες δš</span>. Referring to <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p75.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p75.3"></span>ποίησαν</span>, just
used. But the Greeks (as Aristophanes) sometimes use <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p75.4"></span> ποιῶ</span> in these
cases, whatever word precedes; as in English. They generally repeat the
same word, *e.g*., “<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p75.5"></span>μανθ€νεις</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p75.6"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p75.7"></span>Οὐ μανθ‡νω</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p75.8"></span>,”</span> Aristoph. Here, then, taken in
either way, it comes to the same. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p75.9"></span>Μὴ</span>, because hypothetical, “if they did
not make.”

<span id="fn_454"></span>[152:455](1090043.htm#fr_454) <span
id="viii.iii-p75.10"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p76.1"></span>Πρόφασιν</span>. But it was not their
pretext, but their real motive: v. 17. Any one conversant with Greek
authors cannot fail to notice that, with some mental process of their
own, they at times use expressions naturally suggesting the very
contrary to what they must mean.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[152:456](1090043.htm#fr_455) <span
id="viii.iii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p78"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p78.1"></span>Εὐλ€βειαν</span>, Lit. carefulness in
handling anything holy—reverence.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[152:457](1090043.htm#fr_456) <span
id="viii.iii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p79"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p79.1"></span>Αὐτὀ</span>, *i.e*., the change: <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p79.2"></span> ž</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p79.3"></span>γκλημα</span>, involved
in <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p79.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p79.5"></span>γκαλει</span>.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[152:458](1090043.htm#fr_457) <span
id="viii.iii-p79.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p80"></span> [Philip. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#017)<span id="viii.iii-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[153:459](1090043.htm#fr_458) <span
id="viii.iii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p81"></span> Philip. v. 18<span
id="viii.iii-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[153:460](1090043.htm#fr_459) <span
id="viii.iii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p82"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p82.1"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p82.2"></span>Εκεῖνοι</span>, Lat *isti*, “the men.”

<span id="fn_460"></span>[153:461](1090043.htm#fr_460) <span
id="viii.iii-p82.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p83"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p83.1"></span>Κακουργία</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p83.2"></span>, “</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p83.3"></span>παρα τ€υτας γὰρ κακουργεὶ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p83.4"></span>,”</span> of the sophist
Arist. *Rhet*. iii. 2, 7.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[153:462](1090043.htm#fr_461) <span
id="viii.iii-p83.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p84"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p84.1"></span>Κήρυγμα</span>. In its proper sense, the
thing preached, the Gospel. But it more commonly is = <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p84.2"></span>κηρυξις</span>, which
word is scarcely used at all.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[153:463](1090043.htm#fr_462) <span
id="viii.iii-p84.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p85"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019)<span id="viii.iii-p85.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p85.2"></span>Δρασσόμενος</span>,
lit. clutches. Hence <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p85.3"></span>δραχμὴ</span>, a handful of copper, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p85.4"></span>σοφούς</span>, falsely
wise. “<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p85.5"></span>Σοφία</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p85.6"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p85.7"></span>‡</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p85.8"></span>ρετὴ τεχνῆς</span> ” Arist. *Eth. Nich*. l.
vi. Comp. [Luke xvi. 8](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#008)<span
id="viii.iii-p85.9"></span>, of the dishonest steward.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[153:464](1090043.htm#fr_463) <span
id="viii.iii-p85.10"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p86"></span> [Phil.
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#025)<span id="viii.iii-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[153:465](1090043.htm#fr_464) <span
id="viii.iii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p88"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p88.1"></span>̔</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p88.2"></span>Απλῶς</span>.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[153:466](1090043.htm#fr_465) <span
id="viii.iii-p88.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p89"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p89.1"></span>̓</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p89.2"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p89.3"></span>κτενῶς</span>. Like a racer, with every
muscle “stretched out.” Antilochus exclaims to his horses in the chariot
race, <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p89.4"></span>̓</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p89.5"></span>Ε</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p89.6"></span>ιμβητον, κὰι σφῶι
τιταινετον</span>. *Il*. xxiii. 403. Comp. [Philip. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span id="viii.iii-p89.7"></span>;
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p89.8"></span> τοῖς žμπροσθεν
ἐπεκτεινόμενος διώκω</span>: the same metaphor.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[153:467](1090043.htm#fr_466) <span
id="viii.iii-p89.9"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p90"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p90.1"></span>Παρˆμεινον</span>. Wait, as it were, at the
door; <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p90.2"></span>παρ‡</span>,
until answered. [Matt. vii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span
id="viii.iii-p90.3"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p90.4"></span> τῶ κρουοντι</span> (to him who continues
knocking) ‡<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p90.5"></span>νοιγήσεται</span>.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[153:468](1090043.htm#fr_467) <span
id="viii.iii-p90.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p91"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p91.1"></span> Αποστρεφόμενος</span>. The Pagans adopted
the expression literally, *Diva solo fixos oculos aversa tenebat*, Virg.
*Æn*. i. 482.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[153:469](1090043.htm#fr_468) <span
id="viii.iii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p92"></span> Here we have <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p92.1"></span> ποιουσι</span>, as in English, after <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p92.2"></span> κατ™χειν</span>. See
previous note. It might be <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p92.3"></span>κατ™χουσι</span>, repeated.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[153:470](1090043.htm#fr_469) <span
id="viii.iii-p92.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p93"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p93.1"></span>Περιδρομῆς</span>, running about for votes
and favour. Lat. *<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p93.2"></span>
ambitio</span>*. *“Non ego…Grammaticas ambire tribus et pulpita
dignor*.” Hor. *Epist*. i. 19, 40.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[153:471](1090043.htm#fr_470) <span
id="viii.iii-p93.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p94"></span> To understand this description we have
to bear in mind that, at Rome at least, legal advocates could claim no
fees. They were forbidden, at least before the Imperial age, by the
Cincian law. *Turpe reos emptâ miseros defendere linguâ*. Ov. *Amor*. i.
10, 39. Hence, the obtaining the services of an eminent lawyer required
interest and entreaty. So the Sicilians begged Cicero to undertake the
prosecution of Verres. Cic. *in Verr. Div*. c. 12.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[154:472](1090043.htm#fr_471) <span
id="viii.iii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p96"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p96.1"></span>̓</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p96.2"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p96.3"></span>κπεμψαι</span>, *i.e.* from the hall, as it
were, of audience.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[154:473](1090043.htm#fr_472) <span
id="viii.iii-p96.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p97"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p97.1"></span>̓</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p97.2"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p97.3"></span>κτεν™ιας</span>, as above.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[154:474](1090043.htm#fr_473) <span
id="viii.iii-p97.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p98"></span> φησίν, the parable says. An instance,
however, of its redundancy before noticed. 'Ελ™ησον depends not on it,
but on βοῶσα.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[154:475](1090043.htm#fr_474) <span
id="viii.iii-p98.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p99"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p99.1"></span>Κυναρίοις</span>. In Greek, as in Latin and
German, the diminutive sometimes expresses contempt.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[154:476](1090043.htm#fr_475) <span
id="viii.iii-p99.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p100"></span> [Matt.
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#022),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#028)<span id="viii.iii-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[154:477](1090043.htm#fr_476) <span
id="viii.iii-p100.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p101"></span> [Matt. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023)<span id="viii.iii-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[154:478](1090043.htm#fr_477) <span
id="viii.iii-p101.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p102"></span> [Matt. v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024)<span id="viii.iii-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[154:479](1090043.htm#fr_478) <span
id="viii.iii-p102.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p103"></span> [Matt. v.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#027)<span id="viii.iii-p103.1"></span>.
That is, the bread thrown to them, when it had been used to cleanse the
fingers. Gr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p103.2"></span>‡</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p103.3"></span>πομαγδαλία</span>, *ab* ‡<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p103.4"></span>πομ€σσομαι</span>. Comp.
the very apposite passage, in which Agaracritus, a low person, says that
this had been his own fare; <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p103.5"></span>ἤ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p103.6"></span>μ€την γὰν ̓Απομαγδαλἱας σιτόυμενος τοσουτος
ἐκτραφ™ιην</span>. Cleon rejoins, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p103.7"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p103.8"></span>Απομαγδαλίοις ὡσπερ κύων, ὦ
παμπόνηρε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p103.9"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p103.10"></span>πῶς οῦν κυνος βορ‡ν σιτούμενος μ€χει
σὺ</span><span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p103.11"></span>,</span>
Aristoph. *Equ*. 412. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p103.12"></span>Κυνˆρια</span>. So “canicula,” of the dog
star, *invisum sidus*.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[154:480](1090043.htm#fr_479) <span
id="viii.iii-p103.13"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p104"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p104.1"></span>Ταύτη</span> = <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p104.2"></span>αὐτῆ</span>.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[154:481](1090043.htm#fr_480) <span
id="viii.iii-p104.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p105"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p105.1"></span>Διακρούσηται</span>, as with rude violence.
Lit. knock to a distance from himself, as with a hard blow.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[154:482](1090043.htm#fr_481) <span
id="viii.iii-p105.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p106"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p106.1"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p106.2"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p106.3"></span>σιγα</span>. Not literally, for Christ had
answered, “It is not meet to take the children’s bread.” But that was
silence, as far as returning any favorable answer went.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[154:483](1090043.htm#fr_482) <span
id="viii.iii-p106.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p107"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p107.1"></span>Τὴν ‡νδρ™ιαν τῆς γυναικὸς</span>. Lit the
woman’s manliness; a courage above her sex. The antithesis is doubtless
intentional. “<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p107.2"></span>Ε'ν€ντια παρ€λληλα μ‚λλον γνώριμα</span>,
Arist. *Rhet*. 'Ανδρ™ia = Lat. *virtus*. Gibbon, using this is the
general sense, has the expression, “manly virtue,” in reference to <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p107.3"></span> ‡</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p107.4"></span>ρετῆς
'Ανδρ™να</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p107.5"></span>,</span> Hom. *Odys*. xvii. 322.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[154:484](1090043.htm#fr_483) <span
id="viii.iii-p107.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p108"></span> Φησὶν again: with no nominative.
Certainly not Christ—the disciples said it. We might expect <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p108.1"></span>φ€σιν</span>; but this,
I believe, Chrysostom never uses in these cases. “It says,” *i.e*., the
history, or “he,” the Evangelist. Sometimes <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p108.2"></span>τις</span> is understood.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[154:485](1090043.htm#fr_484) <span
id="viii.iii-p109.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p110"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p110.1"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p110.2"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p110.3"></span>ποκρουσόμεθα</span>. Rebut the charges
brought against us. “<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p110.4"></span>Κακὰ</span>,” comp. the double sense of the
Lat. *crimen*.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[154:486](1090043.htm#fr_485) <span
id="viii.iii-p110.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p111"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p111.1"></span>Παρρησίαν</span>. Here, liberty to address
the Court. So King Agrippa says, “Paul, thou art permitted to speak for
thyself.” [Acts xxvi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001)<span
id="viii.iii-p111.2"></span>. Chrysostom throughout maintains the
metaphor of the judicial process—<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p111.3"></span>‡</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p111.4"></span>προστ€τευτος, κ.τ.λ.</span>

<span id="fn_486"></span>[154:487](1090043.htm#fr_486) <span
id="viii.iii-p111.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p112"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p112.1"></span>Θυγατριον</span>. Here a diminutive of
endearment, “*filiola*.” <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p112.2"></span>Ω῏ Σωκρατιδιον φιλτατον</span>, Arist.
*Nub*. 736. As the Greeks said, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p112.3"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p112.4"></span>ποκοριστικῶς</span>.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[155:488](1090043.htm#fr_487) <span
id="viii.iii-p112.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p113"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p113.1"></span>Καιρον</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p113.2"></span>, “</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p113.3"></span>μ™ρος χρονου</span>,” Aristotle, A critical
moment.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[155:489](1090043.htm#fr_488) <span
id="viii.iii-p113.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p114"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p114.1"></span> Εὐκολίας</span>. Effect for cause;
contentedness for that which creates it; ease. Comp. “*O Melibæe, Deus
nobis hæc otia fecit*,” Virg. *Ecl*. i. 6.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[155:490](1090043.htm#fr_489) <span
id="viii.iii-p114.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p115"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p115.1"></span>'</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p115.2"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p115.3"></span>κει</span>. The Greek euphemism for the
other world. Aristophanes speaks of the kindliness and contentedness of
Sophocles in both states of being, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p115.4"></span>̔</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p115.5"></span>Ο δ' ἐύκολος μ™ν ἐνθ€δ žυκαλος δ'
ἐκει</span> *Ranæ*, 82. See last note.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[155:491](1090043.htm#fr_490) <span
id="viii.iii-p115.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p116"></span> Perhaps this common phrase, “ages
(consisting) of ages,” is in contrast to ages of years. Comp. “*magnus
annus-menses*. *Magnus ab integro sæclorum nascitur ordo*.” Vir. *Eccl*.
IV. 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Instructions to Catechumens.](1090044)
