[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090096)  [Next](1090098.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.vi"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span
id="xix.vi-Page_364"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="xix.vi-p1.1"></span>Homily IV.</span>

<span id="xix.vi-p2"></span>An exhortation to the people respecting
fortitude and patience, from the examples of Job and the Three Children
in Babylon. The Homily concludes with an address on the subject of
abstaining from oaths.

<span id="xix.vi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="xix.vi-p3.1"></span>Blessed</span> be God! who hath comforted your
sorrowing souls, and stayed your agitated spirits! For that ye have
received no small consolation is evident by the desire and readiness to
listen which ye are now showing. For it is impossible that a soul in
anguish, and oppressed with the cloud of despondency, should have power
to hear with readiness anything that is spoken. But I see you are
attending to us with much good will, and with an intense earnestness;
and that you have shaken off gloomy thoughts, and put aside the sense of
present distress, in your affectionate desire of listening. For this
cause, I thank God heartily together with you, that the calamity has not
overmatched your philosophy; nor fear relaxed your vigour; nor
tribulation quenched your alacrity; nor danger dried up your zeal: nor
the fear of men overcome the desire for God; nor the difficulty of the
times overthrown your earnestness; nay, so far from overthrowing, it has
strengthened it; so far from slackening, it has given it more intensity;
so far from quenching, has kindled it the more. The forum is indeed
empty, but the church is filled; the former supplies material for
melancholy, the latter is an occasion of joy and spiritual gladness!
When therefore, beloved, you betake yourself to the forum, and the sight
of the solitude calls forth a groan, fly back to thy Mother, and
straightway she will console thee with the multitude of her offspring
and will show thee the chorus of the Brethren complete, and will drive
away all thy despondency! For in the city we are as earnestly longing to
see human beings, as those who inhabit the deserts; but when we take
refuge in the church, we are straitened for room by the multitude. And
as when the sea is in uproar, and rendered furious by the violent
tempest, fear compels all to fly for refuge from without into the
harbour; so also now, the waves of the forum, and the tempest of the
city, drives together every one from all sides into the church, and by
the bond of love knits the members close to one another.

<span id="xix.vi-p4"></span>2. Let us then give thanks to God even for
these things, that we have reaped so much fruit from the tribulation;
that we have received so great an advantage from the trial. If there
were no trial, there would be no crown; if there were no wrestlings,
there would be no prize; if there were no lists <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[1189](#fn_1188.md) marked out, there would be no
honours; if there were no tribulation, there would be no rest; if there
were no winter, there would be no summer. And this may be observed, not
only amongst men, but even with the very seeds; for if, in that case, we
expect the ear of corn to spring and flourish, there must be much rain,
much gathering of the clouds, and much frost; and the time of sowing is
also a rainy season. Since therefore the winter, a winter not of the
elements, but of souls, has now set in, let us too sow in this winter
that we may reap in the summer; let us sow tears, that we may reap
gladness. This is not my word, it is a prophetic promise, “They who sow
in tears, shall reap in joy.” <span id="fr_1189"></span>[1190](#fn_1189.md)
The rain which cometh down, doth not so make the seeds to sprout and
grow, as the shower of falling tears maketh the seed of godliness to
spring up and flourish. This it is that cleanseth the soul; watereth the
mind, and causeth the growing germ of doctrine to push rapidly forwards.
For this reason also, it is needful to plough up a deep furrow. This the
Prophet signified when he spoke thus, “Break up your fallow ground, and
sow not among thorns.” <span id="fr_1190"></span>[1191](#fn_1190.md)
Therefore, as when he who has set the plough on the field, turns up the
earth from below, preparing beforehand a safe lodgment for the seeds, in
order that they may not lie dispersed over the surface, but may be
hidden in the very womb of the earth, and deposit their roots in safety:
so also it is our business to act; and making use of the plough of
tribulation to break up the depth of the heart. For another Prophet
admonishes of this, when he says, “Rend your hearts and not your
garments.” <span id="fr_1191"></span>[1192](#fn_1191.md) Let us then rend
our hearts, that if any evil plant, any treacherous thought be present
in <span id="page_365">p. 365</span> <span
id="xix.vi-Page_365"></span>us, we may tear it up by the roots, and
provide a pure soil for the seeds of godliness. For if we do not now
break up the fallow ground; if we do not now sow; if we do not now water
it with tears, whilst it is a time of tribulation and fasting, when
shall we ever be brought to compunction? Will it be when we are at ease,
and in luxury? But this is impossible. For ease and luxury generally
lead to indolence, just as tribulation leads back again to diligence;
and restores to itself the mind that had wandered abroad, and been
dreaming after a multitude of objects.

<span id="xix.vi-p9"></span>3. Let us not then grieve on account of this
despondency, but even give thanks to God, for great is the gain that
comes of tribulation. The husbandman, when he has sown the seed he had
gathered with so much labour, prays that a shower may come; and the
ignorant man, looking on, will be surprised at all that takes place; and
perhaps say to himself, “what can this man be doing? He is scattering
what he has collected; and not only scattering, but he is also mixing it
up in the earth with much industry, so that it will be no easy matter
for him to collect these together again; and besides mixing them with
the earth, he is moreover desiring a heavy rain, so that all he has cast
therein will rot, and become mire.” Such a person is also terrified when
he observes the thunders bursting through the clouds, and the lightnings
striking downwards. But not so the farmer. He is glad and rejoices
whilst beholding the heavy rain. For he does not regard what is present,
but awaits the future. He does not attend to the thunderings, but is
reckoning the number of his sheaves. He thinks not of the decaying seed,
but of the flourishing ears of corn; not of the tedious rain, but of the
delightful dust of the threshing floor. Thus indeed, also, should we
regard, not our present tribulation, nor the pain of it, but the benefit
that may arise from it—the fruit that it will bring forth. Let us wait
for the sheaves of the threshing floor; for if we be sober, we shall be
able to collect much fruit from the present time, and to fill the
granaries of our minds. If we be sober, we shall not only be far from
taking any harm from this trouble, but we shall also reap innumerable
benefits. But should we be slothful, even tranquillity will destroy us!
Either of these things is injurious to him who takes no heed; but they
both profit him who lives with strictness. And even as gold if it be
covered with water, still shows its own proper beauty, and although it
should fall into the furnace, would again come forth brighter than
before; but on the other hand, should clay or grass be mixed with water,
the one dissolves and the other corrupts; and should they fall into the
fire, the one is parched and the other is burnt up; so also in truth it
is with the just man and the sinner! For should the former enjoy repose,
he remains illustrious, even as gold is when immersed in water; and
though he falls into trial, he becomes the more illustrious, like gold
when subjected to the test of fire; but the sinner, if he obtains rest,
is enervated and corrupted like the grass and the clay, when they come
in contact with water; and should he undergo trial, he is burnt up and
destroyed, in the same way as the grass and the clay are by the action
of fire!

<span id="xix.vi-p10"></span>4. Let us not then be out of heart for the
present evils; for if thou hast any sins <span
id="fr_1192"></span>[1193](#fn_1192.md) remaining, they will disappear, and
easily be burnt up by the tribulation; but if thou possessest virtue,
thou wilt become thereby more illustrious and distinguished; for if thou
art continually vigilant and sober, thou wilt be superior to all injury.
For it is not the nature of the trials, but the listlessness of those
who are tried, that is apt to cause their overthrow. So that if thou
desirest to rejoice, and to enjoy ease and pleasure, seek neither for
pleasure nor ease, but seek for a soul full of patience, and one that is
able to manifest fortitude; since if thou hast not this, not only will
trial put thee to shame, but repose will destroy and overthrow thee yet
more signally. For to prove that it is not the attack of evils, but the
listlessness of the mind which subverts our salvation, hear what Christ
saith: “Whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will
liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock; and the
rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon
that house; and it fell not, for it was founded upon a rock.” And again:
“Every one who heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall
be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand; and
the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house; and it fell, and great was the fall of it.” <span
id="fr_1193"></span>[1194](#fn_1193.md) Do you perceive that it was not the
attack of these trials that produced the overthrow, but the folly of the
builders? For there was rain there, and there was rain here; there were
floods there, <span id="page_366">p. 366</span> <span
id="xix.vi-Page_366"></span>and there were floods here; here the beating
of winds, and there again the same. The one man built a house, and the
other built a house. The building was the same; the trials were the
same; but the end was not the same; because there was not the same
foundation. For the folly of the builder, not the nature of the trials,
caused the fall of the building; otherwise the house that was founded
upon the rock should have fallen, whereas nothing of that kind befell
it. But do not suppose that these things were spoken merely of a house;
for the discourse relates to a soul, giving proof by its works that it
hears the divine word, or rejects it. Thus Job builded up his soul. The
rain descended;—for the fire fell from heaven and devoured all his
flocks; the floods came;—the frequent,—the constant,—the successive
messengers of his calamities, telling him of the destruction of his
herds—of his camels—of his children. The winds blew,—the bitter words of
his wife:—“Curse God,” she said, “and die.” <span
id="fr_1194"></span>[1195](#fn_1194.md) Yet the house fell not: the soul
was not supplanted: the just man did not blaspheme; but even gave thanks
thus, saying, “The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away. As it pleased
the Lord, so is it come to pass.” <span
id="fr_1195"></span>[1196](#fn_1195.md) Seest thou that not the nature of
the trials, but the negligence of the indolent, is wont to cause the
overthrow? since tribulation makes the strong man stronger. Who saith
this? It is the man who lived in tribulation, the blessed Paul; he
speaks thus: “Tribulation worketh patience, and patience probation, and
probation hope.” <span id="fr_1196"></span>[1197](#fn_1196.md) And even as
the violence of the wind, when it rushes upon strong trees, and sways
them in all directions, does not root them up, but renders them still
firmer and stronger by these attacks; so the soul that is holy, and
lives in a religious state, is not supplanted by the inroads of trial
and tribulation, but stimulated thereby to more patience; even as the
blessed Job, whom they made more illustrious and honourable.

<span id="xix.vi-p16"></span>5. At the present time then, a man is angry
with us, a man of like passions, and of like soul, and we are afraid:
but in the case of Job it was an evil and malignant demon who was angry;
nay, he was not simply angry, but set in motion all sorts of
machinations, and brought forward every stratagem; and yet even with all
he could not conquer the fortitude of the just man. But here is a man,
who is at one time angry, at another time is reconciled; and we are
nevertheless dead with fear. On that occasion it was a devil that waged
war, who is never reconciled to human nature, but has engaged in a war
without treaty, and a battle without truce against our race; yet
nevertheless, the just man laughed his darts to scorn. What apology
then, or what pardon can be ours, if we cannot sustain a human trial; we
who are taught such spiritual wisdom under grace; when this man before
grace, and before the Old Testament, endured this most grievous war so
nobly! These things, beloved, we should therefore always discourse of
with one another; and by words of this kind encourage ourselves. For ye
are witnesses, and your conscience is a witness how much gain we have
already received from this trial! The dissolute man hath now become
sober; the bold man meek; the slothful man active. They who never at any
time saw a church, but constantly spent their time at the theatre, now
remain in the church the whole day long. Tell me then, dost thou grieve
on this account, that God hath made thee earnest through fear; that He
hath led thee by tribulation to a sense of thine own safety? But is thy
conscience pained? Yea, is thy mind pierced every day as with a dart,
expecting death, and the greatest wrath? Nevertheless, from thence too
we shall gain a great advance toward virtue, if our piety is made more
earnest by means of the distress. For God is able to free you from all
these evils this day. But not until He sees that you are purified; not
until He sees that a conversion has taken place, and a repentance firm
and unshaken, will He entirely remove the tribulation. The goldsmith,
until he perceives the gold well refined, will not draw it out from the
furnace; and even so God will not take away this cloud before He hath
thoroughly amended us. For He Himself who hath permitted this trial,
knows the time for removing it. So it is also with one who plays the
harp; he neither overstrains the string, lest he break it, nor relaxes
it too much, lest he mar the consonance of its harmony. Thus does God
act. He neither places our souls in a state of constant repose, nor of
lengthened tribulation; making use of both these at His discretion; for
he neither suffers us to enjoy continual repose, lest we should grow
listless, nor on the other hand does he permit us to be in constant
tribulation, lest we sink under it, and become desperate.

<span id="xix.vi-p17"></span>6. Let us then leave to Him the time for
the removal of our evils; let *us* only pray; let *us* live in piety:
for this is our work, to turn to virtue; but to set us free from these
evils is God’s work! For indeed He is more desirous to quench this fire
than thou who art <span id="page_367">p. 367</span> <span
id="xix.vi-Page_367"></span>tried by it: but He is waiting for thy
salvation. As tribulation then came of rest, so also after tribulation,
rest must be expected. For neither is it always winter, nor always
summer; neither are there always waves, nor always a calm; neither
always night, nor always day. Thus tribulation is not perpetual, but
there will be also repose; only in our tribulation, let us give thanks
to God always. For the three youths were cast into the furnace, and did
not even for this forget their piety; neither did the flames affright
them, but more earnestly than men sitting in a chamber, and suffering
nothing to alarm them, did they, whilst encircled by the fire, send up
to heaven those sacred prayers <span
id="fr_1197"></span>[1198](#fn_1197.md) —therefore the fire became a wall
unto them, and the flame a robe; and the furnace was a fountain; and
whereas it received them bound, it restored them free. It received
bodies that were mortal, but abstained from them as if they had been
immortal! It knew their nature, yet it reverenced their piety! The
tyrant bound their feet, and their feet bound the operation of the fire!
O marvellous thing! The flame loosed those who were bound, and was
itself afterwards bound by those who had been in bonds; for the piety of
the youths changed the nature of things; or rather it did not change the
nature, but, what was far more wonderful, it stayed the operation of
them, even whilst their nature remained. For it did not quench the fire,
but though burning, made it powerless. And it was truly marvellous and
unaccountable, that this not only happened with respect to the bodies of
these saints, but also with respect to their garments, and their shoes.
And as it was in the case of the Apostles, the garments of Paul expelled
diseases and demons, <span id="fr_1198"></span>[1199](#fn_1198.md) and the
shadow <span id="fr_1199"></span>[1200](#fn_1199.md) of Peter <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200.md) put death to flight; so indeed also
in this case, the shoes of these youths extinguished the power of the
fire.

<span id="xix.vi-p22"></span>7. I know not how I should speak, for the
wonder surpasses all description! The force of the fire was both
quenched and not quenched: for whilst it came in contact with the bodies
of these saints, it was quenched; but when it was needful to burst their
bonds, it was not quenched; wherefore it broke their bonds, but touched
not their ancles. <span id="fr_1201"></span>[1202](#fn_1201.md) Do you see
how very near it was? Yet the fire was not deceived, and dared not
penetrate within the bonds. The tyrant bound, and the flame set loose;
that thou mightest learn at once the fierceness of the barbarian, and
the submissiveness of the element. For what reason did he bind, when he
was about to cast into the fire? In order that the miracle might be the
greater; that the sign might be the more unaccountable; that thou mayest
not suppose that the things seen were an optical delusion. For if that
fire had been no fire, it would not have consumed the bands; and what is
much more, it would not have seized upon the soldiers who were placed
without the furnace; but as the case was, it showed its power upon those
without; but towards those within, its submissiveness. But observe, I
pray, in everything, how the devil by the very same means with which he
fights with the servants of God, pulls down his own power; not
intentionally, but because the wisdom and abundant contrivance of God
turns all his weapons and devices upon his own head; which assuredly
happened on that occasion. For the devil at that time inspiring the
tyrant, neither suffered the heads of the saints to be cut off with the
sword, nor that they should be delivered to wild beasts, nor punished in
any such manner; but that they should be thrown into the fire; to the
end that not even any relics of these saints should remain, their bodies
being altogether consumed, and their ashes being mingled with the ashes
of the fagots. But God accordingly employed this very circumstance for
the taking away of impiety. <span id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202.md)
And how? I will tell you. Fire is accounted by the Persians to be a god;
and the barbarians, who inhabit that country even now honour it with
much worship. God, therefore, being desirous to pull up by the roots the
material of impiety, permitted the punishment to take this form, in
order that He might give the victory to His servants before the eyes of
all these fire-worshippers; persuading them by the plain fact, that the
gods of the Gentiles are in dread not of God only, but even of the
servants of God.

<span id="xix.vi-p25"></span>8. Consider, moreover, how the crown of
this victory was woven by the adversaries, and the enemies themselves
were made witnesses of this trophy. For “Nebuchadnezzar,” it says, “sent
to gather together the princes, the governors, and the captains, the
judges, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come to
the dedication of the image, and they were all gathered together.” <span
id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203.md) <span id="page_368">p. 368</span>
<span id="xix.vi-Page_368"></span>The enemy prepares the theatre, and he
himself collects together the spectators, and prepares the lists; a
theatre too, not of chance persons, or of some private individuals, but
of all those who were honourable and in authority, to the end that their
testimony may be worthy of credit with the multitude. They had come
summoned for one thing; but they all departed having beheld another
thing. They came in order to worship the image; and they departed,
having derided the image, and struck with wonder at the power of God,
through the signs which had taken place with respect to these young men.
And observe, where the field for this display was spread out. No city,
nor select enclosure furnished room for this theatre of the whole world,
but smooth and naked plains. For in the plain of Dura, outside the city,
he set up the image, and the herald came and cried, “To you it is
commanded, O people, nations, and languages, that at what time ye hear
the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and
all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the golden image;” (for a
fall indeed it was to worship the idol) “and whoso falleth not down, and
worshippeth, shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning
fiery furnace.” <span id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204.md) Seest thou
how difficult these struggles are made; how irresistible the snare; and
how deep the gulph, and a precipice on either hand? But be not afraid.
In whatever degree the enemy increases his machinations, so much the
more does he display the courage of the young men. For this reason is
there this symphony of so many musicians; for this reason the burning
furnace; in order that both pleasure, and fear, may besiege the souls of
those present. Is there any one of harsh and unyielding character among
them? “Let the melody of every kind of music,” saith he, “enchant and
soften him.” But is he superior to this artifice, “let the sight of the
flame affright and astound him.” Thus was fear as well as pleasure
present; the one entering to assault the soul by the ears, the other by
the eyes. But the noble character of these youths was not by any such
means to be conquered; but even as, when they fell into the fire, they
mastered the flames, even so they derided all desire and all fear. For
it was for them the devil had prepared all these things beforehand. For
he had no doubts of his own subjects, but was exceedingly confident that
no one would resist the royal mandate. But when all fell down, and were
subdued, then the youths alone are led into the midst; in order that
from this too the conquest may become the more illustrious, they alone
conquering and being proclaimed victors among so vast a multitude. For
this would not have been so surprising if they had acted courageously at
the first, when as yet no one had been overthrown. But the greatest, and
most astonishing fact was, that the multitude of those who fell down,
neither affrighted, nor enfeebled them. They did not say to themselves
any such things as many are ofttimes wont to say; “If we were the first,
and the only persons to worship the image, this would have been a sin:
but if we do this with so many myriads, who will not make allowance? who
will not think us worthy of defence?” nothing of that sort did they say
or think, when they beheld the prostrate forms <span
id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205.md) of so many tyrants. <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206.md) Consider thou also with me the
wickedness of those who were their accusers, and how maliciously and
bitterly they brought the accusation! “There are,” say they, “certain
Jews whom thou hast set up over the works of the province of Babylon.”
They did not merely make mention of the nation, but they also bring to
mind their honourable condition, that they may inflame the wrath of the
king; almost as if they had said, “These slaves, these captives, who are
without a city, thou hast made rulers over us. But they shew contempt
for such honour, and treat insolently him who has given them this
honour!” Therefore they say this; “The Jews whom thou hast set over the
works of the province of Babylon, obey not thy decree, nor serve thy
gods.” <span id="fr_1207"></span>[1208](#fn_1207.md) The accusation becomes
their greatest praise; and the crimes imputed, their encomium; a
testimony indeed that is indubitable, since their enemies bring it
forward. What then does the king? He commands that they should be
brought into the midst, so that he may affright them in every way. But
nothing dismayed them, neither the wrath of the king, nor their being
left alone in the midst of so many, nor the sight of the fire, nor the
sound of the trumpet, nor the whole multitude looking fire at them; for
deriding all these things, as if they were about to be cast into a cool
fountain of water, they entered the furnace uttering that blessed
sentence, “We will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image
which thou hast set up.” <span id="fr_1208"></span>[1209](#fn_1208.md)

<span id="xix.vi-p32"></span>9. I have not referred to this history
without reason, but that ye may learn that whether it be the wrath of a
king, or the <span id="page_369">p. 369</span> <span
id="xix.vi-Page_369"></span>violence of soldiers, or the envy of
enemies, or captivity, or destitution, or fire, or furnace, or ten
thousand terrors, nothing will avail to put to shame or terrify a
righteous man. For if where the king was godless the youths were not
dismayed at the tyrant’s wrath, how much more ought we to be confident,
having an emperor who is humane and merciful, and to express
thankfulness to God for this tribulation, knowing from what has now been
said, that tribulations render men more illustrious both in the presence
of God and of man, if they know how to bear them with fortitude! For
indeed if these had not been made slaves, we should not have known their
freedom! If they had not been captives, we should not have learned their
nobility of soul! If they had not been exiles from their country below,
we should not have known the excellency of their citizenship above! If
the earthly king had not been angry with them, we should not have known
the favour with which they were regarded by the heavenly King!

<span id="xix.vi-p33"></span>10. Thou too then, if thou hast Him for thy
Friend, be not despairing, although thou fallest into the furnace: and
in like manner if He be angry, think not thou art safe though thou be in
Paradise. For Adam indeed was in Paradise, yet, when he had provoked
God, Paradise profited him nothing. These youths were in the furnace;
yet, since they were approved, the furnace injured them not at all. Adam
was in Paradise, but when he was supine, he was supplanted! Job sat down
on the dunghill, yet, since he was vigilant he prevailed! Yet how much
better was Paradise than a dunghill! still the excellency of the place
benefitted in no degree the inhabitant; forasmuch as he had betrayed
himself; as likewise indeed the vileness of the place did to one no
injury, who was fortified on every side with virtue. As to ourselves
then, let us fortify our souls; for if the loss of wealth should
threaten us, or even death, and yet no one can rob us of our religion,
we are the happiest of men, Christ commended this when he said, “Be ye
wise as serpents.” <span id="fr_1209"></span>[1210](#fn_1209.md) For just
as he exposes the whole body in order that he may save the head, <span
id="fr_1210"></span>[1211](#fn_1210.md) so also do thou. Although it should
be necessary to expose wealth, or the body, or the present life, or all
things, for the purpose of preserving thy religion; be not cast down!
For if thou depart hence in possession of that, God will restore to thee
all things with more abundant splendour, and will raise again thy body
with greater glory; and instead of riches, there will be the good things
that surpass all power of description. Did not Job sit naked on a
dunghill, sustaining a life more grievous than ten thousand deaths? Yet
since he did not cast away his piety, all his former things came back to
him in greater abundance, soundness and beauty of body; his full band of
children; his possessions; and what was greater than all, the splendid
crown of his patience. For as it happens with trees, should any one
pluck away the fruit and the leaves together; should he even cut off all
the branches letting the root only remain; the tree will rise again
entire, with greater beauty, so indeed is it also with us. If the root
of piety remain, although wealth be taken away, although the body
destroyed, all things again revert to us with greater glory than before.
Casting away therefore all anxiety and superfluous care, let us return
to ourselves; and let us adorn the body and the soul with the ornament
of virtue; converting our bodily members into instruments of
righteousness and not instruments of sin.

<span id="xix.vi-p36"></span>11. And first of all, let us discipline our
tongue to be the minister of the grace of the Spirit, expelling from the
mouth all virulence and malignity, and the practice of using disgraceful
words. For it is in our power to make each one of our members an
instrument of wickedness, or of righteousness. Hear then how men make
the tongue an instrument, some of sin, others of righteousness! “Their
tongue is a sharp sword.” <span id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211.md) But
another speaks thus of his own tongue: “My tongue <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212.md) is the pen of a ready
writer.” <span id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213.md) The former wrought
destruction; the latter wrote the divine law. Thus was one a sword, the
other a pen, not according to its own nature, but according to the
choice of those who employed it. For the nature of this tongue and of
that was the same, but the operation was not the same. And again, as to
the mouth likewise, we may see this same thing. For these had a mouth
full of filth and of wickedness, therefore against such it is said by
way of accusation, “Their mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness;” <span id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214.md) not such was
his, but “My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart
shall be of understanding.” <span id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215.md)
Again, there were others who had their hands full of iniquity, and
accusing these he said, “Iniquities are in their hands, <span
id="page_370">p. 370</span> <span id="xix.vi-Page_370"></span>and their
right hand is filled with gifts.” <span
id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216.md) But he himself had hands practised
in nothing but in being stretched out towards heaven. Therefore he said
of these too, “The lifting up of my hands (let it be) an evening
sacrifice.” <span id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217.md) The same may also
be perceived with reference to the heart; for their heart indeed was
foolish, but this man’s was true; hence he speaks of them thus, “Their
heart is vain;” but of his own, “My heart is inditing of a good
matter.” <span id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218.md) And as to the ear,
one may see that the case is the same; for some have a sense of hearing
like that of beasts, which is not to be charmed or moved to pity; and
reproaching such the Psalmist says, “They are like the deaf adder, that
stoppeth her ears.” <span id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219.md) But his
ear was the receptacle of the divine words, and this he again makes
manifest, when he says, “I will incline mine ear to a parable, I will
open my dark speech upon the harp.” <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220.md)

<span id="xix.vi-p47"></span>12. Knowing these things then, let us
fortify ourselves with virtue on all sides, and thus we shall avert the
wrath of God, and let us make the members of the body instruments of
righteousness; and let us discipline eyes, and mouth, and hands, and
feet, and heart, and tongue, and the <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[1222](#fn_1221.md) whole body, to be employed only in
the service of virtue. And let us remember those three precepts, of
which I discoursed <span id="fr_1222"></span>[1223](#fn_1222.md) to your
Charity, exhorting you to consider no one as an enemy, nor to speak evil
of any one of those who have aggrieved you; and to expel from your mouth
the evil custom of oaths. And with respect to the two former precepts,
we will discourse to you on another occasion; but we shall speak to you
during the whole of the present week respecting oaths; thus beginning
with the easier precept. For it is no labour at all to overcome the
habit of swearing, if we would but apply a little endeavour, by
reminding each other; by advising; by observing; and by requiring those
who thus forget themselves, to render an account, and to pay the
penalty. For what advantage shall we gain by abstinence from meats, if
we do not also expel the evil habits of the soul? Lo, we have spent the
whole of this day fasting; and in the evening we shall spread a table,
not such as we did on yester-eve, but one of an altered and more solemn
kind. <span id="fr_1223"></span>[1224](#fn_1223.md) Can any one of us then
say that he has changed his life too this day; that he has altered his
ill custom, as well as his food? Truly, I suppose not! Of what advantage
then is our fasting? Wherefore I exhort, <span
id="fr_1224"></span>[1225](#fn_1224.md) and I will not cease to exhort,
that undertaking each precept separately, you should spend two or three
days in the attainment of it; and just as there are some who rival one
another in fasting, and shew a marvellous emulation in it; (some indeed
who spend two whole days without food; and others who, rejecting from
their tables not only the use of wine, and of oil, but of every dish,
and taking only bread and water, persevere in this practice during the
whole of Lent); so, indeed, let us also contend mutually with one
another in abolishing the frequency <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[1226](#fn_1225.md) of oaths. For this is more useful
than any fasting; this is more profitable than any austerity. And this
same care which we display in abstaining from food, let us exhibit with
respect to abstinence from oaths; since we shall be chargeable with the
reproach of extreme folly, while we regard not things that are
forbidden, and expend all our care upon things indifferent; for to eat
is not forbidden, but to swear is forbidden; we, however, abstaining
from those things that are permitted, daringly venture upon those things
that are forbidden! On this account I beseech your Charity to make some
change, and to let the beginning of it be visible from this day. For if
we spend the whole of the present fast with such zeal, having in this
week attained the practice of not swearing at all; and in the following
having extinguished wrath; and in that which succeeds it, having pulled
up evil-speaking by the roots; and after that, having amended what yet
remains; thus going forward in our course, we shall come by little and
little to the very summit of virtue; and we shall escape the present
danger; and shall make God propitious; and the multitude will come back
again to our city; and we shall teach the fugitives that we are to place
our hopes of safety neither in security of place, nor in flight and
retirement; but in piety of soul, and in virtue of manners. And thus
shall we obtain the good things of this and of the future life; which,
God grant! we may all be found worthy of, by the grace and
loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom and with whom be
glory to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, now and for ever and
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[364:1189](1090097.htm#fr_1188.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p5"></span> σκ€μματα, elsewhere translated “arena,” see
Fabr. *Ag*. ii. 7. Græv. viii. 1963, he quotes St. Ephraim *De Luctâ
Spirituali*. *In luctaminibus hujus sæculi*, &c. Ed. Rom. Gr. Lat. iii.
577, Voss. p. 371. “The most perfect combatants are ever to be found
fearless and active within the lines (scamma), but the timid and feeble
fly this way and that before they begin to strive, and for their great
softness and laziness will not exert themselves in the scamma. Now the
scamma, beloved brethren, is the central place in which the wrestlers
strive;” this may explain œλκωνται, p. 18; see also Voss’s note, p. 123.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[364:1190](1090097.htm#fr_1189.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p6"></span> [Ps. cxxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#005.md)<span id="xix.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[364:1191](1090097.htm#fr_1190.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p7"></span> [Jer. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003.md)<span id="xix.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[364:1192](1090097.htm#fr_1191.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p8"></span> [Joel ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013.md)<span id="xix.vi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[365:1193](1090097.htm#fr_1192.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p11"></span> ƒμαρτίας. This seems from the contrast to
mean “sinful habits,” which trouble affords facilities for amending. Had
he meant removing *guilt*, he would probably have said ƒμαρτήματα, or
κηλῖδας, as Hom. I. 22. See also Hom. III. 21, where he speaks of the
removal of guilt as depending on the *use* made of chastisement. Also on
[Rom. v. 11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011.md)<span
id="xix.vi-p11.1"></span>; Hom. IX .; see also Hom. V. (5), Hom. VI.
(5), and Hom. VII. (1).

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[365:1194](1090097.htm#fr_1193.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p12"></span> [Matt. vii.
24-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024.md)<span id="xix.vi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[366:1195](1090097.htm#fr_1194.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p13"></span> [Job ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#009.md)<span id="xix.vi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[366:1196](1090097.htm#fr_1195.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p14"></span> [Job i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021.md)<span id="xix.vi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[366:1197](1090097.htm#fr_1196.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p15"></span> [Rom.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004.md)<span id="xix.vi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[367:1198](1090097.htm#fr_1197.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p18"></span> St. Chrysostom refers to the Benedicite,
or “Song of the Three Children.” In his book *Quod nemo læditur nisi a
seipso*, he calls it “That admirable and marvellous song, which from
that day to this hath been sung every where throughout the world, and
shall yet be sung in future generations.” Ben. t. iii. 464; E. quoted by
Bingham, b. xiv. c. ii., sec. 6, New Ed., vol. iv., p. 461.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[367:1199](1090097.htm#fr_1198.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p19"></span> [Acts xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012.md)<span id="xix.vi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[367:1200](1090097.htm#fr_1199.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p20"></span> So. Sav. and M. Ben. σκιαὶ.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[367:1201](1090097.htm#fr_1200.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p21"></span> [Acts v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#015.md)<span id="xix.vi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[367:1202](1090097.htm#fr_1201.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p23"></span> [Dan. iii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025.md)<span id="xix.vi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[367:1203](1090097.htm#fr_1202.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p24"></span> τὴς ‡σεβείας, used especially of
Heathenism, as “ungodliness.” Hom. I. 15, so εὐσεβεία perhaps; [Tit. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001.md)<span id="xix.vi-p24.1"></span>, for
*right* religion, but this use of the words belongs rather to the
Fathers than to the New Testament.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[367:1204](1090097.htm#fr_1203.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p26"></span> [Dan. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#002.md)<span id="xix.vi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[368:1205](1090097.htm#fr_1204.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p27"></span> [Dan.
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#004.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#006.md)<span id="xix.vi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[368:1206](1090097.htm#fr_1205.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p28"></span> πτώματα, usually of fallen carcases.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[368:1207](1090097.htm#fr_1206.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p29"></span> Or princes, πυρ€ννων.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[368:1208](1090097.htm#fr_1207.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p30"></span> [Dan. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#012.md)<span id="xix.vi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[368:1209](1090097.htm#fr_1208.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p31"></span> [Dan. iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#018.md)<span id="xix.vi-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[369:1210](1090097.htm#fr_1209.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p34"></span> [Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016.md)<span id="xix.vi-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[369:1211](1090097.htm#fr_1210.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p35"></span> So St. Jerome, *Cat. Aur*., St. Aug.,
*Doct. Christ*. II. xvi. (24); Comp. [Gen. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015.md)<span id="xix.vi-p35.1"></span>.
Luc. xvi. 8, 9; Origen on [Prov. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#002.md)<span id="xix.vi-p35.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[369:1212](1090097.htm#fr_1211.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p37"></span> [Ps. lvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004.md)<span id="xix.vi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[369:1213](1090097.htm#fr_1212.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p38"></span> The references in the Psalms are made to
the English version, which is divided as the Hebrew, except that it
sometimes varies a verse or two. LXX. and Vulg. annex [Ps.
x.](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#000.md)<span id="xix.vi-p38.1"></span> to
ix., and call [Ps. xi.](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#000.md)<span
id="xix.vi-p38.2"></span> [Ps. x.](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#000.md)<span
id="xix.vi-p38.3"></span>, and so on till [Ps.
cxlvii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#000.md)<span
id="xix.vi-p38.4"></span>, which they divide, beginning their [Ps.
cxlvii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#000.md)<span id="xix.vi-p38.5"></span>
at v. 12.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[369:1214](1090097.htm#fr_1213.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p38.6"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p39"></span> [Ps. xlv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001.md)<span id="xix.vi-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[369:1215](1090097.htm#fr_1214.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p40"></span> [Ps. xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#006.md)<span id="xix.vi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[369:1216](1090097.htm#fr_1215.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p41"></span> [Ps. xlix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#003.md)<span id="xix.vi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[370:1217](1090097.htm#fr_1216.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p42"></span> [Ps. xxvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#010.md)<span id="xix.vi-p42.1"></span>. Or,
more perspicuously, according to the usual sense of the Hebrew,
*bribes*.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[370:1218](1090097.htm#fr_1217.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p43"></span> [Ps. cxli.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002.md)<span id="xix.vi-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[370:1219](1090097.htm#fr_1218.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p44"></span> [Ps.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009.md), [Ps.
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001.md)<span id="xix.vi-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[370:1220](1090097.htm#fr_1219.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p45"></span> [Ps. lviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004.md)<span id="xix.vi-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[370:1221](1090097.htm#fr_1220.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p46"></span> [Ps. xlix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#004.md)<span id="xix.vi-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[370:1222](1090097.htm#fr_1221.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p48"></span> Sav. our.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[370:1223](1090097.htm#fr_1222.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p49"></span> *i.e*., at the close of the last Homily.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[370:1224](1090097.htm#fr_1223.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p50"></span> σεμνοτ™ραν. Tillemont supposes as well as
Montfaucon, that the preceding Homily (the 3d) was delivered on
Quinquagesima Sunday, and that this (the 4th) was preached on the
Monday, which explains this allusion, Tr. The Lent fast began with that
Monday. During Lent the Greek Church allows the use of fish on Sundays.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[370:1225](1090097.htm#fr_1224.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p51"></span> Or, beseech.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[370:1226](1090097.htm#fr_1225.md) <span
id="xix.vi-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p52"></span> νιφ€δας, lit. snowflakes. Comp. *Il*. iii.
222.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily V](1090098.md)
