[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090089)  [Next](1090091.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.vi"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c34"><span
id="xviii.vi-p1.1"></span>innocent, bishop, to presbyters and deacons,
and to all the clergy and people of the church of constantinople, the
brethren beloved who are subject to the bishop john, greeting.</span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="xviii.vi-p2.1"></span>From</span> the letters of your love which ye
have sent by the hands of Germanus the presbyter, and Casianus the
deacon, I have studied with anxious care the scene of calamity which ye
have placed before my eyes, and by repeated perusal of your description
I thoroughly perceived under what great distress and toil your faith is
labouring: and this is a matter which can be cured only by the
consolation of patience: for our God will speedily grant an end to such
great afflictions, and He will aid you in your endurance of these
things. Moreover whilst praising the statement of your case which
contains many testimonies encouraging to patience I notice this
necessary consolation placed at the beginning of the epistle of your
love: for the consolation which we ought to have written to you, ye have
anticipated by your letter. For this is the kind of patience which our
Master is wont to supply to those who are in distress, in order that the
servants of Christ when they are in affliction may console themselves by
reflecting that the things which they themselves are suffering have
happened to the saints also in former times. And we also from your
letter shall be able to derive consolation: for we are not estranged
from sympathy with you, inasmuch as we also are chastised in your
persons. For who will be able to endure the offences committed by those
men who ought to be specially zealous promoters of the tranquillity of
the Church and of concord itself. At the present time, by a perversion
of custom, guiltless priests are expelled from the presidency of their
own <span id="page_314">p. 314</span> <span
id="xviii.vi-Page_314"></span>Churches. And this is what your chief
brother, and fellow minister, John, your bishop has unjustly suffered,
not having obtained any hearing: no crime is charged against him, none
is heard. And what is the object of this iniquitous device? that no
pretext for a trial may occur, or be sought, other men are introduced
into the places of living priests, as if those who start from an offence
of this description could be judged by any one to have anything good or
to have done anything right. <span id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965.md) For
we understand that such deeds have never been perpetrated by our
fathers; or rather that they were prevented by the fact that no one had
authority given him to ordain another to take the place of one who was
still living. For a spurious ordination cannot deprive the priest of his
rank: seeing that neither can he be a bishop who is wrongfully
substituted for another. And as regards the observance of the canons we
lay it down that we ought to follow those, which were defined at Nicæa,
to which alone the Catholic Church is bound to pay obedience and
recognition. And if others are brought forward by certain men, which are
at variance with the canons framed at Nicæa, and are proved to have been
composed by heretics, let them be rejected by the Catholic bishops. For
the inventions of heretics ought not to be appended to the Catholic
canons; for by their adverse and unlawful decrees they are always
intending to weaken the design of the canons of Nicæa. Not only
therefore do we say that these ought not to be followed, but rather that
they should be condemned amongst heretical and schismatic decrees, as
was formerly done in the Council of Sardica by the bishops who were
before us. <span id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966.md) For it were more
fitting, most honoured brethren, that good deeds should be condemned
than that things done in direct opposition to the canons should have any
validity. But what are we to do against such things at the present time?
A synodical decision of them is necessary, and we have long declared
that a synod ought to be convened, as it is the only means of allaying
the agitation of such tempests as these: and if we obtain this it is
expedient that the healing of these evils should be committed to the
will of the great God, and His Christ our Lord. All the disturbances
then which have been caused by the envy of the devil for the probation
of the faithful will be mitigated; through the firmness of our faith we
ought not to despair of anything from the Lord. For we ourselves also
are considering much by what means the œcumenical synod may be brought
together in order that by the will of God these disturbing movements may
be brought to an end. Let us therefore endure for a while, and fortified
by the wall of patience let us hope that all things may be restored to
us by the assistance of our God. Moreover all things which ye say ye
have undergone we have learned by accurate enquiry from our fellow
bishops who have already taken refuge in Rome, although for the most
part at different times, that is to say, Demetrius, Cyriacus, Eulysius
and Palladius, who are here with us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_965"></span>[314:966](1090090.htm#fr_965.md) <span
id="xviii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p3"></span> I have followed the Latin here. The Greek
version of the passage seems to me hopelessly confused.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[314:967](1090090.htm#fr_966.md) <span
id="xviii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p4"></span> The Council of Sardica was convened A.D.
343, (or A.D. 344?) with a view of settling the Arian controversy. The
Oriental bishops, however, of whom the majority belonged to the Arian
faction, seceded from Sardica, and held a separate council at
Philippopolis, where they drew up a creed which was condemned by the
Western bishops as heretical.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Homilies on the Statues to the People of Antioch.](1090091.md)
