[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090095)  [Next](1090097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.v"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="xix.v-p1.1"></span>Homily III.</span>

<span id="xix.v-p2"></span>*On the departure of Flavian,* <span
id="fr_1124"></span>[1125](#fn_1124) *Bishop of Antioch, who was gone on
an embassy to the Emperor Theodosius, on behalf of the city. Of the
dignity of the Priesthood. What is true fasting. Slander worse than
devouring the human body. And finally of those who had been put to death
on account of the sedition; and against those who complained that many
innocent persons were apprehended.*

<span id="xix.v-p4"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="xix.v-p4.1"></span>When</span> I look on that throne, deserted and
bereft of our teacher, I rejoice and weep at the same time. I weep,
because I see not our father with us! but I rejoice that he hath set out
on a journey for our preservation; that he is gone to snatch so great a
multitude from the wrath of the Emperor! Here is both an ornament to
you, and a crown to him! An ornament to you, that such a father hath
been allotted to you; a crown to him, because he is so affectionate
towards his children, and hath confirmed by actual deeds what Christ
said. For having learnt that “the good shepherd layeth down his life for
the sheep,” <span id="fr_1125"></span>[1126](#fn_1125) he took his
departure; venturing his own life for us all, notwithstanding there were
many things to hinder his absence, and enforce his stay. And first, his
time of life, extended as it is to the utmost limits of old age; next,
his bodily infirmity, and the season of the year, as well as the
necessity for his presence at the holy festival; and besides these
reasons, his only sister even now at her last breath! He has
disregarded, however, the ties of kindred, of old age, of infirmity, and
the severity of the season, and the toils of the journey; and preferring
you and your safety above all things, he has broken through all these
restraints. And, even as a youth, the aged man is now hastening along,
borne upon the wings of zeal! For if Christ (saith he) gave Himself for
us, what excuse or pardon should we deserve, having undertaken the
charge of so numerous a people, if we were not ready to do and to suffer
anything for the security of those committed into our hands. For if
(continues he) the patriarch Jacob, when in charge of flocks, and
feeding brute sheep, and having to give account to man, passed sleepless
nights, and bore heat and <span id="page_355">p. 355</span> <span
id="xix.v-Page_355"></span>cold, and all the inclemency of the elements,
to the end that not one of those animals might perish, much less doth it
become us, who preside over those, who are not irrational, but spiritual
sheep; who are about to give an account of this charge, not to man, but
to God, to be slack in any respect, or shrink from anything which might
benefit the flock. Besides, in proportion as the latter flock is
superior to the former; men to brutes, and God to men; so it behoves us
to manifest a greater and more intense anxiety and diligence. He knows
well that his concern is now, not for one city only, but for the whole
of the East. For our city is the head and mother of all that lie towards
the East. For this reason he would encounter every danger, and nothing
would avail to detain him here.

<span id="xix.v-p6"></span>2. On this account I trust that there may be
a good hope; for God will not disdain to look upon such earnestness and
zeal, nor will He suffer his servant to return without success. I know
that when he has barely seen our pious Emperor, and been seen by him, he
will be able at once by his very countenance to allay his wrath. For not
only the words of the saints, but their very countenances are full of
grace. And he is a person too endowed with abundant wisdom; and being
well skilled in the divine laws, he will say to him as Moses said to
God, “Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin;—and if not, slay me
together with them.” <span id="fr_1126"></span>[1127](#fn_1126) For such
are the bowels of the saints, that they think death with their children
sweeter than life without them. He will also make the special season his
advocate and shelter himself behind the sacred festival of the Passover;
and will remind the Emperor of the season when Christ remitted the sins
of the whole world. He will exhort him to imitate his Lord. He will also
remind him of that parable of the ten thousand talents, and the hundred
pence. I know the boldness of our father, that he will not hesitate to
alarm him from the parable, and to say, “Take heed lest thou also hear
it said in that day, ‘O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that
debt, because thou desirest me; you ought also to forgive thy
fellow-servants!’ <span id="fr_1127"></span>[1128](#fn_1127) Thou dost
to thyself a greater benefit than them, since by pardoning these few
offences thou gainest an amnesty for greater.” To this address he will
add that prayer, which those who initiated him into the sacred mystery
taught him to offer up, and say, “Forgive us our debts, as we forgive
our debtors.” <span id="fr_1128"></span>[1129](#fn_1128)

<span id="xix.v-p10"></span>3. He will moreover inform him, that the
offence was not common to the whole city, but the deed of certain
strangers and adventurers, men that act upon no deliberate plan, but
with every sort of audacity and lawlessness; and that it would not be
just for the disorderly conduct of a few to extirpate so great a city,
and to punish those who had done no wrong; and that even though all had
been transgressors, they had paid a sufficient punishment, being
consumed by fear so many days, and expecting every day to be put to
death, and being exiles and fugitives; thus living more wretchedly than
condemned criminals, carrying their life in their hands, and having no
confidence of escape! “Let this punishment (he will say) suffice. Carry
not thy resentment further! Make the Judge above merciful to thyself, by
humanity towards thy fellow-servants! Think of the greatness of the
city, and that the question now is not concerning one, or two, or three,
or ten souls, but of a vast multitude too numerous to be reckoned up! It
is a question which affects the capital of the whole world. This is the
city in which Christians were first called by that name. <span
id="fr_1129"></span>[1130](#fn_1129) Honor Christ. Reverence the city
which first proclaimed that name, so lovely and sweet to all! This city
hath been the tabernacle of Apostles; the dwelling place of the just!
And now this is the first and only instance of insurrection against its
rulers; and all past time will bear favourable witness to the manners of
the city. For had the people been continually given to sedition, it
might have been necessary to make an example of such iniquity; but if
this hath happened only once in all time, it is plain that the offence
has not arisen from the habit of the city, but that it was the
transgression of those who had in an evil hour by mere random chance
arrived there.”

<span id="xix.v-p12"></span>4. These things and more than these the
priest will say with still greater boldness; and the Emperor will listen
to them; and one is humane, and the other is faithful; so that on both
sides we entertain favourable hopes. But much more do we rely upon the
mercy of God, than upon the fidelity of our Teacher and the humanity of
the Emperor. For whilst the Emperor is supplicated, and the priest is
supplicating, He Himself will interpose, softening the heart of the
Emperor, and exciting the tongue of the priest; facilitating <span
id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span id="xix.v-Page_356"></span>his
utterance;—preparing the mind of the other to receive what is said and
with much indulgence, to accede to the petitions. For our city is dearer
to Christ than all others both because of the virtue of our ancestors,
and of your own. And as Peter was the first among the apostles to preach
Christ, so as I said before, this city was the first of cities that
adorned itself by assuming the Christian appellation, as a sort of
admirable diadem. But if where only ten just men were found, God
promised to save all who dwelt therein, why should we not expect a
favourable issue, and become assured of all our lives, when there are
not only ten, twenty, or twice so many only, but far more; who are
serving God with all strictness.

<span id="xix.v-p13"></span>5. I have heard many saying, “The threats of
a king are like the wrath of a lion;” <span
id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130) being full of dejection and
lamentation. What then should we say to such? That He who said, “The
wolves and the lambs shall feed together; and the leopard shall lie down
with the kid, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox,” <span
id="fr_1131"></span>[1132](#fn_1131) will be able to convert the lion
into a mild lamb. Let us therefore supplicate Him; let us send an
embassy to Him; and He will doubtless allay the Emperor’s wrath, and
deliver us from the impending distress. Our Father hath gone thither on
this embassy. Let us go on embassy from hence to the Majesty of heaven!
Let us assist him by prayers! The community of the Church can do much,
if with a sorrowful soul, and with a contrite spirit, we offer up our
prayers! It is unnecessary to cross the ocean, or to undertake a long
journey. Let every man and woman among us, whether meeting together at
church, or remaining at home, call upon God with much earnestness, and
He will doubtless accede to these petitions.

<span id="xix.v-p16"></span>Whence does this appear evident? Because He
is exceedingly desirous, that we should always take refuge in Him, and
in everything make our requests unto Him; and do nothing and speak
nothing without Him. For men, when we trouble them repeatedly concerning
our affairs, become slothful and evasive, and conduct themselves
unpleasantly towards us; but with God it is quite the reverse. Not when
we apply to him continually respecting our affairs, but when we fail to
do so, then is he especially displeased. Hear at least what He reproves
the Jews for, when He says, “Ye have taken counsel, but not of Me, and
made treaties, <span id="fr_1132"></span>[1133](#fn_1132) but not by My
Spirit.” <span id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133) For this is the
custom of those who love; they desire that all the concerns of their
beloved should be accomplished by means of themselves; and that they
should neither do anything, nor say anything, without them. On this
account did God not only on that occasion, but again elsewhere, uttering
a reproof, speak the same language. “They <span
id="fr_1134"></span>[1135](#fn_1134) have reigned, but not by Me; they
have ruled, and they made it not known to Me.” <span
id="fr_1135"></span>[1136](#fn_1135) Let us not then be slow to take
refuge in Him continually; and whatever be the evil, it will in any case
find its appropriate solution.

<span id="xix.v-p21"></span>6. Doth a man affright you? Hasten to the
Lord above, and thou wilt suffer no evil. Thus the ancients had release
from their calamities; and not men only, but also women. There was a
certain Hebrew woman, Esther was her name. This Esther rescued the whole
people of the Jews, when they were about to be delivered over to
destruction, by this very method. For when the Persian king gave orders
that all the Jews should be utterly destroyed, and there was no one who
was able to stand in the way of his wrath,—this woman having divested
herself of the splendid robe, and clothed herself with sackcloth and
being besprinkled with ashes, supplicated the merciful God to go in with
her to the king; and offering up her prayer to Him, these were the words
she uttered, “O Lord, make my words acceptable, <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[1137](#fn_1136) and put eloquent speech in my
mouth.” <span id="fr_1137"></span>[1138](#fn_1137) Let this be the
prayer which we offer to God for our Teacher. For if a woman,
supplicating on behalf of the Jews, prevailed to allay the wrath of a
barbarian, much rather will our Teacher, entreating on behalf of so
great a city, and in conjunction with so great a Church, be able to
persuade this most mild and merciful Emperor. For if he hath received
authority to loose sins committed against God, much more will he be able
to take away and blot out those which have been committed against a man.
He is also himself a ruler and a ruler of more dignity than the other.
For the sacred laws take and place under his hands even the royal head.
And when there is need of any good thing from above, the Emperor is
accustomed to fly to the priest: but not the priest to the Emperor.
He <span id="fr_1138"></span>[1139](#fn_1138) too hath his breast-plate,
that of right<span id="page_357">p. 357</span> <span
id="xix.v-Page_357"></span>eousness. <span
id="fr_1139"></span>[1140](#fn_1139) He too hath his girdle, that of
truth, and sandals <span id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140) of much
greater dignity, those of the Gospel of peace. He too hath a sword, not
of iron, but of the Spirit; he too hath a crown resting on his head.
This panoply is the more splendid. The weapons are grander, the license
of speech greater, <span id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141) and
mightier <span id="fr_1142"></span>[1143](#fn_1142) the strength. So
that from the weight of his authority, and from his own greatness of
soul; and more than all the rest, from the hope which he has in God, he
will address the Emperor with much freedom and much discretion.

<span id="xix.v-p29"></span>7. Let us not then despair of our safety,
but let us pray; let us make invocation; let us supplicate; let us go on
embassy to the King that is above with many tears! We have this fast too
as an ally, and as an assistant in this good intercession. Therefore, as
when the winter is over and the summer is appearing, the sailor draws
his vessel to the deep; and the soldier burnishes his arms, and makes
ready his steed for the battle; and the husbandman sharpens his sickle;
and the traveller boldly undertakes a long journey, and the wrestler
strips and bares himself for the contest. So too, when the fast makes
its appearance, like a kind of spiritual summer, let us as soldiers
burnish our weapons; and as husbandmen let us sharpen our sickle; and as
sailors let us order our thoughts against the waves of extravagant
desires; and as travellers let us set out on the journey towards heaven;
and as wrestlers let us strip for the contest. For the believer is at
once a husbandman, and a sailor, and a soldier, a wrestler, and a
traveller. Hence St. Paul saith, “We wrestle not against flesh and
blood, but against principalities, against powers. Put on therefore the
whole armour of God.” <span id="fr_1143"></span>[1144](#fn_1143) Hast
thou observed the wrestler? Hast thou observed the soldier? If thou art
a wrestler, it is necessary for thee to engage in the conflict naked. If
a soldier, it behoves thee to stand in the battle line armed at all
points. How then are both these things possible, to be naked, and yet
not naked; to be clothed, and yet not clothed! How? I will tell thee.
Divest thyself of worldly business, and thou hast become a wrestler. Put
on the spiritual armour, and thou hast become a soldier. Strip thyself
of worldly cares, for the season is one of wrestling. Clothe thyself
with the spiritual armour, for we have a heavy warfare to wage with
demons. Therefore also it is needful we should be naked, so as to offer
nothing that the devil may take hold of, while he is wrestling with us;
and to be fully armed at all points, so as on no side to receive a
deadly blow. Cultivate thy soul. Cut away the thorns. Sow the word of
godliness. Propagate and nurse with much care the fair plants of divine
wisdom, and thou hast become a husbandman. And Paul will say to thee,
“The husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the
fruits.” <span id="fr_1144"></span>[1145](#fn_1144) He too himself
practised this art. Therefore writing to the Corinthians, he said, “I
have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase.” <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[1146](#fn_1145) Sharpen thy sickle, which thou hast
blunted through gluttony—sharpen it by fasting. Lay hold of the pathway
which leads towards heaven; rugged and narrow as it is, lay hold of it,
and journey on. And how mayest thou be able to do these things? By
subduing thy body, and bringing it into subjection. For when the way
grows narrow, the corpulence that comes of gluttony is a great
hindrance. Keep down the waves of inordinate desires. Repel the tempest
of evil thoughts. Preserve the bark; display much skill, and thou hast
become a pilot. But we shall have the fast for a groundwork and
instructor in all these things.

<span id="xix.v-p33"></span>8. I speak not, indeed, of such a fast as
most persons keep, but of real fasting; not merely an abstinence from
meats; but from sins too. For the nature of a fast is such, that it does
not suffice to deliver those who practise it, unless it be done
according to a suitable law. <span id="fr_1146"></span>[1147](#fn_1146)
“For the wrestler,” it is said, “is not crowned unless he strive
lawfully.” <span id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147) To the end then,
that when we have gone through the labour of fasting, we forfeit not the
crown of fasting, we should understand how, and after what manner, it is
necessary to conduct this business; since that Pharisee also
fasted, <span id="fr_1148"></span>[1149](#fn_1148) but afterwards went
down empty, and destitute of the fruit of fasting. The <span
id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span id="xix.v-Page_358"></span>Publican
fasted not; and yet he was accepted in preference to him who had fasted;
in order that thou mayest learn that fasting is unprofitable, except all
other duties follow with it. The Ninevites fasted, and won the favour of
God. <span id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149) The Jews, fasted too,
and profited nothing, nay, they departed with blame. <span
id="fr_1150"></span>[1151](#fn_1150) Since then the danger in fasting is
so great to those who do not know how they ought to fast, we should
learn the laws of this exercise, in order that we may not “run
uncertainly,” nor “beat the air,” nor while we are fighting contend with
a shadow. Fasting is a medicine; but a medicine, though it be never so
profitable, becomes frequently useless owing to the unskilfulness of him
who employs it. For it is necessary to know, moreover, the time when it
should be applied, and the requisite quantity of it; and the temperament
of body that admits it; and the nature of the country, and the season of
the year; and the corresponding diet; as well as various other
particulars; any of which, if one overlooks, he will mar all the rest
that have been named. Now if, when the body needs healing, such
exactness is required on our part, much more ought we, when our care is
about the soul, and we seek to heal the distempers of the mind, to look,
and to search into every particular with the utmost accuracy.

<span id="xix.v-p39"></span>9. Let us see then how the Ninevites fasted,
and how they were delivered from that wrath—“Let neither man nor beast,
herd nor flock, taste anything,” <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[1152](#fn_1151) saith (the prophet). What sayest
thou? Tell me—must even the irrational things fast, and the horses and
the mules be covered with sackcloth? “Even so,” he replies. For as when,
at the decease of some rich man, the relatives clothe not only the men
servants and maid servants, but the horses also with sackcloth, and give
orders that they should follow the procession to the sepulchre, led by
their grooms; thus signifying the greatness of the calamity, and
inviting all to pity; thus also, indeed, when that city was about to be
destroyed, even the irrational nature was enveloped in sackcloth, and
subjected to the yoke of fasting. “It is not possible,” saith he, “that
irrational creatures should learn the wrath of God by means of reason;
let them be taught by means of fasting, that this stroke is of divine
infliction. For if the city should be overturned, not only would it be
one common sepulchre for us, the dwellers therein, but for these
likewise. Inasmuch then as these would participate in the punishment,
let them also do so in the fast.” But there was yet another thing which
they aimed at in this act, which the prophets also are wont to do. For
these, when they see some dreadful chastisement proceeding from heaven,
and those who are to be punished without anything to say for
themselves;—laden with shame,—unworthy of the least pardon or
excuse:—not knowing what to do, nor from whence they may procure an
advocacy for the condemned, they have recourse to the things irrational;
and describing their death in tragical fashion, they make intercession
by them, putting forward as a plea their pitiable and mournful
destruction. When therefore, aforetime, famine had seized upon the Jews,
and a great drought oppressed their country, and all things were being
consumed, one of the prophets spoke thus, “The young heifers leaped in
their stalls; the herds of oxen wept, because there was no pasture; all
the cattle of the field looked upward to Thee, because the streams of
waters were dried up.” <span id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152)
Another prophet bewailing the evils of drought again speaks to this
effect: “The hinds calved in the fields and forsook it, because there
was no grass. The wild asses did stand in the forests; they snuffed up
the wind like a dragon; their eyes did fail, because there was no
grass.” <span id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153) Moreover, ye have
heard Joel saying to-day, “Let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber,
and the bride out of her closet;—the infants that suck the
breast.” <span id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154) For what reason, I
ask, does he call so immature an age to supplication? Is it not plainly
for the very same reason? For since all who have arrived at the age of
manhood, have inflamed and provoked God’s wrath, let the age, saith he,
which is devoid of transgressions supplicate Him who is provoked.

<span id="xix.v-p44"></span>10. But, as I said before, we may see what
it was that dissolved such inexorable wrath. Was it, forsooth, fasting
only and sackcloth? We say not so; but the change of their whole life.
Whence does this appear? From the very language of the prophet. For he
who hath discoursed of the wrath of God, and of their fasting, <span
id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155) himself too, when speaking of the
reconciliation, and teaching us the cause of the reconciliation, speaks
to this effect; “And God saw their works.” <span
id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156) What kind of <span id="page_359">p.
359</span> <span id="xix.v-Page_359"></span>works? That they had fasted?
That they had put on sackcloth? Nothing of the sort: but passing all
these points in silence, he adds, “That they turned every one from their
evil ways, and the Lord repented of the evil that He had said He would
do unto them.” Seest thou, that fasting did not rescue from this danger,
but it was the change of life, which rendered God propitious and kind to
these barbarians?

<span id="xix.v-p47"></span>11. I have said these things, not that we
may disparage fasting, but that we may honour fasting; for the honour of
fasting consists not in abstinence from food, but in withdrawing from
sinful practices; since he who limits his fasting only to an abstinence
from meats, is one who especially disparages it. Dost thou fast? Give me
proof of it by thy works! Is it said by what kind of works? If thou
seest a poor man, take pity on him! If thou seest in enemy, be
reconciled to him! If thou seest a friend gaining honour, envy him not!
If thou seest a handsome woman, pass her by! For let not the mouth only
fast, but also the eye, and the ear, and the feet, and the hands, and
all the members of our bodies. Let the hands fast, by being pure from
rapine and avarice. Let the feet fast, by ceasing from running to the
unlawful spectacles. Let the eyes fast, being taught never <span
id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157) to fix themselves rudely upon
handsome countenances, or to busy themselves with strange beauties. For
looking is the food of the eyes, but if this be such as is unlawful or
forbidden, it mars the fast; and upsets the whole safety of the soul;
but if it be lawful and safe, it adorns fasting. For it would be among
things the most absurd to abstain from lawful food because of the fast,
but with the eyes to touch even what is forbidden. Dost thou not eat
flesh? Feed not upon lasciviousness by means of the eyes. Let the ear
fast also. The fasting of the ear consists in refusing to receive evil
speakings and calumnies. “Thou shalt not receive a false report,” <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158) it says.

<span id="xix.v-p50"></span>12. Let the mouth too fast from disgraceful
speeches and railing. For what doth it profit if we abstain from birds
and fishes; <span id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159) and yet bite and
devour our brethren? The evil speaker eateth the flesh of his brother,
and biteth the body of his neighbour. Because of this Paul utters the
fearful saying, “If ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be
not consumed one of another.” <span id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160)
Thou hast not fixed thy teeth in the flesh, but thou hast fixed the
slander in the soul, and inflicted the wound of evil suspicion; thou
hast harmed, in a thousand ways, thyself and him, and many others, for
in slandering a neighbour thou hast made him who listens to the slander
worse; <span id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161) for should he be a
wicked man, he becomes more careless when he finds a partner in his
wickedness; and should he be a just man, he is lifted to arrogance, and
puffed up; being led on by the sin of others to imagine great things
concerning himself. Besides, <span id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162)
thou hast struck at the common welfare of the Church; for all those who
hear not only accuse the supposed sinner, but the reproach is fastened
on the Christian community; neither dost thou hear the unbelievers
saying, “Such a person is a fornicator, or a libertine;” but instead of
the individual who hath sinned, they accuse all Christians. In addition
to this, <span id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163) thou hast caused the
glory of God to be blasphemed; for as His Name is glorified when we have
good report, so when we sin, it is blasphemed and insulted!

<span id="xix.v-p56"></span>13. A fourth reason is, that thou hast
disgraced him who is ill reported; and hast thus rendered him more
shameless than he was, by placing him in a state of enmity and
hostility. Fifthly, thou hast made thyself liable to chastisement and
vengeance; by involving <span id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164)
thyself in matters which in no way concerned thee. For let not any one
tell me in reply, “Then I am an evil speaker when I speak falsely, but
if I speak what is true, I cease to be so.” Although it be with truth
thou speakest evil, this also is a crime. For that Pharisee spake evil
of the Publican with truth; but nevertheless this availed him not. For
was not the latter, I ask, a publican and a sinner? It is manifest to
every one that he was a publican. But at the same time inasmuch as the
Pharisee spoke ill of him, he departed from the temple with the loss of
every advantage. Dost thou wish to correct a brother? Weep; pray unto
God; taking him apart, admonish, counsel, entreat him! So also Paul did,
“Lest,” saith he, “when I come again, my God will humble me among you,
and I shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented
of the uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness which they have
committed.” <span id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165) Show thy charity
towards the sinner. Persuade him that it is from care and anxiety for
his welfare, and not from a wish to expose him, that thou puttest him in
mind of his sin. Take hold of his feet; embrace him; be not <span
id="page_360">p. 360</span> <span id="xix.v-Page_360"></span>ashamed, if
thou truly desirest to cure him. Physicians too do things of this sort,
oftentimes, when their patients are hard to please; <span
id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166) by embraces and entreaties they at
length persuade them to take a salutary medicine. Thus also do thou.
Show the wound to the priest; <span id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167)
that is the part of one who cares for him, and provides for him, and is
anxious on his behalf.

<span id="xix.v-p61"></span>14. But not only do I now admonish the evil
speakers; but those besides, who hear others ill spoken of, I exhort to
stop up their ears, and to imitate the prophet who saith, “Whoso privily
slandereth his neighbour, him will I punish.” <span
id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168) Say to thy neighbour, “Hast thou
any one to praise or highly to commend? I open my ears, to receive the
fragrant oil; but if thou hast any evil to say, I block up the entrance
to thy words,—for I am not to admit dung and dirt. What profit doth it
afford me to learn that such a one is a bad man? The greatest injury
indeed results from this, and the worst loss!” Say to him, “Let us be
anxious about our own faults; how we may render up an account of our own
transgressions; and exhibit this sort of curiosity and meddlesome
activity respecting our own lives. What excuse or pardon shall we find;
whilst we never even take into consideration our own affairs, but thus
inquisitively pry into those of others!” And as it is mean and extremely
disgraceful to peer into a house, and to observe what is within as one
passes, so also to make inquisition into another man’s life is the last
degree of illiberality. But what is yet more ridiculous is, that those
who lead this sort of life, and are neglectful of their own affairs,
when they have mentioned any of these secret matters, beseech and adjure
him who has heard it, not to mention it more to any other person; thus
making it plain that they have done an action which deserves censure.
For if thou beseechest him to tell this to no other person, much more
did it not become thee to tell these things first to him. The matter was
safe while in thy possession; now, after betraying it, thou art grown
anxious for its safety. If thou art desirous that it be not carried
abroad to another, <span id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169) do not
thyself tell it. But when thou hast betrayed the custody of the matter
to another, thou doest what is superfluous and useless, in charging him,
and putting him on oath for the safety of what has been spoken.

<span id="xix.v-p64"></span>15. “But it is sweet to slander.” Nay, it is
sweet not to speak evil. For he that hath spoken evil is henceforth
contentious; he is suspicious and he fears, repents, and gnaws his own
tongue. Being timorous and trembling, lest at any time, what he said
should be carried to others, and bring great peril, and useless and
needless enmity, on the sayer. But he who keeps the matter to himself,
will spend his days in safety, with much pleasantness. “Thou hast heard
a word,” we read, “let it die with thee; and be bold; it will <span
id="fr_1170"></span>[1171](#fn_1170) not burst thee.” <span
id="fr_1171"></span>[1172](#fn_1171) What is the meaning of this? “let
it die with thee?” Extinguish it; bury it; neither permit it to go
forth, nor even to move at all; but, as the best course, be careful not
to tolerate others in the practice of evil speaking. And should you
perchance, at any time receive an impression from it, bury it, destroy
what has been uttered, deliver it over to oblivion; in order that you
may become like those who have not heard it; and spend the present life
with much peace and security. Should the slanderers learn that we abhor
them more than those do whom they accuse, they themselves will
henceforth abandon this evil habit, and correct the sin; and will
afterwards applaud, and proclaim us as those who were their saviours and
benefactors. For, as to speak well, and to applaud, is the beginning of
friendship, so to speak ill and to calumniate, has been the beginning
and foundation of enmity, and hatred, and a thousand quarrels. From
nothing else have our own affairs been more neglected, than from the
habit of prying into and meddling with the concerns of others; for it is
not possible for one who is given to evil speaking, and busying himself
with other men’s lives, ever to look after his own life. His whole study
being expended upon meddling with other men’s matters, all those which
belong to himself must of necessity be left at hazard and neglected. For
it is well if one who spends all his leisure on the anxious
consideration of his own sins, and the judgment of them, can make any
progress. But when thou art always busy about other men’s matters, when
wilt thou pay any heed to thy own evils?

<span id="xix.v-p67"></span>16. Let us flee then, beloved, let us flee
slander! knowing that it is the very gulph of Satan, and the place where
he lurks with his snares. For in order that we may be careless of our
own state, and may thus render <span id="page_361">p. 361</span> <span
id="xix.v-Page_361"></span>our account heavier, the devil leads us into
this custom. But more than this it is not only a very serious matter,
that we shall hereafter have to give account of what we have spoken, but
that we shall make our own offences the heavier by these means;
depriving ourselves of all excuse. For he who scans with bitterness the
conduct of others, can never obtain pardon for the sins committed by
himself. For God will determine the sentence, not only from the nature
of our transgressions, but from the judgment which thou hast passed upon
others. Therefore He gave the admonition, “Judge not, that ye be not
judged.” <span id="fr_1172"></span>[1173](#fn_1172) For the sin, of
whatever kind, will not there appear any more such as it was when
committed, but will receive a great and unpardonable addition from the
judgment passed by thee upon thy fellow servants. For as he who is
humane, and merciful, and forgiving, cuts away the greater mass of his
sins, so he who is bitter, and cruel, and implacable, greatly increases
the magnitude of his own offences. Let us then expel from our mouth all
slander, knowing that if we do not abstain from it, though we might feed
upon ashes, this austerity would avail us nothing. “For not that which
entereth into, but that which cometh out of the mouth defileth the
man.” <span id="fr_1173"></span>[1174](#fn_1173) If any one were to stir
up a cesspool, when you were passing, say, would you not reproach and
rate the man who did it? This then also do with respect to the
slanderer. For the stirred cesspool does not so grossly offend the sense
of those who smell that ill savour, as the stirring up other men’s sins,
and the exposure of an impure life, offends and disturbs the soul of
those who hear of it. Therefore let us abstain from evil speaking, from
foul language, from blasphemy; and let us not speak ill of our
neighbour, nor of God!

<span id="xix.v-p70"></span>17. For many of our evil speakers have run
into such madness, as to lift up their own tongue from their fellow
servants against their Master. But how great an evil this is, you may
learn from the affairs in which we are now involved. A man is insulted,
and, lo! we are all fearing and trembling, both those who were guilty of
the insult, and those who are conscious of nothing of the kind! But God
is insulted every day! Why do I say every day?—every hour rather, by the
rich, by the poor, by those who are at ease, by the afflicted, by those
who calumniate, and those who are calumniated, and yet no one ever hears
a word of this! Therefore He has permitted our fellow servant <span
id="fr_1174"></span>[1175](#fn_1174) to be insulted, in order that from
the danger which has happened through this insult, thou mayest learn the
benignity of the Lord! And notwithstanding that this is our first and
only offence, we do not on that account expect to gain an excuse, or
pardon. But we provoke God every day, and we show no signs of returning
to Him, and yet He endures it with all long-suffering! Seest thou then
how great the benignity of the Lord is? Yet, in this present outrage,
those who had done amiss were taken and thrust into prison, and paid the
penalty; nevertheless we are still in fear, for he who has been insulted
has not as yet heard <span id="fr_1175"></span>[1176](#fn_1175) what has
taken place, nor pronounced sentence, and we are all trembling. But God
every day hears of the insults offered Him, and no one heeds it,
although God is thus merciful and loving toward man. With Him it
suffices only to acknowledge the sin, and so to cancel the accusation.
But with man it is altogether the reverse. When those who have sinned
confess, then they are punished the more; which indeed has happened in
the present instance. And some have perished by the sword, some by fire;
some given to wild beasts, and not men only, but children. And neither
this immaturity of age, nor the tumult of the people, nor the
circumstance that they were infuriated by demons when they perpetrated
these deeds; <span id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176) nor that the
exaction was thought to be intolerable; <span
id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177) nor poverty, nor having offended in
company with all; nor promising that they would never hereafter dare to
repeat such deeds; nor anything else, could at all rescue them; but they
were led away to the pit, <span id="fr_1178"></span>[1179](#fn_1178)
without reprieve; armed soldiers conducting and guarding them on either
side, lest any one should carry off the criminals; whilst mothers also
followed afar off, seeing their children beheaded, but not daring to
bewail their calamity; for terror conquered grief, and fear overcame
nature! And just as when men beholding from the land those who are
shipwrecked, are deeply distressed, but are not able to approach and to
rescue the drowning, so too here, the mothers restrained through fear of
the soldiers, as it were by so many waves, not only dared not go near to
their children, and res<span id="page_362">p. 362</span> <span
id="xix.v-Page_362"></span>cue them from condemnation, but were afraid
even to shed tears?

<span id="xix.v-p76"></span>18. Assuredly ye gather from thence the
mercy of God, how unspeakable, how boundless, how transcending all
description! Here indeed the person who has been insulted is of the same
nature; <span id="fr_1179"></span>[1180](#fn_1179) and only once in all
his lifetime has experienced this; and then it was not done to his face;
nor while he was present to see or hear it; and nevertheless, none of
those who perpetrated these deeds obtained pardon. But with regard to
God nothing of the kind can be said; for the interval between man and
God, is so great, as no language can at all express; and throughout
every day He is insulted, although present, and seeing and hearing it:
and yet He sends not forth the lightning, nor commands the sea to
overflow the land, and submerge all men; nor does He bid the earth to
cleave asunder and swallow up all the contumelious; but He forbears, and
suffers long, and still offers to pardon those who have insulted Him, if
they only repent and promise to do these things no more! Truly now is
the season to proclaim, “Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? who
can show forth all His praise?” <span
id="fr_1180"></span>[1181](#fn_1180) How many men have not only cast
down, but also trodden under foot the images of God! For when thou
throttlest a debtor, when thou strippest him, when thou draggest him
away, <span id="fr_1181"></span>[1182](#fn_1181) thou tramplest under
foot God’s image. Hear for a certainty Paul saying, that “a man ought
not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of
God.” <span id="fr_1182"></span>[1183](#fn_1182) And again, hear God
Himself saying, “Let us make man in Our Image, after Our
likeness.” <span id="fr_1183"></span>[1184](#fn_1183) But if thou sayest
that man is not of the same substance as God,—what matters that? For
neither was the brazen statue of the same substance as the Emperor; yet
nevertheless, they who defied it paid the penalty. Thus also with regard
to mankind, if men are not of the same substance as God, (as indeed they
are not), still they have been called His image; and it were fitting
they should receive honour on account of the appellation. But thou for
the sake of a little gold dost trample them under foot, dost throttle
them, and drag them away; and hast not to this day in any wise paid the
penalty!

<span id="xix.v-p82"></span>19. May there be then speedily some
favourable and propitious change! This certainly I foretell and testify,
that although this cloud should pass away, and we yet remain in the same
condition of listlessness, we shall again have to suffer much heavier
evils than those we are now dreading; for I do not so much fear the
wrath of the Emperor, as your own listlessness. Surely it is not
sufficient by way of apology that we supplicate <span
id="fr_1184"></span>[1185](#fn_1184) two or three days, but it is
necessary that we should make a change in our whole life, <span
id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185) and that whilst abstaining from
wickedness we should persevere continually in virtue. For as those who
are sickly, unless they keep up a constant regimen, would find no
advantage by their observing a two or three days’ discipline; so those
who are in sin, if they do not exercise sobriety at all times, will find
no benefit in two or three days’ amendment. For as it is said, that he
who is washed, and is again afterwards polluted with the mire, hath
gained nothing; so he who has repented for three days, and has again
returned to his former state, has accomplished nothing. Let us not
therefore, now act as we have always done hitherto. For many times, when
we have been surprised by earthquakes, as well as famine and drought,
after becoming more sober and gentle for three or four days, we did but
return again to the former course. For this cause our present troubles
have happened. But if we have not done so before; yet, now at least let
us all persevere in the same piety; let us preserve the same meekness,
that we may not again need another stroke. Was not God able to have
prevented what has taken place? He did, however, permit it, that He
might make those who despised Him more sober-minded, through dread of a
fellow-servant!

<span id="xix.v-p85"></span>20. But let not any one say that many of the
guilty escaped, and that many of the innocent incurred punishment. For I
hear of numerous persons who frequently say this; not only in the case
of the present sedition, but also in many other circumstances of this
nature. What then should I reply to those who make such observations?
Why, that if he who was captured was innocent of the present sedition,
he had wrought some other transgression before this still more grievous,
for which, not having afterwards repented, he has paid the penalty at
the present time. For thus is the custom of God to deal with us. When we
sin, He does not straightway visit the transgression, but lets it pass,
giving us space <span id="fr_1186"></span>[1187](#fn_1186) for
repentance, in order that we may be amended and converted. But if,
because we have not paid the penalty, we suppose that the offence too is
blotted out, and make light of it; then somewhere, where <span
id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span id="xix.v-Page_363"></span>we think
not of it, we are sure afterwards to be punished. And this takes place
in order that, when we sin and are not punished, we may not be free from
fear, unless we amend, knowing that we shall certainly fall into
punishment where we do not expect it. So that if thou sinnest, beloved,
and art not punished, do not grow presumptuous, but for this very cause
be the more alarmed, knowing that it is an easy matter with God to
recompense again when he pleases. For this reason then he hath not
punished thee, that thou mightest receive space for repentance. Let us
not therefore say, that such a person whilst innocent incurred
punishment; and another whilst guilty escaped, for he who incurred it,
being guiltless, as I observed, paid the punishment of other
transgressions; and he who now escapes it, if he repents not, will be
captured in another snare. If our minds are thus disposed, we shall
never forget our own sins, but, always fearful and trembling lest we
should have to pay the penalty, we shall readily recollect them. For
nothing is so apt to bring sin to remembrance as punishment and
chastisement. And this is shown by Joseph’s brethren. For when they had
sold the just man, and thirteen years had passed away, suspecting they
had fallen into punishment, and fearing for their lives, they remembered
their sin, and said one to another, “We are verily guilty concerning our
brother Joseph.” <span id="fr_1187"></span>[1188](#fn_1187) Seest thou,
how fear brought their guilt to recollection? And yet when they were
sinning they perceived it not, but when they were fearful of being
punished, then they remembered it? Knowing, therefore, all these things,
let us make a change and amendment of our lives; and let us think of
religion and virtue, before we think of deliverance from the impending
distress.

<span id="xix.v-p88"></span>21. And in the meanwhile I desire to fix
three precepts in your mind, to the end that you may accomplish me these
during the fast,—viz. to speak ill of no one; to hold no one for an
enemy; and to expel from the mouth altogether the evil custom of oaths.
And as when we hear that some money tax is imposed, each one going
within, and calling his wife and children and servants, considers and
consults with them how he may pay this tribute, so also let us do with
respect to these spiritual precepts. Let every one when he has returned
home call together his wife and children, and let him say, that a
spiritual tribute was imposed this day: a tribute by which there will be
some deliverance and removal of these evils; a tribute which does not
make those who pay it poor, but richer; that is to say, to have no
enemy, to speak evil of no man, and to swear not at all. Let us
consider; let us think; let us resolve how we may fulfill these
precepts. Let us exert every endeavour. Let us admonish each other. Let
us correct each other, that we may not go to the other world as debtors,
and then, needing to borrow of others, suffer the fate of the foolish
virgins, and fall from immortal salvation. If we thus set our lives in
order, I warrant you and promise, that from this there will be
deliverance from the present calamity, and a removal of these dreadful
ills; and what is greater than all, there will be the enjoyment of the
good things to come. For it were fitting that I should commit to you the
whole body of virtue; but I think it the best method of correction, to
take the laws by parts, and reduce them to practice, and then to proceed
to others. For as in a given field, the husbandman, digging it all up
piecemeal, gradually comes to the end of his task; so we too if we make
this rule for ourselves, in any wise to reduce to a correct practice
these three precepts during the present Lent, and to commit them to the
safe custody of good habit, we shall proceed with greater ease to the
rest; and by this means arriving at the summit of spiritual wisdom, we
shall both reap the fruit of a favourable hope in the present life; and
in the life to come we shall stand before Christ with great confidence,
and enjoy those unspeakable blessings; which, God grant, we may all be
found worthy of, through the grace and loving kindness of Jesus Christ
our Lord, with Whom be glory to the Father and the Holy Spirit forever
and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[354:1125](1090096.htm#fr_1124) <span
id="xix.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p3"></span> This Flavianus was one of those who
maintained the true faith against the Arians, but allowed himself to be
ordained Bishop of Antioch as successor to Meletius, who was placed
there by the Arians, but afterwards became orthodox. Paulinus had been
consecrated Bishop for the orthodox by Lucifer, and should have had full
possession of the see at the death of Meletius, to whom many of the
orthodox had adhered. Hence Flavianus was not acknowledged by the Roman
and Alexandrian patriarchs till after the death of Paulinus, and of
another who succeeded him, and the elevation of his friend St. John
Chrysostom to the see of Constantinople. Socr. iii. 6, v. 9, 15. St.
Chrysostom may allude to these circumstances in [Rom. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#011)<span id="xix.v-p3.1"></span>; Hom.
VII. Tr.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[354:1126](1090096.htm#fr_1125) <span
id="xix.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p5"></span> [John x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span id="xix.v-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[355:1127](1090096.htm#fr_1126) <span
id="xix.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p7"></span> [Exod.
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span id="xix.v-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[355:1128](1090096.htm#fr_1127) <span
id="xix.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p8"></span> [Matt.
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#033)<span id="xix.v-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[355:1129](1090096.htm#fr_1128) <span
id="xix.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p9"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="xix.v-p9.1"></span>. The
use of the Lord’s Prayer was at this period confined to those who were
initiated or baptized. St. Chrysostom calls it the prayer of the
faithful, and others of the Fathers speak in a similar manner. See
Bingham, *Ant*. vol. I., p. 37, new ed.; St. Cyr. *Cat*. xxiii. 11; St.
Cypr. *de Or. Tract*. vii. 6, p. 182; St. Chrys. *Hom. on Rom*. VII. 15.

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[355:1130](1090096.htm#fr_1129) <span
id="xix.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p11"></span> [Acts xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026)<span id="xix.v-p11.1"></span>,
probably in derision; the people of Antioch being notorious for the
invention of scurrilous nick-names.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[356:1131](1090096.htm#fr_1130) <span
id="xix.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p14"></span> [Prov. xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#012)<span id="xix.v-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[356:1132](1090096.htm#fr_1131) <span
id="xix.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p15"></span> [Isa.
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#007)<span id="xix.v-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[356:1133](1090096.htm#fr_1132) <span
id="xix.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p17"></span> So LXX. E.V., *cover with a covering*, if
this be taken for protection, the sense is the same, and apposite here,
as it refers to seeking help from Egypt. The Hebrew הבסמ admits both by
a double derivation, see רֽוס and רֽבס.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[356:1134](1090096.htm#fr_1133) <span
id="xix.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p18"></span> [Isa. xxx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001)<span id="xix.v-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[356:1135](1090096.htm#fr_1134) <span
id="xix.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p19"></span> So LXX. E.V., *They have set up kings, but
not by Me; they have made princes, and I knew it not*; which is more
exact. Βασιλεύω, however, is used by the LXX. for “to make one king.”

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[356:1136](1090096.htm#fr_1135) <span
id="xix.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p20"></span> [Hos. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004)<span id="xix.v-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[356:1137](1090096.htm#fr_1136) <span
id="xix.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p22"></span> This clause is not in our text.

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[356:1138](1090096.htm#fr_1137) <span
id="xix.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p23"></span> From the additions to the <span
id="xix.v-p23.1"></span>Book of Esther, in the Apocrypha, ch. xiv. 2, 3,
13.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[356:1139](1090096.htm#fr_1138) <span
id="xix.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p24"></span> Sav. and M. om. For.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[357:1140](1090096.htm#fr_1139) <span
id="xix.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p25"></span> The imperial armature is here compared not
with the Ecclesiastical dress, but with the spiritual armour, which the
Church has somewhat differently, according to her discretion,
represented by outward forms. What is applied by St. Paul to the
individual Christian is here used specially of one who represents our
Lord in authority as well as in person. Compare on the breastplate,
[Exod. 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#015), [Isa.
59:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#007)<span id="xix.v-p25.1"></span>; on
the girdle, [Exod. 28:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040), [Isa.
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#005), [Rev.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013), [Eph.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014)<span id="xix.v-p25.2"></span>; on
the sandals, [Isa. 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007), [Eph.
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#015)<span id="xix.v-p25.3"></span>; on
the sword, [Heb. 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012), [Eph.
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017)<span id="xix.v-p25.4"></span>; on
the crown, [Exod. 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#006), [Eph.
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017)<span id="xix.v-p25.5"></span>;
see also *Fabr. Ag*. ii. 34 (*Græv. Thes*. viii. p. 2095). Martene *de
Ant. Eccl. Rit*. l. i. c. 4, art. 1, sec. 12; Durand. *Rat*. *Div. Off*.
lib. 3.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[357:1141](1090096.htm#fr_1140) <span
id="xix.v-p25.6"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p26"></span> See on [Rom. viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)<span id="xix.v-p26.1"></span>; Hom.
XIV. Mor., where the shoes are especially noticed as a part of imperial
magnificence.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[357:1142](1090096.htm#fr_1141) <span
id="xix.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p27"></span> μεἴζων ἡ παῤῥησία, lit. “greater the
boldness of speech,” but the context seems to give this meaning.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[357:1143](1090096.htm#fr_1142) <span
id="xix.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p28"></span> *i.e*., than those belonging to an emperor.
See Const. *Ap*. ii. 34, and note 11 of Cotelerius, p. 247.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[357:1144](1090096.htm#fr_1143) <span
id="xix.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p30"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="xix.v-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[357:1145](1090096.htm#fr_1144) <span
id="xix.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p31"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#006)<span id="xix.v-p31.1"></span>. St.
Chrys. *ad loc*. Hom. IV. explains *first*, “before any other person.”
Hammond’s interpretation “labouring first,” requires a different order
in the Greek.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[357:1146](1090096.htm#fr_1145) <span
id="xix.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p32"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="xix.v-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[357:1147](1090096.htm#fr_1146) <span
id="xix.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p34"></span> See *Fabr. Agon*. iii. 1, where St.
Chrysostom’s interpretation on the passage (Hom. IV. *in Ep. ad Tim*.)
is shown to be correct. Galen. Com. 1, *ad Aph*. xviii. fol. 45, is
cited. “And they that contend by rule (or *strive lawfully*) eat only
bread for breakfast and meat for dinner.” There were other rules for the
contest itself. See Hammond on [1 Cor.
ix.](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#000)<span id="xix.v-p34.1"></span>
notes f and g.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[357:1148](1090096.htm#fr_1147) <span
id="xix.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p35"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#005)<span id="xix.v-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[357:1149](1090096.htm#fr_1148) <span
id="xix.v-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p36"></span> [Luke xviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#012)<span id="xix.v-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[358:1150](1090096.htm#fr_1149) <span
id="xix.v-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p37"></span> [Jonah iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010)<span id="xix.v-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[358:1151](1090096.htm#fr_1150) <span
id="xix.v-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p38"></span> [Isa.
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007), [1 Cor.
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026)<span id="xix.v-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[358:1152](1090096.htm#fr_1151) <span
id="xix.v-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p40"></span> [Jonah iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#007)<span id="xix.v-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[358:1153](1090096.htm#fr_1152) <span
id="xix.v-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p41"></span> [Joel i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#017)<span id="xix.v-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[358:1154](1090096.htm#fr_1153) <span
id="xix.v-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p42"></span> [Jer. xiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#005)<span id="xix.v-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[358:1155](1090096.htm#fr_1154) <span
id="xix.v-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p43"></span> [Joel ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#016)<span id="xix.v-p43.1"></span>. This
passage of scripture is read for the epistle in the service of our
Church on Ash Wednesday as it also stands in the Roman Missal, it is
read in the Greek Church on the same day. Ash Wednesday was not,
however, constituted the first day of Lent till a later period, see
Bingham, vol. vi. p. 456, b. xxi., c. 1, sec. 5. This Homily seems to
have been preached on Quinquagesima Sunday, called by the Greeks,
κυριακὴ τῆς ‡ποκρ™ου \[Lat. *carnelevale*, or in *dimissione carnium*,
hence carnival\] as the next is τῆς τυροφ€γου (›βδ), denoting degrees of
abstinence. See note near the end of the next Homily.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[358:1156](1090096.htm#fr_1155) <span
id="xix.v-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p45"></span> διὰ τὴν νηστείαν, with the article it is
“the Fast,” or here Lent, without it “fasting.”

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[358:1157](1090096.htm#fr_1156) <span
id="xix.v-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p46"></span> [Jonah iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010)<span id="xix.v-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[359:1158](1090096.htm#fr_1157) <span
id="xix.v-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p48"></span> μηδ™ποτε. This shows he did not mean only a
temporary abstinence from sin, but a discipline to cure us of it for the
future.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[359:1159](1090096.htm#fr_1158) <span
id="xix.v-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p49"></span> E.V., *raise* Heb. אשת. [Exod. xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001)<span id="xix.v-p49.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[359:1160](1090096.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="xix.v-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p51"></span> It would seem from this passage that not
even the use of fish was then allowed during the season of Lent. On the
strictness of the ancient fasts, consult Bingham, vol. 7. p. 208, new
ed. Tr. (The like is now practiced in the Greek Church. Smith’s Account
of G.C., p. 35, and reports of recent travellers.)

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[359:1161](1090096.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="xix.v-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p52"></span> [Gal. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)<span id="xix.v-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[359:1162](1090096.htm#fr_1161) <span
id="xix.v-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p53"></span> 1st reason.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[359:1163](1090096.htm#fr_1162) <span
id="xix.v-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p54"></span> 2nd reason.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[359:1164](1090096.htm#fr_1163) <span
id="xix.v-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p55"></span> 3rd reason.

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[359:1165](1090096.htm#fr_1164) <span
id="xix.v-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p57"></span> πρ€γματα πλ™ξας.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[359:1166](1090096.htm#fr_1165) <span
id="xix.v-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p58"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021)<span id="xix.v-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[360:1167](1090096.htm#fr_1166) <span
id="xix.v-p58.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p59"></span> δυσαρ™στως žχοντας.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[360:1168](1090096.htm#fr_1167) <span
id="xix.v-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p60"></span> This passage is erroneously quoted by
Montfaucon, *Synops. Diatr*. l. t. 13, p. 179, as if it spoke of
confessing one’s own sins privately. St. Chrysostom certainly did not
regard this as necessary. The original practice was a public confession
of crimes. Private confession was at first subservient to this. See
Bingham, b. xv. c. 8, sec. 6; xviii. c. 3, secs. 2, 7, 8; Socr. v. 19;
Soz. vii. 16.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[360:1169](1090096.htm#fr_1168) <span
id="xix.v-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p62"></span> [Ps. ci.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005)<span id="xix.v-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[360:1170](1090096.htm#fr_1169) <span
id="xix.v-p62.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p63"></span> Punct. Sav.

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[360:1171](1090096.htm#fr_1170) <span
id="xix.v-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p65"></span> οὐ μὴ is used thus with the future
indicative at least in the third person. See Kühner, *Gr. Gram*. 779, 2
*Œd. Col*. 176.

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[360:1172](1090096.htm#fr_1171) <span
id="xix.v-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p66"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
19.10](../../../bib/apo/sir019.htm#010)<span id="xix.v-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[361:1173](1090096.htm#fr_1172) <span
id="xix.v-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p68"></span> [Matt. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)<span id="xix.v-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[361:1174](1090096.htm#fr_1173) <span
id="xix.v-p68.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p69"></span> [Matt.
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#018)<span id="xix.v-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[361:1175](1090096.htm#fr_1174) <span
id="xix.v-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p71"></span> The Emperor.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[361:1176](1090096.htm#fr_1175) <span
id="xix.v-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p72"></span> The two capitals of Antioch and
Constantinople were separated by the distance of 800 miles. See Gibbon,
c. 27.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[361:1177](1090096.htm#fr_1176) <span
id="xix.v-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p73"></span> He clearly means the same persons. See Soz.
vii. 23. This might be pleaded as an excuse where demoniacal possession
was a commonly acknowledged fact.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[361:1178](1090096.htm#fr_1177) <span
id="xix.v-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p74"></span> He probably refers to a tax which had been
imposed on the citizens to defray the expenses of celebrating the 10th
year of Theodosius, whose treasury was exhausted by the late war with
the Goths. (Sozomen and Theodoret mistake the date. See Pref. Ed.) See
Gibbon, c. 27.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[361:1179](1090096.htm#fr_1178) <span
id="xix.v-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p75"></span> τὸ β€ραθρον. Xen. Hell. i. 7, 21, seems to
imply that criminals at Athens were first put to death, and then thrown
into the Barathrum. But they were sometimes thrown in alive, to be
killed by the fall. The places so called may have differed both in
nature and in use.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[362:1180](1090096.htm#fr_1179) <span
id="xix.v-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p77"></span> οὐσίας.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[362:1181](1090096.htm#fr_1180) <span
id="xix.v-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p78"></span> [Ps. cvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002)<span id="xix.v-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[362:1182](1090096.htm#fr_1181) <span
id="xix.v-p78.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p79"></span> Some add ὅταν καταβ€λλῃς, lit. “when thou
throwest him down;” it may have some special meaning. See on [Rom. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#018)<span id="xix.v-p79.1"></span>, Hom.
XI. Comp. [Ja. iii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#009)<span
id="xix.v-p79.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[362:1183](1090096.htm#fr_1182) <span
id="xix.v-p79.3"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p80"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007)<span id="xix.v-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[362:1184](1090096.htm#fr_1183) <span
id="xix.v-p80.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p81"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="xix.v-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[362:1185](1090096.htm#fr_1184) <span
id="xix.v-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p83"></span> λιτανεῦσαι.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[362:1186](1090096.htm#fr_1185) <span
id="xix.v-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p84"></span> Sav. and M. “the change that of our whole
life:” the Greek reads best so.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[362:1187](1090096.htm#fr_1186) <span
id="xix.v-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p86"></span> προθεσμίαν.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[363:1188](1090096.htm#fr_1187) <span
id="xix.v-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p87"></span> [Gen. xlii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#021)<span id="xix.v-p87.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily IV](1090097)
