[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090014)  [Next](1090016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xiii-p1.2"></span>.—*His Theology and Exegesis.*</span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p2"></span>Chrysostom belonged to the Antiochian
school of theology and exegesis, and is its soundest and most popular
representative. It was founded by his teacher Diodor of Tarsus (d. 393),
developed by himself and his fellow-student Theodore of Mopsuestia (d.
429), and followed by Theodoret and the Syrian and Nestorian divines.
Theodore was the exegete, Chrysostom the homilist, Theodoret the
annotator. The school was afterwards condemned for its alleged
connection with the Nestorian heresy; but that connection was
accidental, not necessary. Chrysostom’s mind was not given to
dogmatizing, and too well balanced to run into heresy.

<span id="iii.xiii-p3"></span>The Antiochian school agreed with the
Alexandrian school founded by Origen, in maintaining the divine
inspiration and authority of the Scriptures, but differed from it in the
method of interpretation, and in a sharper distinction between the Old
and the New Testaments, and the divine and human elements in the same.

<span id="iii.xiii-p4"></span>To Origen belongs the great merit of
having opened the path of biblical science and criticism, but he gave
the widest scope to the allegorizing and mystical method by which the
Bible may be made to say anything that is pious and edifying. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) Philo of Alexandria had used that method
for introducing the Platonic philosophy into the Mosaic writings. Origen
was likewise a Platonist, but his chief object was to remove all that
was offensive in the literal sense. The allegorical method is imposition
rather than exposition. Christ sanctions parabolic teaching and typical,
but not allegorical, interpretation. Paul uses it once or twice, but
only incidentally, when arguing from the rabbinical standpoint.

<span id="iii.xiii-p6"></span>The Antiochian school seeks to explain the
obvious grammatical and historical sense, which is rich enough for all
purposes of instruction and edification. It takes out of the Word what
is actually in it, instead of putting into it all sorts of foreign
notions and fancies.

<span id="iii.xiii-p7"></span>Chrysostom recognizes allegorizing in
theory, but seldom uses it in practice, and then more by way of
rhetorical ornament and in deference to custom. He was generally guided
by sound common sense and practical wisdom. He was more free from
arbitrary and absurd interpretations than almost any other patristic
commentator. He pays proper attention to the connection, and puts
himself into the psychological state and historical situation of the
writer. In one word, he comes very near to what we now call the
grammatico-historical exegesis. This is the only solid and sound
foundation for any legitimate use of the Scriptures. The sacred writers
had one definite object in view; they wished to convey one particular
sense by the ordinary use of language, and to be clearly understood by
their readers. At the <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="iii.xiii-Page_19"></span>same time the truths of revelation are so
deep and so rich that they can be indefinitely expanded and applied to
all circumstances and conditions. Interpretation is one thing,
application is another thing. Chrysostom knew as well as any allegorist
how to derive spiritual nourishment from the Scriptures and to make them
“profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete, thoroughly
furnished unto every good work.” <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) As
to the text of the Greek Testament, he is the chief witness of the
Syro-Constantinopolitan recension, which was followed by the later Greek
Fathers. <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) He accepts the Syrian
canon of the Peshito, which includes the Old Testament with the
Apocrypha, but omits from the New Testament the Apocalypse and four
Catholic Epistles (2 Peter, 2 and 3 John, and Jude); at least in the
*Synopsis Veteris et novi Testamenti* which is found in his works, those
five books are wanting, but this does not prove that he did not know
them. <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md)

<span id="iii.xiii-p11"></span>The commentaries of Chrysostom are of
unequal merit. We must always remember that he is a homiletical
commentator who aimed at the conversion and edification of his hearers.
He makes frequent digressions and neglects to explain the difficulties
of important texts. Grammatical remarks are rare, but noteworthy on
account of his familiarity with the Greek as his mother tongue, though
by no means coming up to the accuracy of a modern expert in philology.
In the Old Testament he depended altogether on the Septuagint, being
ignorant of Hebrew, and often missed the mark. The Homilies on the
Pauline Epistles are considered his best, especially those to the
Corinthians, where he had to deal with moral and pastoral questions. The
doctrinal topics of Romans and Galatians were less to his taste, and it
cannot be said that he entered into the depths of Paul’s doctrines of
sin and grace, or ascended the height of his conception of freedom in
Christ. His Homilies on Romans are argumentative; his continuous notes
on Galatians somewhat hasty and superficial. The eighty Homilies on
Matthew from his Antiochian period are very valuable. Thomas Aquinas
declared he would rather possess them than be the master of all Paris.
The eighty-eight Homilies on John, also preached at Antioch, but to a
select audience early in the morning, are more doctrinal and
controversial, being directed against the Anomœans (Arians). <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) We have no commentaries from him on Mark
and Luke, nor on the Catholic Epistles and the Apocalypse. The
fifty-five homilies on the Acts, delivered at Constantinople between
Easter and Whitsuntide, when that book was read in the public lessons,
contain much interesting information about the manners and customs of
the age, but are the least polished of his productions. Erasmus, who
translated them into Latin, doubted their genuineness. His life in
Constantinople was too much disturbed to leave him quiet leisure for
preparation. The Homilies on the Hebrews, likewise preached in
Constantinople, were published after his death from notes of his friend,
the presbyter Constantine, and the text is in a confused state.

<span id="iii.xiii-p13"></span>The Homilies of Chrysostom were a rich
storehouse for the Greek commentators, compilers and epitomizers, such
as Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, and Euthymius Zigabenus, and they
are worth consulting to this day for their exegetical as well as their
practical value.

<span id="iii.xiii-p14"></span>The theology of Chrysostom must be
gathered chiefly from his commentaries. He differs from the metaphysical
divines of the Nicene age by his predominantly practical ten<span
id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="iii.xiii-Page_20"></span>dency, and
in this respect he approaches the genius of the Western church. He lived
between the great trinitarian and christological controversies and was
only involved incidentally in the subordinate Origenistic controversy,
in which he showed a charitable and liberal spirit. He accepted the
Nicene Creed, but he died before the rise of the Nestorian and Eutychian
heresies. Speculation was not his forte, and as a thinker he is behind
Athanasius, Gregory of Nyssa, and John of Damascus. He was a rhetorician
rather than a logician.

<span id="iii.xiii-p15"></span>Like all the Greek fathers, he laid great
stress on free-will and the cooperation of the human will with divine
grace in the work of conversion. Cassian, the founder of
Semi-Pelagianism, was his pupil and appealed to his authority. Julian of
Eclanum, the ablest opponent of Augustin, quoted Chrysostom against
original sin; Augustin tried from several passages to prove the reverse,
but could only show that Chrysostom was no Pelagian. We may say that in
tendency and spirit he was a catholic Semi-Pelagian or Synergist before
Semi-Pelagianism was brought into a system.

<span id="iii.xiii-p16"></span>His anthropology forms a wholesome
contrast and supplement to the anthropology of his younger contemporary,
the great bishop of Hippo, the champion of the slavery of the human will
and the sovereignty of divine grace.

<span id="iii.xiii-p17"></span>We look in vain in Chrysostom’s writings
for the Augustinian and Calvinistic doctrines of absolute
predestination, total depravity, hereditary guilt, irresistible grace,
perseverance of saints, or for the Lutheran theory of forensic and
solifidian justification. He teaches that God foreordained all men to
holiness and salvation, and that Christ died for all and is both willing
and able to save all, but not against their will and without their free
consent. The vessels of mercy were prepared by God unto glory, the
vessels of wrath were not intended by God, but fitted by their own sin,
for destruction. The will of man, though injured by the Fall, has still
the power to accept or to reject the offer of salvation. It must first
obey the divine call. “When we have begun,” he says, in commenting on
[John i. 38](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#038.md)<span
id="iii.xiii-p17.1"></span>, “when we have sent our will before, then
God gives us abundant opportunities of salvation.” God helps those who
help themselves. “When God,” he says, “sees us eagerly prepare for the
contest of virtue, he instantly supplies us with his assistance,
lightens our labors and strengthens the weakness of our nature.” Faith
and good works are necessary conditions of justification and salvation,
though Christ’s merits alone are the efficient cause. He remarks on
[John vi. 44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044.md)<span
id="iii.xiii-p17.2"></span>, that while no man can come to Christ unless
drawn and taught by the Father, there is no excuse for those who are
unwilling to be thus drawn and taught. Yet on the other hand he fully
admits the necessity of divine grace at the very beginning of every good
action. “We can do no good thing at all,” he says, “except we are aided
from above.” And in his dying hour he gave glory to God “for all
things.”

<span id="iii.xiii-p18"></span>Thus Augustinians and Semi-Pelagians,
Calvinists and Arminians, widely as they differ in theory about human
freedom and divine sovereignty, meet in the common feeling of personal
responsibility and absolute dependence on God. With one voice they
disclaim all merit of their own and give all glory to Him who is the
giver of every good and perfect gift and works in us “both to will and
to work, for his good pleasure” ([Phil. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.xiii-p18.1"></span>). <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md)

<span id="iii.xiii-p20"></span><span id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span
id="iii.xiii-Page_21"></span>As to the doctrines which separate the
Greek, Roman and Protestant churches, Chrysostom faithfully represents
the Greek Catholic church prior to the separation from Rome. In addition
to the œcumenical doctrines of the Nicene Creed, he expresses strong
views on baptismal regeneration, the real presence, and the eucharistic
sacrifice, yet without a clearly defined theory, which was the result of
later controversies; hence it would be unjust to press his devotional
and rhetorical language into the service of transubstantiation, or
consubstantiation, or the Roman view of the mass. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md)

<span id="iii.xiii-p22"></span>His extravagant laudations of saints and
martyrs promoted that refined form of idolatry which in the Nicene age
began to take the place of the heathen hero-worship. But it is all the
more remarkable that he furnishes no support to Mariolatry, which soon
after his death triumphed in the Greek as well as the Latin church. He
was far from the idea of the sinless perfection and immaculate
conception of the Virgin Mary. He attributes her conduct at the wedding
of Cana ([John 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004)<span id="iii.xiii-p22.1"></span>.md)
to undue haste, a sort of unholy ambition for the premature display of
the miraculous power of her Son; and in commenting on [Matthew xii.
46-49](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#046.md)<span
id="iii.xiii-p22.2"></span>, he charges her and his brethren with vanity
and a carnal mind. <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) He does not use
the term *theotokos*, which twenty years after his death gave rise to
the Nestorian controversy, and which was endorsed by the third and
fourth œcumenical councils.

<span id="iii.xiii-p24"></span>As to the question of the papacy he
considered the bishop of Rome as the successor of Peter, the prince of
the Apostles, and appealed to him in his exile against the unjust
condemnation of the Council at the Oak. Such appeals furnished the popes
with a welcome opportunity to act as judges in the controversies of the
Eastern church, and greatly strengthened their claims. But his Epistle
to Innocent was addressed also to the bishops of Milan and Aquileia, and
falls far short of the language of submission to an infallible
authority. He conceded to the pope merely a primacy of honor (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii-p24.1"></span>προστασία, ‡ρχή</span>),
not a supremacy of jurisdiction. He calls the bishop of Antioch
(Ignatius and Flavian) likewise a successor of Peter, who labored there
according to the express testimony of Paul. In commenting on [Gal. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xiii-p24.2"></span>,
he represents Paul as equal in dignity (¸<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii-p24.3"></span>σότιμος</span>) to Peter. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) He was free from jealousy of Rome, but
had he lived during the violent controversies between the patriarch of
new Rome and the pope of old Rome, it is not doubtful on which side he
would have stood.

<span id="iii.xiii-p26"></span>In one important point Chrysostom
approaches the evangelical theology of the Reformation, his devotion to
the Holy Scriptures as the only rule of faith. “There is no topic on
which he dwells more frequently and earnestly than on the duty of every
Christian man and woman to study the Bible: and what he bade others do,
that he did pre-eminently him<span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span
id="iii.xiii-Page_22"></span>self.” <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md)
He deemed the reading of the Bible the best means for the promotion of
Christian life. A Christian without the knowledge of the Scriptures is
to him a workman without tools. Even the sight of the Bible deters from
sin, how much more the reading. It purifies and consecrates the soul, it
introduces it into the holy of holies and brings it into direct
communion with God. <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[18:26](1090015.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p5"></span> Allegorical interpretation makes the
writer say something else than what he meant, ˆλλο μšν ‡γορεύει, ˆλλο δš
νοει.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[19:27](1090015.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p8"></span> On the school of Antioch, see <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.xiii-p8.1"></span> Schaff</span>, *Church
Hist*. II. 816–818; III. 612, 707, 937; <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.xiii-p8.2"></span>Neander</span>, *Chrysost*. I. 35 sqq.; <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.xiii-p8.3"></span>Förster</span>,
*Chrysostomus in seinem Verhältniss zur Antioch*. *Schule* (1869); <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.xiii-p8.4"></span>Reuss</span>, *Geschichte
des N. T*., 6th ed. (1887), secs. 320, 518, 521; <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.xiii-p8.5"></span>Farrar</span>, *History of Interpretation*
(1886), pp. 210 sqq., 220 sqq. Ruess pays this tribute to Chrysostom (p.
593): “The Christian people of ancient times never enjoyed richer
instruction out of the Bible than from the golden mouth of a genuine and
thoroughly equipped biblical preacher.” Farrar calls Chrysostom “The
ablest of Christian homilists and one of the best Christian men,” and
“the bright consummate flower of the school of Antioch.”

<span id="fn_27"></span>[19:28](1090015.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p8.6"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p9"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.xiii-p9.1"></span>Westcott & Hort</span>, *Gr. Test*., II. 141
sqq.; <span class="c12"><span id="iii.xiii-p9.2"></span>Schaff</span>,
*Companion to the Greek Test*. (3rd ed.), p. 206.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[19:29](1090015.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p10"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.xiii-p10.1"></span>Ruess</span>, *l. c*. sec. 320 (p. 359);
<span class="c12"><span id="iii.xiii-p10.2"></span>Holtzmann</span>,
*Einleitung ins N.T*., ed. II. (1886), p. 171.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[19:30](1090015.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p12"></span> So called because they taught that the
Son is *unlike* or *dissimilar* (‡νόμοιος) to the Father and of a
*different* substance, in opposition to the Nicene doctrine of *equal*
substance (ὁμοουσία), and the semi-Arian doctrine of *like*, or
*similar* substance (ὁμοιουσία).

<span id="fn_30"></span>[20:31](1090015.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p19"></span> I add the remarks of <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.xiii-p19.1"></span>Stephens</span> on the
difference between Chrysostom and Augustin (p. 430): “Unquestionable as
the intellectual genius of Chrysostom was, yet it is rather in the
purity of his moral character, his single-minded boldness of purpose,
and the glowing piety which burns through all his writings, that we find
the secret of his influence. If it was rather the mission of Augustin to
mould the minds of men so as to take a firm grasp of certain great
doctrines, it was the mission of Chrysostom to inflame the whole heart
with a fervent love of God. Rightly has he been called the great teacher
of consummate holiness, as Augustin was the great teacher of efficient
grace; rightly has it been remarked that, like Fénélon, he is to be
ranked among those who may be termed disciples of St. John, men who seem
to have been pious without intermission from their childhood upwards,
and of whose piety the leading characteristics are ease, cheerfulness
and elevation; while Augustin belongs to the disciples of St. Paul,
those who have been converted from error to truth, or from sin to
holiness, and whose characteristics are gravity , earnestness, depth. If
Augustin has done more valuable service in building up the church at
large, Chrysostom is the more lovable to the individual, and speaks out
of a heart overflowing to God and man, unconstrained by the fetters of a
severe and rigid system. Yet it is precisely on this account that he has
not been so generally appreciated as he deserves. His tone is too
catholic for the Romanist, or for the sectarian partisan of any
denomination. ‘It would be easy to produce abundant instances of his
oratorial abilities; I wish it were in my power to record as many of his
evangelical excellencies.’ Such is the verdict of a narrow-minded
historian \[Milner\], and the comparative estimation in which he held
St. Augustin and St. Chrysostom may be inferred from the number of pages
in his History given to each: St. Augustin is favored with 187,
Chrysostom with 20. But he whose judgment is not cramped by the shackles
of some harsh and stiff theory of gospel truth will surely allow that
Chrysostom not only preached the gospel, but lived it. To the last
moment of his life he exhibited that calm, cheerful faith, that patient
resignation under affliction, and untiring perseverance for the good of
others, which are preeminently the marks of a Christian saint. The cause
for which he fought and died in a corrupt age was the cause of Christian
holiness.”

<span id="fn_31"></span>[21:32](1090015.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p21"></span> In his comments on [Heb. ix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.xiii-p21.1"></span>
(Hom. XVII. on Hebrews, in the Bened. ed. XII. 241 sq.; in the Oxford
translation, p. 213), he expresses himself on the sacrificial aspect of
the eucharist in these words: “Christ is our High Priest, who offered
the sacrifice that cleanses us. That sacrifice we offer now also, which
was then offered, which cannot be exhausted. This is done in remembrance
of what was then done. For, saith He, ‘Do this in remembrance of Me.’ It
is not another sacrifice that we make (ποιοῦμεν), as the High Priest of
old, but always the same, or rather we perform a remembrance of a
sacrifice (μ‚λλον δš ‡ν€μνησιν ἐργαζόμεθα θυσίας).” The word
*remembrance* would favor the Protestant rather than the Roman view,
which demands an actual, though unbloody, repetition of the sacrifice of
the cross in the mass. Other passages, however, are much stronger,
though highly rhetorical, *e.g*., *De Sacerd*. III. 4: “When you behold
the Lord slain, and lying there, and the priest standing over the
sacrifice and praying, and all stained with that precious blood, do you
then suppose you are among men, and standing upon earth? Are you not
immediately transported to Heaven?” In another place he says, “Christ
lies slain (τεθυμ™νος) upon the altar.” And yet the people were so
indifferent that Chrysostom laments: “In vain is the daily sacrifice, in
vain stand we at the altar; there is no one to take part” (Third Hom. on
Ephesians).

<span id="fn_32"></span>[21:33](1090015.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p23"></span> See his 21st Homily on John, and his
44th Homily on Matthew. Comp. <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.xiii-p23.1"></span>Stephens</span>, p. 417 sqq.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[21:34](1090015.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p25"></span> See his letter to Innocent I. and his
comments on [Gal. i.](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.xiii-p25.1"></span> and ii. The passages of Chrysostom on Peter
and his successors are collected in <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.xiii-p25.2"></span>Berington & Kirk</span>, *The Faith of
Catholics*, ed. 3, vol. II. 32–35, 80, but the important passage from
his Commentary on Galatians is omitted. See <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.xiii-p25.3"></span>Treat</span>, *The Catholic Faith* (1888), p.
396.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[22:35](1090015.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p27"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.xiii-p27.1"></span>Stephens</span>, p. 422.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[22:36](1090015.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p28"></span> Comp. the rich extracts from his
writings bearing on the Bible, in <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.xiii-p28.1"></span>Neander</span>, I. 211–226.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chrysostom as a Preacher.](1090016.md)
