[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1090004)  [Next](1090006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III</span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iii-p1.2"></span>.—*His Conversion and Ascetic Life.*</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>The quiet study of the Scriptures, the
example of his pious mother, the acquaintance with Bishop Meletius, and
the influence of his intimate friend Basil, who was of the same age and
devoted to ascetic life, combined to produce a gradual change in his
character. <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md)

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span>He entered the class of catechumens, and
after the usual period of three years of instruction and probation, he
was baptized by Meletius in his twenty-third year (369 or 370). From
this time on, says Palladius, “he neither swore, nor defamed any one,
nor spoke falsely, nor cursed, nor even tolerated facetious jokes.” His
baptism was, as in the case of St. Augustin, the turning point in his
life, an entire renunciation of this world and dedication to the service
of Christ. The change was radical and permanent.

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span>Meletius, who foresaw the future greatness
of the young lawyer, wished to secure him for <span id="page_7">p.
7</span> <span id="iii.iii-Page_7"></span>the active service of the
church, and ordained him to the subordinate office of rector
(*anagnostes*, reader), about A.D. 370. The rectors had to read the
Scripture lessons in the first part of divine service (the “Missa
Catechumenorum”), and to call upon the people to pray, but could not
preach nor distribute the sacraments.

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>The first inclination of Chrysostom after
baptism was to adopt the monastic life as the safest mode, according to
the prevailing notions of the church in that age, to escape the
temptations and corruptions of the world, to cultivate holiness and to
secure the salvation of the soul. But the earnest entreaties of his
mother prevailed on him to delay the gratification of his desire. He
relates the scene with dramatic power. She took him to her chamber, and
by the bed where she had given him birth, she adjured him with tears not
to forsake her. “My son,” she said in substance, “my only comfort in the
midst of the miseries of this earthly life is to see thee constantly,
and to behold in thy features the faithful image of my beloved husband
who is no more. This comfort commenced with your infancy before you
could speak. I ask only one favor from you: do not make me a widow a
second time; wait at least till I die; perhaps I shall soon leave this
world. When you have buried me and joined my ashes with those of your
father, nothing will then prevent you from retiring into monastic life.
But as long as I breathe, support me by your presence, and do not draw
down upon you the wrath of God by bringing such evils upon me who have
given you no offense.” <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md)

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span>These tender, simple and impressive words
suggest many heart-rending scenes caused by the ascetic enthusiasm for
separation from the sacred ties of the family. It is honorable to
Chrysostom that he yielded to the reasonable wishes of his devoted
mother. He remained at home, but turned his home into a monastery. He
secluded himself from the world and practiced a rigid asceticism. He ate
little and seldom, and only the plainest food, slept on the bare floor
and frequently rose to prayer. He kept almost unbroken silence to
prevent a relapse into the habit of slander.

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span>His former associates at the bar called him
unsociable and morose. But two of his fellow-pupils under Libanius
joined him in his ascetic life, Maximus (afterwards bishop of Seleucia),
and Theodore of Mopsuestia. They studied the Scriptures under the
direction of Diodorus (afterwards bishop of Tarsus), the founder of the
Antiochian school of theology, of which Chrysostom and Theodore became
the chief ornaments. <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md)

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span>Theodore was warmly attached to a young
lady named Hermione, and resolved to marry and to leave the ascetic
brotherhood. This gave rise to the earliest treatise of
Chrysostom—namely, an exhortation to Theodore, in two letters. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) He plied all his oratorical arts of sad
sympathy, tender entreaty, bitter reproach, and terrible warning, to
reclaim his friend to what he thought the surest and safest way to
heaven. To sin, he says, is human, but to persist in sin is devilish; to
fall is not ruinous to the soul, but to remain on the ground is. The
appeal had its desired effect; Theodore resumed his monastic life and
became afterwards bishop of Mopsuestia in Cilicia and one of the first
biblical scholars. The arguments which Chrysostom used, would condemn
all who broke their monastic vows. They retain moral force only if we
substitute apostasy from faith for apostasy from monasticism, which must
be regarded as a temporary and abnormal or exceptional form of Christian
life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[6:5](1090005.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.iii-p3.1"></span>Socrates</span> and <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.iii-p3.2"></span> Kurtz</span> (in the 10th edition of his
*Kirchengeschichte*, I. 223), confound this Basil with Basil the Great
of Cappadocia, who was eighteen years older than Chrysostom and died in
379. Chrysostom’s friend was probably (as Baronius and Montfaucon
conjecture) identical with Basil, bishop of Raphanea in Syria, near
Antioch, who attended the Council of Constantinople in 381. Comp. <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.iii-p3.3"></span>Stephens</span>, *l. c.* p.
14; and <span class="c12"><span id="iii.iii-p3.4"></span>Venables</span>
in *Smith & Wace*, I. 297.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[7:6](1090005.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span> *De Sacerd*. I. 5.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7:7](1090005.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span> Socrates and Sozomenus represent Diodor
and Karterius as abbots under whom Chrysostom lived as monk, but <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.iii-p10.1"></span> Neander</span> (in the 3d
ed. I. 29) thinks it more likely that Chrysostom was previously
instructed by Diodor at Antioch.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[7:8](1090005.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p12"></span> *Parænesis ad Theodorum Lapsum*, in <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.iii-p12.1"></span> Migne’s</span> ed. I., Pars
I. 277–319. The second letter is milder than the first, and was written
earlier. It is somewhat doubtful whether the first refers to the same
case. <span class="c12"><span id="iii.iii-p12.2"></span>Neander</span>
(I. 38 sq.) conjectures that the second only is addressed to Theodore.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chrysostom Evades Election to a Bishopric, and Writes His Work on
the Priesthood.](1090006.md)
