[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku06)  [Next](tku08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

1\. THE Ancient One is hidden and concealed; the Microprosopus is
manifested, and is not manifested.

\[The "Ancient One" is Kether. Eheieh, Macroprosopus, the Vast
Countenance. See introduction, §§, 42, 77.\]

2\. When he is manifested, he is symbolized by the letters (in the
ordinary form in which the Tetragrammaton is written).

3\. When he is concealed, he is hidden by the letters which are not
disposed according (to the proper order) of the letters, or (according
to another reading of this passage) in their proper place; because also
in him their superiors and inferiors are not rightly disposed (because
of the disturbed transpositions).

4\. In Gen. i. 24 it is written: "The earth brought forth the living
creature after its kind, cattle and reptile," &c. Hereunto belongeth
that which is written, Ps. xxxv. 7: "O Lord, thou shalt preserve both
man and beast."

5\. The one is contained under the general meaning of the other, and
also the beast under the general idea of the man (on account of the
mystery of the revolution of the soul).

6\. (And hereunto pertaineth that passage) Levit. i. 2: "When a man
shall bring *from among you* an offering unto the Lord, &c. Ye shall
offer, &c." Because animals are included under the generic term man.

7\. When the inferior man descendeth (into this world), like unto the
supernal form (in himself), there are found two spirits. (So that) man
is formed from two sides--from the right and from the left.

8\. With respect unto the right side he had NShMThA QDIShA, *Neschamotha
Qadisha*, the holy intelligences; with

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

respect unto the left side, NPSh ChIH, *Nephesh Chiah*, the animal soul.

\[These answer to the right and left pillars of the Sephiroth. See
Introduction.\]

9\. Man sinned and was expanded on the left side; and then they who are
formless were expanded also. (That is those spirits of matter, who
received dominion in the inferior paths of the soul of Adam, whence
arose base concupiscence.) When (therefore) both were at once joined
together (namely by base concupiscence, together with connexion, and the
animal soul) generations took place, like as from some animal which
generateth many lives in one connexion.

10\. (There are given) twenty-two letters hidden and twenty-two letters
manifested (which are the symbols of those sublime forms).

11\. (The one) *Yod* is concealed; the other is manifested. (The one is
the understanding or mother, the other is the kingdom or queen; so that
at the same time it looketh back to the superior paths.) But that which
is hidden and that which is manifest are balanced in the equilibrium of
forms. (That is, masculine and feminine; the one, the father and the
mother; the other, the foundation and the queen; meaning principally the
female idea, which includeth form and receptacle.)

12\. Out of *Yod* are produced male and female (if, namely, it be fully
written as IVD, Yod, they are then its augment), *Vau* and *Daleth*. In
this position *Vau* is male, and *Daleth* is female. And hence arise DV,
the two letters which are the duad male and female; and not only the
duad, but also the co-equal duads (of the superior and inferior
conjunctions).

13\. *Yod* by itself is male (the father); *He*, female (the mother).

14\. H, *He*, at first was D, *Daleth*; but after it was impregnated by
I, *Yod* (so that thence it might produce the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

form H--namely the I, *Yod*, placed at the left hand lower part of
Daleth) it brought forth V, *Vau*. (That is, the mother impregnated by
the father produced Microprosopus. But in the shape of the letter out of
that minute I, *Yod*, which is hidden within the H, *He*, V, *Vau*, is
said to be formed. Or from the upper horizontal line of the letter H,
which is one V, *Vau*, and from the right-hand vertical line, which is
another V, *Vau*, and from the inserted I, *Yod*, is made VIV, the full
form of letter *Vau*.)

\[This is again referring to the *shape* of the letter. See Table of the
Alphabet for Hebrew form.\]

15\. Whence it is plain that in the letter H, *He*, are hidden the
letters D, *Daleth*, V, *Vau*; and in IVD, *Yod*, is hidden H: whence
are formed IHV. Therefore it appeareth that IVD in its own form
containeth IHV, whensoever it is fully written by IVD, which are male
and female (namely I, *Yod*, male, and V, *Vau*, D, *Daleth*, in the
form, H, *He*, female); hence is compounded (the son, who is) V, *Vau*,
and who overshadoweth his mother. (That is V placed after H, so that IHV
may form the father, the mother, and Microprosopus.)

16\. (Therefore in the letter IVD, *Yod*, and in the name IHI are hidden
two males and two females, which is symbolized in that saying, Gen. vi.
2: "And the sons of the Elohim beheld (the plural in its least form
denoteth two) the daughters of men" (and this also). This explaineth on
this account that which is written, Josh. ii. 1: "Two men as Spies,
saying" (hence is revealed the mystery of the two men). But how (is it
proved that two females are understood) by the words, "Daughters of
men?" Because it is written, 1 Kings iii. 16: "Then came there two women
unto the king."

17\. Of these it is written, *ibid*. 28: "Because they saw that the
wisdom of Elohim was in him." (Here are involved the two males, in the
wisdom, the father; in

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

Solomon, Microprosopus. Therefore) then came they (even the two women,
the understanding and the queen) and not before.

18\. In the palace of the union of the fountains (that is, in the world
of creation) there were two connexions by conjunctions among the
supernals; these descended from above, and occupied the earth; but they
rejected the good part, which in them was the crown of mercy; and were
crowned with the cluster of grapes. (That is instead of benignity, they
were surrounded with judgments and rigours. Which also can be explained
concerning Microprosopus and his bride, first in the mother, and
afterwards in the existences below, and in exile with surrounding
rigours and severities.)

\[Referring to the previous symbolical explanation of Joshua ii, 1.\]

19\. (Also we find these two equations in that saying) Exod. xiv. 15:
"And the Lord said unto Moses (who is referred to the mother), Why
criest thou unto Me?" (But also a cry is referred to the mother, just as
a groan is to the beautiful path, and an exclamation to the kingdom.
But) ALI, *Eli*, unto me (note this is the same as, "and unto I, *Yod*;"
or the father). "Speak unto the children of Israel (the speech is the
queen; Israel is the beautiful path) that they set forward." Wherein
note well the word VISOV, *Vayesaau*, "that they set forward," wherein
are VI masculine letters; SO feminine letters).

\["But also a cry, &c." Meaning the three Sephiroth, *Binah*,
*Tiphereth*, and *Malkuth*.\]

20\. From above the power of life flowed down in equilibrium, for he
entreated the influence of the Venerable One.

\["The Venerable One"--*i.e.*, the first Sephira, proceeding from the
AIN SVP AVR, *Ain Soph Aur*. See Introduction.)

21\. Hereunto also pertaineth that passage, Exod. xv. 26: "And if thou
shalt do right in His eyes, and shalt hearken

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

unto His precepts, and shalt keep all His statutes." (Where in the last
word also two equations are placed.) "Because I am the Lord thy God who
healeth thee." (Note this, because again here is hidden the mystery of
the understanding and the wisdom, of the path of beauty and of the
congregation of Israel.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](tku08.md)
