[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku12)  [Next](tku14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER V.

### FURTHER CONCERNING THE SKULL OF MACROPROSOPUS.

52\. THE whiteness of this skull shineth in thirteen carved out sides:
in four sides from one portion; in four sides from the part of His
countenance; and in four sides from another part of the periphery; and
in one above the skull, as if this last might be called the supernal
side. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_15)

53\. And thence is the Vastness of His Countenance extended into three
hundred and seventy myriads of worlds; and hence ARK APIM, <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_16) *Arikh Aphim*, Vastness of Countenance is
His name.

54\. And He Himself, the Most Ancient of the Most Ancient Ones, is
called ARIK DANPIN, *Arikh Da-Anpin*, the Vast Countenance, or
Macroprosopus; and He Who is more external is called ZOIR ANPIN, *Zauir
Anpin*, or

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Him Who hath the Lesser Countenance
(*Microprosopus*) in opposition to the Ancient Eternal Holy One, the
Holy of the Holy Ones.

55\. And when Microprosopus looketh back upon Him, all the inferiors are
restored in order, and His Countenance is extended, and is made more
vast at that time, but not for all time (*then only is it*), vast like
unto the (*countenance*) of the More Ancient one.

56\. And from that skull issueth a certain white shining emanation,
towards the skull of Microprosopus, for the purpose of fashioning His
head; and thence towards the other inferior skulls, which are
innumerable.

57\. And all the skulls reflect this shining whiteness towards the
Ancient of Days, <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](tku14.htm#fn_17) when they
are numbered out of their mingled confusion. And by reason of this there
existeth herein an opening towards the skull below, when they proceed to
numeration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[117:1](tku13.htm#fr_16) The hidden sense of
this somewhat obscure passage is, that the brightness arises from the
skull, *which it conceals*, which latter is therefore the emblem of the
Concealed One. The thirteen parts are three tetragrammatic forms, which
give twelve letters, and symbolize thus the Trinity of the Tetragram;
and the one supernal part is the unity. The meaning therefore is, the
Trinity in Unity, proceeding from the Concealed Unity, which also
proceedeth from the Negatively Existent. Thirteen, moreover, occultly
points out unity. for AChD. *Achad*, Unity, adds up for thirteen.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[117:2](tku13.htm#fr_17) Or, AVRKA DANPIN,
*Aurikha Da-Anpin*, the Vast Countenance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: Concerning the Membrane of the Brain of
Macroprosopus](tku14)
