[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku18)  [Next](tku20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XI.

### CONCERNING THE BEARD OF MACROPROSOPUS IN GENERAL.

209\. RABBI SCHIMEON began, and said: Woe unto him who extendeth his
hand unto that most glorious supernal beard of the Holy Ancient One, the
concealed of all.

210\. This is the praise of that beard; the beard which is concealed and
most precious in all its dispositions; the beard which neither the
superiors nor the inferiors have known; <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_27) the beard which is the praise of all
praise; the beard to which neither man, nor prophet, nor saint hath
approached so as to behold it.

211\. The beard, whose hairs hang down even unto the breast, white as
snow; the adornment of adornments, the concealment of concealments, the
truth of all truths.

212\. It is said in the "Book of Concealed Mystery": That beard, the
truth of all (*truths*), proceedeth from the place of the ears, and
descendeth around the mouth of the Holy One; arid descendeth and
ascendeth, covering (*the cheeks which it calleth*) the places of
copious fragrance; (*it is*) white with ornament: and\* it descendeth

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

in the equilibrium (*of balanced power*), and furnisheth a covering even
unto the midst of the breast.

213\. That is the beard of adornment, true and perfect, from the which
flow down thirteen fountains, scattering the most precious balm of
splendour.

214\. This is disposed in thirteen forms.

215\. In the first disposition are classed the hairs from above, and it
commenceth from that portion of the hair of His head which is above His
ears; and descendeth in one tress before the apertures of the ears in
the most perfect equilibrium, even unto the corner of the mouth.

216\. In the second disposition are classed the hairs from the comer of
the mouth, and they ascend even unto the other corner of the mouth in
perfectly equated order.

217\. The third disposition is from midway between the nostrils; beneath
those two apertures there goeth forth a certain path, and the hair is
wanting in that path; but on either side of and bordering that path it
is fuller and in perfect order.

218\. The hairs which are classed under the fourth disposition descend
below the mouth from the one corner even unto the other comer, in
perfect order.

219\. The fifth disposition. Beneath the mouth proceedeth another path,
from the region of the superior path, and those two paths are impressed
on His mouth on this side and on that.

220\. The hairs which are classed in the sixth disposition ascend and
come from beneath upwards unto the corner of the mouth, and cover the
places of copious fragrance, even unto the upper corner of the mouth,
and the hair descendeth at the corner of the opening, and across below
the mouth.

221\. In the seventh disposition the hair terminateth, and there are
seen two apples in the places of copious fragrance, beautiful and joyful
in aspect, because (*in that aspect*) is the universe maintained. And
this is that which is said, Prov.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

xvi\. 16: "In the light of the king's countenance is life."

222\. In the eighth disposition a certain tress of hair proceedeth round
about the beard, and (*the hairs*) hang down equilibrated even unto the
chest.

223\. In the ninth disposition the hairs of the beard are interwoven and
mingled with those hairs which hang in equilibrium; which hang even
thus, so that none is preeminent over another.

224\. In the tenth disposition the hairs descend beneath the beard, and
cover the throat beneath the beard.

225\. The eleventh disposition is, that no hairs are preeminent over
other hairs, and they are restored into perfect proportion.

226\. The twelfth disposition is that the hairs do not hang over the
mouth, and that the mouth is uncovered in every part, and that the hair
surrounding it is beautiful.

227\. The thirteenth disposition is that the hairs hang down on this
side and on that beneath the beard, furnishing a covering in beautiful
adornment, even unto the chest.

228\. Nothing is seen of the whole countenance and of the places of
fragrance, except those beautiful white apples which produce the life of
the universe; and they radiate gladness upon Microprosopus.

229\. Through those thirteen dispositions do they flow down, and the
thirteen fountains of precious oil issue forth, and they flow down
through all those inferiors, and in that oil do they shine, and with
that oil are they anointed.

230\. The beard of ornament of the Ancient of the Ancient Ones, the most
concealed of all things, is configurated in thirteen dispositions.

231\. From the two beautiful apples <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_28)
of His countenance is the face of Macroprosopus illuminated; and
whatsoever

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

is white and rosy is found below; <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_29) it
shineth and radiateth from that light.

232\. Those thirteen dispositions are found in the beard. And in
proportion to the purity of his beard, <span
id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_30) according to its dispositions, is a man
said to be true; for also whosoever (*in sleep*) beholdeth his beard,
that man is very desirous of truth.

233\. We have taught in the "Book of Concealed Mystery," that certain
(*dispositions*) are found in the universe, according to those thirteen
(*dispositions*) which depend from that venerable beard, and they are
opened out into the thirteen gates of mercies.

234\. And he who extendeth his hand in swearing, also doth the same if
he swear by the thirteen <span id="fr_32"></span>[3](#fn_31)
dispositions of the beard: these are in Arikh Anpin, or Macroprosopus.

235\. In Zauir Anpin, or Microprosopus, how many are there? He said unto
Rabbi Isaac: "Arise in thy place, and describe the beard of the Holy
King according unto the arrangement of its parts. How are these
arranged?

236\. Rabbi Isaac arose; he commenced and said, Micah vii. 18: "What god
is like unto Thee," &c.; "Thou shalt give truth unto Jacob," &c.

237\. "We have learned by tradition that herein are thirteen sections
seen, and they all proceed from the thirteen fountains of excellent oil,
of the parts of the holy beard of the Ancient of the Ancient Ones.

238\. "Tradition: A most secret thing is this disposition of the beard.
Secret is it and hidden; hidden, yet not

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

hidden; concealed, yet not concealed in its dispositions; known, yet
unknown.

239\. "The first disposition. We have learned that the single locks and
the single hairs do not mutually adhere unto each other; and that the
hairs of the beard take their rise from the disposition of the hair (of
the head).

240\. "This matter is worthy of examination. If all the hairs of the
head and the hairs of the venerable supernal beard are balanced in one
equilibrium, wherefore are some long, and others not so long?

241\. "Wherefore are not the hairs of the beard constant in the same
proportion of length? These also are firm; while those which are on the
head are not firm, but soft.

242\. "Therefore is it said that (in Macroprosopus) all the hairs
descend equally from the head and beard; for the hair of the head is
prolonged even unto the shoulders, so that it may reach unto the head of
Microprosopus, from that flux of the one brain unto the other.

243\. "And because they are not firm (also it is necessary that they be
soft). <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_32)

244\. "We have learned by tradition. What is that which is written,
Prov. i. 20: 'Wisdom (*plural in Hebrew*, ChKMVTh, not ChKMH) will cry
without; and at the end of the verse it is written, 'She (*singular*)
will utter Her voice in the streets.' In this text the beginning doth
neither agree with the end, nor the end with the beginning.

245\. "Therefore is it said: Wisdom will cry without when She passeth
from the concealed brain of Macroprosopus unto the brain of
Microprosopus, through those longer hairs; and thus as it were
extrinsically those two brains are connected and become in this way one
brain.

246\. "Since there is not subsistence in the inferior brain except by
the preservation of the supernal brain.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

247\. "And when this proflux is instituted from the one, namely, into
the other, this hath place which is written, 'She will utter Her voice;'
namely, in the singular number.

248\. "And because She passeth over from brain unto brain through those
long hairs, these same (hairs) are not found to be firm.

249\. "Wherefore? Because if they were firm, Wisdom could not be
conducted by them unto the brain.

250\. "Because Wisdom cometh not from man, who is stern and wrathful,
like as it is written, Eccles. ix. 17: 'The words of wise men are heard
in quiet.'

251\. "And thence we learn that in him whose hair is firm, wisdom
dwelleth not <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_33)

252\. "But because these are long (the others are soft) in order that
they may bring assistance to all.

253\. "How, unto all? So that it may have entrance into the marrow of
the spine of the back, which is connected with the brain.

254\. "And because the hair of the head doth not hang over the hairs of
the beard, since the hair of the head hangeth down, and is drawn back
behind the ears, and doth not overhang the beard; because it is not
necessary to mingle these with those, but all are separated in their own
paths.

255\. "We have learned by tradition. All the hairs, as well of the head
as of the beard, are white as snow.

256\. "And we have learned. Those which are in the beard are all firm.
Wherefore? Because those are firm accordingly, that they may firmly mark
out their thirteen measurements from the Ancient of the Ancient
Ones. <span id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_34)

257\. "And those measurements take their beginning from before the ears.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

258\. "And those measurements have been included within certain
limitations, in order that they should not be confounded with each
other. (Others read the passage thus: Because they are communicated unto
the inferiors. For this have we been taught. The hairs commence before
the ears, because they have been separated, and are not to be mingled
with the others," &c.)

259\. "But if thou sayest that other (sacred passages) are not given,
analogous to these (measurements), thou art in error. For thus is the
tradition: "The thirteen measurements of the mercies of the Most Holy
Ancient One (are symbolized by these clauses of) Mic. vii. 18: 'What God
is like unto Thee?' the first.

260\. "'Pardoning iniquity;' the second.

261\. "'And passeth by the transgression;' the third.

262\. "'Of the remnant of His heritage;' the fourth.

263\. "'He retaineth not His anger for ever;' the fifth.

264\. "'Because He delighteth in mercy;' the sixth.

265\. "'Again, He will have compassion on us;' the seventh.

266\. "'He will subdue our iniquities;' the eighth.

267\. "'And Thou wilt cast all their iniquities into the depths of the
sea;' the ninth.

268 "'Thou wilt give truth unto Jacob;' the tenth.

269\. "'Mercy unto Abraham;' the eleventh.

270\. "'Which Thou hast sworn unto our fathers;' the twelfth.

271\. "'From the days of old;' the thirteenth.

272\. "'Unto these correspond in the law, Exod. xxxiv. 6: 'God merciful
and gracious,' &c. And those are the Inferiors.

273\. "And if thou sayest, 'Why did not Moses pronounce those majestic
words? <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_35) It shall be answered unto
thee: 'Moses hath no duty to perform save in the place

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

where judgment is found; and in the place where judgment is found it is
not necessary to speak thus. <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_36)

274\. "And Moses spake not, save in that time when the Israelites had
sinned and judgment was impending; hence Moses spake only in that place
wherein judgment is found.

275\. "But in another place the prophet hath instituted the order of the
praise of the Ancient of Days. <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_37)

276\. "And those thirteen forms of the supreme holy beard, concealed
with many concealments, are most powerful to subdue and mitigate all the
stern decrees of the judgments.

277\. "What man is he who looketh back upon that most secret, holy
supernal beard, who is not confounded before it?

278\. "Because also all the hairs are hard and firm in their
disposition.

279\. "But if thou sayest, 'What if they be so? Surely the lower hairs
are black: why are these not as those?'

280\. "Nevertheless, thus is the tradition: It is written, Cant. v. 11:
'His locks are bushy and black as a raven.'

281\. Also it is written, Dan. vii. 18: 'The hair of His head like pure
wool.'

282\. "There is no contradiction here, for the one is said of the
supernal beard, but the other of the inferior beard. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[3](#fn_38)

283\. "Also because when the law was given forth unto the Israelites, it
was written in black fire upon white fire.

284\. "Also the foundation of the matter cometh from

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

those hairs; because they are found (arising) out of the (supernal)
brain, and stretching down unto the inferior brain.

285\. "Also because these are above the beard. Hence the beard is
distinct, and all its forms are found separated (each from the other);
so that the beard is alone, and its hairs are also distinct.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[134:1](tku19.htm#fr_28) Because it is the beard
of Macroprosopus, the Concealed Ancient One.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[136:1](tku19.htm#fr_29) The cheeks.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[137:1](tku19.htm#fr_30) That is, the lower
Sephiroth reflect and partake of the properties of the superior
emanations.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[137:2](tku19.htm#fr_31) By the beard is of
course symbolically meant the atmosphere of good or bad deeds with which
a man surrounds himself during his life. Concerning dreaming of the
beard, see the "Book of Concealed Mystery," c. iii. §§17, 18.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[137:3](tku19.htm#fr_32) Thirteen is by Gematria
the number of AChD, *Achad*, Unity. For A+ Ch + D = 1 + 8 + 4 = 13.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[138:1](tku19.htm#fr_33) *I.e.* If they be not
the one, they must be the other.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[139:1](tku19.htm#fr_34) *I.e.*, Meaning
symbolically, "in him who is hardened."

<span id="fn_34"></span>[139:2](tku19.htm#fr_35) I have before remarked
that this refers to the unity of the Deity: AChD, *Achad*, One; which by
Gematria yields 13.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[140:1](tku19.htm#fr_36) Apparently meaning
that, as the words of the text denote, it was the LORD and not Moses
that proclaimed the titles of Tetragrammaton aloud.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[141:1](tku19.htm#fr_37) *I.e.*, Mentioning the
merciful characteristics of the Deity, who is represented as the
equilibrium of justice and mercy.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[141:2](tku19.htm#fr_38) That is, of AHIH, as
distinct from IHVH. (See Introduction.)

<span id="fn_38"></span>[141:3](tku19.htm#fr_39) The hair and beard of
Macroprosopus, as distinct from that of Microprosopus. (See the "Book of
Concealed Mystery," ch. iii. 16.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII: Concerning the Beard of Macroprosopus in Particular,
and in the First Place, Concerning its First Part](tku20)
