[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku17)  [Next](tku19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER X.

### CONCERNING THE NOSE OF MACROPROSOPUS.

171\. AND come, behold, lo! it is written, Isaiah xli. 4: "I,
Tetragrammaton, (*am*) first and with the last. I am HE HIMSELF"
(*Hoa*).

172\. All things are HVA, *Hoa*, He Himself, and He Himself is hidden on
every side. So also is His nose.

173\. From the nose is the face known.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

174\. And come--see! What is the (*difference*) between the Ancient One
and Microprosopus? Over these nostrils He ruleth; one of which is life,
and the other is the life of life.

175\. This nose is as a mighty gallery, whence His spirit rusheth forth
upon Microprosopus, and they call it the Giver.

176\. And it is thus: The Spirit descendeth; and again the Spirit from
hence proceedeth through those nostrils.

177\. One is the Spirit; She goeth forth unto Microprosopus, so that he
may be aroused in the Garden of Eden.

178\. And one is She the Spirit of Life, through Whom in process of time
the sons of David hope to know Wisdom.

179\. And from that gallery ariseth the Spirit, and proceedeth from the
concealed brain, and at length resteth upon King Messiach.

180\. Like as it is written, Isaiah xi. 2: "And the Spirit of
Tetragrammaton shall rest upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge,
and of the Fear of Tetragrammaton."

181\. Apparently four spirits (*are described*) here. But we have
already said that the Spirit is one; why, then, are three (*others added
unto it?*). Arise, Rabbi Yosi, in thy place.

182\. Rabbi Yosi arose and said: "in the days of King Messiach, one
shall not say unto the other, 'Teach me this Wisdom.'

183\. "Because it is thus written, Jer. xxxi. 34: 'A man shall no more
teach his neighbour, &c., because all shall know Me, from the least of
them even unto the greatest of them.'

184\. "And in that time shall the Ancient of Days arouse His Spirit
which proceedeth from His brain, the most concealed of all.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

185\. "And when that cometh forth all the inferior spirits are aroused
with Her.

186\. "And who are they? They are the holy crowns of Microprosopus.

187\. "And there are six other spirits which are given. They are those
of whom it is written: 'The Spirit of Wisdom and Intelligence, the
Spirit of Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge and of the Fear of
the Lord.'

188\. "For thus is the tradition: It is written, 1 Kings ii. 12: 'And
Solomon sat upon the throne of David.' Also it is written, 1 Kings x.
19: 'The throne had six steps.'

189\. "And King Messiach will be seated on those seven (steps). These
are those six, and the Spirit of the Ancient of Days, Who is above them,
is the seventh.

190\. "Like as it is said, 'There are three spirits which comprehend
three others.'"

191\. Rabbi Schimeon said unto him: "Thy spirit shall rest in the world
to come."

192\. Come--behold! It is written, Ezek. xxxvii. 9: "Thus saith the
Lord, 'Come from the four winds, O Spirit!' But what have the four winds
of the world to do with this?

193\. Nevertheless, the four winds are aroused; those three, namely, and
the Spirit of the Concealed Ancient One; whence there are four.

194\. And thus is the matter; because when that one is produced, three
others are produced with it, who in themselves comprehend three others.

195\. But it is the will of that Holy and Blessed One to produce the one
Spirit, Who in Herself includeth all others.

196\. Because it is written, Ezek. xxxvii. 9: "From the four spirits,
come, O spirit! It is not written thus: "Ye four spirits, come!" but
"From the four spirits, come!"

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

197\. And in the days of King Messiach there shall be no need that one
should teach another; for that one Spirit Who in Herself includeth all
spirits, knoweth all Wisdom and Understanding, Counsel and Might, (*and
is*) the Spirit of Science and of the Fear of the Lord; because She is
the Spirit comprehending all spirits.

198\. Therefore is it written, "From the four spirits;" which are those
four comprehended in the seven steps of which we have just spoken, §
189.

199\. And this is the tradition: All things are comprehended in this
Spirit of the Ancient of the Ancient Ones, <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_26) Who proceedeth from the concealed brain,
into the gallery of the nostrils.

200\. And come--see! Wherein is the difference between the nose (*of
Macroprosopus*), and the nose (*of Microprosopus*).

201\. The nose of the Ancient of Days is life in every part. Concerning
the nose of Microprosopus it is written, Ps. xviii. 8. "There went up
smoke out of His nostrils, and fire out of His mouth devoured," &c.

202\. There goeth up a smoke through His nostrils, and out of that smoke
is a fire kindled.

203\. When that smoke goeth up, what afterwards followeth? Coals are
kindled by it. What is the meaning of this, "by it?" By that smoke, out
of that nose, out of that fire.

204\. This is the tradition: When Rav Hammenuna the elder wished to
offer up his prayer, he said, "I pray unto the Lord of the nostrils,
unto the Lord of the nostrils do I pray."

205\. And this is that which is written, Isa. xlviii. 9: "In my praise
(that is, My nose) will I refrain My nostrils for thee." In which place
the sentence is concerning the Ancient of Days.

206\. This is the tradition. The size of this nose is so

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

vast that three hundred and seventy-five worlds are supported by it,
which all adhere unto Microprosopus.

207\. This is the praise of the conformation of the nose.

208\. And this, and all forms of the Ancient of Days, are seen, and are
not seen; they are seen by the lords of lords--viz., by pious men--and
they are not seen by any others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[133:1](tku18.htm#fr_27) *I.e.*, The Spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI: Concerning the Beard of Macroprosopus in
General](tku19)
