[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku15)  [Next](tku17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VIII.

### CONCERNING THE FOREHEAD OF MACROPROSOPUS.

87\. THE forehead of His skull is the acceptation of acceptations,
whereunto is opposed the acceptation of Microprosopus, like as it is
written, Exod. xxviii. 38: "And it shall be upon His forehead always for
acceptation," &c.

90\. And that forehead is called RTzVN, *Ratzon*, Will-power, because it
is the ruler of the whole head and of the skull, which is covered by
four hundred and twenty worlds.

91\. And when it is uncovered, the prayers of the Israelites ascend.

92\. "When is it uncovered?" Rabbi Schimeon was silent. He asked again a
second time, "When?" Rabbi Schimeon said unto Rabbi Eleazar, his son,
"When is it uncovered."

93\. He answered unto him: "In the time of the offering of the evening
prayer on the Sabbath."

94\. He said unto him: "For what reason?" He answered unto him: "Because
at that time the lower judgment threateneth through Microprosopus; but
that forehead is uncovered which is called 'Acceptation,' and then wrath
is assuaged, and the prayer ascendeth.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

95\. "This is that which is written, Ps. lxix. 14: 'And I have prayed
unto Thee, O Tetragrammaton! in an acceptable time.'

96\. "And the time of acceptance by the Ancient of Days <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_21.md) is here to be understood, and of the
unveiling of the forehead; and because it is thus disposed at the
offering of the evening prayer on the Sabbath."

97\. Rabbi Schimeon spake unto Rabbi Eleazar, his son, and said: Blessed
be thou, O my son! by the Ancient of Days; for thou hast found in that
time in which thou hast need--the acceptation of His forehead.

98\. Come and behold! in these inferiors, when the forehead is
uncovered, there is found fixed shamelessness.

99\. This is the same which is written, Jer. iii. 3: "Yet thou hadst the
forehead of a shameless woman, thou refusedst to be ashamed."

100\. But when this forehead <span id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_22.md) is
uncovered, inclination and acceptation are found in perfect form, and
all wrath is quieted and subdued before Him.

10I, From that forehead shine forth four hundred habitations of
judgments, when it is uncovered during that period of acceptation, anti
all things are at peace before it.

102\. This is the same which is written, Dan. vii. 10: "The judgment was
set"--that is, subsideth in its place, and the judgment is not
exercised.

103\. And this is the tradition: There is no hair found on that part,
because it is opened and not covered.

104\. It is covered, I say, and the executors of judgment behold this,
and are pacified, and (*judgment*) is not exercised.

105\. This is the tradition: This forehead hath been extended into two
hundred and seventy thousand lights of the luminaries of the superior
Eden.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

106\. This is the tradition: There existeth an Eden which shineth in
Eden. The superior Eden, which is not uncovered, and is hidden in
concealment, and is not distributed into the paths, like as it hath been
said.

107\. The inferior Eden is distributed into its paths; (*namely*) into
thirty-two directions of its paths.

108\. And although this Eden is distributed into its path, yet is it not
known unto any, save unto Microprosopus,

109\. But no man hath known the superior Eden, nor its paths, except
Macroprosopus Himself.

110\. Like as it is written, Job xxviii. 23: "God understandeth the way
thereof, and He knoweth the place thereof."

111\. "The Elohim understand the way thereof: "this is the inferior
Eden, known unto Microprosopus. "And He hath known the place thereof:"
this is the superior Eden, which the Ancient of Days hath known, the
most abstruse of all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[123:1](tku16.htm#fr_22.md) Macroprosopus.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[123:2](tku16.htm#fr_23.md) That of Macroprosopus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: Concerning the Eyes of Macroprosopus](tku17.md)
