[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku25)  [Next](tku27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVIII.

### CONCERNING THE SEVENTH PART OF THE BEARD OF MACROPROSOPUS.

408\. THE seventh conformation is that wherein the hair is wanting, and
there appear two apples in the circles of fragrance, fair and beautiful
of aspect.

409\. Rabbi Schimeon commenced, and said, Cant. ii. 3: "'Like as the
apple-tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the
sons.'

410\. "What is the apple-tree? Like as this in itself hath three
colours, so do the two apples of the holy blessed one contain six
colours.

411\. "And those two apples which are the seventh conformation include
all the six conformations before mentioned.

412\. "And concerning them is that passage (*to be taken in*), Prov.
xvi. 15 'In the light of the countenance of the King is life.'

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

413\. "Also we have learned that from those apples goeth forth the life
of the universe, and it giveth joy unto Microprosopus; like as it is
written, Num. vi. 24: 'The Lord maketh His countenance to shine upon
thee.'

414\. "And it is written: 'In the light of the countenance of the King
is life.' 'In the light of the countenance of the King.' Those are the
two apples of the circles of fragrance of which we have spoken.

415\. "'The Lord make His countenance to shine upon thee.' Here is
understood the exterior countenance which when it shineth blesseth the
universe.

416\. "And we have learned that whensoever those external lights shine
He blesseth the whole world, and wrath is no longer found in the
universe.

417\. "And if these externals (*do this*), how much more do these two
apples, which ever shine, which ever are joyful!

418\. "This is a tradition, given forth without the city. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_63) 'When those two apples are disclosed,
Microprosopus appeareth in joy; for all those inferior lights are
joyful; and all those inferiors shine; and all the worlds rejoice, and
are perfected in all perfection; and all things rejoice and shine, and
no good thing is wanting; all things are satisfied at once; all things
rejoice together at the same time.

419\. "Come, behold! The external countenance at times shineth, at times
is obscured; and therefore is it written: 'The Lord make His face to
shine upon thee.' And, Ps. i.: 'And cause His face to shine upon us.
Selah.'

420\. "Whence (*we learn*), that it is not always (*luminous*), but only
when those superior apples are uncovered.

421\. "This have we learned by tradition. 'Those hidden apples shine,
and are ever brilliant; and from them

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

proceed rays in three hundred and seventy <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](tku27.htm#fn_64) directions; and in them all the
six (*preceding*) conformations of the beard are included.'

422\. "This is that which is said, Mic. vii. 18: 'May He return and have
mercy upon us!' May He return, that is, again; <span
id="fr_66"></span>[2](tku27.htm#fn_65) whence it is to be noticed that
sometimes they are concealed and sometimes uncovered; wherefore it is
said: 'May He return and have mercy upon us!"

423\. "And in that which is inferior (*correspondeth to this form*) the
name, AMTh, *Amath*, Truth. This is the seventh conformation, which
includeth the six first, in the two apples of the Ancient of the Ancient
Ones."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[159:1](tku26.htm#fr_64) I suppose this means
later than the Captivity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX: Concerning the Eighth Part of the Beard of
Macroprosopus](tku27)
