[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku34)  [Next](tku36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXVII.

### CONCERNING THE SKULL OP MICROPROSOPUS AND ITS APPURTENANCES; NAMELY, CONCERNING THE SUBTLE AIR, AND THE FIRE, AND THE DEW.

536\. THIS is the tradition. When the White Head <span
id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_94) propounded unto Himself to superadd
ornament unto His own adornment, He constituted, prepared, and produced
one single spark from His intense splendour of light. He fanned it and
condensed it (or conformed it).

537\. And He developed His thought, and extended it in three hundred and
seventy directions.

538\. And the spark subsisted, and waited until the pure air went forth
which involved it around; and an ultimate extension having been made, He
produced a certain hard skull (*bounded*) on four sides. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[2](#fn_95)

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

539\. And in that pure subtle air was the spark absorbed and
comprehended and included therein.

540\. Dost thou not think therein? Truly it is hidden therein.

541\. And therefore is that skull expanded in its sides; and that air is
the most concealed attribute of the Ancient of Days.

542\. In the spirit which is hidden in that skull there are expanded
fire on the one side and air on the other. And the subtle air is whirled
about it from this side, and the subtle fire is whirled about it from
that side.

543\. What is the fire in this place? But verily it is not fire, but
that splendour which is included in the subtle air, and it shineth in
two hundred and seventy worlds.

544\. And rigour or judgment is found therefrom; and therefore it is
called the hard skull.

545\. Within that skull are nine thousand myriads of worlds, which
receive the influx from it, and are at peace above it.

546\. In that skull distilleth the dew <span
id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_96) from the White Head, which is ever filled
therewith; and from that dew are the dead raised unto life.

547\. And that dew hath in itself two colours. From the White Head there
is a whiteness in it, which entirely comprehendeth all whiteness.

548\. But whensoever it remaineth in that head of Microprosopus, there
appeareth in it a redness, like as in crystal, which is white, and there
appeareth a red colour in the white colour.

549\. And therefore is it written, Dan. xii. 2: "And many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life,
and some to shame and everlasting contempt."

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

550\. "To everlasting life." Because they are worthy of that whiteness
which cometh from Macroprosopus, even from the Ancient of Days.

551\. "To shame and everlasting contempt." Because they are worthy of
that redness of Microprosopus.

552\. And all things are contained in that dew as is intimated in these
words, Isa. xxvi. 19: "Because the dew of lights is thy dew"--where
there is a duality of expression.

553\. And that dew, which distilleth, distilleth daily upon the field of
apples, in colour white and red.

554\. This skull shineth in two colours toward this side and toward
that.

555\. And from that subtle air, from the skull, there are expanded in
His countenance one hundred and fifty myriads of worlds; and therefore
is He called Zauir Aphin (or Anpin), Microprosopus, the Lesser
Countenance.

556\. But in that time, when there is need, is His countenance expanded
and made vast, because He looketh back upon the countenance of the
Ancient of the Ancient Ones, from whom is the life of the universe.

557\. And from that skull there is a place of exit in one place unto
those which are below; and they reflect His light towards the Ancient of
Days, when they ascend in numeration beneath the wand. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_97)

558\. Therefore is His skull cleft beneath, when (the inferiors) ascend
in numeration, and from this cleavage a reflection of light ariseth
toward the Ancient of Days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_94"></span>[177:1](tku35.htm#fr_95) Another title for the
crown, Kether. (See Introduction.)

<span id="fn_95"></span>[177:2](tku35.htm#fr_96) By the letters of the
Tetragram.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[178:1](tku35.htm#fr_97) This subtle air, fire,
and dew are analogous to the three "mother letters" of the "Sepher
Yetzirah." A, M. and Sh: the letter A symbolising air, the medium
between M the water, and Sh the fire.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[179:1](tku35.htm#fr_98) This statement will be
utterly unintelligible to the ordinary reader. unless he is told that
there are four secret qabalistical symbols attached to the four letters
of Tetragrammaton--viz., the wand to I, the cup of libation to H, the
sword to V and the shekel of gold to H final. The wand in the text
refers to the I, *Yod*, of the Ancient One, hidden and concealed in the
I of IHVH and at the head of the Sephiroth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII: Concerning the Brain and Membrane of the Brain of
Microprosopus](tku36)
