[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku33)  [Next](tku35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXVI.

### CONCERNING THE EDOMITE KINGS.

513\. BEHOLD! this have we learned in the "Book of Concealed Mystery":
that the Ancient of the Ancient Ones before that He prepared His
conformations <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_89) (*in the equilibrium
of balance*) formed certain kings, collected certain kings, and gave due
proportion unto certain kings; but they only subsisted (*for a time*)
until He could expel them; and in that time hath He concealed them.

514\. This is intimated in those words, Gen. xxxvi. 31: "And these are
the kings which have reigned in ADVM, <span
id="fr_91"></span>[3](#fn_90)

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Edom*." In the land of Edom; that is, in the
place wherein all judgments exist.

515\. But all these subsisted not until the White Head <span
id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_91) of the Ancient of the Ancient Ones was
disposed (*in its ordination*).

516\. When this was conformed, He disposed all the inferior
conformations, and all the superior and inferior forms were thus
arranged.

517\. Thence we learn that unless the head (*or ruling power, or
government*) of a nation, whatever form of government it may happen to
be, be first properly constituted, that nation cannot be properly ruled.
For if the head be first disposed aright, then all things can be
ordained, but if that be not first disposed aright, neither can the
nation be governed aright.

518\. The ordering of all things is from the Ancient of Days. For before
that He was disposed in His conformation, nothing could be ordained,
because as yet it was first necessary that Himself <span
id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_92) should be ordained; and all the worlds
were desolate.

519\. Which these words intimate, *ibid*. 32: "And there reigned in Edom
Bela, the son of Beor."

520\. "And there reigned in Edom." Here is a certain venerable Arcanum
hidden; for herein is that place intimated wherein all the judgments are
collected together, and whence they depend.

521\. "Bela, the son of Beor." This is the tradition. This denoteth the
most rigorous judicial decree, for whose cause there are collected
together a thousand times a thousand authors of mourning and woe.

522\. "And the name of his city is Dinhabah." What is DNHBH, *Dinhabah*?
As if it were to be said, "Give forth judgment." Like as it is written,
Prov. xxx. 15: "The horse-leech hath two daughters, crying, 'Give,
give.'"

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

523\. But when he ascendeth, so that he may be conformed therein, he
cannot subsist and he cannot consist. Wherefore? Because the form of the
man is not as yet constituted.

524\. What is the reason of this? Because the constitution of man
containeth all things under this form, and in that form are all things
disposed.

525\. And because that constitution of Adam was not as yet found, they
(*the Edomite Kings*) could not subsist, nor be conformed, and they were
destroyed.

526\. Have they then been abolished, and are all these included in (*the
supernal*) man? For truly they were abolished that they might be
withdrawn from form, until there should come forth the representation of
Adam.

527\. But when that form is configurated, they all exist, and have been
restored in another condition.

529\. Some among them are mitigated, and (*some*) are not mitigated; but
evidently there are certain of them which have not been mitigated.

529\. And if thou shalt say: "Also it is written, 'and he died,' surely
that denoteth that they were altogether abolished." I answer that it is
not so; but whosoever descendeth from his former position wherein he was
before, concerning such an one is it said in Scripture that he died.

530\. Like as it is written, Exod. ii. 23: "And the King of Egypt died."
Because he descended from the former condition wherein he was.

531\. But after that Adam was constituted they are called by other
names, and are mitigated in a permanent condition through him; and they
exist in their place, and are all called by other names and not by their
former (*appellations*).

532\. Excepting that one <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_93) concerning
whom it is written, Gen. xxxvi. 39: "And the name of his wife

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.

533\. For what reason? Because they were not abolished like the others.
Wherefore? Because they were male and female, like as the palm-tree,
which groweth not unless there be both male and female.

534\. And because now they are found male and female, and it is not
written concerning them that they died like as the others, but remained
in a fixed condition.

535\. But they were not (*definitely composed*) until the form of the
man was composed (*that is, the supernal man*). But after that the form
of the supernal Adam was constituted, they were restored in another
condition, and came in proper order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[174:1](tku33.htm#fr_89) This brings in the
subject of the worlds of unbalanced force which are said by the Zohar to
have been created and destroyed prior to the creation of the present
world. These worlds of unbalanced force are typified by the Edomite
kings. (See, introduction.)

<span id="fn_89"></span>[174:2](tku34.htm#fr_90) As the Sephiroth
proceed each from the preceding one in the series, it is evident that
before the counterbalancing Sephira is formed. the force in the
preceding Sephira is unbalanced; *e.g.*, the fourth Sephira is Gedulah
or Chesed, Mercy, and the fifth Sephira is Geburah or Pachad, Sternness;
therefore, till Geburah appears, Gedulah is unbalanced, and this
condition is the reign of one of the Edomite kings: but when Geburah
appears, his reign is over.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[174:3](tku34.htm#fr_91) ADVM = 1 + 4 + 6 + 40 =
51 = NA = Failure. AN = also 51, and means pain. *Ergo*, also unbalanced
force is the source alike of failure and of pain.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[175:1](tku34.htm#fr_92) This is another title
of the Crown, Kether. the first Sephira. (See Introduction.)

<span id="fn_92"></span>[175:2](tku34.htm#fr_93) Because He is the
Absolute One, the Eheieh Asher Eheieh.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[176:1](tku34.htm#fr_94) Hadar. HDR.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII: Concerning the Skull of Microprosopus and its
Appurtenances; Namely, Concerning the Subtle Air, and the Fire and the
Dew.](tku35)
