[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku38)  [Next](tku40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXXI.

### CONCERNING THE EYES OF MICROPROSOPUS.

607\. The eyes of the head (*of Microprosopus*) are diverse from all
other eyes. There is a shadowy darkness cast by the eyebrows which is
(*as if it were*) painted above the eyes, whence all eyes are
overshadowed with a dark shade.

608\. Curling hairs hang down from the curls of the hair which is above
them, and mark the form of the eyebrows above the eyes, at the
commencement of the forehead.

609\. And in both (*the eyebrows*) are contained seven hundred times a
thousand lords of inspection who reside above the eyelids.

610\. In the eyelids radiate one thousand four hundred myriads (of
hairs), which adhere to the edges and form the eyelashes; and far above
these is the inspection of the eye of the Ancient of Days. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_106)

611\. And as often as those eyelids (*of Microprosopus*) are raised, the
same eye (*i.e., that of Microprosopus*) appeareth, just as when the
eyes of any man are opened when he awaketh from sleep.

612\. And (*the eyes of Microprosopus*) behold the open eye (*of
Macroprosopus shining down upon them*), and they are rendered brilliant
with a certain brilliant whiteness of the good eye (*i.e., that of
Macroprosopus, because in Him "all is right"--i.e., good--and there is
no left*).

613\. Like as it is written, Cant. v. 12: "Washed with milk." What is
"with milk?" With this excellent primal whiteness.

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

614\. And in that time is there found with Him (*i.e., Microprosopus*)
an intuition of mercy, and therefore the prayer of the Israelites
ascendeth, because His eyes are opened (*i.e., those of Microprosopus*),
and are whitened with that whiteness (*of the eye of Macroprosopus*).

615\. Like as it is written, Ps. xliv. 23: "Awake; why sleepest Thou, O
Tetragrammaton? Arise."

616\. And truly as often as His eyes are not open, all the lords of
judgment subdue the Israelites, and the other nations have dominion over
them.

617\. But whensoever He openeth His eyes, these are illuminated from the
good eye (*of Macroprosopus*), and mercy is over Israel; and His eye
turneth around and executeth vengeance upon the other nations.

618\. This is that same which is written, Ps. xxxv. 23: "Awake, and
arise." "Awake!" and (*Thine eye*) shall be illuminated with that
whiteness. "Arise!" so that it may exercise judgment upon those who have
overcome them.

619\. When his eyes are opened they appear beautiful as those of doves;
in colour, white, red, and black, and golden yellow.

620\. And this eye (otherwise, this whiteness) is not uncovered except
when it is looked upon by the good eye, and then all those colours are
covered (otherwise, bathed) with this whiteness of the rays.

621\. From those colours, when they are uncovered, go forth seven eyes
of Providence, which issue from the black of the eye.

622\. This is that which is said, Zac. iii. 9: "Upon one stone seven
eyes."

623\. What is the "one stone?" The black of the eye.

624\. From the red go forth seven emissaries, who deflect towards the
left side, and they flame with fire, which is toward the north side, and
they are combined, so that they may be expanded into the world for the
purpose of uncovering the ways of sinners.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

625\. This is that which is written, Zach. iv. 10: "Those seven are the
eyes of Tetragrammaton going forth throughout the whole earth."

626\. From the yellow go forth seven pure splendours (otherwise lights),
which are turned towards the south side, and they are combined so that
they may be extended into the world, towards those ways which are
necessary to be uncovered (otherwise towards those deeds, &c.).

627\. Like as it is written, Job xxxiv. 21: "Because His eyes are upon
the ways of man." And when they are illuminated with that whiteness,
then they behold all the lords of truth, in order to do good unto the
world because of them; and every glance (*of those eyes*) is benevolent
towards Israel.

628\. But with the red colour He beholded those who are bound; which is
intimated in these words, Exod. iii. 7: "In seeing have I seen;" "In
seeing," for the purpose of doing good unto them; "I have seen," that by
vindicating them I may deliver them from their afflictors.

620\. And therefore is it written, Ps. xliv. 24: "Awake: wherefore
sleepest Thou, O Tetragrammaton? Arise! forsake us not for ever." "Awake
and arise." There are two inspections, two openings, two good things;
there is mercy, there is also vengeance.

630\. The first colour is red, hidden and inclosed within red; in
comparison with it, all other reds do not seem to be (*red*). <span
id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_107)

631\. Around this red goeth a certain black thread (*of colour*), and
surroundeth it.

632\. This second colour is black, like that stone which goeth forth
from the abyss once in a thousand years into the great sea.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

633\. And when that stone <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_108) goeth
forth there cometh a tempest and a storm upon the great sea <span
id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_109) and its waters are troubled, and (*their
motion soundeth as*) a voice, and they are heard by the great fish which
is called Leviathan.

634\. And this stone goeth forth, and is whirled onward in the current
of the sea, and goeth forth thence; and this, is so great a
blackness <span id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_110) that beside it all other
blacknesses are as nought (otherwise, now it is withdrawn because all
the other paths are hidden and enshrouded by it).

635\. And such is the blackness of the black (*part of*) the eye, which
includeth and concealeth all the remaining blacknesses; and about that
blackness there is found a certain red thread (of colour) which
surroundeth that blackness.

636\. The third colour is the yellow of all yellows, which includeth and
concealeth all other yellows, and in the circumference of that yellow
there whirl around two threads (*of colour*), a red thread on the one
direction, and a black thread in another direction; and they surround
that yellow colour.

637\. But when that white brilliance whirleth around it, and the eye
flameth with that white brilliance, all those other colours are not at
rest, and are submerged in the lowest depths thereof; the red, the
yellow, and the black are not seen, only that white brilliance alone;
which receiveth its light from Him, even from the Ancient of Days.

638\. And from that (*white brilliance*) all the inferiors shine,
neither is any colour seen save that white brilliance alone. And
therefore are all the lords of redness

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

and blackness, which are as it were twin (*colours*), displaced.

639\. This is the same which is written, Cant. iv. 2: "Which go up from
the washing, which are all twins."

640\. What is this, "From the washing?" From that white brilliance of
the excellent holy eye; for all are twins, the one (*colour*) is as the
other. <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_111)

641\. But truly doth not he (the author of the Canticles) say that the
teeth are each in turn like a shorn flock; and thou sayest that all
these are twins?

642\. Nevertheless, the sense is that this whiteness of them is as that
whiteness of the eyes (*of Microprosopus*) when they are made brilliant
by the white brilliance of the supernal eye (*of Macroprosopus*).

643\. And the just are about to understand and behold that thing in the
Spirit of Wisdom.

644\. Like as it is written, Isa. lii. 3: "Because they shall see eye to
eye." When? "When Tetragrammaton shall bring again Zion."

645\. Also it is written, Num. xiv. 14: "By whom Thou, O Tetragrammaton!
art seen eye to eye:" <span id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_112) and then the
opening of the eyes is toward good.

646\. For there is so opening of the eyes toward good, and there is also
another (*opening of the eyes*) toward evil.

647\. Toward good, like as it is written, Dan. ix. 18: "Open Thine eyes
and behold our desolations, and the city over which Thy name hath been
pronounced." Here it is toward good.

648\. But toward evil, like as it is written, Isa. xxxiii. 20: "Thine
eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not
be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed."
Here truly it is toward good and toward evil, because the one existeth
not without the other.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

649\. We have learned it in the "Book of Concealed Mystery." What is
this? "Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation." Is not
Jerusalem therefore a quiet habitation? Also it is written, Isa. i. 21:
"Justice dwelt therein." But in the place wherein justice is found there
is not rest, neither is it at peace (otherwise: In the place wherein
judgment dwelleth and is found, this justice is not rest, &c.).

650\. For verily this is the true interpretation: "Thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem a quiet habitation" (is thus to be explained). The habitation
is said to be quiet, in respect of the Ancient of Days, who looketh upon
those eyes (*of Microprosopus*).

651\. For truly His eye is quiet and tranquil; the eye of mercy the eye
which altereth not from this aspect unto any other aspect.

652\. And therefore is it written OINK, <span
id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_113) (*instead of* OINIK) "They shall behold
Thine eye:" not Thine eyes, (*seeing* OINK *is written*) without the
second I, *Yod*.

653\. But how cometh it that it is said Jerusalem, and not Zion? It is
properly thus said for the purpose of subjugating judgment which was
found therein, and for exciting mercy upon it.

654\. Also have we learned this. It is written, Dent. xi. 12: "The eyes
of Tetragrammaton thy God are upon it, from the beginning of the year
even unto the end of the year." This is that which is written: "Justice
dwelt therein;" because therein are found many most severe judgments, as
in all other instances.

655\. But in the time to come there shall be found therein one eye of
mercy (*namely*) the eye of the Ancient of Days.

656\. This is that which is intimated, Isa. liv. 7: "But with great
mercies will I gather thee."

657\. Where, because it is said "with mercies," what is

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (*the meaning of the adjective*) "great" (*used
herewith*): Assuredly because mercy is duplicated, (*namely*) the mercy
of the Ancient of Days (*Macroprosopus*), which is called "great
mercies."

658\. And the mercy of Microprosopus, which is called mercies plain and
unqualified, seeing that in Him there are right and left, <span
id="fr_115"></span>[1](tku40.htm#fn_114) (*symbolizing the balance of*)
justice and Mercy. And therefore is it said: "And in great mercies will
I gather thee;" those, namely, of the Ancient of Days.

659\. This have we learned. In those eyes (*of Microprosopus*), and in
the two colours of them--namely, in the red and in the black--there are
said to abide two tears, and when He, even the Holy of the Holy Ones,
desireth to have mercy upon the Israelites, then He sendeth down those
two tears so that they may grow sweet in the (*waters of the*) great
sea.

660\. The great sea, which is that of excellent wisdom, so that in that
stream (otherwise, white brilliance) and in that fountain they may be
cleansed; and they go forth from the great sea, and there is mercy upon
the Israelites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[186:1](tku39.htm#fr_107) True to all the
previous symbolism, the eye of the Ancient of Days, Macroprosopus, is
here spoken of, instead of eyes in the plural number, seeing that, as I
have before remarked, he is rather to be symbolized by a profile than by
a full face.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[188:1](tku39.htm#fr_108) Meaning that it Is so
brilliant that all other red colours seem poor and pale in comparison
with it.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[189:1](tku39.htm#fr_109) Cf. Rev. viii. 8.
This also suggests alchemical symbolism.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[189:2](tku39.htm#fr_110) The great sea is
Binah. and the great fish is Leviathan: "whose head is broken by the
waters of the great sea." (See the Introduction, "Book of Concealed
Mystery," i. § 28; Ps. lxxiv. 13. and Rev. xiii.)

<span id="fn_110"></span>[189:3](tku39.htm#fr_111) Cf. the "blackest of
the black" of Hermes Trismegistus.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[190:1](tku39.htm#fr_112) *I.e.*. the black and
the red, which are here represented as simultaneously involving each
other.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[190:2](tku39.htm#fr_113) In our version it is
translated "face to face," and not "eye to eye"; but in the original
Hebrew it is OIN BOIN, *Ayin Be-Ayin*, "eye to eye."

<span id="fn_113"></span>[191:1](tku39.htm#fr_114) OINK signifies "thine
eye," in the singular.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII: Concerning the Nose of Microprosopus](tku40)
