[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku37)  [Next](tku39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXX.

### CONCERNING THE FOREHEAD OF MICROPROSOPUS.

588\. THE forehead of the skull is the inspection of inspection, and it
is not uncovered, except in that time when it is necessary to visit
sinners for the purpose of examining their deeds.

589\. Also we have learned that when that forehead is uncovered, all the
lords of judgment are stirred up, and the whole universe is brought
under judgment.

590\. Save in that time when the prayers of the Israelites ascend before
the Ancient of Days, and entreat mercy for His children; then is
uncovered the forehead of the benevolence of benevolences, <span
id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_104) and it shineth down upon this
(*forehead*) of Microprosopus, and judgment is quieted.

591\. Over this forehead there goeth forth a certain

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

portion of hair, which is extended over it from the brain, which
produceth the fifty gates (*of understanding*).

592\. And when it is expanded, that brow glows with anger; it is the
inspector of the sinners of the world--namely, of those who are
shameless in their deeds.

593\. Like as it is written, Jer. iii. 3: "And thou hadst the forehead
of a woman who is a whore, thou refusedst to be ashamed."

594\. And we have learned that that hair subsisteth not in that part of
the forehead; so that it may be uncovered against those who remain
steadfast in their iniquities.

595\. And when the Holy One--blessed be He!--is awakened, that He may be
pleased with the just, the Countenance of the Ancient of Days shineth
upon the Countenance of Microprosopus, and His forehead (*that of
Macroprosopus*) is uncovered, and illuminateth that forehead (that of
Macroprosopus), and then is called the rime of benevolence.

596\. But as often as judgment threateneth, and that forehead of
Microprosopus is uncovered, there is uncovered the forehead of the
Ancient of the Ancient Ones, and judgment is mitigated and is not
exercised.

597\. We have learned that that forehead is expanded into two hundred
thousand rednesses of rednesses, which are contained therein, and are
included therein.

598\. And when the forehead of Microprosopus is uncovered, licence is
given unto all those to destroy. But when the forehead of the
benevolence of benevolences is uncovered, so that it may shine upon that
forehead (*of Microprosopus*) and upon all those (*rednesses*), then are
they quieted.

599\. Also we have learned by tradition: Twenty-four superior judgments
are found, and they are all called NTzChIM, *Netzachim*, or Victories;
howsoever, while (*in the arrangement of letters, NTzChIM, the
singular*) NTZCh, *Netzach*, is called Victory (*i.e., means that*), the
neighbouring

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

letters <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_105) (*M and N in NTzChIM*),
being permuted, (*we obtain NTzChIN singular*), MTzCh, *Metzach*
(*meaning*) forehead.

600\. Therefore (*the same word signifieth*) forehead and Victory, which
is in the plural victories. And this is that which is given by
tradition: The Victory of victories. And they are in the forehead, but
certain among them are extended in the body in (*certain*) known parts.

601\. This is the exotic tradition: What is that which is written, 1
Sam. xv. 29: "Also the Netzach of Israel doth not lie nor repent, for He
is not man that He should repent."

602\. Now have we declared that Arcanum according to its constitution.
All that Victory which is expanded in the body, at that time when the
world is to be judged and converted, admitteth repentance, neither
executeth judgment if they be converted.

603\. For what reason? Because the matter resteth in that place which is
called Adam, and He may repent.

604\. But if that Victory be seen and uncovered in that part of the head
just spoken of--namely, the forehead--there is neither time nor
opportunity for repentance.

605\. Wherefore? Because it is not that place which is called Adam, for
the countenance and the nose are not uncovered, but the forehead alone.

606\. And in that part--(*i.e., the forehead*) the whole countenance is
not found, for that (*forehead*) is not called Adam, and therefore is it
said: "He is not a man that He may repent" (*i.e., He, HOAVA, H, is not
Adam), &c.*). So also is it as regardeth the (*proportion of*) Victory
in the other parts of the body (*of Macroprosopus*).

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[183:1](tku38.htm#fr_105) Namely, that of
Macroprosopus.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[185:1](tku38.htm#fr_106) *I.e.*, in their
usual place in the order of the alphabet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI: Concerning the Eyes of Microprosopus](tku39)
