[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku46)  [Next](tku48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXXIX.

### CONCERNING THE BODY OF MICROPROSOPUS IN GENERAL, UNDER THE CONDITION OF AN ANDROGYN.

919\. This have we learned. Rabbi Schimeon said: All those dispositions
and all those words ought to be revealed by those who are weighed in the
balance, and not by those who have not entered therein, but by those who
have both entered therein and departed therefrom. For he who entereth
therein and goeth not out therefrom, better were it for that man that he
had never been born.

920\. The sum of all is this: The Ancient of the Ancient Ones existeth
in Microprosopus; He is the all-existent One; He was all, He is all, He
will be all; He will not be changed, neither is He changed, neither hath
He been changed.

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

921\. But by means of those conformations hath He conformed Himself in
that form which comprehendeth all forms, in that form which
comprehendeth all names.

922\. But this form wherein He Himself only appeareth is in the
similitude of this form; and is not that form, but is analogous unto
this form <span id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_161)--namely, when there are
associated therewith the crowns and the diadems and the perfection of
all things.

923\. And therefore is the form of the man the form of the superiors and
inferiors which are included therein.

924\. And because that form comprehendeth the superiors and the
inferiors, therefore by such a disposition is the Most Holy Ancient One
conformed; and thus also is Microprosopus configurated in this
disposition.

925\. And if thou sayest: What, then, is the difference between the one
and the other?

926\. Assuredly all things are equally (*balanced in the*) Unity. But
yet from our point of view (i.e., from our plane) His paths are divided,
and from our point of view (*on our plane*) is judgment found, and from
the side which is turned towards us are (*His attributes*) by turns
duplicated. <span id="fr_163"></span>[2](#fn_162)

927\. And these Arcana are not revealed save unto the reapers of the
Sacred Land. <span id="fr_164"></span>[3](#fn_163)

928\. For it is written, Ps. xxv. 14: "The secret of Tetragrammaton is
with them that fear Him."

929\. Also it is written, Gen. ii. 7: "VIlTzR IHVH ALHIM ATh HADM,
*Va-Yeyetzer Tetragrammaton Eloim Ath Ha-Adam*. <span
id="fr_165"></span>[4](#fn_164) And Tetragrammaton Elohim formed the

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

substance of man, completed (*him*) formation by formation from the most
ethereal (*portion*) of the refined (*element of*) earth (otherwise
formation within formation from the best, &c.)

930\. And this is *Va-Yeyetzer* VIITzR, written with two (*Yod's*, I's
*instead of VITzR, Va-Yetzer, with one Yod*, I).

931\. Wherefore? There is an Arcanum of the Most Holy Ancient One, and
an Arcanum of Microprosopus.

932\. VIITzR, Va-Yeyetzer, and formed. What did (*Tetragrammaton
Elohim*) form? Form in form. And this is VIlTzR.

933\. And what is form in form? The two names, which are called the full
name, IHVH ALHIM, *Tetragrammaton Elohim*.

934\. And this is the Arcanum of the two I's, Yods, in VIITzR; and of
how it hath been conformed form within form; namely, in the disposition
of the perfect name, Tetragrammaton Elohim.

935\. And in what are they comprehended? In the supernal beard
(otherwise, in this supernal form which is called (*the supernal*) man;
the man who comprehendeth Male and Female equally).

936\. And therefore is it written: "ATh HADM, *Ath Ha-Adam* (τὸυ
ἄνθρωπου), the substance of man," because it comprehendeth equally the
Male and the Female, for to the word ADM, ATh is subjoined, so as to
extend and exaggerate the species which is here produced. Most assuredly
here therefore is it as Male and as Female.

937\. "OPR MN HADMH, *Ophir Men Ha-Adamah*, from the dust of the
ground," dust, form within form (otherwise, from the most ethereal
portion of the refined element of earth, one within the other).

939\. But wherefore are all these things so? Because that from the
supernals there was sent down into him (*Man*) the Arcanum of the
supernal Arcana, even the end of all Arcana.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

939\. This is that which is herein written: "VIPCh BAPIV NShMThChIIM,
*Ve-Yepech Be-Ephaiu Neschamath Chiim*, and breathed into his nostrils
the Neschamath <span id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_165) of (*their*) lives.

940\. Their souls, from which all things living, superiors and
inferiors, alike depend, and wherein they have their existence.

941\. "VIHI HADM LNPSh ChIH, *Va-Yehi Ha-Adam Le-Nephesch Chiah*, and
the Adam was formed into a living Nephesch," so that it (*the physical
Nephesch form*) might be attached to himself (otherwise, so that it
might be developed in him), and that he might form himself into similar
conformations; <span id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_166) and that he might
project himself in that Neschamah from path into path, <span
id="fr_168"></span>[3](#fn_167) even unto the end and completion of all
the paths.

942\. So that in all this Neschamah might be found, and that it might be
extended into all, and that it itself might be still one.

943\. Whence he who taketh this away from the universe doth the same
thing as if he should take away this Neschamah for the purpose of
setting in its place another Neschamah beside it. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[4](#fn_168)

944\. And therefore shall such a man and his remembrance be cut off from
generations unto generations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_160"></span>[225:1](tku46.htm#fr_161) Microprosopus, the
*Vau*, V, of IHVH. The sea is Binah, the Supernal Mother, the third
Sephira, and the first H of IHVH.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[226:1](tku47.htm#fr_162) I take the sense of
this second clause to be that He is not really in the outward and
visible form of a material man; but that he can be best expressed hereby
in a symbolic spiritual form. Cf. Ezek. i. 26; "And upon the LIKENESS of
the throne was the LIKENESS as the APPEARANCE of a man above it."

<span id="fn_162"></span>[226:2](tku47.htm#fr_163) In connection with
this section read ch. i. §§ 5, 6, 7, and 5, of the "Book of Concealed
Mystery."

<span id="fn_163"></span>[226:3](tku47.htm#fr_164) *I.e.*, to the
students of the Qabalah.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[226:4](tku47.htm#fr_165) See also "Book Of
Concealed Mystery," ch. ii. § 23.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[228:1](tku47.htm#fr_166) Neschamath is either
the plural of Neschamah, *defectively written*, or else shows that
Neschamah is *in regimine* to Chiim, and evidently means the united
higher souls of *both Adam and Eve conjoined in one body*. (For
explanation of Neschamah, &c., see Introduction.)

<span id="fn_166"></span>[228:2](tku47.htm#fr_167) That is into
conformations similar to those of the Supernal Man.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[228:3](tku47.htm#fr_168) That is, into forms,
conditions, and qualities analogous to the Sephiroth. (See Introduction
regarding the soul, and Plate showing the analogy between the soul, the
letters of Tetragrammaton, and the four worlds, where the Sephiroth are
shown reflected in Nephesch.)

<span id="fn_168"></span>[228:4](tku47.htm#fr_169) Apparently the sense
of this passage is intended to combat Atheism. and to show that it is
logically absurd to deny the existence of a Spirit of God which works in
the universe; inasmuch that if this be denied, at all events something
analogous in its general properties will have to be substituted for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL: Concerning the Feminine Portion of
Microprosopus](tku48)
