[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku42)  [Next](tku44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

# CHAPTER XXXV.

### CONCERNING THE FIRST PART OF THE BEARD OF MICROPROSOPUS.

819\. "IN the first conformation the hair is disposed from above, and
goeth forth before the opening of the ears, beneath the locks which hang
down over the ears; and the hairs descend, hairs above hairs, even unto
the beginning of the mouth.

820\. "This have we learned. All those hairs which are in the beard are
harder than all the hairs of the locks of the hair of the head. But the
hair of the head is longer and bendeth more easily, while these hairs
(*of the beard*) are not so long.

821\. Of the hairs of the head some are hard and some are soft.

822\. And whensoever the white locks of the Ancient of Days reach
forward into Microprosopus, it is written that, Prov. i. 20: 'Wisdom
crieth without.'

823\. "What is this (word) 'without'? In this (*instance*) in
Microprosopus, wherein are conjoined the two (*forms of the*) brain. Two
forms of the brain, sayest thou? But it should rather be said, four
forms of the brain.

824\. (*Assuredly*) "there are three (*forms of the*) brain in
Microprosopus, and they are found in the three cavities of the skull of
His head.

825\. "And there is one calm and tranquil brain residing in its own
clear brilliancy, which comprehendeth all the three (*forms of the*)
brain, and from it are brought forth the productions of the hairs which
are produced and continued in equilibrium in the white hair into that
part of Microprosopus, into His three (forms of) brain (*namely*), so
that therein in Him are found four (*forms of the*) brain.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

826\. "And hence are perfected the four texts which are written on the
phylacteries, because in them is contained the Holy Name of the Ancient
of Days, the Ancient of the Ancient Ones, and that of Microprosopus.

827\. "For this is the perfection of the Holy Name, concerning which it
is written, Deut. xxviii. 10: 'And all the people of the earth shall see
that the name of Tetragrammaton have been invoked over thee, and they
shall be afraid of thee.'

828\. The Name of the Lord is this very Name of Tetragrammaton, which
formeth the canals and hollows of the phylacteries.

829\. "And therefore is it said: 'Wisdom crieth without,' Prov. i. 20,
because it is herein found (*i.e., in Microprosopus*).

830\. "For truly the Ancient of the Ancient Ones, even He who is
concealed with all concealments, is not found, neither doth His wisdom
come forth (*openly*); seeing that His wisdom is concealed in all, and
doth not make itself manifest.

831\. "And since there are four (*forms of the*) brain associated
together, and that herefrom, even from Microprosopus, there flow down
four fountains in four directions, and that they are all distributed
from one fountain, which proceedeth from them all, therefore are there
four. <span id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_146)

832\. Also we have learned: From the Wisdom which is comprehended in the
Quaternary the hairs flow down,

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

which hang in curls upon curls, and all are strong and close, and they
extend and flow down singly each in its own direction.

833\. "And so many thousand thousand myriads of myriads depend from them
that they are innumerable.

834\. "This is that same which is written, Cant. v. 11: 'His locks are
bushy, ThLThLIM, *Teltelim*,' as if it were ThLI ThLIM, curls heaped
upon curls.

835\. "And all are strong and close (*fit*) for breaking (*whatsoever is
opposed to them*), hard as the rock, and as hardest stone.

836\. "Until they can make openings in the skull, and the fountains can
flow down beneath the locks, those strong fountains flow forth in
separate directions, and in separate ways.

837\. "And because those locks are black and obscure, it is written, Job
xii. 22: 'He discovereth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out
to light the shadow of death.'

838\. "Also we have learned that those hairs of the beard are so much
harder than those hairs of the head, because these alone make themselves
so prominent, and are easily found, and are hard in their paths. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_147)

839\. "Wherefore sayest thou that they are hard? Is it because they all
symbolize Judgment? By no means; for truly in those dispositions Mercy
as well as Judgment is found.

840\. "When the thirteen fountains of the rivers of oil descend, all
these are mercies.

841\. "But yet we have learned that all those hairs of the beard are
hard. Wherefore? Those which symbolize mercies necessarily must be hard
in order to divert the course of Judgment.

842\. "And all those which denote Judgment, are also firm; and therefore
it is necessary in every instance that they should both be hard.

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

843\. "When the Universe hath need of Mercy, mercies are strong, and
prevail over Judgment; but when it requireth Judgment, Judgment is
strong, and prevaileth over Mercy; and therefore is it necessary that in
each instance they should be firm and strong.

844\. "And whensoever Mercy is required, those hairs which symbolize
Mercy stand forth, and the beard is evident in those hairs only
(otherwise, is contained by those hairs only), and all are abundant
mercies.

845\. "But when Judgment is required the beard is evident in those hairs
only (*which denote judgment*), and all consist in judgments.

846\. "But when that holy white beard <span
id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_148) is uncovered, all these (*hairs denoting
Mercy*) and all those (hairs denoting Judgment) are alike illuminated
and made brilliant, like as when a man cleanseth himself in a deep river
from his uncleanness.

847\. "And all consist together in Mercy, and there is no Judgment to be
found at all.

848\. "And when all those <span id="fr_150"></span>[2](#fn_149) nine
forms shine together, all are made white with Mercy.

849\. "And therefore Moses saith in another place, Num. xiv. 18:
'Tetragrammaton is ARK APIM, *Arikh Aphim*, long-suffering (*literally
long of nose*), and of great mercy.'

850\. "And that which he had said concerning truth, <span
id="fr_151"></span>[3](#fn_150)

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Exod. xxxiv. 6, he addeth not (*in this
passage*), because the Arcanum of the matter is these nine measurements
which shine down from the Ancient of Days into Microprosopus.

851\. "For when Moses in the second passage rehearseth these praises of
God, Num. xxiv. 18, he enumereth the nine conformations; and these are
the conformations of the beard, even those which are found in
Microprosopus, and descend from the Ancient of Days and shine down into
Him.

852\. "The word AMTh, *Emeth*, Truth, therefore dependeth from the
Ancient One; whence in this passage Moses saith not: 'And in truth.'

853\. "We have learned that the hairs of the head of Microprosopus are
all hard and curling, and not soft. <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_151)

854\. "For we see that in Him three forms of the brain are found in the
three cavities (*of the skull*), which shine forth from the hidden and
concealed brain.

855\. "And because the brain of the Ancient of Days is tranquil and
quiet, like good wine upon the tees, hence all His hairs are soft, and
anointed with excellent oil.

856\. "And therefore is it written, Dan. vii. 9: 'His head like pure
wool.'

857\. "But those which are in Microprosopus are partly hard, and partly
not hard, because they all hang down, and are not diverted from their
course.

858\. "And therefore Wisdom <span id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_152)
floweth forth and proceedeth (*therefrom*); but it is not the Wisdom of
Wisdom, for that is quiet and tranquil.

859\. "For we have learned that no one knoweth the brain of the Ancient
of Days save Himself alone.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

860\. "This is that very thing which is said, Job xxviii. 23: 'God
understandeth the way thereof,' &c.; which (*words*) are spoken
concerning Microprosopus."

861\. Rabbi Schimeon said (*unto him*): "Blessed be thou, O my son! in
that Holy and Blessed One, in this world and in the world to come!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_146"></span>[214:1](tku43.htm#fr_147) This four proceeding
from one, and containing all things, is precisely the Pythagorean
doctrine of the Tetractys, which Pythagoras probably obtained from
qabalistic sources, though indeed most religions of antiquity attached
considerable importance to this number four. Four is said to contain the
whole Decad, because the sum of the first four numbers = ten; 1 + 2 + 3
+ 4 = 10. But eight is the reflection of four, and eight is IHVH ADNI
(see Introduction). And 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8 = 36. the number
of the Decans (or groups of ten degrees) in the Zodiac. But 5 + 6 + 7 +
8 = 26, the number of the IHVH. Therefore thirty-six represents the sum
of the letters of the Tetragrammaton, and the number of the Sephiroth.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[215:1](tku43.htm#fr_148) See definition of
term "path" in Introduction.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[216:1](tku43.htm#fr_149) Which is of course
that of Macroprosopus. the Ancient of Days.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[216:2](tku43.htm#fr_150) The nine
conformations into which the beard of Microprosopus is divided.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[216:3](tku43.htm#fr_151) I give these two
passages side by side for the reader's benefit.

Exod. xxxiv. 6 and 7: "The LORD, the LORD God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth.

"Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and
sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity
of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, unto
the third and to the fourth generation."

Num. xiv. 18: "The LORD is long-suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving
iniquity and transgression, and by no means clearing the guilty.
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third
and fourth generation."

<span id="fn_151"></span>[217:1](tku43.htm#fr_152) It appears to read
thus in the Chaldee and in the Latin alike, though this statement is
contradicted distinctly both in § 587 and in § 857. I should think the
word "LA, not," before "soft," is a mistake, or else that the passage
refers to the hair of the *beard*, and not that of the *head*.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[217:2](tku43.htm#fr_153) That is, Chokmah of
the second Sephira, and not that Chokmah which is its root concealed in
Kether: for in Kether are all the other Sephiroth contained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI: Concerning the Second Part of the Beard of
Microprosopus](tku44)
