[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku53)  [Next](tku55.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# HADRA ZVTA QDIShA

#### (HA IDRA ZUTA QADISHA)

###### OR

## THE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY.

## CHAPTER I.

### WHICH CONTAINETH THE INTRODUCTION.

1\. TRADITION.--On that day on which the Companions were assembled
together in the house of Rabbi Schimeon, and on which he had arranged
his affairs because he was about to depart from the world, before him
were Rabbi Eleazar his son, and Rabbi Abba, and the rest of the
Companions; and the house was full.

2\. Therefore lifting up his eyes, Rabbi Schimeon saw that the house was
full. And Rabbi Schimeon wept, saying: "The second time when I was sick,
and Rabbi Benchas Ben Yair was in my presence, and until I had chosen my
place, life hath been prolonged unto me even until now.

3\. "When I was restored, fire surrounded (*my habitation*) which
hitherto hath never ceased, neither did any man enter in unto me without
permission.

4\. "But now I see that it is taken away, and that the house is filled."

5\. Whilst they were sitting down, Rabbi Schimeon,

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

opening his eyes, beheld a certain vision, and lo! fire surrounded the
house!

6\. Therefore all (*the others*) went forth, and Rabbi Eleazar his son,
and Rabbi Abba remained; but the other Companions sat without.

7\. Rabbi Schimeon said unto Rabbi Eleazar his son: "Go forth, and see
whether Rabbi Yitzchaq be present, for whom I have made myself surety.

8\. "And say thou unto him that he dispose his affairs, and that he may
sit down with me. Blessed is his portion."

9\. Rabbi Schimeon arose and again sat down; and he laughed aloud, and
rejoicing, said: "Where are the Companions?"

10\. Rabbi Eleazar arose and introduced them, and they sat down in his
presence.

11\. Rabbi Schimeon lifted up his hands and prayed a prayer, and was
joyful.

12\. And he said: "Let those Companions who were in the former
Conclave <span id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_208.md) assemble here."

13\. Therefore, all the others having gone forth, there remained Rabbi
Eleazar his son, and Rabbi Abba, and Rabbi Yehudah, and Rabbi Yosi Bar
Yoqeb, and Rabbi Chiya.

14\. In the meantime Rabbi Yitzchaq entered, to whom Rabbi Schimeon
said: "How excellent is thy lot! How much joy is this day stored up for
thee!"

15\. Rabbi Abba sat down behind his (*i.e., Rabbi Schimeon's*) back, and
Rabbi Eleazar before him (*i.e., Rabbi Schimeon*).

16\. Rabbi Schimeon spake and said: "Surely now is the time of
benevolence, and I desire to enter without confusion into the world to
come.

17\. "And verily these sacred things, which hereunto have never been
revealed, I desire to reveal before the Schekhinah;

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

18\. "Lest they should say that I have kept back anything, and that I
have been taken away from the world; for even until now these things
have been concealed in my heart, so that having entered into these very
matters I may be with them in the world to come.

19\. "But this is my arrangement of you; let Rabbi Abba write, and let
Rabbi Eleazar my son speak openly; but let the rest of the Companions in
silence meditate in their heart."

20\. Rabbi Abba arose from his seat behind him, and Rabbi Eleazar his
son sat down.

21\. He said unto him, "Arise, O my son, for another shall sit in that
seat;" and Rabbi Eleazar arose.

22\. Rabbi Schimeon covered himself and sat down; and he commenced, and
said Ps. cxv. 17: "'The dead shall not praise IH, *Yah*, nor all they
who go down into silence!

23\. "'The dead shall not praise Yah; 'so it is certain that it is
assuredly those who are called dead; for He, God, the most Holy One--may
He be blessed!--is called the Living One, and is Himself commemorated
among those who are called living, and not with those who are called
dead.

24\. "And the end of this text runneth thus: 'Nor all they who go down
into silence;' for all they who go down into silence remain in Gehenna.

25\. "There is another reason appertaining to those who are called
living, for God the must Holy One--may He be blessed!--desireth their
glory."

26\. Rabbi Schimeon said: "How different is this occasion from that of
the former conclave! For into a certain conclave <span
id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_209.md) came He, the most Holy and Blessed God,
and His Chariot.

27\. "Now verily He, the Holy One, is here--may He

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

be blessed--and He hath approached with those just who are in the Garden
of Eden, <span id="fr_212"></span>[1](#fn_210.md) which did not occur in
the former conclave.

28\. "And God, the Most Holy One--may He be blessed--more promoteth the
glory of the just than His own glory.

29\. "As it is written concerning Jeroboam, who sacrificed unto and
served other gods, and yet God, the Most Holy One--may He be
blessed!--waited for him.

30\. "But because he stretched forth his hand against Iddo the prophet,
his hand became withered.

31\. "For it is written, 1 Kings xiii. 4: 'And his hand became withered,
&c. Here it is not written that it was because he served other gods, but
because he extended his hand against Iddo the prophet, &c.

32\. "Now, therefore, God the Most Holy One--may He be
blessed!--promoteth their glory (*i.e.*, that of the just), and they all
come with Him,"

33\. He said. "Verily, Rav Hamenuna the elder is here, and around him
are seventy just represented in his circle, of whom certain shine with
the splendour of the Ancient and Most Holy One, the Concealed with all
Concealments.

33. <span id="fr_213"></span>[2](#fn_211.md) He, I say, cometh, in order
that with joy he may hear those words which I shall speak."

34\. And when he had sat down be said: "Assuredly here a seat hath been
set aside for Rabbi Benchas Ben Yair."

35\. The companions who were there trembled greatly, and they arose, and
sat down in the lower part of the house; but Rabbi Eleazar and Rabbi
Abba (*still sat*) before Rabbi Schimeon.

36\. Rabbi Schimeon said: "In the former Assembly we acted thus, namely,
that all the companions spoke, and I also with them, by turns.

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

37\. "Now I shall speak alone, and let all hear my words superiors and
inferiors; blessed be my portion this day!"

38\. Rabbi Schimeon commenced, and said, Cant. vii. 10: "'I am my
beloved's, and his desire is towards me.'

39\. "As long as I have been bound unto this world in one link with God,
the Most Holy One--may he be blessed!--have I been bound, and therefore
now is His desire towards me.

40\. "For He Himself and His whole holy company come, so that with joy
they may hear the concealed words, and the praise of Him, the Most Holy
Ancient One, the Concealed with all Concealments.

41\. "And He separateth Himself ever more and more; He is separated from
all things, neither yet doth He altogether separate Himself, seeing that
unto Himself all things adhere, and that He Himself adhereth unto all;
HVA, *Hoa*, He Himself is all; He the Most Holy Ancient of all Ancients,
the Concealed with all Concealments.

42\. "He hath been formed, and yet as it were He hath not been formed.
He hath been conformed, so that He may sustain all things; yet is He not
formed, seeing that He is not discovered.

43\. "When He is conformed He produceth nine Lights, which shine forth
from Him, from His conformation.

44\. "And from Himself those Lights shine forth, and they emit flames,
and they rush forth and are extended on every side, like as from an
elevated lantern the rays of. light stream down on every side.

45\. "And those rays of light, <span id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_212.md)
which are extended, when anyone draweth near unto them, so that they may
be examined, are not found, and there is only the lantern alone.

46\. "So also is He the Most Holy and Ancient One: He is that highest
Light concealed with all concealments,

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

and He is not found; those rays <span
id="fr_215"></span>[1](tku55.htm#fn_213) (*proceeding from Him*.md) being
excepted, which are extended, which are revealed, and which are hidden.

47\. "And they are called the Holy Name, and therefore are all things
One.

48\. "Which truly our companions have said in former books, that certain
paths have been created by the Most Holy Ancient One, who is revealed
through them collectively and severally; since they are the
conformations of the Most Holy Ancient One, concerning them now there is
not time for examination.

49" I have spoken concerning them in the Holy Assembly, and I have
beheld that which before I did not understand in such a manner, and I
have hidden the matter in my heart.

50\. "But now I alone will describe these things before the Holy King,
and all those assuredly just men who have assembled to hear these
words."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_208"></span>[260:1](tku54.htm#fr_210.md) That is, who had
formed part of the Greater Holy Assembly.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[261:1](tku54.htm#fr_211.md) Meaning that the
Greater Holy Assembly had been as it were the reflection of the conclave
of the Sephiroth above. The word used for "chariot" is not *Mercavah*,
but *Rethikh*.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[262:1](tku54.htm#fr_212.md) *I.e.*, The Paradise
above.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[262:2](tku54.htm#fr_213.md) In the original both
this and the foregoing section, apparently by an oversight, have the
number 33 attached to them.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[263:1](tku54.htm#fr_214.md) Carrying on the
simile of the lantern and its rays.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Concerning the Skull of the Ancient One...His
Brain...Three Heads...Hair...Discriminatory Paths](tku55.md)
