[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku51)  [Next](tku53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XLIV.

### FURTHER REMARKS CONCERNING THE SUPERNAL MAN.

1059\. RABBI SCHIMEON spake, and said: Let us behold. The superiors are
below, and the inferiors are above. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_190)

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

1060\. The superiors are below. That is the form of the Man which is the
Universal Superior Conformation.

1061\. We have learned this which is written, <span
id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_191) "And the just man is the foundation,
ISVD, *Yesod*, of the world," Prov. x. 25, because He comprehendeth the
Hexad in one enumeration. <span id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_191)

1062\. And this is that which is written, Cant. v. 15: "His legs are as
columns, ShSh, *Shesh*, of the Number Six." <span
id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_192)

1063\. We have learned in the "Book of Concealed Mystery" that in man
are comprehended the Superior Crowns in general and in special; and that
in man are comprehended the Inferior Crowns in special and in general.

1064\. The Superior Crowns in general (*are comprehended in*) the figure
of all those conformations, as hath been already said.

1065\. (*The Superior Crowns*) in special (*are comprehended*) in the
fingers of the hands, which are ChMSh KNGD ChMSh, *Chamesh Ke-Neged
Chamesh*, Five over against (or opposed to, or chief above) Five. <span
id="fr_195"></span>[3](#fn_193)

1066\. The Inferior Crowns (*are comprehended in*) the toes of the feet,
which are special and general.

1067\. For the body is not seen with them, seeing they are extraneous to
the body. And therefore they

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

are not in the body, seeing the body hath receded from them.

1068\. For if so, what is this, Zach. xiv. 4: "And His feet shall stand
in that day?" Truly the feet of the body, the Lords of Judgments to
exercise vengeance.

1069\. And they are called the Lords of the Feet; and certain of them
are powerful, and the Lords of the Judgments, who are below, adhere unto
the inferior crowns.

1070\. We have learned that all those superior conformations which are
in the Holy Body, in the Male and in the Female, which (*arrangement of
Male and Female*) is the proper ordering (*of the Form*) of the man, are
deduced from themselves by turns, and that by turns they adhere each to
its (*order of deviation*): and that by turns they flow down into
themselves (*i.e., the duplicate Male and Female join*).

1071\. Like as the blood floweth through the passages of the veins--now
through one, now through another; now hither, now thither; from one
place into another place.

1072\. And those interior portions of the Body bind themselves together
by turns until all the worlds are illuminated, and receive benediction
because of them.

1073\. We have learned that all those Crowns which are not comprehended
in the Body are all far distant and impure, and pollute whom they are
permitted--whosoever, namely, cometh near unto them so that he may learn
anything from them.

1074. <span id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_194) This have we learned.
Wherefore, then, is there so great a desire for them among the Disciples
of Wisdom? For no other reason than that they (the Crowns which are
impure) should approach that Holy Body, and that thus perchance through
them (the Disciples of Wisdom) they (the impure Crowns) may seek to be
comprehended in that Body.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

1075\. But if thou sayest that if it be so, surely the Holy Angels also
are not included in the comprehension of the Body.

1076\. Most assuredly it is not so in the least. For if, He being absent
from them, there were Holy Ones without the conformative arrangement of
the Body, surely (*He being absent from them*) they could neither
(*continue to*) be holy, nor to subsist.

1077\. And nevertheless it is written, Dan. x. 6: "And his body like as
ThRShISh, *Tarshish*;" also, Ezek. x. 12: "And their backs full of
eyes;" also, Dan. ix. 21: "The man Gabriel." All these passages refer to
the analogy of the Man.

1078\. Those being accepted which exist not in the ordered arrangement
of the Body; for those are impure, and pollute him--namely, whosoever
shall approach unto them.

1079\. Also, we have learned that these are found to proceed from the
spirit of the left side, which is not mitigated in human form; and they
have gone out from the ordered arrangement of the Holy Body, neither do
they adhere unto it.

1080\. And therefore are they all impure, and they wander to and fro,
and fly through the world.

1081\. And they are entered into the mouth of the Great Abyss, so that
they may adhere unto that former judgment which had gone forth from the
ordered arrangement of the Body, and which is called the Inferior Qain.

1082\. And they wander to and fro, and fly up and down, through the
whole world, being carried abroad hither and thither; and they adhere
not in the Syntagma of the Body.

1083\. And therefore are they without, and impure, among all the hosts
above and below; like as it is written, Lev. xiii. 46: "And his
habitation shall be without the camp."

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

1084\. But from the Spirit which is called Abel, which hath been more
mitigated in the Syntagma of the Holy Body, others go forth who have
been more mitigated, and can adhere unto the body, but cannot completely
be inherent within it.

1085\. They all hang in the air, and go forth from this genus of those
Impure Ones, and bear whatsoever may be said above and below; and
concerning them they have knowledge who have spoken concerning them.

1086\. Also, this is the tradition in the "Book of Concealed Mystery."
When the Syntagma of the Supernal Man had been mitigated as to the Holy
Body, in Male and Female form, these two were conjoined together again
for the third time. <span id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_195)

1087\. And the temperation of all things proceeded therefrom, and the
superior and inferior worlds were mitigated.

1088\. And thenceforth the superior and inferior worlds are bound
together under the form of the Holy Body, and the worlds are associated
together, and cohere together, and have been made one Body. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[2](#fn_196)

1089\. And since all things are one Body, the Schechinah Superior, the
Schechinah Inferior--that Holy One, may His be blessed above! that Holy
One, may He be blessed below!--hence is His Spirit drawn forth, and She
entereth into the One Body, and in all things there appeareth nothing
but the Unity.

1090\. QDVSh, QDVSh, QDVSh, IHVH TzBAVTh; *Qadosh, Qadosh, Qadosh, Yod
He Vau He Tzabaoth*; Holy, holy, holy, Tetragrammaton of the Hosts! the
whole earth is full of Thy glory, for all things are Thy One Body.

1091\. We have learned that because the one hath

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

been tempered by the other, hence it is written, Cant. i. 11: "We will
make thee borders of gold with studs of silver." For judgment and mercy
are connected together (otherwise, judgment is tempered through mercy),
and She is mitigated by Him.

1092\. And therefore She ascendeth not without Him, like as with the
palms; one sex ariseth not without the other.

1093\. And therefore have we learned by tradition that if any one in
this world cutteth himself off from the race of mankind, he hereafter,
when he quitteth this world, shall not enter into the Syntagma of
mankind, which is called the Holy Body; but (*shall enter*) among those
who are not called mankind, so that he shall go forth from the Syntagma
of the Body.

1094\. We have learned in exotic tradition that this is the sense of "We
will make the borders of gold with studs of silver" (Cant. i. 11), that
judgment is mitigated through mercy, so that there can be no judgment in
which mercy is not found.

1095\. And therefore it is written, *ibid*. 10: "Thy cheeks are
beautiful in their outlines, and thy neck in pearls."

1096\. "In outlines (or borders)," as it is written: "He will make thee
borders of gold."

1097\. "In pearls," answering to that which is written "With studs of
silver."

1098\. "Thy neck" involveth the perfection of the Woman. This is found
to be the habitation of the Sanctuary above, but the Jerusalem below.

1099\. And all this is after that She is mitigated through the Male, and
They twain are become one being, even the Syntagma of Truth.

1100\. What is this Truth? Wherein is found all Truth?

1101\. Thus have we learned. If any one be called Adam, and his soul
(*Neschamah*) goeth from him, and he

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

dieth, it is forbidden to leave him in his abode so that he should abide
upon the earth.

1102\. On account of the honour of that Body wherein no corruption can
appear.

1103\. For it is written, Ps. xlix. 13: "Man (*Adam*) shall not abide in
honour;" that is, Adam, who is more worthy that all honour, shall not
abide.

1104\. Wherefore? Because if it were thus, he would be like unto the
beasts (BHMVTh, *Behemoth*) which perish.

1105\. In what manner is it with the beast? He is not in the race of
Adam, neither is he able to receive the Holy Spirit (RVChA QDIShA), for
thus also would he be like unto the beast were his body without the
Spirit, when at the same time that body (*of his*), which is the most
honourable of all (*bodies, seeing it is the image of the Supernal*), is
not meet to be associated with those things which are ignominious.

1106\. Also we have learned in the "Book of Concealed Mystery," that
were any one permitted to remain in such (*image of the*) Holy Body, and
yet without the Spirit (*Ruacha*), there would be a void in the Body of
the World.

1107\. For assuredly, therefore, it could not be permitted unto him that
he should abide in the holy place, in that earth wherein justice
abideth. (Otherwise: Under the command of the Holy Crown, *Kether*, of
the King, *Microprosopus*, in the earth, concerning which it is written,
Isa. i. 21, "Justice abideth in Her.")

1108. <span id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_197) Since that venerable Body is
the Form of the King; but if it were thus permitted to remain, then it
would be counted as one of the beasts. (Otherwise: Since this venerable
Body is called the Form of the King, and if it were thus left abiding,
it would be like as the

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

beast.) Therefore is it said, "Like unto the beasts which perish."

1109\. We have learned this which is written, Gen. vi. 2: "And the sons
of the Elohim beheld the daughters of Adam." These (*sons of the
Elohim*) are they who were withdrawn, and who fell into the mouth of the
Great Abyss. <span id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_198)

1110\. "The daughters of Adam." (*Here it is to be. noted that it is
written HADM, Ha-Adam, the initial being demonstrative and emphatic,
signifying*) of that especial Adam.

1111\. And it is written: "And they came in unto them . . . the same
were mighty men, who were from the Earth," &c. From that place, namely,
which is called the earth, like as the tradition is concerning the
phrase IMI OVLM, *Yemi Olahm*, the day of the world.

1112\. The impurities <span id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_199) of the Name.
From them have gone forth the Spirits, RVChIN, *Ruachin*, and the
Demons, ShDIN, *Shedin*, into the world, so that they may adhere unto
the wicked.

1113\. "There were HNPILIM, *Ha-Nephilim*, Giants, BARTz, *Be-Aretz*, in
the earth;" for the restraining of those who were left, who existed not
in the earth.

1114\. Those giants are OZA, *Auza*, and OZAL, *Auzael*, who were in the
earth, the sons of the Elohim were not in the earth. And this is an
Arcanum, and all these things are said.

1115\. It is written, Gen. vi. 6: "And it repented Tetragrammaton that
He had formed Adam in the earth;" *i.e.*, for the restriction of the
Supernal Adam, who is not in the earth.

1116\. "And it repented Tetragrammaton;" this is said concerning
Microprosopus.

1117\. "And He was grieved about His heart;" it is

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

not written, VIOTzB, *Va-Yautzeb*, and He affected with grief; but
VIThOTzB, *Va-Yethautzeb*, and He was touched with grief; i.e., He was
affected with grief from whom the matter depended, for the restriction
of Him who was not touched with grid.

1118\. "About His heart." It is not written, "within His heart," but
"about His heart like as when any man is afflicted with grief, and
mourneth before his Lord; for herein it is referred unto the heart of
all hearts.

1119\. And Tetragrammaton said: "I will destroy the Adam whom I have
created, from off the face of HADMH, *Ha-Adamah*, the Earth," &c., for
the restriction <span id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_200) of the Adam, who
is supernal.

1120\. And if thou sayest that the Inferior Adam is alone to be
understood, it is to be known that these cannot altogether be opposed,
seeing that the one existeth not without the other.

1121\. And unless *Chokmah*, Wisdom, could be hidden from all, all
things could be conformed like as from the beginning.

1122\. Hence it is said, Prov. viii. 12: "ANI ChKMH, *Ani Chokmah*, I,
Wisdom, have dwelt with Prudence;" read it not ShKNThI, *Shekenethi*, I
have dwelt; but ShIKNTnI, *Shikeneth-i*, My Shechinah or my Presence.

1123\. And unless Adam were thus, the world could not consist; like as
it is written, Prov. iii. 19: "Tetragrammaton in Chokmah hath founded
the earth, IHVH BChKMH ISD ARTz, *Tetragrammaton Bo-Chokmah Yesed
Aretz*.

1124\. Also it is written, Gen. vi. 8: "And Noah found grace in the eyes
of Tetragrammaton."

1125\. Also we have learned that all brains depend from this brain
(*supernal*).

1126\. And *Chokmah*, Wisdom, also is a general name, but this concealed
Wisdom corroborateth and conformeth

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

the form of the Man, so that He may abide in his place.

1127\. Like as it is written, Eccl. vii. 19: "Wisdom is a strength to a
wise man more than ten rulers which are in a city;" which (*ten*) are
the integral conformation of the man.

1128\. Adam, truly, is the interior conformation, wherein consisteth the
RVCh, Ruach, Spirit; like as it is said, 1 Sam. xvi. 6: "Because Adam
seeth according to the eyes, but Tetragrammaton seeth according to the
heart," which is within the interior parts.

1129\. And in that formation appeareth the true perfection of all
things, which existeth above the Throne. Like as it is written: "And the
appearance as the likeness of Adam upon it from above" (Ezek. 1. 26).

1130\. Also it is written, Dan. vii. 13: "And, behold, there came with
the clouds of heaven one like unto a son of man, and even unto the
Ancient of Days he came, and they made Him approach unto Him."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_190"></span>[242:1](tku52.htm#fr_191) Which is equivalent
to the great magical precept of Hermes Trismegistus, in the second
clause of the Smaragdine Tablet: "That which is <span id="page_243">p.
243</span> below is like that which is above, and that which is above is
like that which is below, for the performance of the miracles of the one
substance."

<span id="fn_191"></span>[243:1](tku52.htm#fr_193) It is not at first
sight clear what is meant by this statement. But if we examine the
passage closely, we shall see that the "just man" is taken for
Microprosopus, who is the son, the "form of the man"; "comprehending the
Hexad," because he is composed of the six Sephiroth--*Chesed*,
*Geburah*, *Tiphereth*, *Netzach*, *Hod*, and *Yesod*.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[243:2](tku52.htm#fr_194) The ordinary
translation of this passage is: "His legs are as pillars of marble."
ShSh may he translated either "marble" or "the Number Six," according to
the pointing.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[243:3](tku52.htm#fr_195) Compare "Sepher
Yetzirah," ch. i. § 3: "Ten are the restricting numerations
(*Sephiroth*). The Number Ten (is that of the) fingers--Five as chief
above (or over against, or opposed to) Five, ChMSh KNGD ChMSh, and the
pure Unity enthroned in Her strength in the Word of Renewal. and in the
Word of Might."

<span id="fn_194"></span>[244:1](tku52.htm#fr_196) This section
apparently intends to inculcate the doctrine that it is the duty of the
righteous to endeavour to improve not only the ungodly but even the
demons themselves.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[246:1](tku52.htm#fr_197) For their first
conjunction produced Qain, the severe and evil judgment; their second,
Abel, the milder and weaker form whom Qain absorbs; but their third
produces Seth, the equilibrium of the supernal and inferiors.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[246:2](tku52.htm#fr_198) "And they twain shall
be one flesh."

<span id="fn_197"></span>[248:1](tku52.htm#fr_199) These sections are
going on the idea of the Body remaining alive when the Divine Spirit has
been withdrawn therefrom; that is, were it possible for it to be so.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[249:1](tku52.htm#fr_200) See *ante*. § 1048

<span id="fn_199"></span>[249:2](tku52.htm#fr_201) Knorr Von Rosenroth
translates this word ANShI, *Aneshi*; Viri, "men;" but I think
"impurities" preferable.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[250:1](tku52.htm#fr_202) Or counterbalancing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV: Conclusion](tku53)
