[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku57)  [Next](tku59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER V.

### CONCERNING THE NOSE OF THE MOST HOLY ANCIENT ONE.

136\. THE NOSE. From this nose, from the openings of the nostrils, the
Spirit of Life rusheth forth upon Microprosopus.

137\. And from that opening of the nose, from those openings of the
nostrils, dependeth the letter He, in order to establish the other and
Inferior He.

138\. And that Spirit proceedeth from the hidden brain, and She is
called the Spirit of Life, and through that Spirit <span
id="fr_230"></span>[1](#fn_228) will all men understand ChKMThA,
*Chokmatha*, Wisdom, in the time of King Messiah.

139\. As it is written, Isa. xi. 2: "And the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, RYC <span id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_228) ChKMH VBINH,
*Ruach Chokmah Va-Binah*, shall rest upon Him," &c.

140\. This nose is life in every part; perfect joy, rest of spirit, and
health.

141\. The nose of Microprosopus is as we have (*before*) conformed it.

142\. Since concerning Him it is said, Ps. xviii. 9: "There ascendeth a
smoke in His nose," &c.

143\. But concerning this it is written, Isa. xlviii. 9: "And for my
name's sake will I defer mine anger (literally, lengthen my nose) for
thee."

144\. (But in the Book which is called "The Treatise of the School of
Rav Yeyeva the Elder," the letter He is located in the mouth, and he
doth not argue in the same manner as in the text, neither doth he bring
about the

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

same combination, although the matter eventuateth in the same manner.)

145\. But yet from the letter the judgment dependeth, and judgment
pertaineth unto the nose (*of Microprosopus*). Like as it is written,
Ps. xviii. 9: "Smoke ascendeth out of His nose."

146\. And if thou sayest that behold also it is written, "And fire out
of His mouth consumeth," surely the foundation of wrath dependeth from
His nose.

147\. All the conformations of the Most Holy Ancient One are formed
forth from the calm and concealed brain.

148\. And all the conformations of Microprosopus are formed through the
Inferior *Chokmah*, Wisdom. Like as it is written, Ps. civ. 24: "All
these hast thou made in Chokmah." And certainly it (*Wisdom*) is the
epitome of all things.

149\. Now what is the difference between H, *He*, and H, *He*? By the
Inferior He is judgment stirred up; but in this instance, through the
other lire, mercy unto mercy is denoted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_228"></span>[273:1](tku58.htm#fr_231) Speaking of the
unity, the "Sepher Yetzirah" says: "One is She, the Spirit of the Elohim
of life (blessed and more than blessed be His name who is the life of
ages), Voice, and Spirit, and Word--this is She the Spirit of holiness."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: Concerning the Beard of the Most Holy Ancient
One.](tku59)
