[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku55)  [Next](tku57.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III.

### CONCERNING THE FOREHEAD OF THE MOST HOLY ANCIENT ONE.

87\. THE Forehead, which is uncovered in the Most Holy Ancient One, is
called Grace.

88\. For that Supernal Head concealed in the Higher, which no man hath
known, expandeth a certain external manifestation, beautiful and
gracious, which is comprehended in the Forehead.

89\. And since He Himself is the grace of all graciousness; hence He
assumeth the conformation of the Forehead, which is disclosed in the
most intense light (otherwise, hath a formation in the figure of a
leaf).

90\. And when It is disclosed, the grace of all gracious. ness is found
in all worlds.

91\. And all the prayers of the Inferiors are accepted; and the
countenance of Microprosopus is illuminated, and all things are found to
exist in mercy.

92\. And since (*through this*) all judgments are hidden

and subjected, hence in the Sabbath, in the time of the afternoon
prayers, in which all judgments are excited, that Forehead is disclosed.

93\. And all the judgments are turned aside, and mercies are found.

94\. And therefore is the Sabbath found without judgment, as well that
which is above as that which is below; also the fire of Gehenna is
restrained in its place, and the transgressors are at rest.

95\. And therefore is the Spirit, NShMTh, of joy added on the Sabbath.

96\. And it behoveth man to rejoice with three feasts on the Sabbath;
for all truth, and the whole system of truer faith, is found therein
(*i.e., in the Sabbath*).

97\. And it behoveth man to prepare the table, that he may eat in the
three feasts of true faith, and rejoice in them. <span
id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_222.md)

98\. Rabbi Schimeon said: "I attest concerning myself, before all these
who are here present, that through all my days I have not omitted these
three feasts, and that because of them I have not been compelled to fast
on the Sabbath.

99\. "Furthermore, also on other days I have not been compelled (*to
fast*), much less on the Sabbath, for he who, rightly acteth concerning
these (*feasts*) is the adept of perfect truth.

100\. "The first feast is that of the Great Mother; the second that of
the Holy King; and the third that of the Most Holy Ancient One, the
Concealed with all Concealments. <span id="fr_225"></span>[2](#fn_223.md)

101\. "And in this world, who can thoroughly follow out, through them,
those paths?

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

102\. "If this RTzVN, *Ratzon*, Grace, be revealed, all those judgments
are enlightened, and are diverted from their concentrated rigour.

103\. "The conformation of Him, the Most Holy Ancient One, is instituted
through one form, which is the ideal Syntagma of all forms.

104\. "The same is the Concealed Supernal Wisdom, the synthesis of all
the rest.

105\. "And this is called ODN, *Eden*, or the supernal Paradise,
concealed with all occultations.

106\. "And it is the Brain of the Most Holy Ancient One, and that Brain
is expanded on every side.

107\. "Therefore is it extended into Eden, or another Paradise, <span
id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_224.md) and from this is Eden or Paradise formed
forth.

108\. "And when this Head, which is concealed in the Head of the Ancient
One, which is not known, extendeth a certain frontal formation, which is
formed for brilliance, then flasheth forth the Lightning of His Brain.

109\. And it is formed forth and illuminated with many Lights.

110\. And it produceth and designeth (*a certain effect*) in this Light
(otherwise, in this opening), in this Forehead, whereon is inscribed a
certain Light, which is called RTzVN, *Ratzon*, Grace.

111\. "And that Grace is extended backward into the beard, even unto
that place where it can remain in the beard, and it is called the
Supernal, ChSD, *Chesed*, Mercy.

112\. "And when this Grace is uncovered, all the Lords of Judgment
behold It, and are turned aside."

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_222"></span>[268:1](tku56.htm#fr_224.md) In many of the
ancient mysteries a *feast* was part of the ceremony, analogous to our
Eucharist. *Verbum sapientibus*.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[268:2](tku56.htm#fr_225.md) That is. the greatest
triad of the Sephiroth. the Crown, King, and Queen; which finds a
parallel in the Osiris, Isis, and Horus; the Axieros, Axiochersos, and
Axiochersa of Lemnos and Samothrace, &c., &c.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[270:1](tku56.htm#fr_226.md) Described in other
places as the Supernal Eden and the Inferior Eden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Concerning the Eyes of the Most Holy Ancient
One](tku57.md)
