[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku61)  [Next](tku63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

# CHAPTER IX.

### CONCERNING MICROPROSOPUS AND HIS BRIDE IN GENERAL.

341, HE said: Mouth, mouth, which hath followed out all these things,
they shall not dry up thy fountain.

342\. Thy fountain goeth forth and faileth not: surely concerning thee
may this be applied: "And a river went forth out of Eden;" also that
which is written Like a fountain of waters whose waters fail not."

343\. Now I testify concerning myself, that all the days which I have
lived I have desired to behold this day, yet was it not the will (*of
God*).

344\. For with this crown is this day crowned, and now as yet I intend
to reveal certain things before God the Most Holy--may He be
blessed!--and all these things crown mine head.

345\. And this day <span id="fr_259"></span>[1](#fn_256) suffereth not
increase, neither can it pass on into the place of another day, for this
whole day hath been yielded unto my power.

346\. And now I begin to reveal these things, that I may not enter
ashamed into the world to come. Therefore I begin and say:

347\. "It is written, Ps. lxxxix. 14: 'TzDQ VMShPT, *Tzedeq
Va-Meshephat*, Justice and Judgment are the abode of Thy throne; ChSD
VAMTh, *Chesed Va-Emeth*, Mercy and Truth shall go before Thy
countenance.'"

348\. What wise man will examine this, so that he may behold His paths,
(those, namely,) of the Most Holy Supernal One, the judgments of truth,
the judgments which are crowned with His Supernal crowns.

349\. For I say that all the lights which shine from

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

the Supreme Light, the Most Concealed of All, are all paths (leading)
towards that light.

350\. And in that Light which existeth in those single paths, whatsoever
is revealed is revealed.

351\. And all those lights adhere mutually together, this light in that
light, and that light in this light.

352\. And they shine mutually into each other, neither are they divided
separately from each other.

353\. That Light, I say, of those lights, severally and conjointly,
which are called the conformations of the King, or of the Crown of the
King, that which shineth and adhereth to that Light, which is the
innermost of all things, nor ever shineth without them.

354\. And therefore do all things ascend in one path, and all things are
crowned by one and the same thing, and one thing is not separated from
another, since HVA, *Hoa*, Himself, and His Name, are one.

355\. That Light which is manifested is called the Vestment; for He
Himself, the King, is the Light of all the innermost.

356\. In that Light is Hoa, Who is not separated nor manifested.

357\. And all those lights and all those luminaries shine forth from the
Most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed with all Concealments, who is the
Highest Light.

358\. And whensoever the matter is accurately examined all those lights
which are expanded are no longer found, save only that Highest Light.

359\. Who is hidden and not manifested, through those vestments of
ornament which are the vestments of truth, QShVT, *Qeshot*, the forms of
truth, the lights of truth.

360\. Two light-bearers are found, which are the conformation of the
throne of the King; and they are called TzDQ, *Tzedeq*, Justice, and
MShPT, *Meshephat*, Judgment.

361\. And they are the beginning and the consummation.

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And through them are all the judgments crowned,
as well superior as inferior.

362\. And they all are concealed in Meshephat. And from that Meshephat
is Tzedeq nourished.

363\. And sometimes they call the same, MLKI TzDQ MLK ShLM, *Meleki
Tzedeq Melek Shalem*, Melchizedek, King of Salem.

364\. When the judgments are crowned by Meshephat, all things are mercy;
and all things are in perfect peace, because the one temperateth the
other.

365\. Tzedeq and the Rigours are reduced into order, and all these
descend into the world in peace and in mercy.

366\. And then is the hour sanctified, so that the Male and the Female
are united, and the worlds all and several exist in love and in joy.

367\. But whensoever sins are multiplied in the world, and the sanctuary
is polluted, and the Male and Female are separated. <span
id="fr_260"></span>[1](#fn_257)

368\. And when that strong Serpent beginneth to arise, Woe, then, unto
thee, O World! who in that time art nourished by this Tzedeq. For then
arise many slayers of men and executioners (*of judgment*) in thee, O
World. Many just men are withdrawn from thee.

369\. But wherefore is it thus? Because the Male is separated from the
Female, and judgment, Meshephat, is not united unto justice, Tzedeq.

370\. And concerning this time it is written, Prov. xiii. 23: "There is
that is destroyed, because therein is not Meshephat." Since Meshephat is
departed from this Tzedeq which is not therefore restrained; and Tzedeq
hath operation after another manner.

371\. And concerning this (*matter*) thus speaketh Solomon the king,
Eccles. vii. 16: "All these things have I seen

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

in the days of my HBL, *Hebel*; there is a just man who perisheth in his
Tzedeq," &c.

372\. Where by the word HBL, *Hebel* (*which is usually translated
"vanity"*), is understood the breath from those supernal breathers forth
which are called the nostrils of the King.

373\. But when he saith HBLI, *Hebeli*, of my breath, Tzedeq, Justice,
is to be understood, which is MLKVThA QDIShA, *Malkutha Qadisha*, the
holy Malkuth (*Sanctum Regnum, the Holy Kingdom*).

374\. For when She is stirred up in Her judgments and severities, then
hath this saying place: "There is a just man who perished in his
Tzedeq."

375\. For what reason? Because Judgment, Meshephat, is far from Justice,
Tzedeq. And therefore is it said, Prov. xiii. 23: "And there is that is
destroyed because therein is not Meshephat."

376\. Come and see! When some sublimely just man is found in the world,
who is dear unto God the Most Holy One--may He be blessed!--then even if
Tzedeq, Justice, alone be stirred up, still on account of him the world
can bear it.

377\. And God the Most Holy--may He be blessed!--increaseth His glory so
that He may not be destroyed by the severity (*of the judgments*).

378\. But if that just man remaineth not in his place, then from the
midst is he taken away for example by that Meshephat, judgment, so that
before it he cannot maintain his place, how much less before Tzedeq,
Justice.

379\. David the king said at first, Ps. xxvi. 2: "Try me, O
Tetragrammaton, and prove me!" For I shall not be destroyed by all the
severities, not even by Tzedeq, Justice Herself, seeing that I am joined
thereunto.

380\. For what is written, Ps. xvii. 15: "In Tzedeq, Justice, I will
behold Thy countenance." Therefore, properly speaking, I cannot be
destroyed through

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Tzedeq, seeing that I can maintain myself in its
severities. <span id="fr_261"></span>[1](#fn_258)

381\. But after that he had sinned, he was even ready to be consumed by
that Meshephat, Judgment. Whence it is written, Ps. cxliii. 2: "And
enter not into Meshephat, Judgment, with Thy servant!"

382\. Come and see! When that Tzedeq, Justice, is mitigated by that
Meshephat, Judgment, then is it called TzDQH, *Tzedeqah*, Liberality.

383\. And the world is tempered by Chesed, Mercy, and is filled
therewith.

384\. As it is written, Ps. xxxiii. 5: "Delighting in TzDQH, Liberality,
and MShPT, Judgment; the earth is full of the ChSD, Mercy, of
Tetragrammaton."

385\. I testify concerning myself, that during my whole life I have been
solicitous in the world, that I should not fall under the severities of
justice, nor that the world should be burned up with the flames thereof.

386\. As it is written, Prov. xxx. 20: "She eateth and wipeth her
mouth."

387\. Thenceforward and afterwards all and singular are near unto the
Abyss.

388\. And verily in this generation certain just men are given (*upon
earth*); but they are few who arise that they may defend the flock from
the four angles (otherwise, but judgments arise against the world, and
desire to rush upon us).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_256"></span>[293:1](tku62.htm#fr_259) Meaning the period of
revealing these matters, not exactly a day of twenty-four hours: day in
the Scriptural and qabalistical sense.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[295:1](tku62.htm#fr_260) In other words, whom
there is unbalanced force, there is the origin of evil.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[297:1](tku62.htm#fr_261) Because in those
severities, and behind them, he can see the Countenance of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X: Concerning Microprosopus in Especial, with Certain
Digressions, and Concerning the Edomite Kings](tku63)
