<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml10)  [Next](ml12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16MO4/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Moon Lore*, by Timothy Harley, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

# MOON WORSHIP.

### I. INTRODUCTION.

WE have now to show that the moon has been in every age, and remains
still, one of the principal objects of human worship. Even among certain
nations credited with pure monotheism, it will be manifested that there
was the practice of that primitive polytheism which adored the hosts of
heaven. And, however humiliating or disappointing the disclosure may
prove, it will be established that some of the foremost Christian
peoples of the world maintain luniolatry to this day, notwithstanding
that they have the reproving light of the latest civilization. We are so
prone to talk of heathenism as abroad, that we forget or neglect the
gross heathenism which abounds at home; and while we complacently speak
of the march of the world's progress with which we identify ourselves,
we are oblivious of the fact that much ancient falsehood survives and
blends with the truth in which our superior minds, or minds with
superior facilities, have been trained. How few of us reflect that the
signs and symbols of rejected

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

theories have passed into the nomenclature of received systems! Nay, we
plume ourselves upon the new translation or revision as if we were the
favoured recipients of some fresh revelation. Not only in the names of
our days and months, but also in some of our most cherished dogmas, we
are but the "liberal-conservatives" in religion, who retain the old,
while we congratulate ourselves upon being the apostles of the new. That
the past must always run into the present, and the present proceed from
the past, we readily enough allow as a natural and necessary law; yet
baptized heathenism is often heathenism still, under another name.
Again, we are sometimes so short-sighted that we deny to former periods
the paternity of their own more fortunate offspring, and behave like
prosperous children who ungratefully ignore their poorer parents, to
whom they owe their breath and being. Such treatment of history is to be
emphatically deprecated, whether it arises from ignorance or
ingratitude. We ought to know, if we do not, and we ought also to
acknowledge, that our perfect day grew out of primeval darkness, and
that the progress was a lingering dawn. This we hold to be the clearest
view of the Divine causation. Our modern method in philosophy, largely
owing to the *Novum Organum* of Bacon, is evolution, the *novum organum*
of the nineteenth century; and this process recognises no abrupt or
interruptive creations, but gradual transformations from pre-existent
types, "variations under domestication,"

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

and the passing away of the old by its absorption into the new. Our
religion, like our language, is a garden not only for indigenous
vegetation, but also for acclimatisation, in which we improve under
cultivation exotic plants whose roots are drawn from every soil on the
earth. And, as Paul preached in Athens the God whom the Greeks
worshipped in ignorance, so our missionaries carry back to less
enlightened peoples the fruit of that life-giving tree whose germs exist
among themselves, undeveloped and often unknown. No religion has fallen
from heaven, like the fabled image of Athene, in full-grown beauty. All
spiritual life is primordially an inspiration or intuition from the
Father of spirits, whose offspring all men are, and who is not far from
every one of them. This intuition prompts men to "seek the Lord, if
haply they might feel after Him, and find Him." Thus prayer becomes an
instinct; and to worship is as natural as to breathe. But man is a being
with five senses, and as his contact with his fellow-creatures and with
the whole creation is at one or other of those five points, he is
necessarily sensuous. Endowed with native intelligence, the *intellectus
ipse* of Leibnitz, he nevertheless receives his impressions on
*sensitive* nerves, his emotions are *sentiments*, his words become
*sentences*, and his stock of wisdom is his common *sense*. A few, very
few, words express his sensations, a few more his perceptions, and so
on; but he is conscious of *objects* at first, he deals with *subjects*
afterwards.<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

Soon the sun, moon, and stars, as bright lights attract his eyes, as we
have all seen an infant of a few days fix its gaze upon a candle or
lamp. These heavenly orbs are found to be in motion, to be far away, to
be the glory of day and night: what wonder if *ideas* of these *images*
are formed in the religious mind, if the worshipper imagines the sun and
moon to be reflections of the God of light, and pays homage to the
creature which renders the Creator visible? Thus in the childhood of man
religion grows, and with the multiplication of intellect and sensation,
endless diversity of language, conception and faith is the result.
Another result, of course, is the endless diversity of deities. Every
race, every nation, every tribe, every household, every heart, has had
its own God. And yet, with all this multiplicity in religious literature
and dogma, subject and object, a unity co-exists which the student of
the science notes with profound interest. All nations of men are of one
blood; and all forms of God embody the one Eternal Spirit. To this unity
mythology tends. As one writer says: "We must ever bear in mind that the
course of mythology is from many gods toward one, that it is a
synthesis, not an analysis, and that in this process the tendency is to
blend in one the traits and stories of originally separate
divinities." <span id="fr_108"></span>[107](ml21.htm#fn_109) The ancient
Hebrew worshipped God as " the Eternal, our righteousness "; the Greek
worshipped Him as wisdom and beauty; the Roman as power and government;
the Persian

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

as light and goodness; and so forth. Few hymns have surpassed the beauty
of Pope's *Universal Prayer*. It is the *Te Deum laudamus* of that
catholic Church which embraces God-loved humanity.

"Father of all! in every age,  
  In every clime, adored,  
By saint, by savage, and by sage,  
  Jehovah, Jove, or Lord!"

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Christian,
believing his to be the "One Religion," as a recent Bampton Lecturer
termed it, too often forgets that his system is a recomposition of rays
of a religious light which was decomposed in the prismatic minds of
earlier men. And further, with a change of metaphor, if Christianity has
flourished and fructified through eighteen centuries, it must not be
denied that it is a graft upon an old stock which through fifteen
previous centuries had borne abundant fruit. The same course must be
adopted still. We find men everywhere holding some truth; we add further
truth; until, as a chemist would say, we saturate the solution, which
upon evaporation produces a crystallized life of entirely new colour and
quality and form. Thus Professor Nilsson writes: "Every religious
*change* in a people is, in fact, only an intermixture of religions;
because the new religion, whether received by means of convincing
arguments, or enforced by the eloquence of fire and sword, cannot *at
once* tear up all the wide-spreading roots by which its forerunner has
grown in the heart of the people; this must be the work of many years,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

perhaps of many generations." <span
id="fr_109"></span>[108](ml21.htm#fn_110) We cannot better close this
lengthy introduction than by reminding Christians of the saying of their
Great and Good Teacher, "I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Moon Mostly a Male Deity](ml12)

</div>
