<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml11)  [Next](ml13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16MO4/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Moon Lore*, by Timothy Harley, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II. THE MOON MOSTLY A MALE DEITY.

We have already in part pointed out that the moon has been considered as
of the masculine gender; and have therefore but to travel a little
farther afield to show that in the Aryan of India, in Egyptian, Arabian,
Slavonian, Latin, Lithuanian, Gothic, Teutonic, Swedish, Anglo-Saxon,
and South American, the moon is a male god. To do this, in addition to
former quotations, it will be sufficient to adduce a few authorities.
"Moon," says Max Müller, is a very old word. It was *móna* in
Anglo-Saxon, and was used there, not as a feminine, but as a masculine
for the moon was originally a masculine, and the sun a feminine, in all
Teutonic languages; and it is only through the influence of classical
models that in English moon has been changed into a feminine, and sun
into a masculine. It was a most unlucky assertion which Mr. Harris made
in his *Hermes*, that all nations ascribe to the sun a masculine, and to
the moon a feminine gender." <span
id="fr_110"></span>[109](ml21.htm#fn_111) Grimm says, "Down to recent
times, our people were fond of calling the sun and moon *frau sonne* and
*herr mond*."  <span id="fr_111"></span>[110](ml21.htm#fn_112) Sir
Gardner Wilkinson writes: "Another reason that the moon in the Egyptian
mythology could not be related to<span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span>

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

Bubastis is, that it was a male and not a female deity, personified in
the god Thoth. This was also the case in some religions of the West. The
Romans recognised the god Lunus; and the Germans, like the Arabs, to
this day, consider the moon masculine, and not feminine, as were the
Selênê and Luna of the Greeks and Latins." <span
id="fr_112"></span>[111](ml21.htm#fn_113) Again, "The Egyptians
represented their moon as a male deity, like the German *mond* and
*monat*, or the *Lunus* of the Latins; and it is worthy of remark, that
the same custom of calling it male is retained in the East to the
present day, while the sun is considered female, as in the language of
the Germans." <span id="fr_113"></span>[112](ml21.htm#fn_114) "In
Slavonic," Sir George Cox tells us, "as in the Teutonic mythology, the
moon is male. His wedding with the sun brings on him the wrath of
Perkunas \[the thunder-god\], as the song tells us

'The moon wedded the sun  
In the first spring.  
The sun rose early  
The moon departed from her.  
The moon wandered alone;  
Courted the morning star.  
Perkunas, greatly wroth,  
Cleft him with a sword.  
'Wherefore dost thou depart from the sun,  
Wandering by night alone,  
Courting the morning star?'" <span
id="fr_114"></span>[113](ml21.htm#fn_115)

'In a Servian song a girl cries to the sun--

'O brilliant sun! I am fairer than thou  
Than thy brother, the bright moon.'

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

"In South Slavonian poetry the sun often figures as a radiant youth. But
among the northern Slavonians, as well as the Lithuanians, the sun was
regarded as a female being, the bride of the moon. 'Thou askest me of
what race, of what family I am,' says the fair maiden of a song
preserved in the Tambof Government--

'My mother is--the beauteous Sun,  
And my father--the bright Moon.'" <span
id="fr_115"></span>[114](ml21.htm#fn_116)

"Among the Mbocobis of South America the moon is a man and the sun his
wife." <span id="fr_116"></span>[115](ml21.htm#fn_117) The Ahts of North
America take the same view; and we know that in Sanskrit and in Hebrew
the word for moon is masculine.

This may seem to many a matter of no importance; but if mythology throws
much light upon ancient history and religion, its importance may be
considerable, especially as it lies at the root of that sexuality which
has been the most prolific parent of both good and evil in human life.
The sexual relation has existed from the very birth of animated nature;
and it is remarkable that a man of learning and piety in Germany has
made the strange if not absurd statement that in the beginning "Adam was
externally sexless." <span id="fr_117"></span>[116](ml21.htm#fn_118)
Another idea, more excusable, but equally preposterous, is, that
grammatical gender has been the cause of the male and female personation
of deities, when really it has been the result. The cause, no doubt, was
inherent in man's constitution; and was

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

the inevitable effect of thought and expression. The same necessity of
natural language which led the Hebrew prophets to speak of their land as
married, of their nation as a wife in prosperity and a widow in
calamity, of their Maker as their husband, who rejoices over them as the
bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride: <span
id="fr_118"></span>[117](ml21.htm#fn_119) this same necessity, becoming
a habit like that of our own country folks in Hampshire, of whom Cobbett
speaks, who call almost everything *he* or *she*; led the sensuous and
imaginative ancients, as it leads simple and poetical peoples still, to
call the moon a man and to worship him as a god. Objects of fear and
reverence would be usually masculines; and objects of love and desire
feminines. We may thus find light thrown upon the honours paid to such
goddesses as Astarte and Aphrodite: which will also help us to
understand the deification by a celibate priesthood of the Virgin Mary.
We may, moreover, account partly for the fact that to the sailor his
ship is always she; to the swain the flowers which resemble his idol, as
the lily and the rose, are always feminine, and used as female names;
while to the patriot the mother country is nearly always of the tender
sex. <span id="fr_119"></span>[118](ml21.htm#fn_120) Prof. Max Müller
thinks that the distinction between males and females began, "not with
the introduction of masculine nouns, but with the introduction of
feminines, *i.e.* with the setting apart of certain derivative suffixes
for females. By this all other words became masculine." <span
id="fr_120"></span>[119](ml21.htm#fn_121) Thus the sexual emotions of
men created that grammatical gender which has contributed so powerfully
to our

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

later mythology, and has therefore been mistaken for the author of our
male and female personations. What beside sexuality suggested the
thought of the Chevalier Marini? "He introduces the god *Pan*, who
boasts that the spots which are seen in the moon are impressions of the
kisses he gave it." <span id="fr_121"></span>[120](ml21.htm#fn_122) That
grammar is very much younger than sexual relations is proven by the
curious fact mentioned by Max Müller that *pater* is not a masculine,
nor *mater* a feminine. Gender, we must not forget, is from *genus*, a
kind or class; and that the classification in various languages has been
arranged on no fixed plan. We in our modern English, with much still to
do, have improved in this respect, since, in Anglo-Saxon, *wif* = wife,
was neuter, and *wif-mann* = woman, was masculine. In German still *die
frau*, the woman, is feminine; but *das weib*, the wife, is
neuter. <span id="fr_122"></span>[121](ml21.htm#fn_123) Dr. Farrar finds
the root of gender in the imagination: which we admit if associated with
sex. Otherwise, we cannot understand how an *unfelt* distinction of this
sort could be mentally *seen*. But Dr. Farrar means more than
imagination, for he says, "from this source is derived the whole system
of genders for inanimate things, which was perhaps inevitable at that
early childish stage of the human intelligence, when the actively
working soul attributed to everything around it some portion of its own
life. Hence, well-nigh everything is spoken of as masculine or
feminine." <span id="fr_123"></span>[122](ml21.htm#fn_124) We are
surprised that Dr. Farrar seems to think German an exception, in making
a masculine noun of

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

the moon. He has failed to apply to this point his usual learned and
laborious investigation. <span id="fr_124"></span>[123](ml21.htm#fn_125)

Diogenes Laertius describes the theology of the Jews as an offshoot from
that of the Chaldees, and says that the former affirm of the latter
"that they condemn images, and especially those persons who say that the
gods are male and female." <span
id="fr_125"></span>[124](ml21.htm#fn_126) Which condemnation implies the
prevalence of this sexual distinction between their deities.

In concluding this chapter we think that it will be granted that gender
in the personification of inanimate objects was the result of sex in the
animate subject: that primitive men saw the moon as a most conspicuous
object, whose spots at periods had the semblance of a man's face, whose
waxing and waning increased their wonder: whose coming and going amid
the still and solemn night added to the mystery: until from being viewed
as a man, it was feared, especially when apparently angry in a mist or
an eclipse, and so reverenced and worshipped as the heaven-man, the
monthly god.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Moon a World-Wide Deity](ml13)

</div>
