<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml14)  [Next](ml16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16MO4/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Moon Lore*, by Timothy Harley, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

# MOON SUPERSTITIONS.

### I. INTRODUCTION.

Superstition may be defined as an extravagance of faith and fear: not
what Ecclesiastes calls being "righteous overmuch," but religious
reverence in excess. Some etymologists say that the word originally
meant a "*standing* still *over* or by a thing" in fear, wonder, or
dread. <span id="fr_268"></span>[265](ml21.htm#fn_268) Brewer's
definition is rather more classical: "That which survives when its
companions are dead (Latin, *supersto*). Those who escaped in battle
were called *superstitës*. Superstition is that religion which remains
when real religion is dead; that fear and awe and worship paid to the
religious impression which survives in the mind when correct notions of
Deity no longer exist." <span id="fr_269"></span>[266](ml21.htm#fn_269)
Hooker says that superstition "is always joined with a wrong opinion
touching things divine. Superstition is, when things are either abhorred
or observed with a zealous or fearful, but erroneous relation to God. By
means whereof the superstitious do sometimes serve, though the true God,
yet with needless offices, and defraud Him of duties necessary;
sometimes load others

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

than Him with such honours as properly are His." <span
id="fr_270"></span>[267](ml21.htm#fn_270) A Bampton Lecturer on this
subject says: "Superstition is an *unreasonable belief* of that which is
mistaken for truth concerning the nature of God and the invisible world,
our relations to these unseen objects, and the duties which spring out
of those relations." <span id="fr_271"></span>[268](ml21.htm#fn_271)

We may next briefly inquire into the origin of the thing, which, of
course, is older than the word. Burton will help us to an easy answer.
He tells us that "the *primum mobile*, and first mover of all
superstition, is the devil, that great enemy of mankind, the principal
agent, who in a thousand several shapes, after divers fashions, with
several engines, illusions, and by several names, hath deceived the
inhabitants of the earth, in several places and countries, still
rejoicing at their falls." <span
id="fr_272"></span>[269](ml21.htm#fn_272) Verily this protean,
omnipresent, and malignant devil has proved himself a great convenience!
He has been the scapegoat upon whom we have laid the responsibility of
all our mortal woe: and now we learn that to his infernal influence we
are indebted for our ignorance and superstition. Henceforth, when we are
at our wit's end, we may apostrophize the difficulty, and exclaim, "O
thou invisible spirit, if thou hast no name to be known by, let us call
thee devil!" We hesitate to spoil this serviceable illusion: for as we
have known some good people, of a sort, who would be distressed to find
that there was no hell to burn up the opponents of their orthodoxy; we
fear lest

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

many would be disappointed if they found out that the infernal spirit
was not at the bottom of our abysmal ignorance. But we will give even
the devil his due. We are not like Sir William Brown, who "could never
bring himself heartily to hate the devil." We can, wherever we find him;
but we think it only honest to father our own mental deficiencies, as
well as our moral delinquencies, and instead of seeking a substitute to
use the available remedy. "To err is human"; and it is in humanity
itself that we shall discover the source of superstition. We are the
descendants of ancestors who were the children of the world, and we were
ourselves children not so long ago. Childhood is the age of fancy and
fiction; of sensitiveness to outer influences; of impressions of things
as they seem, not as they are. When we become men we put away childish
things; and in the manhood of our race we shall banish many of the idols
and ideas which please us while we grow. Darwin has told us that our
"judgment will not rarely err from ignorance and weak powers of
reasoning. Hence the strangest customs and superstitions, in complete
opposition to the true welfare and happiness of mankind, have become
all-powerful throughout the world. How so many absurd rules of conduct,
as well as so many absurd religious beliefs, have originated, we do not
know; nor how it is that they have become, in all quarters of the world,
so deeply impressed on the mind of men; but it is worthy of remark that
a belief constantly inculcated during the

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

early years of life, whilst the brain is impressible, appears to acquire
almost the nature of an instinct; and the very essence of an instinct is
that it is followed independently of reason." <span
id="fr_273"></span>[270](ml21.htm#fn_273)

But if superstition be the result of imperfection, there is no
gainsaying the fact that it is productive of infinite evil; and on this
account it has been attributed to a diabolical paternity. Bacon even
affirms that "it were better to have no opinion of God at all, than such
an opinion as is unworthy of Him; for the one is unbelief, the other is
contumely: and certainly superstition is the reproach of the
Deity." <span id="fr_274"></span>[271](ml21.htm#fn_274) Most heartily do
we hold with Dr. Thomas Browne: "It is not enough to believe in God as
an irresistible power that presides over the universe; for this a
malignant demon might be. It is necessary for our devout happiness that
we should believe in Him as that pure and gracious Being who is the
encourager of our virtues and the comforter of our sorrows.

"Quantum religio potuit suadere malorum,"

exclaims the Epicurean poet, in thinking of the evils which
superstition, characterized by that ambiguous name, had produced; and
where a fierce or gloomy superstition has usurped the influence which
religion graciously exercises only for purposes of benevolence to man,
whom she makes happy with a present enjoyment, by the very expression of
devout gratitude for happiness already enjoyed, it would not be easy

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

to estimate the amount of positive misery which must result from the
mere contemplation of a tyrant in the heavens, and of a creation subject
to his cruelty and caprice." <span
id="fr_275"></span>[272](ml21.htm#fn_275) The above quoted line from
Lucretius--To such evils could religion persuade!--is more than the
exclamation of righteous indignation against the sacrifice of Iphigenia
by her father, Agamemnon, at the bidding of a priest, to propitiate a
goddess. It is still further applicable to the long chain of outrageous
wrongs which have been inflicted upon the innocent at the instigation of
a stupid and savage fanaticism. What is worst of all, much of this
bloodthirsty religion has claimed a commission from the God of love, and
performed its detestable deeds in the insulted name of that "soft, meek,
patient, humble, tranquil spirit," whom the loftiest and best of men
delight to adore as the Prince of peace. No wonder that Voltaire cried
out, "Christian religion, behold thy consequences!" if he could
calculate that ten million lives had been immolated on the altar of a
spurious Christianity. One hundred thousand were slain in the
Bartholomew massacre alone. Righteousness, peace, and love were not the
monster which Voltaire laboured to crush: he was most intensely incensed
against the blind and bigoted priesthood, against the malicious and
murderous servants who ate the bread of a holy and harmless Master,
against "their intolerance of light and hatred of knowledge, their
fierce yet profoundly contemptible struggles with one another, the
scandals of their

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

casuistry, their besotted cruelty." <span
id="fr_276"></span>[273](ml21.htm#fn_276) We have been betrayed into
speaking thus strongly of the extreme lengths to which superstition will
carry those who yield themselves to its ruthless tyranny. But perhaps we
have not gone far from our subject, after all; for the innocent
Iphigenia, whose doom kindled our ire, was sacrificed to the goddess of
the moon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Lunar Fancies](ml16)

</div>
