<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml17)  [Next](ml19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16MO4/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Moon Lore*, by Timothy Harley, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV. LUNAR INFLUENCES.

The superficies of the earth being twice seven times that of the moon,
what an influence the earth must exercise over its satellite! We may be
unable to describe this influence in all of its effects; but we may
observe its existence in some of its apparent signs. The moon not only
turns while we turn, but its rotations on its axis keep exact time with
its revolutions round our globe; it accompanies us as we encircle the
sun, facing us all the while, never turning its back upon us; it waits
on us like a link-bearer, or lackey; is our admiring Boswell, living and
moving and having its being in the equability it derives from attending
its illustrious master. An African sage

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

once illustrated this philosophical principle of the greater controlling
the less, by the following fine conundrum. "Why does the dog waggle his
tail?" This problem, being beyond his auditors, was given up. The sage
made answer, "Because the dog is bigger than the tail; else the tail
would waggle the dog." It is alarming to contemplate the effect which
the moon might have upon our august earth, if it were fourteen times
larger instead of fourteen times smaller in extent of surface. As it is,
Luna's influences are so many and so mighty, that we will require
considerable space merely to set them in order, and to substantiate them
with a few facts. We believe that most, if not all, of them, are the
offspring of superstition; but we shall none the less find them in every
land, in every age. In the nineteenth century as well as in the dark
ages, in London as well as in the ends of the earth, men of all colours
and clans are found turning their faces heavenward to read their duty
and destiny in the oracular face of the moon. Many consult their
almanacks more than their Bibles, and follow the lunar phases as their
sole interpretation of the will of God.

Among those who worship the moon as a personal deity, whether beneficent
or malign, its influences are of course welcomed or dreaded as the
manifestations of supreme power. In South America, for example, "the
Botocudos are said to give the highest rank among the heavenly bodies to
Taru, the moon, as causing thunder and lightning and the failure of

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

vegetables and fruits, and as even sometimes falling to the earth,
whereby many men die." <span id="fr_324"></span>[321](ml21.htm#fn_324)
So, in Africa, the emotions of the worshippers vary with their
subjective views of their god. "Negro tribes seem almost universally to
greet the new moon, whether in delight or disgust. The Guinea people
fling themselves about with droll gestures, and pretend to throw
firebrands at it; the Ashango men behold it with superstitious fear; the
Fetu negroes jumped thrice into the air with hands together and gave
thanks." <span id="fr_325"></span>[322](ml21.htm#fn_325) But even
amongst men who neither personify nor deify the moon, its dominion over
the air, earth, and sea, over human health and happiness, is held to be
so all-important, that if the Maker and Monarch of all were jealous, as
men count jealousy, such lunar fears and affections would be
unpardonable sin.

Let us proceed to particulars, rising from inorganic nature to beings
endowed with the highest instruments of life. Even the mineral kingdom
is supposed to be swayed by the moon; for in Scotland, Martin says, "The
natives told me, that the rock on the east side of Harries, in the Sound
of Island Glass, hath a vacuity near the front, on the north-west side
of the Sound; in which they say there is a stone that they call the
*Lunar Stone*, which advances and retires according to the increase and
decrease of the moon." <span id="fr_326"></span>[323](ml21.htm#fn_326)
An ancient instance of belief in lunar influence upon inanimate matter
is cited by Plutarch. "*Euthydemus* of *Sunium* feasted us upon a time
at his house, and

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

set before us a wilde bore, of such bignesse, that all wee at the table
wondred thereat; but he told us that there was another brought unto him
farre greater; mary naught it was, and corrupted in the carriage, by the
beames of the moone-shine; whereof he made great doubt and question, how
it should come to passe; for that he could not conceive, nor see any
reason, but that the sunne should rather corrupt flesh, being as it was,
farre hotter than the moone." <span
id="fr_327"></span>[324](ml21.htm#fn_327) Pliny said that the moon
corrupted carcases of animals exposed to its malefic rays. As with the
lifeless, so with the living. "The inhabitants of St. Kilda observe that
when the April moon goes far in May, the fowls are ten or twelve days
later in laying their eggs than ordinarily they use to be." <span
id="fr_328"></span>[325](ml21.htm#fn_328) The influence of the moon upon
vegetation is an opinion hoary with age. In the *Zend-Avesta* we read,
"And when the light of the moon waxes warmer, golden-hued plants grow on
from the earth during the spring." <span
id="fr_329"></span>[326](ml21.htm#fn_329) An old English author
writes:--

"Sowe peason and beanes, in the wane of the moone,  
Who soweth them sooner, he soweth too soone  
That they with the planet may rest and arise,  
And flourish, with bearing most plentiful wise." <span
id="fr_330"></span>[327](ml21.htm#fn_330)

Cucumbers, radishes, turnips, leeks, lilies, horseradish, saffron, and
other plants, are said to increase during the fulness of the moon; but
onions, on the contrary, are much larger and are better nourished during
the decline. <span id="fr_331"></span>[328](ml21.htm#fn_331) To recur to
Plutarch is to find

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

him saying: "The moone showeth her power most evidently even in those
bodies, which have neither sense nor lively breath; for carpenters
reject the timber of trees fallen in the ful-moone, as being soft and
tender, subject also to the worme and putrifaction, and that quickly, by
reason of excessive moisture; husbandmen, likewise, make haste to gather
up their wheat and other grain from the threshing-floore, in the wane of
the moone, and toward the end of the month, that being hardened thus
with drinesse, the heape in the garner may keepe the better from being
fustie, and continue the longer; whereas corne which is inned and laied
up at the full of the moone, by reason of the softnesse and over-much
moisture, of all other, doth most cracke and burst. It is commonly said
also, that if a leaven be laied in the ful-moone, the paste will rise
and take leaven better." <span id="fr_332"></span>[329](ml21.htm#fn_332)
Still in Cornwall the people gather all their medicinal plants when the
moon is of a certain age; which practice is very probably a relic of
druidical superstition. "In some parts it is a prevalent belief that the
growth of mushrooms is influenced by the changes of the moon, and in
Essex the subjoined rule is often scrupulously adhered to:--

"When the moon is at the full,  
Mushrooms you may freely pull  
But when the moon is on the wane,  
Wait ere you think to pluck again.'" <span
id="fr_333"></span>[330](ml21.htm#fn_333)

Henderson says, "I may, perhaps, mention here, that apples are said to
'shrump up' in Devonshire if

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

picked when the moon is waning." <span
id="fr_334"></span>[331](ml21.htm#fn_334) A writer of miscellaneous
literature tells us that "it has been demonstrated that moonlight has
the power, *per se*, of awakening the sensitive plant, and consequently
that it possesses an influence of some kind on vegetation. It is true
that the influence is very feeble, compared with that of the sun; but
the action is established, and the question remains, what is the
practical value of the fact? 'It will immediately,' says Professor
Lindley, 'occur to the reader that possibly the screens which are drawn
down over hothouses at night, to prevent loss of heat by radiation, may
produce some unappreciated injury by cutting off the rays of the moon,
which nature intended to fall upon plants as much as the rays of the
sun." <span id="fr_335"></span>[332](ml21.htm#fn_335) The same author
says elsewhere, "Columella, Cato, Vitruvius, and Pliny, all had their
notions of the advantages of cutting timber at certain ages of the moon;
a piece of mummery which is still preserved in the royal ordonnances of
France to the conservators of the forests, who are directed to fell oaks
only 'in the wane of the moon' and 'when the wind is at north.'" <span
id="fr_336"></span>[333](ml21.htm#fn_336) Of trees, astrologers affirm
that the moon rules the palm tree (which the ancients say "sends forth a
twig every time the moon rises") and all plants, trees, and herbs that
are juicy and full of sap. <span
id="fr_337"></span>[334](ml21.htm#fn_337)

"A description of the New Netherlands, written about 1650, remarks that
the savages of that land 'ascribe great influence to the moon over
crops.' This venerable superstition, common to all races, still

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

lingers among our own farmers, many of whom continue to observe 'the
signs of the moon ' in sowing grain, setting out trees, cutting timber,
and other rural avocations." <span
id="fr_338"></span>[335](ml21.htm#fn_338) What is here said of the new
world applies also to the old; for in England a current expression in
Huntingdonshire is "a dark Christmas sends a fine harvest": dark meaning
moonless.

Of the lunar influence upon the tides, old John Lilly writes: "There is
nothing thought more admirable, or commendable in the sea, than the
ebbing and flowing; and shall the moone, from whom the sea taketh this
virtue, be accounted fickle for encreasing and decreasing?" <span
id="fr_339"></span>[336](ml21.htm#fn_339) Another writer of the
sixteenth century says, "The moone is founde, by plaine experience, to
beare her greatest stroke uppon the seas, likewise in all things that
are moiste, and by consequence in the braines of man." <span
id="fr_340"></span>[337](ml21.htm#fn_340) Dennys tells us that "the
influence exerted by the moon on tides is recognised by the
Chinese." <span id="fr_341"></span>[338](ml21.htm#fn_341) What some
record in prose, others repeat in rhyme. The following is *one* kind of
poetry.

"Moone changed, keepes closet, three daies as a Queene,  
Er she in hir prime, will of any be scene :  
If great she appereth, it showreth out,  
If small she appereth, it signifieth drout.  
At change or at full, come it late, or else soone,  
Maine sea is at highest, at midnight and noone,  
But yet in the creekes, it is later high flood:  
Through farnesse of running, by reason as good." <span
id="fr_342"></span>[339](ml21.htm#fn_342)

Indirectly, through the influence upon the tides, the moon is concerned
in human mortality.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

"Tyde flowing is feared, for many a thing,  
Great danger to such as be sick it doth bring.  
Sea eb, by long ebbing, some respit doth give,  
And sendeth good comfort, to such as shal live." <span
id="fr_343"></span>[340](ml21.htm#fn_343)

Henderson says, "It is a common belief along the east coast of England,
from Northumberland to Kent, that deaths mostly occur during the falling
of the tide." <span id="fr_344"></span>[341](ml21.htm#fn_344) Every
reader of the inimitable Dickens will be reminded here of the death of
poor old Barkis.

"'He's a-going out with the tide,' said Mr. Peggotty to me, behind his
hand.

"My eyes were dim, and so were Mr. Peggotty's; but I repeated in a
whisper, 'With the tide?'

"'People can't die, along the coast,' said Mr. Peggotty, 'except when
the tide's pretty nigh out. They can't be born, unless it's pretty nigh
in-not properly born, till flood. He's a-going out with the tide. It's
ebb at half-arter three, slack water half an hour. If he lives till it
turns, he'll hold his own till past the flood, and go out with the next
tide.'

"'He's coming to himself,' said Peggotty.

"Mr. Peggotty touched me, and whispered with much awe and reverence,
'They are both a-going out fast.'

"He now opened his eyes.

"I was on the point of asking him if he knew me, when he tried to
stretch out his arm, and said to me distinctly, with a pleasant smile,--

"'Barkis is willin'.'

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

"And, it being low water, he went out with the tide." <span
id="fr_345"></span>[342](ml21.htm#fn_345)

That the rise and fall of our tides twice a day, with spring and neap
tides twice in the lunar month, are the effect of the combined action of
the sun and moon, is never called in question. The water under the moon
is drawn up from the earth, and the earth is drawn from the water on the
opposite side, the consequence of which is two high tides in the two
hemispheres at the same hour. The rotation of the earth bringing the
same point of the ocean twice under the moon's meridian, once under the
upper meridian and once under the lower, each hemisphere has two high
tides in the course of the day. The spring tide is caused by the
attractive force of the sun and moon acting in conjunction, or in a
straight line; and the neap tide is caused by the moon being in
quadrature, or when the sun and moon are at right angles to each other.
They counteract each other's influence, and our tides arc therefore low.
So much is science; but the connection of ebb and flow with life and
death is superstition.

From a very remote antiquity, in the twilight of natural astrology, a
belief arose that changes in the weather were occasioned by the
moon. <span id="fr_346"></span>[343](ml21.htm#fn_346) That the notion
lives on, and will not soon die, is clear to any one who is conversant
with current literature and common folk-lore. Even intelligent,
well-informed people lend it countenance. Professor Newcomb, of
Washington, rightly says: "Thus far there is no

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

evidence that the moon directly affects the earth or its inhabitants in
any other way than by her attraction, which is so minute as to be
entirely insensible except in the ways we have described. A striking
illustration of the fallibility of the human judgment when not
disciplined by scientific training is afforded by the opinions which
have at various times obtained currency respecting a supposed influence
of the moon on the weather. Neither in the reason of the case nor in
observations do we find any real support for such a theory. It must,
however, be admitted that opinions of this character are not confined to
the uneducated." <span id="fr_347"></span>[344](ml21.htm#fn_347) Mr.
Edward B. Tylor holds similar language: "The notion that the weather
changes with the moon's quarterings is still held with great vigour in
England. That educated people to whom exact weather records are
accessible should still find satisfaction in the fanciful lunar rule, is
an interesting case of intellectual survival." <span
id="fr_348"></span>[345](ml21.htm#fn_348) No marvel that the "heathen
Chinee" considers lunar observations as forecasting scarcity of
provisions he is but of the same blood with his British brother, who
takes his tea and sends him opium. "The Hakkas (and also many Puntis)
believe that if in the night of the fifteenth day of the eighth month
(mid autumn) there are clouds obscuring the moon before midnight, it is
a sign that oil and salt will become very dear. If, however, there are
clouds obscuring the moon after midnight, the price of rice will, it is
supposed, undergo a similar change." <span
id="fr_349"></span>[346](ml21.htm#fn_349)

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

One of our provincial proverbs is: "So many days old the moon is on
Michaelmas Day, so many floods after." Sometimes a proverb is a short
saying spoken after long experience; at other times it is a small
crystal left after a lengthy evaporation. In certain instances our rural
apothegms are sacred relics of extinct but canonized fictions. An
equally wise prediction is that if Christmas comes during a waxing moon
we shall have a very good year; and the nearer to the new moon, the
better. But if during a waning moon, a hard year; and the nearer the end
of the moon, so much the worse. Another sage belief is that the
condition of the weather is dependent upon the day of the week upon
which the new moon chances to fall. We are told that "Dr. Forster, of
Bruges, well known as a meteorologist, declares that by the *Journal*
kept by his grandfather, father, and self, ever since 1767, to the
present time, whenever the new moon has fallen on a *Saturday*, the
following *twenty days* have been wet and windy, in nineteen cases out
of twenty." <span id="fr_350"></span>[347](ml21.htm#fn_350) In Italy it
is said, "If the moon change on a Sunday, there will be a flood before
the month is out." New moon on Monday, or moon-day, is, of course,
everywhere held a sign of good weather and luck.

That a misty moon is a misfortune to the atmosphere is widely supposed.
In Scotland it is an agricultural maxim among the canny farmers that--

"If the moon shows like a silver shield,  
You need not be afraid to reap your field <span id="page_186">p.
186</span>  
But if she rises haloed round,  
Soon we'll tread on deluged ground." <span
id="fr_351"></span>[348](ml21.htm#fn_351)

Others say that a mist is unfavourable only with the new moon, not with
the old.

"An old moon in a mist  
Is worth gold in a kist (chest)  
But a new moon's mist  
Will never lack thirst," <span id="fr_352"></span>[349](ml21.htm#fn_352)

is a rugged rhyme found in several places. In Cornwall the idea is
that--

"A fog and a small moon  
Bring an easterly wind soon."

The east wind, as we know, is dry. Two of the Shepherd of Banbury's
rules are:

xii\. If mists in the new moon, rain in the old.  
xiii. If mists in the old, rain in the new moon." <span
id="fr_353"></span>[350](ml21.htm#fn_353)

One thing is a meteorological certainty: the full moon very frequently
clears the sky. But this may be partly accounted for by the fact that a
full moon shows the night to be clear, which in the moon's absence might
be called cloudy.

Another observation shows that in proportion to the clearness of the
night is its cold. The clouds covering the earth with no thick blanket,
it radiates its heat into space. This has given rise to the notion that
the moon itself reduces our temperature. It is *cold* at night without
doubt. But the cold moon is so warm when the sun is shining full on its
disk

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

that no creature on earth could endure a moment's contact with its
surface. The centre of the "pale-faced moon" is hotter than boiling
water. This thought may cheer us when "the cold round moon shines deeply
down." We may be pardoned if we take with a tincture of scepticism the
following statement "Native Chinese records aver that on the 18th day of
the 6th moon, 1590, snow fell one summer night from the midst of the
moon. The flakes were like fine willow flowers on shreds of silk." <span
id="fr_354"></span>[351](ml21.htm#fn_354) Instead of cold, it is more
likely that the white moon gives us heat, for from Melloni's letter to
Arago it seems to be already an ascertained fact. Having concentrated
the lunar rays with a lens of over three feet diameter upon his
thermoscopic pile, Melloni found that the needle had deviated from 0° 6'
to 4° 8', according to the lunar phase. Other thermoscopes may give even
larger indications; but meanwhile the Italian physicist has exploded an
error with a spark of science.

"Another weather guide connected with the moon is, that to see 'the old
moon in the arms of the new one' is reckoned a sign of fine weather; and
so is the turning up of the horns of the new moon. In this position it
is supposed to retain the water, which is imagined to be in it, and
which would run out if the horns were turned down." <span
id="fr_355"></span>[352](ml21.htm#fn_355) On this novel idea of a lunar
bason or saucer, Southey writes from "Keswick, December 29th, 1828," as
follows:--"Poor Littledale has this day explained

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

the cause of our late rains, which have prevailed for the last six
weeks, by a theory which will probably be as new to you as it is to me.
'I have observed,' he says, 'that, when the moon is turned upward, we
have fine weather after it; but if it is turned down, then we have a wet
season; and the reason I think is, that when it is turned down, it holds
no water, like a bason, you know, and then down it all comes.' There, it
will be a long while before the march of intellect shall produce a
theory as original as this, which I find, upon inquiry, to be the
popular opinion here." <span id="fr_356"></span>[353](ml21.htm#fn_356)
George Eliot has taken notice of this fancy in the burial of "poor old
Thias Bede." "They'll ha' putten Thias Bede i' the ground afore ye get
to the churchyard," said old Martin, as his son came up. "It 'ud ha'
been better luck if they'd ha' buried him i' the forenoon when the rain
was fallin'; there's no likelihoods of a drop now, an' the moon lies
like a boat there, dost see? That's a sure sign o' fair weather; there's
a many as is false, but that's sure." <span
id="fr_357"></span>[354](ml21.htm#fn_357)

In Dekker's *Match Me in London*, Act i., the King says, "My Lord, doe
you see this change in the moone? Sharp hornes doe threaten windy
weather."

In the famous ballad of Sir Patrick Spens, concerning whose origin there
has been so much discussion, without eliciting any very accurate
information, we read:

"O ever alack! my master dear,  
  I fear a deadly storm. <span id="page_189">p. 189</span>  
I saw the new moon late yestreen,  
  Wi' the auld moon in her arm  
  And if ye gang to sea, maister,  
I fear we'll suffer harm." <span
id="fr_358"></span>[355](ml21.htm#fn_358)

Jamieson informs us that "prognostications concerning the weather,
during the course of the month, are generally formed by the country
people in Scotland from the appearance of the *new moon*. It is
considered as an almost infallible presage of bad weather, if she *lies
sair on her back*, or when her horns are pointed towards the zenith. It
is a similar prognostic, when the new moon appears *wi' the auld moon in
her arm*, or, in other words, when that part of the moon which is
covered with the shadow of the earth is seen through it." <span
id="fr_359"></span>[356](ml21.htm#fn_359) The last sentence is a *lapsus
calami*. Dr. Jamieson should have said, when that part of the moon which
is turned from the sun is dimly visible through the reflected light of
the earth.

"At Whitby, when the moon is surrounded by a halo with watery clouds,
the seamen say that there will be a change of weather, for the 'moon
dogs' are about." <span id="fr_360"></span>[357](ml21.htm#fn_360) At
Ulceby, in Lincolnshire, "there is a very prevalent belief amongst
sailors and seafaring men that when a large star or planet is seen near
the moon, or, as they express it, 'a big star is dogging the moon,' that
this is a certain prognostication of wild weather. I have met old
sailors having the strongest faith in this prediction, and who have told
me that they have verified it by a long course of observation." <span
id="fr_361"></span>[358](ml21.htm#fn_361)

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

"Some years ago," says a writer from Torquay, "an old fisherman of this
place told me, on the morning next after a violent gale, that he had
foreseen the storm for some time, as he had observed one star ahead of
the moon, towing her, and another astern, chasing her. 'I know'd 'twas
coming, safe enough.'" <span id="fr_362"></span>[359](ml21.htm#fn_362)
The moon was simply in apparent proximity to two stars; but the old
Devonian descried mischief.

The following incident from Zulu life will be of interest. "1878. A
curious phenomenon occurred 7th January. A bright star appeared near the
moon at noonday, the sun shining brightly. *Omen*--The natives from this
foretold the coming war with the Amazulu. Intense heat and drought
prevailed at this time." <span id="fr_363"></span>[360](ml21.htm#fn_363)

Hitherto we have reviewed only the imaginary influences of the moon over
inanimate nature and what are called irrational beings. We have seen
that this potent orb is supposed to affect the lightning and thunder of
the air; the rocks and seas, the vegetables and animals of the earth;
and generally to govern terrestrial matters in a manner altogether its
own. Furthermore, we have found these imaginations rooted in all lands,
and among men whose culture might have been expected to refuse such
fruitless excrescences. When classical authors counsel us to set eggs
under the hen at new moon, and to root up trees only when the moon is
waning and after mid-day; and when "the wisest, brightest," if

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

not the "meanest of mankind" seriously attributes to the moon the
extraction of heat, the furtherance of putrification, the increase of
moisture, and the excitement of animal spirits, with the increase of
hedges and herbs if cut or set during certain phases of that body, we
can but repeat to ourselves the saying, "The best of men are but men at
the best." The half, however, has not been told; and we must now pass on
to speak of lunar influences upon the birth, health, intellect, and
fortune of microcosmical man.

In the system of astrology, which professed to interpret the events of
human existence by the movements of the stars, the moon was one of the
primary planets. As man was looked upon in the light of a microcosm, or
world in miniature, so the several parts of his constitution were viewed
as but a reproduction in brief of the great parts of the vast organism.
Creation was a living, intelligent being, whose two eyes were the sun
and the moon, whose body was the earth, whose intellect was the ether,
whose wings were the heavens. Man was an epitome of all this; and as the
functions of the less were held to correspond with the functions of the
greater, the microcosm with the macrocosm, man's movements could be
inferred by first ascertaining the motions of the universe. The moon,
having dominion in the twelve "houses" of heaven, through which she
passed in the course of the year, her *aspects* to the other bodies were
considered as of prime significance, in indicating benignant or
malignant influences upon

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

human life. This system, which was based upon ignorance and
superstition, and upheld by arbitrary rules and unreasoning credulity,
is so repugnant to all principles of science and common sense, that it
would be unworthy of notice, if we did not know that to this day there
are educated persons still to be seen poring over old almanacs and
peering into the darkness of divination, to read their own fortune or
that of their children by the dim light of some lucky or unlucky
configuration of the planets with the moon. The wheel of fortune yet
revolves, and the despotism of astrology is not dead. The lunar
influence is considered supreme in the hour of birth. Nay, with some the
moon is potential even before birth. In Iceland it is said: "If a
pregnant woman sit with her face turned towards the moon, her child will
be a lunatic." <span id="fr_364"></span>[361](ml21.htm#fn_364) And this
imagination obtains at home as well as abroad. We are told that
"astrologers ascribe the most powerful influence to the moon on every
person, both for success and health, according to her zodiacal and
mundane position at birth, and her aspects to other planets. The sensual
faculties depend almost entirely on the moon, and as she is aspected so
are the moral or immoral tendencies. She has great influence always upon
every person's constitution." <span
id="fr_365"></span>[362](ml21.htm#fn_365) This is the doctrine of a book
published not thirty years ago. Another work, issued also in London,
says, "Cynthia, 'the queen of heaven,' as the ancients termed her, or
the MOON, the companion of the earth, and chief source

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

of our evening light, is a cold, moist, watery, phlegmatic planet,
variable to an extreme, in astrological science; and partaking of good
or evil, as she is aspected by good or evil stars. When angular and
unafflicted in a nativity, she is the promissory pledge of great success
in life and continual good fortune. She produces a full stature, fair,
pale complexion, round face, gray eyes, short arms, thick hands and
feet, smooth, corpulent, and phlegmatic body. Blemishes in the eyes, or
a peculiar weakness in the sight, is the result of her being afflicted
by the Sun. Her conjunction, semi-sextile, sextile, or trine, to
Jupiter, is exceeding fortunate; and she is said by the old Astrologers
to govern the *brain*, *stomach*, *bowels*, *left eye* of the male, and
*right eye* of the female. Her usual diseases are rheumatism,
consumption, palsy, cholic, apoplexy, vertigo, lunacy, scrophula,
smallpox, dropsy, etc.; also most diseases peculiar to young
children." <span id="fr_366"></span>[363](ml21.htm#fn_366) Such teaching
is not a whit in advance of Plutarch's odd dictum that the moon has a
"special hand in the birth of children."

If this belief have disciples in London, it is not by any means confined
to that city. In Sweden great influence is ascribed to the moon, not
only in regulating the weather, but as affecting all the affairs of
man's daily life. The lower orders, and many of the better sort, will
not fell a tree for agricultural purposes in the wane of that orb, lest
it should shrink and decay; nor will the housewife then slaughter for
her family, lest the meat should shrivel

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

and melt away in the pot. The moon is the domestic deity, whom the
household must fear: the Fortuna who presides over the daily doings of
sublunary mortals. In the matter of birth, we find Francis Bacon
affirming that "the calculation of nativities, fortunes, good or bad
hours of business, and the like fatalities, are mere levities that have
little in them of certainty and solidity, and may be plainly confuted by
physical reasons"; <span id="fr_367"></span>[364](ml21.htm#fn_367) and
yet in his Natural History he writes: "It may be that children and young
cattle that are brought forth in the full of the moon, are stronger and
larger than those that are brought forth in the wane." <span
id="fr_368"></span>[365](ml21.htm#fn_368) There surely can be no
superstition in studying the moon's conjunctions and oppositions if her
influence in a nativity have the slightest weight. And this influence is
still widely maintained by philosophers who read Bacon, as well as by
the peasants who read nothing at all. "In Cornwall, when a child is born
in the interval between an old moon and the first appearance of a new
one, it is said that it will never live to reach the age of puberty.
Hence the saying, 'no moon, no man.' In the same county, too, when a boy
is born in the wane of the moon, it is believed that the next birth will
be a girl, and vice versa; and it is also commonly said that when a
birth takes place on the 'growing of the moon' the next child will be of
the same sex." <span id="fr_369"></span>[366](ml21.htm#fn_369)

As a natural proceeding, we find that the moon has influence when the
child is weaned. Caledonian

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

mothers very carefully observe the lunar phases on this account.
Jamieson tells us that "this superstition, with respect to the fatal
influence of a waning moon, seems to have been general in Scotland. In
Angus, it is believed, that, if a child be put from the breast during
the waning of the moon, it will decay all the time that the moon
continues to wane." <span id="fr_370"></span>[367](ml21.htm#fn_370) So
in the heart of Europe, "the Lithuanian precept to wean boys at a
waxing, but girls on a waning moon, no doubt to make the boys sturdy and
the girls slim and delicate, is a fair match for the Orkney Islanders'
objection to marrying except with a growing moon, while some even wish
for a flowing tide." <span id="fr_371"></span>[368](ml21.htm#fn_371) As
to marriage, the ancient Greeks considered the day of the full moon the
most propitious period for that ceremony. In Euripides, Clytemnestra
having asked Agamemnon when he intended to give Iphigenia in marriage to
Achilles, he replies, "When the full moon comes forth with good luck."
In Pindar, too, this season is preferred. <span
id="fr_372"></span>[369](ml21.htm#fn_372)

Lunar influences over physical health and disease must be a fearful
contemplation to those who are of a superstitious turn. There is no
malady within the whole realm of pathology which the moon's destroying
angel cannot inflict; and from the crown of the head to the sole of the
foot the entire man is at the mercy of her beams. We have all seen those
disgusting woodcuts to which the following just condemnation refers:
"The moon's influence on parts of the human body, as given in some
old-fashioned

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

almanacs, is an entire *fallacy*; it is most untrue and absurd, often
indecent, and is a discredit to the age we live in." <span
id="fr_373"></span>[370](ml21.htm#fn_373) Most of these inartistic
productions are framed upon the assumption of the old alchymists that
the physiological functions were regulated by planetary influence. The
sun controlled the heart, the moon the brain, Jupiter the lungs, Saturn
the spleen, Mars the liver, Venus the kidneys, and Mercury the
reproductive powers. But even with this distribution among the heavenly
bodies the moon was allowed plenipotentiary sway. As in mythology it is
the god or goddess of water, so in astrology it is the embodiment of
moisture, and therefore rules the humours which circulate throughout the
human system. No wonder that phlebotomy prevailed so long as the reign
of the moon endured. "This lunar planet," says La Martinière, "is damp
of itself, but, by the radiation of the sun, is of various temperaments,
as follows: in its first quadrant it is warm and damp, at which time it
is good to let the blood of sanguine persons; in its second it is warm
and dry, at which time it is good to bleed the choleric; in its third
quadrant it is cold and moist, and phlegmatic people may be bled; and in
its fourth it is cold and dry, at which time it is well to bleed the
melancholic." Whatever the moon's phase may be, let blood be shed! We
are reminded here of that sanguifluous theology, which even Christians
of a certain temperament seem to enjoy, while they sing of fountains
filled with blood: as though

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

a God of love could take delight in the effusion of precious life. La
Martinière continues, and physicians will make a note of his words: " It
is a thing quite necessary to those who meddle with medicine to
understand the movement of this planet, in order to discern the causes
of sickness. And as the moon is often in conjunction with Saturn, many
attribute to it apoplexy, paralysis, epilepsy, jaundice, hydropsy,
lethargy, catapory, catalepsy, colds, convulsions, trembling of the
limbs, etc., etc. I have noticed that this planet has such enormous
power over living creatures, that children born at the first quarter of
the declining moon are more subject to illness, so that children born
when there is no moon, if they live, are weak, delicate, and sickly, or
are of little mind or idiots. Those who are born under the house of the
moon which is Cancer, are of a phlegmatic disposition." <span
id="fr_374"></span>[371](ml21.htm#fn_374)

That the ancient Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans believed in the deleterious
influence of the moon on the health of man, is very evident. The Talmud
refers the words, "Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death" (Ps. xxiii. 4) "to him who sleeps in the shadow of the
moon." <span id="fr_375"></span>[372](ml21.htm#fn_375) Another Psalm
(cxxi. 6) reads, literally, "By day the sun shall not smite thee, and
the moon in the night." In the Greek Testament we find further proof of
this belief. Among those who thronged the Great Teacher (Matt. iv. 24)
were the σεληνιαζομένοι (*lunatici*, Beza; *i lunatici*, Diodati; *les
lunatiques*, French version; "those who were lunatick"). The Revised
Version of 1881 reads

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

epileptic," but that is a comment, not a translation. So again (Matt.
xvii. 15) we read of a boy who was "lunatick"--σεληνιάζεται. On which
Archbishop Trench remarks, "Of course the word originally, like μανία
(from μήνη) and lunaticus, arose from the widespread belief of the evil
influence of the moon on the human frame." <span
id="fr_376"></span>[373](ml21.htm#fn_376) Jerome attributes all this
superstition to dæmons, of which men were the dupes. "The *lunatics*,"
he says, "were not really smitten by the moon, but were believed to be
so, through the subtlety of the dæmons, who by observing the seasons of
the moon sought to bring an evil report against the creature, that it
might redound to the blasphemy of the Creator." <span
id="fr_377"></span>[374](ml21.htm#fn_377) Demons or no demons, faith in
moonstroke is clear enough. Pliny was of opinion that the moon induced
drowsiness and stupor in those who slept under her beams. Galen, in the
second century, taught that those who were born when the moon was
falciform, or sickle-shaped, were weak and short-lived, while those born
during the full moon were vigorous and of long life. He also took notice
of the lunar influence in epilepsy <span
id="fr_378"></span>[375](ml21.htm#fn_378) of which fearful malady a
modern physician writes, "This disease has been known from the earliest
antiquity, and is remarkable as being that malady which, even beyond
insanity, was made the foundation of the doctrine of possession by evil
spirits, alike in the Jewish, Grecian, and Roman philosophy." <span
id="fr_379"></span>[376](ml21.htm#fn_379) The terrible disorder was a
fact; and evil spirits or the moon had to bear the blame.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

In modern times the moon is no less the deity of insalutary disaster. Of
Mexico, Brinton says: "Very different is another aspect of the
moon-goddess, and well might the Mexicans paint her with two colours.
The beneficent dispenser of harvests and offspring, she nevertheless has
a portentous and terrific phase. She is also the goddess of the night,
the dampness, and the cold; she engenders the miasmatic poisons that
rack our bones; she conceals in her mantle the foe who takes us
unawares; she rules those vague shapes which fright us in the dim light;
the causeless sounds of night or its more oppressive silence are
familiar to her; she it is who sends dreams wherein gods and devils have
their sport with man, and slumber, the twin brother of the grave." <span
id="fr_380"></span>[377](ml21.htm#fn_380) So farther south, "the
Brazilian mother carefully shielded her infant from the lunar rays,
believing that they would produce sickness; the hunting tribes of our
own country will not sleep in its light, nor leave their game exposed to
its action. We ourselves have not outgrown such words as lunatic,
moon-struck, and the like. Where did we get these ideas? The
philosophical historian of medicine, Kurt Sprengel, traces them to the
primitive and popular medical theories of ancient Egypt, in accordance
with which all maladies were the effects of the anger of the goddess
Isis, the moisture, the moon." <span
id="fr_381"></span>[378](ml21.htm#fn_381) Perhaps Dr. Brinton's own
Mexican myth is a better elucidation of this origin of nocturnal evil
than that which traces it to Egypt. According to an ancient tradition
in<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

Mexico, "it is said that in the absence of the sun all mankind lingered
in darkness. Nothing but a human sacrifice could hasten his arrival.
Then Metzli, the moon, led forth one Nanahuatl, the leprous, and
building a pyre, the victim threw himself in its midst. Straightway
Metzli followed his example, and as she disappeared in the bright
flames, the sun rose over the horizon. Is not this a reference to the
kindling rays of the aurora, in which the dark and baleful night is
sacrificed, and in whose light the moon presently fades away, and the
sun comes forth?" <span id="fr_382"></span>[379](ml21.htm#fn_382) We
venture to think that it is, and that it is nearest to a natural
explanation of purely natural effects.

Coming next to Britain, we find that "no prejudice has been more firmly
rivetted than the influence of the moon over the human frame,
originating perhaps in some superstition more ancient than recorded by
the earliest history. The frequent intercourse of Scotland with the
north may have conspired to disseminate or renew the veneration of a
luminary so highly venerated there, in counteracting the more southern
ecclesiastical ordinances." <span
id="fr_383"></span>[380](ml21.htm#fn_383) Forbes Leslie surely goes too
far, and mixes matters up too much, when he writes: "An ancient belief,
adhered to by the ignorant after being denounced and apparently
disproved by the learned, is now admitted to be a fact; viz. the
influence of the moon in certain diseases. This, from various
circumstances, is more apparent in some of the Asiatic countries, and
may have given rise to the custom which extended into<span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

Britain, of exposing sick children on the housetops." <span
id="fr_384"></span>[381](ml21.htm#fn_384) We know that the *solar* rays,
from the time of Hippocrates, the reputed "father of medicine," were
believed by the Greeks to prolong life; and that the Romans built
terraces on the tops of their houses called *solaria*, where they
enjoyed their solar baths. "Levato sole levatur morbus," was one of
their medical axioms. But who ever heard of the *lunar* rays as
beneficial? If sick children were exposed on the housetops, it must have
been in the daytime; and, unless it were intended as an alterative, it
is difficult to see what connection this had with the belief that
disease was the product of the lunar beam. Besides, is the moon's
influence in disease an admitted fact? The "certain diseases" should be
specified, and their lunar origin sustained.

The following strange superstition is singularly like that interpolated
legend in the Gospel of John, about the angel troubling the pool of
Bethesda. In this case the medicinal virtue seems to come with the
change of the moon. But in both cases supernatural agency is equally
mythical. "A cave in the neighbourhood of Dunskey ought also to be
mentioned, on account of the great veneration in which it is held by the
people. At the change of the moon (which is still considered with
superstitious reverence), it is usual to bring, even from a great
distance, infirm persons, and particularly ricketty children, whom they
often suppose bewitched, to bathe in a stream which pours from the hill,
and then dry them in the cave." <span
id="fr_385"></span>[382](ml21.htm#fn_385)

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

Those who are in danger of apoplexy, or other cerebral disease, through
indulgence too freely in various liquids, vinous and spirituous, should
cherish Bacon's sapient deliverance: "It is like that the brain of man
waxeth moister and fuller upon the full of the moon; and therefore it
were good for those that have moist brains, and are great drinkers, to
take sume of *lignum aloes*, rosemary, frankincense, etc., about the
full of the moon. It is like, also, that the humours in men's bodies
increase and decrease as the moon doth; and therefore it were good to
purge some day or two after the full; for that then the humours will not
replenish so soon again." <span
id="fr_386"></span>[383](ml21.htm#fn_386) All this sounds so
unphilosophical that it is almost incredible that the learned Bacon
believed what he wrote. Darker superstitions, however, still linger in
our land. "In Staffordshire, it is commonly said, if you want to cure
chin-cough, take out the child and let it look at the new moon; lift up
its clothes and rub your right hand up and down its stomach, and repeat
the following lines (looking steadfastly at the moon, and rubbing at the
same time):--

'What I see, may it increase;  
What I feel, may it decrease;

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.'" <span
id="fr_387"></span>[384](ml21.htm#fn_387) There is a little ambiguity
here. What is felt is the child's stomach. But the desire is not that
that may decrease, but only the whooping cough, which is *felt*, we take
it, by proxy. A lady, writing of

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

the southern county of Sussex, says: "A superstition lingering amongst
us, worthy of the days of paganism, is that the new May moon, aided by
certain charms, has the power of curing scrofulous complaints." <span
id="fr_388"></span>[385](ml21.htm#fn_388)

As the cutting of hair, finger-nails, and corns has some relation to
health and comfort, we may here mention that in Devonshire it is said
that hair and nails should always be cut in the waning of the moon,
thereby beneficial consequences will result. If corns are cut after the
full moon, some say that they will gradually disappear. In the *British
Apollo* we have the following request for advice:

"Pray tell your querist if he may  
Rely on what the vulgar say,  
That when the moon's in her increase,  
If corns be cut they'll grow apace  
But if you always do take care  
After the full your corns to pare,  
They do insensibly decay  
And will in time wear quite away.  
If this be true, pray let me know,  
And give the reason why 'tis so." <span
id="fr_389"></span>[386](ml21.htm#fn_389)

The following passage is worth quoting, without any abbreviation, as an
excellent summary of wisdom and sense regarding the moon's influence on
health: "There is much reason for regarding the moon as a source of
evil, yet not that she herself is so, but only the circumstances which
attend her. With us it happens that a bright moonlight night is always a
cold one. The absence of cloud allows the

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

earth to radiate its heat into space, and the air gradually cools, until
the moisture it contained is precipitated in the form of dew, and lies
like a thick blanket on the ground to prevent a further cooling. When
the quantity of moisture in the air is small, the refrigerating process
continues until frost is produced, and many a moonlight night in spring
destroys half or even the whole of the fruit of a new season. Moonlight,
therefore, frequently involves the idea of frigidity. With us, whose
climate is comparatively cold, the change from the burning, blasting, or
blighting heat of day, or sun-up, to the cold of a clear night, or
sun-down, is not very great, but within the tropics the change is
enormous. To such sudden vicissitudes in temperature, an Indian doctor,
in whom I have great confidence, attributes fevers and agues. As it is
clear that those persons only, whose business or pleasure obliges them
to be out on cloudless nights, suffer from the severe cold produced by
the rapid radiation into space of the heat of their own bodies and that
of the earth, those who remain at home are not likely to suffer from the
effects of the sudden and continued chill. Still further, it is clear
that people in general will not care to go out during the darkness of a
moonless night, unless obliged to do so. Consequently few persons have
experience of the deleterious influence of starlight nights. But when a
bright moon and a hot, close house induce the people to turn out and
enjoy the coldness and clearness of night, it is very probable

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

that refrigeration may be followed by severe bodily disease. Amongst
such a people, the moon would rather be anathematised than adored. One
may enjoy half an hour, or perhaps an hour, of moonlight, and yet be
blighted or otherwise injured by a whole night of it." <span
id="fr_390"></span>[387](ml21.htm#fn_390) In Denmark a superstition is
current concerning the noxious influences of night. The Danes have a
kind of elves which they call the "Moon Folk." "The man is like an old
man with a low-crowned hat upon his head; the woman is very beautiful in
front, but behind she is hollow, like a dough-trough, and she has a sort
of harp on which she plays, and lures young men with it, and then kills
them. The man is also an evil being, for if any one comes near him he
opens his mouth and breathes upon them, and his breath causes sickness.
It is easy to see what this tradition means: it is the damp marsh wind,
laden with foul and dangerous odours; and the woman's harp is the wind
playing across the marsh rushes at nightfall." <span
id="fr_391"></span>[388](ml21.htm#fn_391) It is the Queen of the Fairies
in the *Midsummer-Night's Dream* who says to the Fairy King,--

These are the forgeries of jealousy  
And never, since the middle summer's spring,  
Met we on hill, in dale, forest or mead,  
By pavèd fountain, or by rushy brook,  
Or in the beachèd margent of the sea,  
To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,  
But with thy brawls thou hast disturb'd our sport.  
No night is now with hymn or carol blest:  
Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,  
Pale in her anger, washes all the air, <span id="page_206">p.
206</span>  
That rheumatic diseases do abound  
And this same progeny of evils comes  
From our debate, from our dissension  
We are their parents and original."

It will be thought rashly iconoclastic if we cast the least doubt upon
the idea that blindness is caused directly by the light of the moon. So
many cases have been adduced that it is considered a settled point. We,
however, dare to dispute some of the evidence. For instance "A poor man
born in the village *Rowdil*, commonly called St. Clement's, blind, lost
his sight at every change of the moon, which obliged him to keep his bed
for a day or two, and then he recovered his sight." <span
id="fr_392"></span>[389](ml21.htm#fn_392) If logic would enable us to
prove a negative to this statement, we would meet it with simple denial.
But we have no hesitation in saying that an investigation into this case
would have exonerated the moon of any share in the affliction, and have
revealed some other and likely cause. Our chief objection to this story
is its element of periodicity; and we would require overwhelming
testimony to establish even the probability of such a miracle once a
month. That permanent injury may accrue to those whose sleeping eyes are
exposed all night to the brightness of a full moon is probable enough.
But this would take place not because the moon's beams were peculiarly
baneful, but because any strong light would have a hurtful effect upon
the eyes when fixed for hours in the condition of sleep.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

We can quite believe that in a dry atmosphere like that of Egypt, where
ophthalmia is very prevalent on account of constant irritation from the
fine sand in the air, the eye, weary with the heat and aridity of the
day, would be impaired if uncovered in the air to the rays of the moon.
Carne's statements are consequently quite credible. He tells us: "The
effect of the moonlight on the eyes in this country is singularly
injurious; the natives tell you, as I found they also afterwards did in
Arabia, always to cover your eyes when you sleep in the open air. The
moon here really strikes and affects the sight, when you sleep exposed
to it, much more than the sun; indeed, the sight of a person who should
sleep with his face exposed at night, would soon be utterly impaired or
destroyed." <span id="fr_393"></span>[390](ml21.htm#fn_393) For the same
reason, that strong light oppresses the slumbering eye, "the seaman in
his hammock takes care not to face the full moon, lest he be struck with
blindness." <span id="fr_394"></span>[391](ml21.htm#fn_394) Nor can we
regard the following as "an *extraordinary* effect of moonlight upon the
human subject." In 1863, "a boy, thirteen years of age, residing near
Peckham Rye, was expelled his home by his mother for disobedience. He
ran away to a cornfield close by, and, on lying down in the open air,
fell asleep. He slept throughout the night, which was a moonlight one.
Some labourers on their way to work, next morning, seeing the boy
apparently asleep, aroused him; the lad opened his eyes, but declared he
could not see. He was conveyed

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

home, and medical advice was obtained; the surgeon affirmed that the
total loss of sight resulted from sleeping in the moonlight." <span
id="fr_395"></span>[392](ml21.htm#fn_395) This was sad enough; but it
was antecedently probable. No doubt a boy of thirteen who for
disobedience was cast out of home in such a place as London had a hard
lot, and went supperless to his open bed. His optic nerves were young
and sensitive, and the protracted light so paralysed them that the
morning found them closed "in endless night." This was a purely natural
result: to admitting it, reason opposes no demur. But we must object,
for truth's sake, to the tendency to account for natural consequences by
assigning supernatural causes. The moon is no divinity; moonlight is no
Divine emanation, with a vindictive animus; and those who countenance
such silly superstition as that moonstroke is a mysterious, evil agency,
are contributing to a polytheism which leads to atheism: for many gods
logically means no GOD at all.

Another branch of this umbrageous if not fructuous tree of lunar
superstition is the moon's influence on human fortune. Butler satirizes
the visionary who--

"With the moon was more familiar  
Than e'er was almanac well-willer (compiler);  
Her secrets understood so clear  
That some believed he had been there;  
Knew when she was in fittest mood  
For cutting corns, or letting blood:  
Whether the wane be, or increase,  
Best to set garlick, or sow pease: <span id="page_209">p. 209</span>  
Who first found out the man i' th' moon,  
That to the ancients was unknown."--*Hudibras*.

A Swiss theologian amusingly describes the superstitious person who
reads his fortune in the stars. He, it is said, "will be more afraid of
the constellation fires than the flames of his next neighbour's house.
He will not open a vein till he has asked leave of the planets. He will
not commit his seed to the earth when the soil, but when the moon,
requires it. He will have his hair cut when the moon is either in *Leo*,
that his locks may stare like the lion's shag, or in *Aries*, that they
may curl like a ram's horn. Whatever he would have to grow, he sets
about when she is in her increase; but for what he would have made less,
he chuses her wane. When the moon is in *Taurus*, he never can be
persuaded to take physic, lest that animal which chews its cud should
make him cast it up again. He will avoid the sea whenever *Mars* is in
the midst of heaven, lest that warrior-god should stir up pirates
against him. In *Taurus* he will plant his trees, that this sign, which
the astrologers are pleased to call *fixed*, may fasten them deep in the
earth. If at any time he has a mind to be admitted into the presence of
a prince, he will wait till the moon is in conjunction with the sun; for
'tis then the society of an inferior with a superior is salutary and
successful." <span id="fr_396"></span>[393](ml21.htm#fn_396)

The *new moon* is considered pre-eminently auspicious for
commencements,--for all kinds of building

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

up, and beginning *de novo*. Houses are to be erected and moved into;
marriages are to be concluded, money counted, hair and nails cut,
healing herbs and pure dew gathered, all at the new moon. Money counted
at that period will be increased. The *full moon* is the time for
pulling down, and thinking of the end of all things. Cut your timber,
mow your grass, make your hay, not while the sun shines, but while the
moon wanes; also stuff your feather-bed then, and so kill the newly
plucked feathers completely, and bring them to rest. Wash your linen,
too, by the waning moon, that the dirt may disappear with the dwindling
light. <span id="fr_397"></span>[394](ml21.htm#fn_397) According to one
old notion it was deemed unlucky to assume a new dress when the moon was
in her decline. So says the Earl of Northampton: "They forbidde us when
the moone is in a fixed signe, to put on a newe garment. Why so? Because
it is lyke that it wyll be too longe in wearing, a small fault about
this towne, where garments seldome last till they be payd for. But thyr
meaning is, that the garment shall continue long, not in respect of any
strength or goodness in the stuffe, but by the durance or disease of him
that hath neyther leysure nor liberty to weare it." <span
id="fr_398"></span>[395](ml21.htm#fn_398) It is well known that the
ancient Hebrews held the new moon in religious reverence. The trumpets
were blown, solemn sacrifices were offered and festivals held; and the
first clay of the lunar month was always holy. In a Talmudic
compilation, to which Dr. Farrar has

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

contributed a preface, we find an interesting account of the *Blessing
the new moon*. "It is a very pious act to bless the moon at the close of
the Sabbath, when one is dressed in his best attire and perfumed. If the
blessing is to be performed on the evening of an ordinary week-day, the
best dress is to be worn. According to the Kabbalists the blessings upon
the moon are not to be said till seven full days after her birth, but,
according to later authorities, this may be done after three days. The
reason for not performing this monthly service under a roof, but in the
open air, is because it is considered as the reception of the presence
of the Shekinah, and it would not be respectful so to do anywhere but in
the open air. It depends very much upon circumstances when and where the
new moon is to be consecrated, and also upon one's own predisposition,
for authorities differ. We will close these remarks with the conclusion
of the Kitzur Sh'lu on the subject, which, at p. 72, col. 2, runs thus:

"When about to sanctify the new moon, one should straighten his feet (as
at the Shemonah-esreh) and give one glance at the moon before he begins
to repeat the ritual blessing, and having commenced it he should not
look at her at all. Thus should he begin--'In the united name of the
Holy and Blessed One' and His Shekinah, through that Hidden and
Consecrated One! and in the name of all Israel!' Then he is to proceed
with the 'Form of Prayer for the New Moon,' word for word, with

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

out haste, but with solemn deliberation, and when be repeats-

'Blessed is thy Former, Blessed is thy Maker,  
Blessed is thy Possessor, Blessed is thy Creator,'

he is to meditate on the initials of the four Divine epithets, which
form 'Jacob'; for the moon, which is called 'the lesser light,' is his
emblem or symbol, and he is also called 'little' (see Amos vii. 2). This
he is to repeat three times. He is to skip three times while repeating
thrice the following sentence, and after repeating three times forwards
and backwards: thus (*forwards*)--'Fear and dread shall fall upon them
by the greatness of thine arm; they shall be as still as a stone'; thus
(*backwards*)--'Still as a stone may they be; by the greatness of thine
arm may fear and dread fall on them'; he then is to say to his neighbour
three times, 'Peace be unto you,' and the neighbour is to respond three
times, 'Unto you be peace.' Then he is to say three times (very loudly),
'David, the King of Israel, liveth and existeth!' and finally, he is to
say three times, 'May a good omen and good luck be upon us and upon all
Israel! Amen!'" <span id="fr_399"></span>[396](ml21.htm#fn_399)

That the ancient Germans held the moon in similar regard we know from
Cæsar, who, having inquired why Ariovistus did not come to an
engagement, discovered this to be the reason: "that among the Germans it
was the custom for their matrons to pronounce from lots and divination,
whether it were expedient that the battle should be engaged in or not;
that

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

they had said, 'that it was not the will of heaven that the Germans
should conquer, if they engaged in battle before the new moon.'" <span
id="fr_400"></span>[396\*](ml21.htm#fn_400)

Halliwell has reproduced an illustration of British superstition of the
same sort. "A very singular divination practised at the period of the
harvest moon is thus described in an old chap-book. When you go to bed,
place under your pillow a prayer-book open at the part of the
matrimonial service 'with this ring I thee wed'; place on it a key, a
ring, a flower, and a sprig of willow, a small heart-cake, a crust of
bread, and the following cards:--the ten of clubs, nine of hearts, ace
of spades, and the ace of diamonds. Wrap all these in a thin
handkerchief of gauze or muslin, and on getting into bed, cross your
hands, and say:--

'Luna, every woman's friend,  
To me thy goodness condescend  
Let me this night in vision see  
Emblems of my destiny.'

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If you dream of
storms, trouble will betide you; if the storm ends in a fine calm, so
will your fate; if of a ring or the ace of diamonds, marriage; bread, an
industrious life; cake, a prosperous life; flowers, joy; willow,
treachery in love; spades, death; diamonds, money; clubs, a foreign
land; hearts, illegitimate children; keys, that you will rise to great
trust and power, and never know want; birds, that you will have many
children; and geese, that you will marry more than once." <span
id="fr_401"></span>[397](ml21.htm#fn_401) Such ridiculous absurdities
would be rejected

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

as apocryphal if young ladies were not still in the habit of placing
bits of wedding cake under their pillows in the hope that their dreaming
eyes may be enchanted with blissful visions of their future lords.

Hone tells us that in Berkshire, "at the first appearance of a new moon,
maidens go into the fields, and, while they look at it, say:--

'New moon, new moon, I hail thee!  
By all the virtue in thy body.  
Grant this night that I may see  
He who my true love is to be.'

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then they return
home, firmly believing that before morning their future husbands will
appear to them in their dreams." <span
id="fr_402"></span>[398](ml21.htm#fn_402)

In Devonshire also "it is customary for young people, as soon as they
see the first new moon after midsummer, to go to a stile, turn their
back to it, and say:--

'All hail, new moon, all hail to thee!  
I prithe, good moon, reveal to me  
This night who shall my true love be  
Who is he, and what he wears,  
And what he does all months and years.'" <span
id="fr_403"></span>[399](ml21.htm#fn_403)

Aubrey says the same of the Scotch of his day, and the custom is not yet
extinct. "In Scotland (especially among the Highlanders) the women doe
make a curtsey to the new moon; I have known one in England doe it, and
our English woemen in the country doe retain (some of them) a touch of
this gentilisme still, *e.g.*:--

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

'All haile to thee, moon, all haile to thee  
I prithe, good moon, declare to me,  
This night, who my husband must be.'

This they doe sitting astride on a gate or stile the first evening the
new moon appears. In Herefordshire, etc., the vulgar people at the prime
of the moon say, '\`Tis a fine moon, God bless her.'" <span
id="fr_404"></span>[400](ml21.htm#fn_404) " In Ireland, at the new moon,
it is not an uncommon practice for people to point with a knife, and
after invoking the Holy Trinity, to say:--

'New moon, true morrow, be true now to me,  
That I ere the morrow my true love may see.'

The knife is then placed under the pillow, and silence strictly
observed, lest the charm should be broken." <span
id="fr_405"></span>[401](ml21.htm#fn_405)

Dr. Charles Mackay quotes from Mother Bridget's *Dream and Omen Book*
the following prescription for ascertaining the events of futurity.
"*First new moon of the year*. On the first new moon in the year take a
pint of clear spring water, and infuse into it the *white* of an egg
laid by a *white* hen, a glass of *white* wine, three almonds peeled
*white*, and a tablespoonful of *white* rose-water. Drink this on going
to bed, not making more nor less than three draughts of it; repeating
the following verses three several times in a clear distinct voice, but
not so loud as to be overheard by anybody:--

'If I dream of water pure  
  Before the coming morn,  
'Tis a sign I shall be poor,  
  And unto wealth not born. <span id="page_216">p. 216</span>  
If I dream of tasting beer,  
Middling, then, will be my cheer--  
Chequered with the good and bad,  
Sometimes joyful, sometimes sad;  
But should I dream of drinking wine,  
Wealth and pleasure will be mine.  
The stronger the drink, the better the cheer--  
Dreams of my destiny, appear, appear!'" <span
id="fr_406"></span>[402](ml21.htm#fn_406)

The day of the week on which the moon is new or full, is a question that
awakens the most anxious concern. In the north of Italy Wednesday is
dreaded for a lunar change, and in the south of France the inauspicious
day is Friday. <span id="fr_407"></span>[403](ml21.htm#fn_407) In most
of our own rural districts Friday's new moon is much disliked

"Friday's moon,  
Come when it wool,  
It comes too soon."

Saturday is unlucky for the *new*, and Sunday for the *full* moon. In
Norfolk it is said:--

"Saturday's new and Sunday's full,  
Never was good, and never wull."

An apparently older version of the same weather-saw runs:--

"A Saturday's change, and a Sunday's prime,  
Was nivver a good mune in nea man's time."

In Worcestershire, a cottager near Berrow Hill told Mr. Edwin Lees,
F.L.S., that as the new moon had fallen on a Saturday, there would
follow twenty-one days of wind or rain; for

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

"If the moon on a Saturday be new or full,  
There always *was* rain, and there always *wüll*."

One rustic rhyme rehearsed in some places is:--

"A Saturday moon,  
If it comes once in seven years,  
  Comes once too soon."

Next to the day, the medium through which the new moon is first beheld,
is of vital moment. In Staffordshire it is unlucky to see this sight
through trees. A correspondent in *Notes and Queries* (21st January,
1882) once saw a person almost in tears because she looked on the new
moon through her veil, feeling convinced that misfortune would follow.
Henderson cites a canon to be observed by those who would know what year
they would wed. "Look at the first new moon of the year through a silk
handkerchief which has never been washed. As many moons as you see
through the handkerchief (the threads multiplying the vision), so many
years will pass ere you are married." <span
id="fr_408"></span>[404](ml21.htm#fn_408) Hunt tells us, what in fact is
widely believed, that "to see the new moon for the first time through
glass, is unlucky; you may be certain that you will break glass before
that moon is out. I have known persons whose attention has been called
to a clear new moon hesitate. 'Hev I seed her out o' doors afore?' if
not, they will go into the open air, and, if possible, show the moon 'a
piece of gold,' or, at all events, turn their money." <span
id="fr_409"></span>[405](ml21.htm#fn_409) Mrs. Latham says: "Many of our
Sussex superstitions are probably of Saxon origin; amongst which may be

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

the custom of bowing or curtseying to the new or Lady moon, as she is
styled, to deprecate bad luck. There is another kindred superstition,
that the Queen of night will dart malignant rays upon you, if on the
first day of her re-appearance you look up to her without money in your
pocket. But if you are not fortunate enough to have any there, in order
to avert her evil aspect, you must immediately turn head over heels! It
is considered unlucky to see the new moon through a window-pane, and I
have known a maidservant shut her eyes when closing the shutters lest
she should unexpectedly see it through the glass. Do not kill your pig
until full moon, or the pork will be ruined." <span
id="fr_410"></span>[406](ml21.htm#fn_410) In Suffolk, also, "it is
considered unlucky to kill a pig in the wane of the moon; if it is done,
the pork will waste in boiling. I have known the shrinking of bacon in
the pot attributed to the fact of the pig having been killed in the
moon's decrease; and I have also known the death of poor piggy delayed,
or hastened, so as to happen during its increase." <span
id="fr_411"></span>[407](ml21.htm#fn_411)

The desirability of possessing *silver* in the pocket, and of turning it
over, when the new moon is first seen, is a point of some interest.
Forbes Leslie says, "The ill-luck of having no *silver* money--coins of
other metals being of no avail--when you first see or hail a new moon,
is still a common belief from Cornwall to Caithness, as well as in
Ireland." <span id="fr_412"></span>[408](ml21.htm#fn_412) And Jamieson
writes: "Another superstition, equally ridiculous and unaccountable, is
still regarded by

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

some. They deem it very unlucky to see the new moon for the first time
without having *silver* in one's pocket. Copper is of no avail." <span
id="fr_413"></span>[409](ml21.htm#fn_413) We venture to think that this
is not altogether unaccountable. The moon at night, in a clear sky,
reflects a brilliant whiteness. The two Hebrew words used of this
luminary in the Bible, mean "pale light" and "white." "Hindooism says
that the moon, Soma, was turned into a female called Chandra--'thc White
or Silvery One.'" <span id="fr_414"></span>[410](ml21.htm#fn_414) The
Santhals of India call the sun *Chando*, which means bright, and is also
a name for the moon. Now pure silver is of a very white colour and of a
strong metallic lustre. It was one of the earliest known metals, and
used as money from the remotest times. Its whiteness led the ancient
astrologers, as it afterwards led the alchemists, to connect it with the
moon, and to call it Diana and Luna, names previously given to the
satellite. For Artemis, the Greek Diana, the Ephesian craftsmen made
silver shrines. The moon became the symbol of silver; and to this day
fused nitrate of silver is called *lunar* caustic. It was natural and
easy for superstition to suppose that silver was the moon's own metal;
and to imagine that upon the reappearance of the lunar deity or demon,
its beams should be propitiated by some argentine possession. We find
that silver was exclusively used in the worship of the moon in Peru.

In a book published in the earlier part of last century, and attributed
to Daniel Defoe, we read;<span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span>

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

"To see a new moon the first time after her change, on the right hand,
or directly before you, betokens the utmost good fortune that month; as
to have her on your left, or behind you, so that in turning your head
back you happen to see her, foreshows the worst; as also, they say, to
be without gold in your pocket at that time is of very bad
consequence." <span id="fr_415"></span>[411](ml21.htm#fn_415) The
mistake in substituting gold for silver here is easily explained. As
among the Romans *æs* meant both copper and money; and among the French
*argent* means both silver and money in general; so in England gold is
the common expression for coin of any substance. Silver being *money*,
the word gold was thus substituted; the generic for the specific. Other
superstitions besides those above noticed are found in different parts
of our enlightened land. Denham says, "I once saw an aged matron turn
her apron to the new moon to insure good luck for the ensuing
month." <span id="fr_416"></span>[412](ml21.htm#fn_416) And Halliwell
mentions a prayer customary among some persons:--

"I see the moon, and the moon sees me.  
God bless the moon, and God bless me." <span
id="fr_417"></span>[413](ml21.htm#fn_417)

In Devonshire it is lucky to see the new moon over the right, but
unlucky to see it over the left shoulder; and to see it straight before
is good fortune to the end of the month. "In Renfrewshire, if a man's
house be burnt during the wane of the moon, it is deemed unlucky. If the
same misfortune take place

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

when the moon is waxing, it is viewed as a presage of prosperity. In
Orkney, also, it is reckoned unlucky to flit, or to remove from one
habitation to another, during the waning of the moon." <span
id="fr_418"></span>[414](ml21.htm#fn_418) A recent writer tells us that
in Orkney "there are superstitions likewise associated with the moon.
The increase, and full growth, and wane of that satellite are the
emblems of a rising, flourishing, and declining fortune. No business of
importance is begun during the moon's wane; if even an animal is killed
at that period, the flesh is supposed to be unwholesome. A couple to
think of marrying at that time would be regarded as recklessly careless
respecting their future happiness Old people in some parts of
Argyllshire were wont to invoke the Divine blessing on the moon after
the monthly change. The Gaelic word for fortune is borrowed from that
which denotes the full moon; and a marriage or birth occurring at that
period is believed to augur prosperity." <span
id="fr_419"></span>[415](ml21.htm#fn_419)

Kirkmichael, says another writer on the Highlands of Scotland, hath "its
due proportion of that superstition which generally prevails over the
Highlands. Unable to account for the cause, they consider the effects of
times and seasons as certain and infallible. The moon in her increase,
full growth, and in her wane, are with them the emblems of a rising,
flourishing, and declining fortune. At the last period of her revolution
they carefully avoid to engage in any business of importance; but the
first and the middle they seize with avidity, presaging the most

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

auspicious issue to their undertakings. Poor Martinus Scriblerus never
more anxiously watched the blowing of the west wind to secure an heir to
his genius, than the love-sick swain and his nymph for the coming of the
new moon to be noosed together in matrimony. Should the planet happen to
be at the height of her splendour when the ceremony is performed, their
future life will be a scene of festivity, and all its paths strewed over
with rosebuds of delight. But when her tapering horns are turned towards
the north, passion becomes frost-bound, and seldom thaws till the genial
season again approaches. From the moon they not only draw
prognostications of the weather, but according to their creed also
discover future events. There they are clearly portrayed, and ingenious
illusion never fails in the explanation. The veneration paid to this
planet, and the opinion of its influences, are obvious from the meaning
still affixed to some words of the Gaelic language. In Druidic
mythology, when the circle of the moon was complete, fortune then
promised to be most propitious. Agreeably to this idea, *rath*, which
signifies in Gaelic a wheel or circle, is transferred to signify
fortune." <span id="fr_420"></span>[416](ml21.htm#fn_420)

Forbes Leslie writes: "The influence which the moon was supposed to
exercise on mankind, as well as on inanimate objects, may be traced in
the practice of the Druids. It is not yet extinct in Scotland; and the
moon, in the increase, at the full, and on the wane, are emblems of
prosperity, established success, or declining fortune, by which many

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

persons did, and some still do, regulate the period for commencing their
most important undertakings." <span
id="fr_421"></span>[417](ml21.htm#fn_421) And yet once more, to make the
induction most conclusive; we are told that "the canon law anxiously
prohibited observance of the moon as regulating the period of marriage;
nor was any regard to be paid to certain days of the year for
ceremonies. If the Lucina of the ancients be identified with Diana, it
was not unreasonable to court the care of the parturient, by selecting
the time deemed most propitious. The strength of the ecclesiastical
interdiction does not seem to have prevailed much in Scotland. Friday,
which was consecrated to a northern divinity, has been deemed more
favourable for the union. In the southern districts of Scotland, and in
the Orkney Islands, the inhabitants preferred the increase of the moon
for it. Auspicious circumstances were anticipated in other parts, from
its celebration at full moon. Good fortune depended so much on the
increase of that luminary, that nothing important was undertaken during
its wane. Benefit even accrued to the stores provided during its
increase, and its effect in preserving them is still credited." <span
id="fr_422"></span>[418](ml21.htm#fn_422) To what, but to this prevalent
belief in lunar influence on fortune can Shakespeare allude, when Romeo
swears:

"*Rom*. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,  
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--  
  *Jul*. Oh, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,  
That monthly changes in her circled orb,  
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable." <span
id="fr_423"></span>[419](ml21.htm#fn_423)

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

Upon the physiological influence of the lunar rays in the generation or
aggravation of disease, we have but little to add to what has been
already written. It is a topic for a special treatise, and properly
belongs to those medical experts whose research and practice in this
particular branch of physics qualify them to speak with plenary
authority. Besides, it has been so wisely handled by Dr. Forbes Winslow,
in his admirable monograph on *Light*, that inquirers cannot follow a
safer guide than his little book affords. Dr. Winslow accounts for the
theory of planetary influence partly by the action of the moon in
producing the tides. He says: "Astronomers having admitted that the moon
was capable of producing this physical effect upon the waters of the
ocean, it was not altogether unnatural that the notion should become not
only a generally received but a popular one, that the ebb and flow of
the tides had a material influence over the bodily functions. The
Spaniards imagine that all who die of chronic diseases breathe their
last during the ebb. Southey says, that amongst the wonders of the isles
and city of Cadiz, which the historian of that city, Suares de Salazar,
enumerates, one is, according to p. Labat, that the sick never die there
while the tide is rising or at its height, but always during the ebb. He
restricts the notion to the isle of Leon, but implies that the effect
was there believed to take place in diseases of all kinds, acute as well
as chronic. 'Him fever,' says the negro in the West Indies, 'shall go

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

when the water come low; him always come not when the tide high.' The
popular notion amongst the negroes appears to be that the ebb and flow
of the tides are caused by a '*fever of the sea*,' which rages for six
hours, and then intermits for as many more." <span
id="fr_424"></span>[420](ml21.htm#fn_424) Dr. Winslow then subjoins a
long list of learned authorities, several of whose writings he subjects
to a brief analysis. He disapproves of the presumption that the subject
is altogether visionary and utopian; and affirms that it has not always
been pursued by competent observers. Periodicity is noted as an
important symptom in disease; a feature in febrile disturbance which the
present writer himself had abundant opportunity of marking and measuring
during an epidemic of yellow fever in the city of Savannah in the year
1876. This periodicity Dr. Winslow regards as the foundation of the
alleged lunar influence in morbid conditions. Some remarkable cases are
referred to, which, if the fact of the moon's interference with human
functions could be admitted, would go a long way to corroborate and
confirm it. The supposed influence of the moon on plants is not passed
over, nor the chemical composition of lunar light as a possible evil
agency. Still considering the matter *sub judice*, Dr. Winslow then
proceeds to the alleged influence of the moon on the insane; a question
with which he was pre-eminently competent to cope. After alluding to the
support given to the popular belief by poets and philosophers of ancient
and modern times, the question of periodicity, or<span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

"lucid intervals," is again discussed, this time in its mental aspect,
and the hygienic or sanatory influence of light is allowed its meed of
consideration. The final result of the investigation is that the matter
is held to be purely speculative, and it is esteemed wise to hold in
reserve any theory in relation to the subject that may have been formed.
With this conclusion we are greatly disappointed. Dr. Winslow's aid in
the inquiry is most valuable, and if he, after his careful review of
pathological literature on lunar influence, coupled with his own
extended experience, holds the question in abeyance, who will venture
upon a decision? We however believe, notwithstanding every existing
difficulty, that the subject will be brought into clear light ere long,
and all superstition end in accurate science. Meanwhile, many, even of
the enlightened, will cling to the unforgotten fancy which gave rise to
the word *lunatic*, and in cases of mental derangement will moralize
with young Banks in the *Witch of Edmonton* (1658), "When the moon's in
the full, then wit's in the wane."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Moon Inhabitation](ml19)

</div>
