<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml18)  [Next](ml20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16MO4/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Moon Lore*, by Timothy Harley, \[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

# MOON INHABITATION.

SCIENCE having practically diminished the moon's distance, and rendered
distinct its elevations and depressions, it is natural for " those
obstinate questionings of sense and outward things " to urge the
inquiry, *Is the moon inhabited*? This question it is easier to ask than
to answer. It has been a mooted point for many years, and our wise men
of the west seem still disposed to give it up, or, at least, to adjourn
its decision for want of evidence. Of "guesses at truth" there have been
a great multitude, and of dogmatic assertions not a few; but
demonstrations are things which do not yet appear. We now take leave to
report progress, and give the subject a little ventilation. We do not
expect to furnish an Ariadne's thread, but we may hope to find some
indication of the right way out of this labyrinth of uncertainty.
*Veritas nihil veretur nisi abscondi*: or, as the German proverb says,
"Truth creeps not into corners"; its life is the light.

But before we advance a single step, we desire to preclude all
misunderstanding on one point, by distinctly

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

avowing our conviction that the teachings of Christian theology are not
at all involved in the issue of this discussion, whatever it may prove.
Infinite harm has been done by confusing the religion of science with
the science of religion. Religion *is* a science, and science is a
religion; but they are not identical. Philosophy ought to be pious, and
piety ought to be philosophical; but philosophy and piety are two
quantities and qualities that may dwell apart, though, happily, they may
also be found in one nature. Each has its own faculties and functions;
and in our present investigation, religion has nothing more to do than
to shed the influence of reverence, humility, and teachableness over the
scientific student as he ponders his problem and works out the truth. In
this, and in kindred studies, we may yield without reluctance what a
certain professor of religion concedes, and grant without grudging what
a certain professor of science demands. Dr. James Martineau says, "In so
far as Church belief is still committed to a given kosmogony and natural
history of man, it lies open to scientific refutation"; and again, "The
whole history of the Genesis of things Religion must unconditionally
surrender to the Sciences." <span
id="fr_425"></span>[421](ml21.htm#fn_425) In this we willingly concur,
for science ought to be, and will be, supreme in its own domain. Bishop
Temple does "not hesitate to ascribe to Science a clearer knowledge of
the true interpretation of the first chapter of Genesis, and to
scientific history a truer knowledge of the

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

great historical prophets. Science enters into Religion, and the
believer is bound to recognise its value and make use of its
services." <span id="fr_426"></span>[422](ml21.htm#fn_426) Then, to
quote the professor of science, Dr. John Tyndall says. "The impregnable
position of science may be described in a few words. We claim, and we
shall wrest from Theology, the entire domain of cosmological
theory." <span id="fr_427"></span>[423](ml21.htm#fn_427) We wish the
eloquent professor all success. It was not the spirit of primitive
Christianity, but the spirit of priestly ignorance, intolerance, and
despotism, which invaded the territory of natural science; and if those
who are its rightful lords can recover the soil, we bid them heartily,
God speed! We have been driven to these remarks by a twofold impulse.
First, we can never forget the injury that has been inflicted on science
by the oppositions of a headless religion; any more than we can forget
the injury which has been inflicted on religion by the oppositions of a
heartless science. Secondly, we have seen this very question of the
inhabitation of the planets and satellites rendered a topic of ridicule
for Thomas Paine, and an inviting theme for raillery to others of
sophistical spirit, by the way in which it has been foolishly mixed up
with sacred or spiritual concerns. Surely, the object of God in the
creation of our terrestrial race, or the benefits of the death of Jesus
Christ, can have no more to do with the habitability of the moon, than
the doctrine of the Trinity has to do with the multiplication table and
the rule of three, or

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

the hypostatical union with the chemical composition of water and light.
Having said thus much of compulsion, we return, not as ministers in the
temple of religion so much as students in the school of science, to
consider with docility the question in dispute, *Is the moon inhabited*?

Three avenues, more or less umbrageous, are open to us; all of which
have been entered. They may be named *observation*, *induction*, and
*analogy*. The first, if we could pursue it, would explicate the enigma
at once. The second, if clear, would satisfy our reason, which, in such
a matter, might be equivalent to sight. And the third might conduct us
to a shadow which would "prove the substance true." We begin by dealing
briefly with the argument from *observation*. Here our data are small
and our difficulties great. One considerable inconvenience in the
inquiry is, of course, the moon's distance. Though she is our next-door
neighbour in the many-mansioned universe, two hundred and thirty-seven
thousand miles are no mere step heavenward. Transit across the
intervenient space being at present impracticable, we have to derive our
most enlarged views of this "spotty globe" from the "optic glass." But
this admirable appliance, much as it has revealed, is thus far wholly
inadequate to the solution of our mystery. Robert Hooke, in the
seventeenth century, thought that he could construct a telescope with
which we might discern the inhabitants of the moon life-size-seeing them
as

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

plainly as we see the inhabitants of the earth. But, alas! the sanguine
mathematician died in his sleep, and his dream has not yet come true.
Since Hooke's day gigantic instruments have been fitted up, furnished
with all the modern improvements which could be supplied through the
genius or generosity of such astronomers as Joseph Fraunhofer and Sir
William Herschel, the third Earl of Rosse and the fourth Duke of
Northumberland. But all of these worthy men left something to be done by
their successors. Consequently, not long since, our scientists set to
work to increase their artificial eyesight. The Rev. Mr. Webb tells us
that "the first 'Moon Committee' of the British Association recommended
a power of 1,000." But he discourages us if we anticipate large returns;
for he adds: "Few indeed are the instruments or the nights that will
bear it; but when employed, what will be the result? Since increase of
magnifying is equivalent to decrease of distance, we shall see the moon
as large (though not as distinct) as if it were 240 miles off, and any
one can judge what could be made of the grandest building upon earth at
that distance." <span id="fr_428"></span>[424](ml21.htm#fn_428) If
therefore we are to see the settlement of the matter in the speculum of
a telescope, it may be some time before we have done with what Guillemin
calls "the interesting, almost insoluble question, of the existence of
living and organized beings on the surface of the satellite of our
little earth." <span id="fr_429"></span>[425](ml21.htm#fn_429) Some
cynic may interpose with the quotation,--

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

"But optics sharp it needs, I ween,  
To see what is not to be seen." <span
id="fr_430"></span>[426](ml21.htm#fn_430)

True, but it remains to be shown that there is nothing to be seen beyond
what *we* see. We are not prepared to deny the existence of everything
which our mortal eyes may fail to trace. Four hundred years ago all
Europe believed that to sail in search of a western continent was to
wish "to see what is not to be seen"; but a certain Christopher Columbus
went out persuaded of things not seen as yet, and having embarked in
faith he landed in sight. The lesson must not be lost upon us.

"There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,  
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy."

Because we cannot now make out either habitations or habitants on the
moon, it does not necessarily follow that the night will never come
when, through some mightier medium than any ever yet constructed or
conceived, we shall descry, beside mountains and valleys, also peopled
plains and populous cities animating the fair features of this beautiful
orb. One valuable auxiliary of the telescope, destined to play an
important part in lunar discovery, must not be overlooked. Mr. Norman
Lockyer says, "With reference to the moon, if we wish to map her
correctly, it is now no longer necessary to depend on ordinary eye
observations alone; it is perfectly clear that by means of an image of
the moon, taken by photography, we are able to fix many points on the
lunar surface." <span id="fr_431"></span>[427](ml21.htm#fn_431)<span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

With telescopic and photographic lenses in skilled hands, and a wealth
of inventive genius in fertile brains, we can afford to wait a long
while before we close the debate with a final negative.

In the meantime, eyes and glasses giving us no satisfaction, we turn to
scientific *induction*. Speculation is a kind of mental mirror, that
before now has anticipated or supplemented the visions of sense. Not
being practical astronomers ourselves, we have to follow the counsel of
that unknown authority who bids us believe the expert. But expertness
being the fruit of experience, we may be puzzled to tell who have
attained that rank. We will inquire, however, with due docility, of the
oracles of scientific research. It is agreed on all sides that to render
the moon habitable by beings at all akin with our own kind, there must
be within or upon that body an atmosphere, water, changing seasons, and
the alternations of day and night. We know that changes occur in the
moon, from cold to heat, and from darkness to light. But the lunar day
is as long as 291 of ours; so that each portion of the surface is
exposed to, or turned from, the sun for nearly 14 days. This long
exposure produces excessive heat, and the long darkness excessive cold.
Such extremities of temperature are unfavourable to the existence of
beings at all like those living upon the earth, especially if the moon
be without water and atmosphere. As these two desiderata seem
indispensable to lunar inhabitation, we may chiefly consider the
question, Do these conditions

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

exist? If so, inductive reasoning will lead us to the inference, which
subsequent experience will strengthen, that the moon is inhabited like
its superior planet. But if not, life on the satellite similar to life
on the earth, is altogether improbable, if not absolutely impossible.

The replies given to this query will be by no means unanimous. But, for
the full understanding of the state of the main question, and to assist
us in arriving at some sort of verdict, we will hear several authorities
on both sides of the case. The evidence being cumulative, we pursue the
chronological order, and begin with La Place. He writes: "The lunar
atmosphere, if any such exists, is of an extreme rarity, greater even
than that which can be produced on the surface of the earth by the best
constructed air-pumps. It may be inferred from this that no terrestrial
animal could live or respire at the surface of the moon, and that if the
moon be inhabited, it must be by animals of another species." <span
id="fr_432"></span>[428](ml21.htm#fn_432) This opinion, as Sir David
Brewster points out, is not that the moon has no atmosphere, but that if
it have any it is extremely attenuated. Mr. Russell Hind's opinion is
similar with respect to water. He says: "Earlier selenographists
considered the dull, grayish spots to be water, and termed them the
lunar seas, bays, and lakes. They arc so called to the present day,
though we have strong evidence to show that if water exist at all on the
moon, it must be in very small quantity." <span
id="fr_433"></span>[429](ml21.htm#fn_433) Mr. Grant tells us that "the

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

question whether the moon be surrounded by an atmosphere has been much
discussed by astronomers. Various phenomena are capable of indicating
such an atmosphere, but, generally speaking, they are found to be
unfavourable to its existence, or at all events they lead to the
conclusion that it must be very inconsiderable." <span
id="fr_434"></span>[430](ml21.htm#fn_434) Humboldt thinks that
Schroeter's assumptions of a lunar atmosphere and lunar twilight are
refuted, and adds: "If, then, the moon is without any gaseous envelope,
the entire absence of any diffused light must cause the heavenly bodies,
as seen from thence, to appear projected against a sky *almost black* in
the day-time. No undulation of air can there convey sound, song, or
speech. The moon, to our imagination, which loves to soar into regions
inaccessible to full research, is a desert where silence reigns
unbroken." <span id="fr_435"></span>[431](ml21.htm#fn_435) Dr. Lardner
considers it proven "that there does not exist upon the moon an
atmosphere capable of reflecting light in any sensible degree," and also
believes that "the same physical tests which show the non-existence of
an atmosphere of air upon the moon are equally conclusive against an
atmosphere of vapour." <span id="fr_436"></span>[432](ml21.htm#fn_436)
Mr. Breen is more emphatic. He writes: "In the want of water and air,
the question as to whether this body is inhabited is no longer
equivocal. Its surface resolves itself into a sterile and inhospitable
waste, where the lichen which flourishes amidst the frosts and snows of
Lapland would quickly wither and die, and where no animal with a drop of
blood in its veins could exist." <span
id="fr_437"></span>[433](ml21.htm#fn_437) The anonymous

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

author of the Essay on the *Plurality of Worlds* announces that
astronomers are agreed to negative our question without dissent. We
shall have to manifest his mistake. His words are: "Now this minute
examination of the moon's surface being possible, and having been made
by many careful and skilful astronomers, what is the conviction which
has been conveyed to their minds with regard to the fact of her being
the seat of vegetable or animal life? Without exception, it would seem,
they have all been led to the belief that the moon is not inhabited;
that she is, so far as life and organization are concerned, waste and
barren, like the streams of lava or of volcanic ashes on the earth,
before any vestige of vegetation has been impressed upon them; or like
the sands of Africa, where no blade of grass finds root." <span
id="fr_438"></span>[434](ml21.htm#fn_438) Robert Chambers says: "It does
not appear that our satellite is provided with an atmosphere of the kind
found upon earth; neither is there any appearance of water upon the
surface. . . . These characteristics of the moon forbid the idea that it
can be at present a theatre of life like the earth, and almost seem to
declare that it never can become so." <span
id="fr_439"></span>[435](ml21.htm#fn_439) Schoedler's opinion is
concurrent with what has preceded. He writes: "According to the most
exact observations it appears that the moon has no atmosphere similar to
ours, that on its surface there are no great bodies of water like our
seas and oceans, so that the existence of water is doubtful. The whole
physical condition of the lunar surface must, therefore, be so different

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

from that of our earth, that beings organized as we are could not exist
there." <span id="fr_440"></span>[436](ml21.htm#fn_440) Another German
author says: "The observations of Fraunhofer (1823), Brewster and
Gladstone (1860), Huggins and Miller, as well as Janssen, agree in
establishing the complete accordance of the lunar spectrum with that of
the sun. In all the various portions of the moon's disk brought under
observation, no difference could be perceived in the dark lines of the
spectrum, either in respect of their number or relative intensity. From
this entire absence of any special absorption lines, it must be
concluded that there is no atmosphere in the moon, a conclusion
previously arrived at from the circumstance that during an occultation
no refraction is perceived on the moon's limb when a star disappears
behind the disk." <span id="fr_441"></span>[437](ml21.htm#fn_441) Mr.
Nasmyth follows in the same strain. Holding that the moon lacks air,
moisture, and temperature, he says, "Taking all these adverse conditions
into consideration, we are in every respect justified in concluding that
there is no possibility of animal or vegetable life existing on the
moon, and that our satellite must therefore be regarded as a barren
world." <span id="fr_442"></span>[438](ml21.htm#fn_442) A French
astronomer holds a like opinion, saying: "There is nothing to show that
the moon possesses an atmosphere; and if there was one, it would be
perceptible during the occultations of the stars and the eclipses of the
sun. It seems impossible that, in the complete absence of air, the moon
can be peopled by beings organized like ourselves, nor is there any sign
of vegetation or

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

of any alteration in the state of its surface which can be attributed to
a change of seasons." <span id="fr_443"></span>[439](ml21.htm#fn_443) On
the same side Mr. Crampton writes most decisively, "With what we *do*
know, however, of our satellite, I think the idea of her being inhabited
may be dismissed *summarily*; *i.e.* her inhabitation by intelligent
beings, or an animal creation such as exist here." <span
id="fr_444"></span>[440](ml21.htm#fn_444) And, finally, in one of
Maunder's excellent *Treasuries*, we read of the moon, "She has no
atmosphere, or at least none of sufficient density to refract the rays
of light as they pass through it, and hence there is no water on her
surface; consequently she can have no animals like those on our planet,
no vegetation, nor any change of seasons." <span
id="fr_445"></span>[441](ml21.htm#fn_445) These opinions, recorded by so
many judges of approved ability and learning, have great weight; and
some may regard their premisses and conclusions as irresistibly cogent
and convincing. The case against inhabitation is certainly strong. But
justice is impartial. *Audi alteram partem*.

Judges of equal erudition will now speak as respondents. We go back to
the seventeenth century, and begin with a work whose reasoning is really
remarkable, seeing that it is nearly two hundred and fifty years since
it was first published. We refer to the *Discovery of a New World* by
John Wilkins, Bishop of Chester; in which the reverend philosopher aims
to prove the following propositions:--"1. That the strangeness of this
opinion (that the moon may be a world) is no sufficient reason why it
should be rejected; because

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

other certain truths have been formerly esteemed as ridiculous, and
great absurdities entertained by common consent. 2. That a plurality of
worlds does not contradict any principle of reason or faith. 3. That the
heavens do not consist of any such pure matter which can privilege them
from the like change and corruption, as these inferior bodies are liable
unto. 4. That the moon is a solid, compacted, opacous body. 5. That the
moon hath not any light of her own. 6. That there is a world in the
moon, hath been the direct opinion of many ancient, with some modern
mathematicians; and may probably be deduced from the tenets of others.
9. That there are high mountains, deep valleys, and spacious plains in
the body of the moon. 10. That there is an atmosphœra, or an orb of
gross vaporous air, immediately encompassing the body of the moon. 13.
That 'tis probable there may be inhabitants in this other world; but of
what kind they are, is uncertain." <span
id="fr_446"></span>[442](ml21.htm#fn_446) We go on to 1686, and listen
to the French philosopher, Fontenelle, in his Conversations with the
Marchioness. "'Well, madam,' *said I*, 'you will not be surprised when
you hear that the moon is an earth too, and that she is inhabited as
ours is.' 'I confess,' *said she*, 'I have often heard talk of the world
in the moon, but I always looked upon it as visionary and mere fancy.'
'And it may be so still,' *said I*. 'I am in this case as people in a
civil war, where the uncertainty of what may happen makes them hold
intelligence with the opposite party; for though I verily

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

believe the moon is inhabited, I live civilly with those who do not
believe it; and I am still ready to embrace the prevailing opinion. But
till the unbelievers have a more considerable advantage, I am for the
people in the moon.'" <span id="fr_447"></span>[443](ml21.htm#fn_447)
Whatever may be thought of his philosophy, no one could quarrel with the
Secretary of the Academy on the score of his politeness or his prudence.
A more recent and more reliable authority appears in Sir David Brewster.
He tells us that "MM. Mädler and Beer, who have studied the moon's
surface more diligently than any of their predecessors or
contemporaries, have arrived at the conclusion that she has an
atmosphere." Sir David himself maintains that "*every planet and
satellite in the solar system must have an atmosphere*." <span
id="fr_448"></span>[444](ml21.htm#fn_448) Bonnycastle, whilom professor
of mathematics in the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, writes:
"Astronomers were formerly of opinion that the moon had no atmosphere,
on account of her never being obscured by clouds or vapours; and because
the fixed stars, at the time of an occultation, disappear behind her
instantaneously, without any gradual diminution of their light. But if
we consider the effects of her days and nights, which are near thirty
times as long as with us, it may be readily conceived that the phenomena
of vapours and meteors must be very different. And besides, the vaporous
or obscure part of our atmosphere is only about the one thousand nine
hundred and eightieth part of the earth's diameter, as is evident from
observing the clouds, which

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

are seldom above three or four miles high; and therefore, as the moon's
apparent diameter is only about thirty-one minutes and a half, or one
thousand eight hundred and ninety seconds, the obscure part of her
atmosphere, supposing it to resemble our own, when viewed from the
earth, must subtend an angle of less than one second; which is so small
a space, that observations must be extremely accurate to determine
whether the supposed obscuration takes place or not." <span
id="fr_449"></span>[445](ml21.htm#fn_449) Dr. Brinkley, at one time the
Astronomer-Royal of Ireland, writes: "Many astronomers formerly denied
the existence of an atmosphere at the moon; principally from observing
no variation of appearance on the surface, like what would take place,
did clouds exist as with us; and also, from observing no change in the
light of the fixed stars on the approach of the dark edge of the moon.
The circumstance of there being no clouds, proves either that there is
no atmosphere similar to that of our earth, or that there are no waters
on its surface to be converted into vapour; and that of the lustre of
the stars not being changed, proves that there can be no dense
atmosphere. But astronomers now seem agreed that an atmosphere does
surround the moon, although of small density when compared with that of
our earth. M. Schroeter has observed a small twilight in the moon, such
as would arise from an atmosphere capable of reflecting the rays at the
height of about one mile." <span
id="fr_450"></span>[446](ml21.htm#fn_450) Dr. Brinkley is inaccurate in
saying that astronomers are agreed as to

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

the lunar atmosphere. Like students in every other department of
inquiry, spiritual as well as physical, they fail at present to see "eye
to eye"; which is not surprising, seeing that the eye is so restricted,
and the object so remote.

Dr. Dick, whose productions have done much to popularize the study of
the heavens, and to promote its reverent pursuit, says: "On the whole it
appears most probable that the moon is surrounded with a fluid which
serves the purpose of an atmosphere; although this atmosphere, as to its
nature, composition, and refractive power, may be very different from
the atmosphere which surrounds the earth. It forms no proof that the
moon, or any of the planets, is destitute of an atmosphere, because its
constitution, its density, and its power of refracting the rays of light
are different from ours. An atmosphere may surround a planetary body,
and yet its parts be so fine and transparent that the rays of light,
from a star or any other body, may pass through it without being in the
least obscured, or changing their direction. In our reasonings on this
subject, we too frequently proceed on the false principle, that
everything connected with other worlds must bear a resemblance to those
on the earth." <span id="fr_451"></span>[447](ml21.htm#fn_451) Mr.
Neison, who has written one of the latest contributions to the science
of selenography, says, "Of the present non-existence of masses of water
upon the surface of the moon, there remains no doubt, though no evidence
of its entire absence from the lunar crust can be adduced; and
similarly, many

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

well-established facts in reference to the moon afford ample proof of
the non-existence of a lunar atmosphere, having a density equal to, or
even much less than, that of the earth; but of the absence of an
atmosphere, whose mass should enable it to play an important part in the
moulding of the surface of the moon, and comparable almost to that of
the terrestrial atmosphere, in their respective ratios to the masses of
their planets, little, if any, trustworthy evidence exists." On another
page of the same work, the author affirms "that later inquiries have
shown that the moon may possess an atmosphere that must be regarded as
fully capable of sustaining various forms of vegetation of even an
advanced type; and, moreover, it does not appear how it can justly be
questioned that the lunar surface in favourable positions may yet retain
a sufficiency of moisture to support vegetation of many kinds; whilst in
a very considerable portion of the entire surface of the moon, the
temperature would not vary sufficiently to materially affect the
existence of vegetable life." <span
id="fr_452"></span>[448](ml21.htm#fn_452) Some of these writers may
appear to be travelling rather too fast or too far, and their
assumptions may wear more of the aspect of plausibility than of
probability. But on their atmospheric and aqueous hypothesis, vegetation
in abundance is confessedly a legitimate consequence. If a recent writer
has liberty to condense into a sentence the conclusion from the negative
premiss in the argument by saying, "As there is but a little appearance
of water or air upon

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

the moon, the conclusion has been inferred that there exists no
vegetable or animal life on that globe," <span
id="fr_453"></span>[449](ml21.htm#fn_453) other writers, holding
opposite views of the moon's physical condition, may be allowed to
expatiate on the luxuriant life which an atmosphere with water and
temperature would undoubtedly produce. Mr. Proctor's tone is temperate,
and his language that of one who is conscious with Hippocrates that "art
is long and life is short." He says, in one of his contributions to
lunar science, "It may safely be asserted that the opportunities
presented during the life of any single astronomer for a trustworthy
investigation of any portion of the moon's surface, under like
conditions, are few and far between, and the whole time so employed must
be brief, even though the astronomer devote many more years than usual
to observational research." <span
id="fr_454"></span>[450](ml21.htm#fn_454) This prepares us to find in
another of the same author's works the following suggestive sentence:
"With regard to the present habitability of the moon, it may be remarked
that we are not justified in asserting positively that no life exists
upon her surface. Life has been found under conditions so strange, we
have been so often mistaken in assuming that *here* certainly, or
*there*, no living creatures can possibly exist, that it would be rash
indeed to dogmatise respecting the state of the moon in this
respect." <span id="fr_455"></span>[451](ml21.htm#fn_455) Narrien, one
of the historians of the science, may be heard, though his contribution
might be cast into either scale. He writes: "The absence of those
variations of light and shade which

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

would be produced by clouds floating above her surface, and the
irregularities of the ground, visible at the bottom and on the sides of
her cavities, have given reason to believe that no atmosphere surrounds
her, and that she is destitute of rivers and seas. Such are the opinions
generally entertained concerning the moon; but M. Schroeter, a German
astronomer, ventures to assert that our satellite is the abode of living
and intellectual beings; he has perceived some indications of an
atmosphere which, however, he admits, cannot exceed two miles in height,
and certain elevations which appear to him to be works of art rather
than of nature. He considers that a uniformity of temperature must be
produced on her surface by her slow rotation on her axis, by the
insensible change from day to night, and the attenuated state of her
atmosphere, which is never disturbed by storms; and that light vapours,
rising from her valleys, fall in the manner of a gentle and refreshing
dew to fertilize her fields." <span
id="fr_456"></span>[452](ml21.htm#fn_456) Dr. H. W. M. Olbers is fully
persuaded "that the moon is inhabited by rational creatures, and that
its surface is more or less covered with a vegetation not very
dissimilar to that of our own earth." Dr. Gruithuisen, of Munich,
maintains that he has descried through his large achromatic telescope
"great artificial works in the moon erected by the lunarians," which he
considers to be "a system of fortifications thrown up by the selenitic
engineers." We should have scant hope of deciding the dispute by the
dicta of the ancients,

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

were these far more copious than we find them to be. Yet reverence for
antiquity may justify our quoting one of the classic fathers. Plutarch
says, "The Pythagoreans affirme, that the moone appeereth terrestriall,
for that she is inhabited round about, like as the earth wherein we are,
and peopled as it were with the greatest living creatures, and the
fairest plants." Again, "And of all this that hath been said (my friend
*Theon*) there is nothing that doth proove and show directly, this
habitation of men in the moon to be impossible." <span
id="fr_457"></span>[453](ml21.htm#fn_457) Here we close the argument
based on *induction*, and sum up the evidence in our possession. On the
one hand, several scientific men, whose names we need not repeat, having
surveyed the moon, deny it an atmosphere, water, and other conditions of
life. Consequently, they disbelieve in its inhabitation, solely because
they consider the fact undemonstrable; none of them being so
unscientific as to believe it to be absolutely impossible. On the other
hand, we have the valuable views of Mädler and Beer, whose lunar labours
are unsurpassed, and whose map of the moon is a marvel and model of
advanced selenography. They do not suppose the conditions on our
satellite to be exactly what they are on this globe. In their own words,
the moon is "no copy of the earth, much less a colony of the same." They
merely believe her to be environed with air, and thus habitable. And
when we recall our own Sir David Brewster, Professor Bonnycastle, Dr.
Brinkley, Dr. Dick, Mr. Neison, and Mr. Proctor;

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

and reckon with them the continental astronomers, Dr. Gruithuisen, Dr.
Olbers, and Schroeter, all of whom attempted to fix the idea of
planetary inhabitation on the popular mind, we must acknowledge that
they, with their opponents, have a strong claim on our attention. The
only verdict we are able just now to render, after hearing these
conflicting testimonies, is the Scotch one, *Not proven*. We but append
the legal indorsement *ignoramus*, we do not know. The subject must
remain *sub judice*; but what we know not now, we hope to know
hereafter.

Having interrogated *sense* and *science*, with the solution of our
enigma anything but complete, we resort last of all to the argument from
*analogy*. If this can illumine the obscurity, it will all be on the
positive side of the inquiry. At present the question resembles a
half-moon: analogy may show that the affirmative is waxing towards a
full-orbed conviction. We open with Huyghens, a Dutch astronomer of
note, who, while he thinks it certain "that the moon has no air or
atmosphere surrounding it as we have," and "cannot imagine how any
plants or animals whose whole nourishment comes from fluid bodies, can
thrive in a dry, waterless, parched soil," yet asks, "What, then, shall
this great ball be made for; nothing but to give us a little weak light
in the night time, or to raise our tides in the sea? Shall not we plant
some people there that may have the pleasure of seeing our earth turn
upon its axis, presenting them sometimes with a prospect of Europe

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

and Africa, and then of Asia and America; sometimes half and sometimes
full?" <span id="fr_458"></span>[454](ml21.htm#fn_458) Ray was
"persuaded that this luminary doth serve many ends and uses, especially
to maintain the creatures which in all likelihood breed and inhabit
there." <span id="fr_459"></span>[455](ml21.htm#fn_459) Swedenborg's
*ipse dixit* ought to convince the most incredulous; for he speaks "from
what has been heard and seen." Thus he says: "That there are inhabitants
in the moon is well known to spirits and angels, and in like manner that
there are inhabitants in the moons or satellites which revolve about
Jupiter and Saturn. They who have not seen and discoursed with spirits
coming from those moons still entertain no doubt but there are men
inhabiting them, because they are earths alike with the planets, and
wherever an earth is, there are men inhabitants; for man is the end for
which every earth was created, and nothing was made by the great Creator
without an end." <span id="fr_460"></span>[456](ml21.htm#fn_460) If any
are still sceptical, Sir William Herschel, an intellectual light of no
mean magnitude, may reach them. He writes: "While man walks upon the
ground, the birds fly in the air, and fishes swim in water, we can
certainly not object to the conveniences afforded by the moon, if those
that are to inhabit its regions are fitted to their conditions as well
as we on this globe arc to ours. An absolute or total sameness seems
rather to denote imperfections, such as nature never exposes to our
view; and, on this account, I believe the analogies that have been
mentioned fully sufficient to establish the high probability

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

of the moon's being inhabited like the earth." <span
id="fr_461"></span>[457](ml21.htm#fn_461) The voice of Dr. Dwight, the
American theologian, will not be out of harmony here. In discoursing of
the starry heavens, he says of the planets: "Of these inferior worlds,
the moon is one; and to us, far the most interesting. How many important
purposes which are known does this beautiful attendant of our earth
continually accomplish! How many more, in all probability, which are
hitherto unknown, and which hereafter may be extensively disclosed to
more enlightened, virtuous, and happy generations of men! At the same
time, it is most rationally concluded that intelligent beings in great
multitudes inhabit her lucid regions, being far better and happier than
ourselves." <span id="fr_462"></span>[458](ml21.htm#fn_462) Whewell's
*Bridgewater Treatise* will furnish us a fitting quotation. "The earth,
the globular body thus covered with life, is not the only globe in the
universe. There are, circling about our own sun, six others, so far as
we can judge, perfectly analogous in their nature: besides our moon and
other bodies analogous to it. No one can resist the temptation to
conjecture, that these globes, some of them much larger than our own,
are not dead and barren:--that they are, like ours, occupied with
organization, life, intelligence." <span
id="fr_463"></span>[459](ml21.htm#fn_463) In a most eloquent passage,
Dr. Chalmers, who will always be heard with admiration, exclaims: "Who
shall assign a limit to the discoveries of future ages? Who shall
prescribe to science her boundaries, or restrain the active and
insatiable curiosity of man

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

within the circle of his present acquirements? We may guess with
plausibility what we cannot anticipate with confidence. The day may yet
be coming when our instruments of observation shall be inconceivably
more powerful. They may ascertain still more decisive points of
resemblance. They may resolve the same question by the evidence of sense
which is now so abundantly convincing by the evidence of analogy. They
may lay open to us the unquestionable vestiges of art, and industry, and
intelligence. We may see summer throwing its green mantle over those
mighty tracts, and we may see them left naked and colourless after the
flush of vegetation has disappeared. In the progress of years or of
centuries, we may trace the hand of cultivation spreading a new aspect
over some portion of a planetary surface. Perhaps some large city, the
metropolis of a mighty empire, may expand into a visible spot by the
powers of some future telescope. Perhaps the glass of some observer, in
a distant age, may enable him to construct the map of another world, and
to lay down the surface of it in all its minute and topical varieties.
But there is no end of conjecture; and to the men of other times we
leave the full assurance of what we can assert with the highest
probability, that yon planetary orbs are so many worlds, that they teem
with life, and that the mighty Being who presides in high authority over
this scene of grandeur and astonishment has there planted the
worshippers of His glory." <span
id="fr_464"></span>[460](ml21.htm#fn_464)

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

How fine is this outburst of the great Scotch orator! He spoke as one
inspired with prophetic foreknowledge; for in less than twenty years
after this utterance, Beer and Mädler published their splendid *Mappe
Selenographica*, or map of the moon; and photography offered its aid to
the fuller delineation of our silvery satellite. Who can tell what the
last fifteen years of this eventful century may develop in the same
direction? Verily these intuitions of reason seem often favoured with an
apocalypse of coming disclosures; and, if we may venture to adopt with
slight alteration a sentence of Shelley, we will say: "It is impossible
to read the compositions of the most celebrated writers of the present
day without being startled with the electric life which burns within
their words. They measure the circumference and sound the depths of
nature with a comprehensive and all-penetrating spirit, and they are
themselves perhaps the most sincerely astonished at its manifestations;
for it is less their spirit than the spirit of the age." The poets of
science, in their analogies, are "the hierophants of an unapprehended
inspiration; the mirrors of the gigantic shadows which futurity casts
upon the present." <span id="fr_465"></span>[461](ml21.htm#fn_465)
Equally noble with the language of Chalmers is a paragraph which we have
extracted from a work by that scholarly writer, Isaac Taylor. He says:
"There are two facts, each of which is significant in relation to our
present subject, and of which the first has long been understood, while
the

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

latter (only of late ascertained) is every day receiving new
illustrations; namely, that our planet is, in no sense, of primary
importance in the general system, or entitled, by its magnitude, or its
position, or its constitution, to be considered as exerting any peculiar
influence over others, or as the object of more regard than any others.
This knowledge of our real place and value in the universe is a very
important consequence of our modern astronomy, and should not be lost
sight of in any of our speculations. But then it is also now ascertained
that the great laws of our own planet, and of the solar system to which
it belongs, prevail in all other and the most remote systems, so as to
make the visible universe, in the strictest sense, ONE
SYSTEM--indicating one origin and showing the presence of one
Controlling Power. Thus the law of gravitation, with all the conditions
it implies, and the laws of light, are demonstrated to be in operation
in regions incalculably remote; and just so far as the physical
constitution of the other planets of our system can be either traced, or
reasonably conjectured, it appears that, amid great diversities of
constitution, the same great principles prevail in all; and therefore
our further conjecture concerning the existence of sentient and rational
life in other worlds is borne out by every sort of analogy, abstract and
physical; and this same rule of analogy impels us to suppose that
rational and moral agents, in whatever world found, and whatever
diversity of form may distinguish them, would be

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

such that we should soon feel at home in their society, and able to
confer with them, to communicate knowledge to them, and to receive
knowledge from them. Neither truth nor virtue is local; nor can there be
wisdom and goodness in one planet, which is not wisdom and goodness in
every other." <span id="fr_466"></span>[462](ml21.htm#fn_466) The writer
of the *Plurality of Worlds*, a little work distinct from the essay
already quoted, vigorously vindicates "the deeply cherished belief of
some philosophers, and of many Christians, that our world, in its
present state, contains the mere embryo of intelligent, moral, and
religious happiness; that the progress of man in his present state is
but the initiation of an interminable career of glory; and that his most
widely extended associations are a preparation for as interminably an
intercourse with the whole family of an intelligent universe." <span
id="fr_467"></span>[463](ml21.htm#fn_467) Dr. Arnott may add a final
word, a last link in this evidential chain of analogy. He writes: "To
think, as our remote forefathers did, that the wondrous array of the
many planets visible from this earth serve no purpose but to adorn its
nocturnal sky, would now appear absurd indeed; but whether they are
inhabited by beings at all resembling the men of this earth, we have not
the means of knowing. All the analogies favour the opinion that they are
the abodes of life and its satisfactions. On this earth there is no
place so hot or so cold, so illumined or so dark, so dry or so wet, but
that it has creatures constituted to enjoy life there." <span
id="fr_468"></span>[464](ml21.htm#fn_468)

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

Here our long list of learned authorities shall terminate. We have
strung together a large number of citations, and have ourselves
furnished only the string. Indeed, what more have amateurs that they can
do? For, as Pope puts it,--

"Who shall decide, when doctors disagree,  
And soundest casuists doubt, like you and me?

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Besides, astronomy
is no child's play, nor are its abstruse problems to be mastered by
superficial meddlers. "Its intricacy," as Narrien reminds us, "in the
higher departments, is such as to render the processes unintelligible to
all but the few distinguished persons who, by nature and profound
application to the subject, are qualified for such researches." <span
id="fr_469"></span>[465](ml21.htm#fn_469) But if professionals must be
summoned as witnesses, ordinary men may sit as jurors. This function we
have wished to fufil; and we avow ourselves considerably perplexed,
though not in despair. We hoped that after a somewhat exhaustive
examination, we might be able to state the result with an emphasis of
conviction. This we find impossible; but we can affirm on which side the
evidence appears to preponderate, and whither, we rest assured, further
light will lead our willing feet. The conclusion, therefore, of the
whole matter is: we cannot see any living creatures on the moon, however
long we strain our eyes. No instrument has yet been constructed that
will reveal the slightest vestige of inhabitation. Consequently, the
actual evidence of

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

sense is all against us, and we resign it without demur. This point,
being settled, is dismissed.

Next, we reconsider the results of scientific study, and are strongly
inclined to think the weight of testimony favours the existence of a
thin atmosphere, at least some water, and a measure of light and shade
in succession. These conditions must enable vegetables and animals to
exist upon its surface, though their constitution is in all probability
not analogous with that of those which are found upon our earth. But to
deny the being of inhabitants of some kind, even in the absence of these
conditions, we submit would be unphilosophical, seeing that the Power
which adapted terrestrial life to terrestrial environments could also
adapt lunar life to the environments in the moon. We are seeking no
shelter in the miraculous, nor do we run from a dilemma to the refuges
of religion. Apart from our theological belief in the potency of the
Creator and Controller of all worlds, we simply regard it as illogical
and inconclusive to argue that because organization, life, and
intelligence obtain within one sphere under one order of circumstances,
*therefore* the same order obtains in every other sphere throughout the
system to which that one belongs. The unity of nature is as clear to us
as the unity of God; but unity is not uniformity. We view the whole
creation as we view this world; the entire empire as we view this single
province,

"Where order in variety we see,  
And where, though all things differ, all agree."

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

And, finally, as analogy is unreservedly on the side of the occupation
of every domain in creation, by some creatures who have the dominion, we
cannot admit the probability that the earth is the only tenement with
tenants: we must be confirmed in our judgment that the sun and the
planets, with their moons, ours of course included, are neither blank
nor barren, but abodes of variously organized beings, fitted to fulfil
the chief end of all noble existence: the enjoyment of life, the
effluence of love, the good of all around and the glory of God above.

This article, that the moon is inhabited, may therefore form a clause of
our scientific creed; not to be held at any hazard, as a matter of life
or death, or a test of communion, but to be maintained subject to
corrections such as future elucidation may require. We believe that we
are justified by science, reason, and analogy; and confidently look to
be further justified by verification. We accept many things as matters
of faith, which we have not fully ascertained to be matters of fact; but
"faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the proving of things not
seen." By double entry the books of science are kept, by reasoning and
demonstration: when future auditors shall examine the accounts of the
moon's inhabitation, we are persuaded that the result of our reckoning
will be found to be correct.

If any would charge us with a wish to be wise above what is written, we
merely reply: There are unwritten revelations which are nevertheless
true.<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

Besides, we are not sure that at least an intimation of other races than
those of the earth is not already on record. Not to prove any position,
but to check obstructive criticism, we refer to the divine who is said
to have witnessed in magnificent apocalypse some closing scenes of the
human drama. If he also heard in sublime oratorio a prelude of this
widely extended glory, our vision may not be a "baseless fabric." After
the quartettes of earth, and the interludes of angels, came the grand
finale, when every creature which is in heaven, as well as on the earth,
was heard ascribing "Blessing and honour and glory and power to Him who
sitteth upon the throne." Assuredly, our conception of a choir worthy to
render that chorus is not of an elect handful of "saints," or contracted
souls, embraced within any Calvinistic covenant, but of an innumerable
multitude of ennobled, purified, and expanded beings, convoked from
every satellite and planet, every sun and star, and overflowing with
gratitude and love to that universal Father of lights, with whom is no
parallax, nor descension, and who kindled every spark of life and beauty
that in their individual and combined lustre He might reflect and repeat
His own ineffable blessedness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](ml20)

</div>
