[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040654)  [Next](1040656) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.lviii"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.lviii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.lviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 58.—</span>70.  For when he quoted
a passage from the gospel as making against us, where our Lord says,
"They will come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are
ravening wolves; ye shall know them by their fruits," <span
id="fr_2462"></span>[2463](#fn_2462) —I answered and said, "Then let us
consider their fruits;" and then I at once went on to add the following
words:  "You bring up against them their delivery of the sacred books. 
This very charge we urge with greater probability, against their
accusers themselves.  And not to carry our search too far:  in the same
city of Constantina, your predecessors ordained Silvanus bishop at the
very outset of his schism.  He, while he was still a sub-deacon, was
most unmistakably entered as a *traditor* in the archives of the city. 
If you, on your side, bring forward documents against our predecessors,
all that we ask is equal terms, that we should either believe both to be
true, or both to be false.  If both are true, you are unquestionably
guilty of schism, who have pretended that you avoid offenses in the
communion of the whole world, though these were common among you in your
own fragmentary sect.  But again, if both are false, you are
unquestionably guilty of schism, who, on account of the false charges of
*traditors*, are staining yourselves with the heinous offense of
severance from the Church.  But if we have something to urge in
accusation, while you have nothing, or if our charges are true, while
yours are false, it is no longer matter of discussion how thoroughly
your mouths are closed.  What if the holy and true Church of Christ were
to convince and overcome you, even if we held no documents in support of
our cause, or only such as were false, while you had possession of some
genuine proof of delivery of the sacred books, what would then remain
for you, except that, if you would, you should show your love of peace,
or otherwise should hold your tongues?  For whatever in that case you
might bring forward in evidence, I should be able to say with the
greatest ease and with the most perfect truth, that then you are bound
to prove as much to the full and Catholic unity of the Church, already
spread abroad and established throughout so many nations, to the end
that you should remain within, and that those whom you convict should be
expelled.  And if you have endeavored to do this, certainly you have not
been able to make good your proof; and, being vanquished or enraged, you
have separated yourselves, with all the heinous guilt of sacrilege, from
the guiltless men who could not condemn on insufficient proof.  But if
you have not even endeavored to do this, then with most accursed and
unnatural blindness you have cut yourselves off from the wheat of
Christ, which grows throughout His whole fields, that is, throughout the
whole world until the end, because you have taken offense at a few tares
in Africa." <span id="fr_2463"></span>[2464](#fn_2463)   To this, which
I have quoted from my former epistle, Petilianus has made no answer
whatsoever.  And, at all events, you see that in these few words is
comprised the whole question which is at issue between us.  For what
should he endeavor to say, when, whatever course he chose, he was sure
to be debated?

<span id="v.v.v.lviii-p4"></span>71.  For when documents are brought
forward relating to the *traditors*, both by us against the men of your
party, and by you against the men of our party, (if indeed any really
are brought forward on your side, for to this very day we are left in
total ignorance of them; nor indeed can we believe that Petilianus would
have omitted to insert them in his letter, seeing that he has taken so
much pain to secure the quotation and insertion of those portions of the
Chronicles which bear on the matter in opposition to me),—but still, as
I began to say, if such documents are brought forward both by us and by
you, documents of whose existence we are wholly ignorant to this very
day,—surely you must acknowledge that either both are true, or both
false, or ours true and yours false, or yours true and ours false; for
there is no further alternative that can be suggested.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2462"></span>[627:2463](1040655.htm#fr_2462) <span
id="v.v.v.lviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.lviii-p2"></span> [Matt.
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)<span
id="v.v.v.lviii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2463"></span>[627:2464](1040655.htm#fr_2463) <span
id="v.v.v.lviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.lviii-p3"></span> See Book I. cc. 21, 22, 23, 24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 59](1040656)
