[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040518)  [Next](1040520) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 32.—</span>72.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"For although there is only one baptism, yet it is consecrated in three
several grades.  John <span id="page_548">p. 548</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-Page_548"></span>gave water without the name of the
Trinity, as he declared himself, saying, ‘I indeed baptize you with
water unto repentance:  but He that cometh after me is mightier than I,
whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; He shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost, and with fire.’ <span id="fr_2069"></span>[2070](#fn_2069)  
Christ gave the Holy Spirit, as it is written, ‘He breathed on them, and
saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost,’ <span
id="fr_2070"></span>[2071](#fn_2070)   And the Comforter Himself came on
the apostles as a fire burning with rustling flames.  O true divinity,
which seemed to blaze, not to burn! as it is written, ‘And suddenly
there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it
filled all the house where the apostles were sitting.  And there
appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon each
of them.  And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to
speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.’ <span
id="fr_2071"></span>[2072](#fn_2071)   But you, O persecutor, have not
even the water of repentance, seeing that you hold the power not of the
murdered John, but of the murderer Herod.  You therefore, O *traditor*,
have not the Holy Spirit of Christ; for Christ did not betray others to
death, but was Himself betrayed.  For you, therefore, the fire in the
spirit in Hades is full of life,—that fire which, surging with hungry
tongues of flame, will be able to burn your limbs to all eternity
without consuming them, as it is written of the punishment of the guilty
in hell, ‘Neither shall their fire be quenched.’" <span
id="fr_2072"></span>[2073](#fn_2072)

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p6"></span>73.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p6.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  You are the
calumnious slanderer, not the truthful arguer.  Will you not at length
cease to make assertions of a kind which, if you do not prove them, can
apply to nobody; and even if you prove them, certainly cannot apply to
the unity of the whole world, which is in the saints as in the wheat of
God?  If we too were pleased to return calumnies for calumnies, we too
might possibly be able to give vent to eloquent slanderers.  We too
might use the expression, "With rustling flames;" but to me an
expression never sounds in any way eloquent which is inappropriate in
its use.  We too might say, "Surging with hungry tongues of flame;" but
we do not wish that the tongues of flame in our writings, when they are
read by any one in his senses, should be judged hungry for want of the
sap of weightiness, or that the reader himself, while he finds in them
no food of useful sentiments, should be left to suffer from the hunger
of excessive emptiness.  See, I declare that your Circumcelliones are
burning, not with rustling but with headlong flames.  If you answer,
What is that to us? why do not you, when you reproach with any one whom
you will, not listen in turn to our answer, We too know nothing of it? 
If you answer, You do not prove the fact, why may not the whole world
answer you in turn, Neither do you prove it?  Let us agree, therefore,
if you please, that you should not charge us with the guilt of the
wicked men whom you consider to belong to us, and that we should abstain
from similar charges against you.  So you will see, by this just
agreement, confirmed and ratified, that you have no charge which you can
bring against the seed of Abraham, as found in all the nations of the
earth.  But I find without difficulty a grievous charge to bring against
you:  Why have you impiously separated yourselves from the seed of
Abraham, which is in all nations of the earth?  Against this charge you
certainly have no means whereby you may defend yourselves.  For we each
of us clear ourselves of the sins of other men; but this, that you do
not hold communion with all the nations of the earth, which are blessed
in the seed of Abraham, is a very grievous crime, of which not some but
all of you are guilty.

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p7"></span>74.  And yet you know, as you prove by
your quotation, that the Holy Spirit descended in such wise, that those
who were then filled with it spake with divers tongues:  what was the
meaning of that sign and prodigy?  Why then is the Holy Spirit given now
in such wise, that no one to whom it is given speaks with divers
tongues, except because that miracle then prefigured that all nations of
the earth should believe, and that thus the gospel should be found to be
in every tongue?  Just as it was foretold in the psalm so long before: 
"There is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard."  This
was said with reference to those men who were destined, after receiving
the Holy Spirit, to speak with every kind of tongue.  But because this
passage itself signified that the gospel should be found hereafter in
all nations and languages, and that the body of Christ should sound
forth throughout all the world in every tongue, therefore he goes on to
say, "Their sound is gone out throughout all the earth, and their words
to the ends of the world."  Hence it is that the true Church is hidden
from no one.  And hence comes that which the Lord Himself says in the
gospel, "A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid." <span
id="fr_2073"></span>[2074](#fn_2073)   And therefore David continues in
the same psalm, "In the sun hath He placed His tabernacle," that is,
<span id="page_549">p. 549</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-Page_549"></span>in the open light of day; as we read
in the Book of Kings, "For thou didst it secretly; but I will do this
thing before all Israel, and before the sun." <span
id="fr_2074"></span>[2075](#fn_2074)   And He Himself is "as a
bridegroom coming out of His chamber, and rejoiceth as a giant to run
His race.  His going forth is from the end of heaven:"  here you have
the coming of the Lord in the flesh.  "And His circuit unto the ends of
it:"  here you have His resurrection and ascension.  "And there is
nothing hid from the heat thereof:" <span
id="fr_2075"></span>[2076](#fn_2075)   here you have the coming of the
Holy Spirit, whom He sent in tongues of fire, that He might make
manifest the glowing heat of charity, which he certainly cannot have who
does not keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace with the
Church, which is throughout all languages.

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p11"></span>75.  Next, however, with regard to
your statement that there is indeed one baptism, <span
id="fr_2076"></span>[2077](#fn_2076) but that it is consecrated in three
several grades, and to your having distributed the three forms of it to
three persons after such fashion, that you ascribe the water to John,
the Holy Spirit to the Lord Jesus Christ, and, in the third place, the
fire to the Comforter sent down from above,—consider for a moment in how
great an error you are involved.  For you were brought to entertain such
an opinion simply from the words of John:  "I indeed baptize you with
water:  but He that cometh after me is mightier than I:  He shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire." <span
id="fr_2077"></span>[2078](#fn_2077)   Nor were you willing to take into
consideration that the three things are not attributed to three persons
taken one by one,—water to John, the Holy Spirit to Christ, fire to the
Comforter,—but that the three should rather be referred to two
persons—one of them to John, the other two to our Lord.  For neither is
it said, I indeed baptize you with water:  but He that cometh after me
is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear:  He shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost:  and the Comforter, who is to come
after Him, He shall baptize you with fire; but "I indeed," He says,
"with water:  but He that cometh after me with the Holy Ghost, and with
fire."  One he attributes to himself, two to Him that cometh after him. 
You see, therefore, how you have been deceived in the number.  Listen
further.  You said that there was one baptism consecrated in three
stages—water, the Holy Spirit, and fire; and you assigned three persons
to the three stages severally—John to the water, Christ to the Spirit,
the Comforter to the fire.  If, therefore, the water of John bears
reference to the same baptism which is commended as being one, it was
not right that those should have been baptized a second time by the
command of the Apostle Paul whom he found to have been baptized by
John.  For they already had water, belonging, as you say, to the same
baptism; so that it remained that they should receive the Holy Spirit
and fire, because these were wanting in the baptism of John, that their
baptism might be completed, being consecrated, as you assert, in three
stages.  But since they were ordered to be baptized by the authority of
an apostle, it is sufficiently made manifest that that water with which
John baptized had no reference to the baptism of Christ, but belonged to
another dispensation suited to the exigencies of the times.

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p14"></span>76.  Lastly, when you wished to prove
that the Holy Spirit was given by Christ, and had brought forward as a
proof from the gospel, that Jesus on rising from the dead breathed into
the face of His disciples, saying, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost;" <span
id="fr_2078"></span>[2079](#fn_2078) and when you wished to prove that
that last fire which was named in connection with baptism was found in
the tongues of fire which were displayed on the coming of the Holy
Ghost, how came it into your head to say, "And the Comforter Himself
came upon the apostles as a fire burning with rustling flames," as
though there were one Holy Spirit whom He gave by breathing on the face
of His disciples, and another who, after His ascension, came on the
apostles?  Are we to suppose, therefore, that there are two Holy
Spirits?  Who will be found so utterly mad as to assert this?  Christ
therefore Himself gave the same Holy Spirit, whether by breathing on the
face of the disciples, or by sending Him down from heaven on the day of
Pentecost, with undoubted commendation of His holy sacrament. 
Accordingly it was not that Christ gave the Holy Spirit, and the
Comforter gave the fire, that the saying might be fulfilled, "With the
Holy Spirit, and with fire;" but the same Christ Himself gave the Holy
Spirit in both cases, making it manifest while He was yet on earth by
His breathing, and when He was ascended into heaven by the tongues of
flame.  For that you may know that the words of John, "He shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost," were not fulfilled at the time when He
breathed on His disciples face, so that they should require to be
baptized, when the Comforter should come, not with the Spirit any
longer, but with fire, I would have you remember the most outspoken
words of Scripture, and see what the Lord Himself said to <span
id="page_550">p. 550</span> <span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-Page_550"></span>them
when He ascended into heaven:  "John truly baptized you with water; but
ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, whom ye shall receive not many
days hence at Pentecost." <span id="fr_2079"></span>[2080](#fn_2079)  
What could be plainer than this testimony?  But according to your
interpretation, what He should have said was this:  John verily baptized
you with water; but ye were baptized with the Holy Spirit when I
breathed on your faces; and next in due order shall ye be baptized with
fire, which ye shall receive not many days hence;—in order that by this
means the three stages should be completed, in which you say that the
one baptism was consecrated.  And so it proves to be the case that you
are still ignorant of the meaning of the words, "He shall baptize you
with the Holy Ghost, and with fire;" and you are rash enough to be
williing to teach what you do not know yourselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2069"></span>[548:2070](1040519.htm#fr_2069) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p2"></span> [Matt. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2070"></span>[548:2071](1040519.htm#fr_2070) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p3"></span> [John xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2071"></span>[548:2072](1040519.htm#fr_2071) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p4"></span> [Acts ii.
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#002)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2072"></span>[548:2073](1040519.htm#fr_2072) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p5"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2073"></span>[548:2074](1040519.htm#fr_2073) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p8"></span> [Matt. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2074"></span>[549:2075](1040519.htm#fr_2074) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p9"></span> [2 Sam. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#012)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2075"></span>[549:2076](1040519.htm#fr_2075) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p10"></span> [Ps. xix.
3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p10.1"></span>, cp. Hieron.

<span id="fn_2076"></span>[549:2077](1040519.htm#fr_2076) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p12"></span> [Eph. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2077"></span>[549:2078](1040519.htm#fr_2077) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p13"></span> [Matt. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2078"></span>[549:2079](1040519.htm#fr_2078) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p15"></span> [John xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2079"></span>[550:2080](1040519.htm#fr_2079) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p16"></span> [Acts i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#005)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxii-p16.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 33](1040520)
