[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040094)  [Next](1040096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.vi.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—Again It is Shown from the Utility
of Repenting that Souls are Not by Nature Evil.  So Sure a Demonstration
is Not Contradicted Except from the Habit of Erring.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p2"></span>22.  Like the foregoing considerations is
what I shall now say about repenting.  For as among all sane people it
is agreed, and this the Manichæans themselves not only confess but also
teach, that to repent of sin is useful.  Why shall I now, in this
matter, collect the testimonies of the divine Scriptures, which <span
id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span id="iv.vi.xv-Page_107"></span>are
scattered throughout their pages?  It is also the voice of nature;
notice of this thing has escaped no fool.  We should be undone, if this
were not deeply imbedded in our nature.  Some one may say that he does
not sin; but no barbarity will dare to say, that if one sins he should
not repent of it.  This being the case, I ask to which of the two kinds
of souls does repenting pertain?  I know indeed that it can pertain
neither to him who does ill nor to him who cannot do well.  Wherefore,
that I may use the words of the Manichæans, if a soul of darkness repent
of sin, it is not of the substance of supreme evil, if a soul of light,
it is not of the substance of supreme good; that disposition of
repenting which is profitable testifies alike that the penitent has done
ill, and that he could have done well.  How, therefore, is there from me
nothing of evil, if I have acted unadvisedly, or how can I rightly
repent if I have not so done?  Hear the other part.  How is there from
me nothing of good, if in me there is good will, or how do I rightly
repent if there is not?  Wherefore, either let them deny that there is
great utility in repenting, so that they may be driven not only from the
Christian name, but from every even imaginary argument for their views,
or let them cease to say and to teach that there are two kinds of souls,
one of which has nothing of evil, the other nothing of good; for that
whole sect is propped up by this two-headed <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) or rather headlong <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) variety of souls.

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p5"></span>23.  And to me indeed it is sufficient
thus to know that the Manichæans err, that I know that sin must be
repented of; and yet if now by right of friendship I should accost some
one of my friends who still thinks that they are worthy of being
listened to, and should say to him:  Do you not know that it is useful,
when any one has sinned, to repent?  Without hesitation he will swear
that he knows.  If then I shall have convinced you that Manichæism is
false, will you not desire anything more?  Let him reply what more he
can desire in this matter.  Very well, so far.  But when I shall have
begun to show the sure and necessary arguments which, bound to it with
adamantine chains, as the saying is, follow that proposition, and shall
have conducted to its conclusion the whole process by which that sect is
overthrown, he will deny perhaps that he knows the utility of repenting,
which no learned man, no unlearned, is ignorant of, and will rather
contend, when we hesitate and deliberate, that two souls in us furnish
each its own proper help to the solution of the different parts of the
question.  O habit of sin!  O accompanying penalty of sin!  Then you
turned me away from the consideration of things so manifest, but you
injured me when I did not discern.  But now, among my most familiar
acquaintances who do not discern, you wound and torment me discerning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_217"></span>[107:218](1040095.htm#fr_217) <span
id="iv.vi.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p3"></span> *Bicipiti*.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[107:219](1040095.htm#fr_218) <span
id="iv.vi.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p4"></span> *Præcipiti*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1040096)
