[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040069)  [Next](1040071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.v.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—The Value of the Symbol of the
Mouth Among the Manichæans, Who are Found Guilty of Blaspheming
God.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p2"></span>20.  Classify as you please, omit what
you please, we must discuss the doctrines you insist upon most.  You say
that the symbol of the mouth implies refraining from all blasphemy.  But
blasphemy is speaking evil of good things.  So usually the word
blasphemy is applied only to speaking evil of God; for as regards man
there is uncertainty, but God is without controversy good.  If, then,
you are proved guilty of saying worse things of God than any one else
says, what becomes of your famous symbol of the mouth?  The evidence is
not obscure, but clear and obvious to every understanding, and
irresistible, the more so that no one can remain in ignorance of it,
that God is incorruptible, immutable, liable to no injury, to no want,
to no weakness, to no misery.  All this the common sense of rational
beings perceives, and even you assent when you hear it.

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p3"></span>21.  But when you begin to relate your
fables, that God is corruptible, and mutable, and subject to injury, and
exposed to want and weakness, and not secure from misery, this is what
you are blind enough to teach, and what some are blind enough to
believe.  And this is not all; for, according to you, God is not only
corruptible, but corrupted; not only changeable, but changed; not only
subject to injury, but injured; not only liable to want, but in want;
not only possibly, but actually weak; not only exposed to misery, but
miserable.  You say that the soul is God, or a part of God.  I do not
see how it can be part of God without being God.  A part of gold is
gold; of silver silver; of stone stone; and, to come to greater things,
part of earth is earth, part of water is water, and of air air; and if
you take part from fire, you will not deny it to be fire; and part of
light can be nothing but light.  Why then should part of God not be
God?  Has God a jointed body, like man and the lower animals?  For part
of man is not man.

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p4"></span>22.  I will deal with each of these
opinions separately.  If you view God as resembling light, you must
admit that part of God is God.  Hence, when you make the soul part of
God, though you allow it to be corrupted as being foolish, and changed
as having once been wise, and in want as needing health, and feeble as
needing medicine, and miserable as desiring happiness, all these things
you profanely attribute to God.  Or if you deny these things of the
mind, it follows that the Spirit is not required to lead the soul into
truth, since it is not in folly; nor is the soul renewed by true
religion, since it does not need renewal; nor is it perfected by your
symbols, since it is already perfect; nor does God give it assistance,
since it does not need it; nor is Christ its physician, since it is in
health; nor does it require the promise of happiness in another life. 
Why then is Jesus called the deliverer, according to His own words in
the Gospel, "If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed?" <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168)   And the Apostle Paul
says, "Ye have been called to liberty." <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169)   The soul, then, which has not
attained this liberty is in bondage.  Therefore, according to you, God,
since part of God is God, is both corrupted by folly, and is changed by
falling, and is injured by the loss of perfection, and is in need of
help, and is weakened by disease, and bowed down with misery, and
subject to disgraceful bondage.

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p7"></span>23.  Again, if part of God is not God,
still He is not incorrupt when His part is corrupted, nor unchanged when
there is change in any part, nor uninjured when He is not perfect in
every part, nor free from want when He is busily endeavoring to recover
part of Himself, nor quite whole when He has a weak part, nor perfectly
happy when any part is suffering misery, nor entirely free when any part
is under bondage.  These are conclusions to which you are driven,
because you say that the soul, which you see to be in such a calamitous
condition, is part of God.  If you can succeed in making your sect
abandon these and many similar opinions, then you may speak of your
mouth being free from blas<span id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span
id="iv.v.xiii-Page_76"></span>phemies.  Better still, leave the sect;
for if you cease to believe and to repeat what Manichæus has written,
you will be no longer Manichæans.

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p8"></span>24.  That God is the supreme good, and
that than which nothing can be or can be conceived better, we must
either understand or believe, if we wish to keep clear of blasphemy. 
There is a relation of numbers which cannot possibly be impaired or
altered, nor can any nature by any amount of violence prevent the number
which comes after one from being the double of one.  This can in no way
be changed; and yet you represent God as changeable!  This relation
preserves its integrity inviolable; and you will not allow God an
equality even in this!  Let some race of darkness take in the abstract
the number three, consisting of indivisible units, and divide it into
two equal parts.  Your mind perceives that no hostility could effect
this.  And can that which is unable to injure a numerical relation
injure God?  If it could not, what possible necessity could there be for
a part of him to be mixed with evil, and driven into such miseries?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_168"></span>[75:169](1040070.htm#fr_168) <span
id="iv.v.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p5"></span> [John viii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036)<span id="iv.v.xiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[75:170](1040070.htm#fr_169) <span
id="iv.v.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p6"></span> [Gal. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span id="iv.v.xiii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1040071)
