[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040046)  [Next](1040048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—Love of Ourselves and of Our
Neighbor.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxviii-p2"></span>48.  To proceed to what remains.  It
may be thought that there is nothing here about man himself, the lover. 
But to think this, shows a want of clear perception.  For it is
impossible for one who loves God not to love himself.  For he alone has
a proper love for himself who aims diligently at the attainment of the
chief and true good; and if this is nothing else but God, as has been
shown, what is to prevent one who loves God from loving himself?  And
then, among men should there be no bond of mutual love?  Yea, verily; so
that we can think of no surer step towards the love of God than the love
of man to man.

<span id="iv.iv.xxviii-p3"></span>49.  Let the Lord then supply us with
the other precept in answer to the question about the precepts of life;
for He was not satisfied with one as knowing that God is one thing and
man another, and that the difference is nothing less than that between
the Creator and the thing created in the likeness of its Creator.  He
says then that the second precept is, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself." <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127)   Now you love
yourself suitably when you love God better than yourself.  What, then,
you aim at in yourself you must aim at in your neighbor, namely, that he
may love God with a perfect affection.  For you do not love him as
yourself, unless you try to draw him to that good which you are yourself
pursuing.  For this is the one good which has room for all to pursue it
along with thee.  From this precept proceed the duties of human society,
in which it is hard to keep from error.  But the first thing to aim at
is, that we should be benevolent, that is, that we cherish no malice and
no evil design against another.  For man is the nearest neighbor of man.

<span id="iv.iv.xxviii-p5"></span>50.  Hear also what Paul says:  "The
love of our neighbor," he says, "worketh no ill." <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128)   The testimonies here made use of are
very short, but, if I mistake not, they are to the point, and sufficient
for the purpose.  And every one knows how many and how weighty are the
words to be found everywhere in these books on the love of our
neighbor.  But as a man may sin against another in two ways, either by
injuring him or by not helping him when it is in his power, and as it is
for these things which no loving man would do that men are called
wicked, all that is required is, I think, proved by these words, "The
love of our neighbor worketh no ill."  And if we cannot attain to good
unless we first desist from working evil, our love of our neighbor is a
sort of cradle of our love to God, so that, as it is said, "the love of
our neighbor worketh no ill," we may rise from this to these other
words, "We know that all things issue in good to them that love
God." <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129)

<span id="iv.iv.xxviii-p8"></span>51.  But there is a sense in which
these either rise together to fullness and perfection, or, while the
love of God is first in beginning, the love of our neighbor is first in
coming to perfection.  For perhaps divine love takes hold on us more
rapidly at the outset, but we reach perfection more easily in lower
things.  However that may be, the main point is this, that no one should
think that while he despises his neighbor he will come to happiness and
to the God whom he loves.  And would that it were as easy to seek the
good of our neighbor, or to avoid hurting him, as it is for one well
trained and kind-hearted to love his neighbor!  These things require
more than mere good-will, and can be done only by a high degree of
thoughtfulness and prudence, which belongs only to those to whom it is
given by God, the source of all good.  On this topic—which is one, I
think, of great difficulty—I will try to say a few words such as my plan
admits of, resting all my hope in Him whose gifts these are.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[55:128](1040047.htm#fr_127) <span
id="iv.iv.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxviii-p4"></span> [Matt. xxii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#039)<span
id="iv.iv.xxviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[55:129](1040047.htm#fr_128) <span
id="iv.iv.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxviii-p6"></span> [Rom. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.xxviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[55:130](1040047.htm#fr_129) <span
id="iv.iv.xxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxviii-p7"></span> [Rom. viii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iv.xxviii-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1040048)
