[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040121)  [Next](1040123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—Refutation of the Absurd Idea
of Two Territories.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxi-p2"></span>22.  But perhaps, instead of thus
addressing carnal minds, we should rather descend to the views of those
who either dare not or are as yet unfit to turn from the consideration
of material things to the study of an immaterial and spiritual nature,
and who thus are unable to reflect upon their own power of reflection,
so as to see how it forms a judgment of material extension without
itself possessing it.  Let us descend then to these material ideas, and
let us ask in what direction, and on what border of the shining and
sacred territory, to use the expressions of Manichæus, was the region of
darkness?  For he speaks of one direction and border, without saying
which, whether the right or the left.  In any case, it is clear that to
speak of one side implies that there is another.  But where there are
three or more sides, either the figure is bounded in all directions, or
if it extends infinitely in one direction, still it must be limited in
the directions where it has sides.  If,then, on one side of the region
of light there was the race of darkness, what bounded it on the other
side or sides?  The Manichæans say nothing in reply to this; but when
pressed, they say that on the other sides the region of light, as they
call it, is infinite, that is, extends throughout boundless space.  They
do not see, what is plain to the dullest understanding, that in that
case there could be no sides?  For the sides are where it is bounded. 
What, then, he says, though there are no sides?  But what you said of
one direction or side, implied of necessity the existence of another
direction and side, or other directions and sides.  For if there was
only one side, you should have said, on the side, not *on one side*; as
in reference to our body we say properly, By one eye, because there is
another; or on one breast, because there is another.  But if we spoke of
a thing as being on one nose, or one navel, we should be ridiculed by
learned and unlearned, since there is only one.  But I do not insist on
words, for you may have used one in the sense of the only one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1040123)
