[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040023)  [Next](1040025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—Happiness is in the Enjoyment of
Man’s Chief Good.  Two Conditions of the Chief Good:  1st, Nothing is
Better Than It; 2d, It Cannot Be Lost Against the Will.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p2"></span>4.  How then, according to reason, ought
man to live?  We all certainly desire to live happily; and there is no
human being but assents to this statement almost before it is made.  But
the title happy cannot, in my opinion, belong either to him who has not
what he loves, whatever it may be, or to him who has what he loves if it
is hurtful or to him who does not love what he has, although it is good
in perfection.  For one who seeks what he cannot obtain suffers torture,
and one who has got what is not desirable is cheated, and one who does
not seek for what is worth seeking for is diseased.  Now in all these
cases the mind cannot but be unhappy, and happiness and unhappiness
cannot reside at the same time in one man; so in none of these cases can
the man be happy.  I find, then, a fourth case, where the happy life
exists,—when that which is man’s chief good is both loved and
possessed.  For what do we call enjoyment but having at hand the objects
of love?  And no one can be happy who does not enjoy what is man’s chief
good, nor is there any one who enjoys this who is not happy.  We must
then have at hand our chief good, if we think of living happily.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p3"></span>5.  We must now inquire what is man’s chief
good, which of course cannot be anything inferior to man himself.  For
whoever follows after what is inferior to himself, becomes himself
inferior.  But every man is bound to follow what is best.  Wherefore
man’s chief good is not inferior to man.  Is it then something similar
to man himself?  It must be so, if there is nothing above man which he
is capable of enjoying.  But if we find something which is both superior
to man, and can be possessed by the man who loves it, who can doubt that
in seeking for happiness man should endeavor to reach that which is more
excellent than the being who makes the endeavor.  For if happiness
consists in the enjoyment of a good than which there is nothing better,
which we call the chief good, how can a man be properly called happy who
has not yet attained to his chief good? or how can that be the chief
good beyond which something better remains for us to arrive at?  Such,
then, being the chief good, it must be something which cannot be lost
against the will.  For no one can feel confident regarding a good which
he knows can be taken from him, although he wishes to keep and cherish
it.  But if a man feels no confidence regarding the good which he
enjoys, how can he be happy while in such fear of losing it?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1040025)
