[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040519)  [Next](1040521) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 33.—</span>77.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span>
said:  "But that I may thoroughly investigate the baptism in the name of
the Trinity, the Lord Christ said to His apostles:  ‘Go ye, and baptize
the nations, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I command
you.’ <span id="fr_2080"></span>[2081](#fn_2080)   Whom do you teach,
*traditor*?  Him whom you condemn?  Whom do you teach, *traditor*?  Him
whom you slay?  Once more, whom do you teach?  Him whom you have made a
murderer?  How then do you baptize in the name of the Trinity?  You
cannot call God your Father.  For when the Lord Christ said, ‘Blessed
are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of
God,’ <span id="fr_2081"></span>[2082](#fn_2081) you who have not peace
of soul cannot have God for your Father.  Or how, again, can you baptize
in the name of the Son, who betray that Son Himself, who do not imitate
the Son of God in any of His sufferings or crosses?  Or how, again, can
you baptize in the name of the Holy Ghost, when the Holy Ghost came only
on those apostles who were not guilty of treason?  Seeing, therefore,
that God is not your Father, neither are you truly born again with the
water of baptism.  No one of you is born perfectly.  You in your impiety
have neither father nor mother.  Seeing, then, that you are of such a
kind, ought I not to baptize you, even though you wash yourselves a
thousand times, after the similitude of the Jews, who as it were baptize
the flesh?"

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p4"></span>78.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  certainly you
had proposed thoroughly to investigate the baptism in the name of the
Trinity, and you had set us to listen with much attention; but
following, as it would seem, what is the easiest course to you, how soon
have you returned to your customary abuse!  This you carry out with
genuine fluency.  For you set before yourself what victims you please,
against whom to inveigh with whatsoever bitterness you please:  in the
midst of which last latitude of discourse you are driven into the
greatest straits if any one does but use the little word, Prove it.  For
this is what is said to you by the seed of Abraham; and since in him all
nations of the earth are blessed, they care but little when they are
cursed by you.  But yet, since you are treating of baptism, which you
consider to be true when it is found in a just man, but false when it is
found in the unjust, see how I too, if I were to investigate baptism in
the name of the Trinity, according to your rule, might say, with great
fullness, as it seems to me, that he has not God for his father who in a
Count has God for his companion, <span
id="fr_2082"></span>[2083](#fn_2082) nor believes that any is his
Christ, save him for whose sake he has endured suffering; and that he
has not the Holy Ghost who burned the wretched Africa in so very
different a fashion with tongues of fire.  How then can they have
baptism, or how can they administer it in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost?  Surely you must now perceive that
baptism can exist in an unrighteous man, and be administered by an
unrighteous man, and that no unrighteous baptism, but such as is just
and true,—not because it belongs to the unrighteous man, but because it
is of God.  And herein I am uttering no calumny against you, as you
never cease to do, on some pretense or other, against the whole world;
and, what is even more intolerable, you do not even bring any proof
about the very points on which you found your calumnies.  But I know not
how this can possibly be endured, because you not only bring calumnies
against holy men about unrighteous men, but you even bring a charge
against the holy baptism itself, which must needs be holy in any man,
however unrighteous he may be, from a comparison with the infection
arising from the sins of wicked men, so that you say that baptism
partakes of the character of him by whom it is possessed, or
administered, or received.  Furthermore, if a man partakes of the
character of him in whose company he approaches sacred mysteries, and if
the sacraments themselves partake of the character of the men in whom
they are, holy men may well be satisfied to find consolation in the
thought that they only fare like holy baptism itself in hearing false
accusa<span id="page_551">p. 551</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-Page_551"></span>tions from your lips.  But it would
be well for you to see how you are condemned out of your own mouths, if
both the sober among you are counted as drunken from the infection of
the drunken in your ranks, and the merciful among you become robbers
from the infection of the robbers, and whatever evil is found among you
in the persons of wicked men is perforce shared by those who are not
wicked; and if baptism itself is unclean in all of you who are unclean,
and if it is of different kinds according to the varying character of
uncleanness itself, as it must be if it is perforce of the same
character as the man by whom it is possessed or administered.  These
suppositions most undoubtedly are false, and accordingly they in no wise
injure us, when you bring them forward against us without looking back
upon yourselves.  But they do injure you, because, when you bring them
forward falsely, they do not fall on us; but since you imagine them to
be true, they recoil upon yourselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2080"></span>[550:2081](1040520.htm#fr_2080) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p2"></span> [Matt.
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2081"></span>[550:2082](1040520.htm#fr_2081) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p3"></span> [Matt. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2082"></span>[550:2083](1040520.htm#fr_2082) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxiii-p5"></span> See above, 23, 53.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](1040521)
