[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040089)  [Next](1040091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.x"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.vi.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Augustin Deceived by Familiarity
with the Manichæans, and by the Succession of Victories Over Ignorant
Christians Reported by Them.  The Manichæans are Likewise Easily Refuted
from the Knowledge of Sin and the Will.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.x-p2"></span>But two things especially, which easily lay
hold upon that unwary age, urged me through wonderful circuits.  One of
these was familiarity, suddenly, by a certain false semblance of
goodness, wrapped many times around my neck as a certain sinuous chain. 
The other was, that I was almost always noxiously victorious in arguing
with ignorant Christians who yet eagerly attempted, each as he could, to
defend their faith. <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208)   By which
frequent success the ardor of youth was kindled, and by its own impulse
rashly verged upon the great evil of stubbornness.  For this kind of
wrangling, after I had become an auditor among them, whatever I was able
to do either by my own genius, such as it was, or by reading the works
of others, I most gladly devoted to them alone.  Accordingly from their
speeches ardor in disputations was daily increased, from success in
disputations love for them \[the Manichæans\].  Whence it resulted that
whatever they said, as if affected by certain strange disorders, I
approved of as true, not because I knew it to be true, but because I
wished it to be.  So it came about that, however slowly and cautiously,
yet for a long time I followed men that preferred a sleek straw to a
living soul.

<span id="iv.vi.x-p4"></span>12.  So be it, I was not able at that time
to distinguish and discern sensible from intelligible things, carnal
forsooth from spiritual.  It did not belong to age, nor to discipline,
nor even to any habit, nor, finally, to any deserts; for it is a matter
of no small joy and felicitation:  had I not thus been able at length
even to grasp that which in the judgment of all men nature itself by the
laws of the most High God has established?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_208"></span>[101:209](1040090.htm#fr_208) <span
id="iv.vi.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.x-p3"></span> Nothing is more certain than that
Christianity has suffered more at the hands of injudicious and ignorant
defenders than from its most astute and determined foes.  Little
attention would be paid to the blatant infidels of the present day were
it not for the interest aroused and sustained by weak attempts to refute
their arguments.  And as the youthful, ardent Augustin was encouraged
and confirmed in his errors by the inability of his opponents, so are
errors confirmed at the present day.  The philosophical defence of
Christianity is a matter of the utmost delicacy, and should be
undertaken with fear and trembling.—A.H.N.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1040091)
