[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040521)  [Next](1040523) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxv"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 35.—</span>81.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xxxv-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"Nor indeed will it be possible that the Holy Spirit should be implanted
in the heart of any one by the laying on of the hands of the priest,
unless the water of a pure conscience has gone before to give him
birth."

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxv-p2"></span>82.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xxxv-p2.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  In these few
words of yours two errors are involved; and one of them, indeed, has no
great bearing on the question which is being discussed between us, but
yet it helps to convict you of want of skill.  For the Holy Spirit came
upon a hundred and twenty men, without the laying on of any person’s
hands, and again upon Cornelius the centurion and those who were with
him, even before they were baptized.  <span
id="fr_2083"></span>[2084](#fn_2083)   But the second error in these
words of yours entirely overthrows your whole case.  For you say that
the water of a pure conscience must necessarily precede to give new
birth, before the Holy Spirit can follow on it.  Accordingly, either all
the water consecrated in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, is water of a pure conscience, not for the merits of
those by whom it is administered, or by whom it is received, but in
virtue of the stainless merits of Him who instituted this baptism; or
else if only a pure conscience on the part both of the ministrant and
the recipient can produce the water of a pure conscience, what do you
make of those whom you find to have been baptized by men who bore a
conscience stained with as yet undiscovered guilt, especially if there
exist among the said baptized persons any one that should confess that
he at the time when he was baptized had a bad conscience, in that he
might possbily have desired to use that opportunity for the
accomplishment of some sinful act?  When, therefore, it shall be made
clear to you that neither the man who administered baptism, nor the man
who received it, had a pure conscience, will you give your judgment that
he ought to be baptized afresh?  You will assuredly neither say nor do
anything of the sort.  The purity therefore of baptism is entirely
unconnected with the purity or impurity of the conscience either of the
giver or the recipient.  Will you therefore dare to say that the
deceiver, or the robber, or the oppressor of the fatherless and widows,
or the sunderer of marriages, or the betrayer, the seller, the divider
of the patrimony of other men, <span
id="fr_2084"></span>[2085](#fn_2084) was a man of pure conscience?  Or
will you further dare to say that those were men of pure conscience,
whom it is hard to imagine wanting in such times, men who made interest
with the man I have described, that they might be baptized, not for the
sake of Christ, nor for the sake of eternal life, but to conciliate
earthly friendships, and to satisfy earthly desires?  Further, if you do
not venture to say that these were men of pure conscience, then if you
find any of their number who have been baptized, give to them the water
of a pure conscience, which they as yet have not received; and if you
will not do this, then leave off casting in our teeth a matter which you
do not understand, lest you should be forced to answer in reply to us
about a matter which you know full well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2083"></span>[551:2084](1040522.htm#fr_2083) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxv-p3"></span> [Acts
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015), [Acts
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004), [Acts
10:44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxxv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2084"></span>[551:2085](1040522.htm#fr_2084) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxxv-p4"></span> Optatus Gildonianus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 36](1040523)
