[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040174)  [Next](1040176) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.xxix"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="iv.ix.xxix-p1.1"></span>Book XXVII.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxix-p2"></span>Faustus warns against pressing too far
the argument, that if Jesus was not born He cannot have suffered. 
Augustin accepts the birth and death alike on the testimony of the
Gospel narrative, which is higher authority than the falsehood of
Manichæus.

<span id="iv.ix.xxix-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xxix-p3.1"></span>Faustus</span> said:  If Jesus was not born,
He cannot have suffered; but since He did suffer, He must have been
born.  I advise you not to have recourse to logical inference in these
matters, or else your whole faith will be shaken.  For, even according
to you, Jesus was born miraculously of a virgin; which the argument from
consequents to antecedents shows to be false.  For your argument might
thus be turned against you:  If Jesus was born of a woman, He must have
been begotten by a man; but He was not begotten by a man, therefore He
was not born of a woman.  If, as you believe, He could be born without
being begotten, why could He not also suffer without being brought
forth?

<span id="iv.ix.xxix-p4"></span>2.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xxix-p4.1"></span>Augustin</span> replied:  The argument which
you here reply to is one which could be used only by such ignorant
people as you succeed in misleading, not by those who know enough to
refute you.  Jesus could both be born without being begotten and suffer
without being brought forth.  His being one and not the other was the
effect of His own will.  He chose to be born without being begotten, and
not to suffer without being brought forth.  And if you ask how I know
that He was brought forth, and that He suffered, I read this in the
faithful Gospel narrative.  If I ask how you know what you state, you
bring forward the authority of Manichæus, and charge the Gospel with
falsehood.  Even if Manichæus did not set forth falsehood as an
excellence in Christ, I should not believe his statements.  His praise
of falsehood comes from nothing that he found in Christ, but from his
own moral character.

<span id="iv.ix.xxix-p5"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXVIII](1040176)
