[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040378)  [Next](1040380) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.viii.xxv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—</span>46.  Sedatus of
Tuburbo <span id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680) said:  "Inasmuch as
water, sanctified by the prayer of the priest in the Church, washes away
sins, just so much does it multiply sins when infected, as by a cancer,
with the words of heretics.  Wherefore one must strive, with all such
efforts as conduce to peace, that no one who has been infected and
tainted by <span id="page_491">p. 491</span> <span
id="v.iv.viii.xxv-Page_491"></span>heretical error should refuse to
receive the one true baptism, with which whosoever is not baptized shall
not inherit the kingdom of heaven." <span
id="fr_1681"></span>[1682](#fn_1681)

<span id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p4"></span>47.  To this we answer, that if the
water is not sanctified, when through want of skill the priest who prays
utters some words of error, many, not only of the bad, but of the good
brethren in the Church itself, fail to sanctify the water.  For the
prayers of many are corrected every day on being recited to men of
greater learning, and many things are found in them contrary to the
Catholic faith.  Supposing, then, that it were shown that some persons
were baptized when these prayers had been uttered over the water, will
they be bidden to be baptized afresh?  Why not?  Because generally the
fault in the prayer is more than counterbalanced by the intent of him
who offers it; and those fixed words of the gospel, without which
baptism cannot be consecrated, are of such efficacy, that, by their
virtue, anything faulty that is uttered in the prayer contrary to the
rule of faith is made of no effect, just as the devil is excluded by the
name of Christ.  For it is clear that if a heretic utters a faulty
prayer, he has no good intent of love whereby that want of skill may be
compensated, and therefore he is like any envious or spiteful person in
the Catholic Church itself, such as Cyprian proves to exist within the
Church.  Or one might offer some prayer, as not unfrequently happens, in
which he should speak against the rule of faith, since many rush into
the use of prayers which are composed not only by unskillful men who
love to talk, but even by heretics, and in the simplicity of ignorance,
not being able to discern their true character, use them, thinking they
are good; and yet what is erroneous in them does not vitiate what is
right, but rather it is rendered null thereby, just as in the man of
good hope and approved faith, who yet is but a man, if in anything he be
otherwise minded, what he holds aright is not thereby vitiated until God
reveal to him also that in which he is otherwise minded.  <span
id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682)   But supposing that the man
himself is wicked and perverse, then, if he should offer an upright
prayer, in no part contrary to the Catholic faith, it does not follow
that because the prayer is right the man himself is also right; and if
over some he offer an erroneous prayer, God is present to uphold the
words of His gospel, without which the baptism of Christ cannot be
consecrated, and He Himself consecrates His sacrament, that in the
recipient, either before he is baptized, or when he is baptized, or at
some future time when he turns in truth to God, that very sacrament may
be profitable to salvation, which, were he not to be converted, would be
powerful to his destruction.  But who is there who does not know that
there is no baptism of Christ, if the words of the gospel in which
consists the outward visible sign be not forthcoming?  But you will more
easily find heretics who do not baptize at all, than any who baptize
without those words.  And therefore we say, not that every baptism (for
in many of the blasphemous rites of idols men are said to be baptized),
but that the baptism of Christ, that is, every baptism consecrated in
the words of the gospel, is everywhere the same, and cannot be vitiated
by any perversity on the part of any men. <span
id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683)

<span id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p7"></span>48.  We must certainly not lightly
pass over in this judgment that he here inserted a clause, and says,
"Wherefore we must strive, with all such efforts as conduce to peace,
that no one who has been infected," etc.  For he had regard to those
words of the blessed Cyprian in his opening speech, "Judging no man, nor
depriving any of the right of communion if he entertain a different
view."  See of what power is the love of unity and peace in the good
sons of the Church, that they should choose rather to show tolerance
towards those whom they called sacrilegious and profane, being admitted,
as they thought, without the sacrament of baptism, if they could not
correct them as they thought was right, than on their account to break
that holy bond, lest on account of the tares the wheat also should be
rooted out, <span id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684) —permitting, so
far as rested with them, as in that noblest judgment of Solomon, that
the infant body should rather be nourished by the false mother than be
cut in pieces. <span id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685)   But this was
the opinion both of those who held the truer view about the sacrament of
baptism, and of those to whom God, in consideration of their great love,
was purposing to reveal any point in which they were otherwise minded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[490:1681](1040379.htm#fr_1680) <span
id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p2"></span> Tuburbo (Thuburbo) was in the
ecclesiastical province of Zeugitana.  Sedatus is not unlikely the same
as the one mentioned in Cypr. Epp. iv., lxvii., lxx.

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[491:1682](1040379.htm#fr_1681) <span
id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p3"></span> Conc. Carth sec. 18.

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[491:1683](1040379.htm#fr_1682) <span
id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p5"></span> [Phil. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015)<span
id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[491:1684](1040379.htm#fr_1683) <span
id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p6"></span> See above, III. cc. 14, 15.

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[491:1685](1040379.htm#fr_1684) <span
id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p8"></span> [Matt. xiii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#029)<span
id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[491:1686](1040379.htm#fr_1685) <span
id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p9"></span> [1 Kings iii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#026)<span
id="v.iv.viii.xxv-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1040380)
