[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040664)  [Next](1040666) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.viii"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.vi.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—</span>21.  It is indeed better
(as no one ever could deny) that men should be led to worship God by
teaching, than that they should be driven to it by fear of punishment or
pain; but it does not follow that because the former course produces the
better men, therefore those who do not yield to it should be neglected. 
For many have found advantage (as we have proved, and are daily proving
by actual experiment), in being first compelled by fear or pain, so that
they might afterwards be influenced by teaching, or might follow out in
act what they had already learned in word.  Some, indeed, set before us
the sentiments of a certain secular author, who said,

<span id="v.vi.viii-p2"></span>"’Tis well, I ween, by shame the young to
train,

<span id="v.vi.viii-p3"></span>And dread of meanness, rather than by
pain." <span id="fr_2505"></span>[2506](#fn_2505)

<span id="v.vi.viii-p5"></span>This is unquestionably true.  But while
those are better who are guided aright by love, those are certainly more
numerous who are corrected by fear.  For, to answer these persons out of
their own author, we find him saying in another place,

<span id="v.vi.viii-p6"></span>"Unless by pain and suffering thou art
taught,

<span id="v.vi.viii-p7"></span>Thou canst not guide thyself aright in
aught." <span id="fr_2506"></span>[2507](#fn_2506)

<span id="v.vi.viii-p9"></span>But, moreover, holy Scripture has both
said concerning the former better class, "There is no fear in love; but
perfect love casteth out fear;" <span
id="fr_2507"></span>[2508](#fn_2507) and also concerning the latter
lower class, which furnishes the majority, "A servant will not be
corrected by words; for though he understand, he will not answer." <span
id="fr_2508"></span>[2509](#fn_2508)   In saying, "He will not be
corrected by words," he did not order him to be left to himself, but
implied an admonition as to the means whereby he ought to be corrected;
otherwise he would not have said, "He will not be corrected by words,"
but without any qualification, "He will not be corrected."  For in
another place he says that not only the servant, but also the
undisdained son, must be corrected with stripes, and that with great
fruits as the result; for he says, "Thou shall beat him with the rod,
and shall deliver his soul from hell;" <span
id="fr_2509"></span>[2510](#fn_2509) and elsewhere he says, "He that
spareth the rod hateth his son." <span
id="fr_2510"></span>[2511](#fn_2510)   For, give us a man who with right
faith and true understanding can say with all the energy of his heart,
"My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God:  when shall I come and
appear before God?" <span id="fr_2511"></span>[2512](#fn_2511) and for
such an one there is no need of the terror of hell, to say nothing of
temporal punishments or imperial laws, seeing that with him it is so
indispensable a blessing to cleave unto the Lord, that he not only
dreads being parted from that happiness as a heavy punishment, but can
scarcely even bear delay in its attainment.  But yet, before the good
sons can say they have "a desire to depart, and to be with
Christ," <span id="fr_2512"></span>[2513](#fn_2512) many must first be
recalled to their Lord by the stripes of temporal scourging, like evil
slaves, and in some degree like good-for-nothing fugitives.

<span id="v.vi.viii-p16"></span>22.  For who can possibly love us more
than Christ, who laid down His life for His sheep? <span
id="fr_2513"></span>[2514](#fn_2513)   And yet, after calling Peter and
the other apostles by His words alone, when He came to summon Paul, who
was before called Saul, subsequently the powerful builder of His Church,
but originally its cruel persecutor, He not only constrained him with
His voice, but even dashed him to the earth with His power; and that He
might forcibly bring one who was raging amid the darkness of infidelity
to desire the light of the heart, He first struck him with physical
blindness of the eyes.  If that punishment had not been inflicted, he
would not afterwards have been healed by it; and since he had been wont
to see nothing with his eyes open, if they had remained unharmed, the
Scripture would not tell us that at the imposition of Ananias’ hands, in
order that their sight might be restored, there fell from them as it had
been scales, by which the sight had been obscured. <span
id="fr_2514"></span>[2515](#fn_2514)   Where is what the Donatists were
wont to cry:  Man is at liberty to believe or not believe?  Towards whom
did Christ use violence?  Whom did He compel?  Here they have the
Apostle Paul.  Let them recognize in his case Christ first compelling,
and afterwards teaching; first striking, and afterwards consoling.  For
it is wonderful how he who entered the service of the gospel in the
first instance under the compulsion of bodily punishment, afterwards
labored more in the gospel than all they who were called by word
only; <span id="fr_2515"></span>[2516](#fn_2515) and he who was
compelled by the greater influ<span id="page_642">p. 642</span> <span
id="v.vi.viii-Page_642"></span>ence of fear to love, displayed that
perfect love which casts out fear.

<span id="v.vi.viii-p20"></span>23.  Why, therefore, should not the
Church use force in compelling her lost sons to return, if the lost sons
compelled others to their destruction?  Although even men who have not
been compelled, but only led astray, are received by their loving mother
with more affection if they are recalled to her bosom through the
enforcement of terrible but salutary laws, and are the objects of far
more deep congratulation than those whom she had never lost.  Is it not
a part of the care of the shepherd, when any sheep have left the flock,
even though not violently forced away, but led astray by tender words
and coaxing blandishments, to bring them back to the fold of his master
when he has found them, by the fear or even the pain of the whip, if
they show symptoms of resistance; especially since, if they multiply
with growing abundance among the fugitive slaves and robbers, he has the
more right in that the mark of the master is recognized on them, which
is not outraged in those whom we receive but do not rebaptize?  For the
wandering of the sheep is to be corrected in such wise that the mark of
the Redeemer should not be destroyed on it.  For even if any one is
marked with the royal stamp by a deserter who is marked with it himself,
and the two receive forgiveness, <span
id="fr_2516"></span>[2517](#fn_2516) and the one returns to his service,
and the other begins to be in the service in which he had no part
before, that mark is not effaced in either of the two, but rather it is
recognized in both of them, and approved with the honor which is due to
it because it is the king’s.  Since then they cannot show that the
destination is bad to which they are compelled, they maintain that they
ought to be compelled by force even to what is good.  But we have shown
that Paul was compelled by Christ; therefore the Church, in trying to
compel the Donatists, is following the example of her Lord, though in
the first instance she waited in the hopes of needing to compel no one,
that the prediction of the prophet might be fulfilled concerning the
faith of kings and peoples.

<span id="v.vi.viii-p22"></span>24.  For in this sense also we may
interpret without absurdity the declaration of the blessed Apostle Paul,
when he says, "Having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when
your obedience is fulfilled." <span id="fr_2517"></span>[2518](#fn_2517)
  Whence also the Lord Himself bids the guests in the first instance to
be invited to His great supper, and afterwards compelled; for on His
servants making answer to Him, "Lord, it is done as Thou hast commanded,
and yet there is room," He said to them, "Go out into the highways and
hedges, and compel them to come in." <span
id="fr_2518"></span>[2519](#fn_2518)   In those, therefore, who were
first brought in with gentleness, the former obedience is fulfilled; but
in those who were compelled, the disobedience is avenged.  For what else
is the meaning of  "Compel them to come in," after it had previously
said, "Bring in," and the answer had been made, "Lord, it is done as
Thou commanded, and yet there is room"?  If He had wished it to be
understood that they were to be compelled by the terrifying force of
miracles, many divine miracles were rather wrought in the sight of those
who were first called, especially in the sight of the Jews, of whom it
was said, "The Jews require a sign;" <span
id="fr_2519"></span>[2520](#fn_2519) and, moreover, among the Gentiles
themselves the gospel was so commended by miracles in the time of the
apostles, that had these been the means by which they were ordered to be
compelled, we might rather have had good grounds for supposing, as I
said before, that it was the earlier guests who were compelled. 
Wherefore, if the power which the Church has received by divine
appointment in its due season, through the religious character and the
faith of kings, be the instrument by which those who are found in the
highways and hedges—that is, in heresies and schisms—are compelled to
come in, then let them not find fault with being compelled, but consider
whether they be so compelled.  The supper of the Lord is the unity of
the body of Christ, not only in the sacrament of the altar, but also in
the bond of peace.  Of the Donatists themselves, indeed, we can say that
they compel no man to any good thing; for whomsoever they compel, they
compel to nothing else but evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2505"></span>[641:2506](1040665.htm#fr_2505) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p4"></span> Ter. *Adelph*. act 1. sc. i. 32, 33.

<span id="fn_2506"></span>[641:2507](1040665.htm#fr_2506) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p8"></span> This is not found in the extant plays of
Terence.

<span id="fn_2507"></span>[641:2508](1040665.htm#fr_2507) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p10"></span> [1 John iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span id="v.vi.viii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2508"></span>[641:2509](1040665.htm#fr_2508) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p11"></span> [Prov. xxix.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#019)<span id="v.vi.viii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2509"></span>[641:2510](1040665.htm#fr_2509) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p12"></span> [Prov. xxiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#014)<span id="v.vi.viii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2510"></span>[641:2511](1040665.htm#fr_2510) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p13"></span> [Prov. xiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#024)<span id="v.vi.viii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2511"></span>[641:2512](1040665.htm#fr_2511) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p14"></span> [Ps. xlii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#002)<span id="v.vi.viii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2512"></span>[641:2513](1040665.htm#fr_2512) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p15"></span> [Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span id="v.vi.viii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2513"></span>[641:2514](1040665.htm#fr_2513) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p17"></span> [John x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015)<span id="v.vi.viii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2514"></span>[641:2515](1040665.htm#fr_2514) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p18"></span> [Acts ix.
1-18](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)<span
id="v.vi.viii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2515"></span>[641:2516](1040665.htm#fr_2515) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p19"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span id="v.vi.viii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2516"></span>[642:2517](1040665.htm#fr_2516) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p21"></span> *Accipiant:*  sc. the baptizer and the
baptized; and so the <span class="c11"><span
id="v.vi.viii-p21.1"></span>Mss.</span>  The common reading is
*"accipiat."*

<span id="fn_2517"></span>[642:2518](1040665.htm#fr_2517) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p23"></span> [2 Cor. x.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span id="v.vi.viii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2518"></span>[642:2519](1040665.htm#fr_2518) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p24"></span> [Luke
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#023)<span id="v.vi.viii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2519"></span>[642:2520](1040665.htm#fr_2519) <span
id="v.vi.viii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.viii-p25"></span> [1 Cor. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022)<span id="v.vi.viii-p25.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1040666)
