[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040082)  [Next](1040084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—If the Light that is Perceived by
Sense Has God for Its Author, as the Manichæans Acknowledge, Much More
The Soul Which is Perceived by Intellect Alone.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p2"></span>2.  But if at that time <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) my thought was not able to bear and
sustain the question concern<span id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span
id="iv.vi.iii-Page_96"></span>ing life and partaking of life, which is
truly a great question, and one that requires much calm discussion among
the learned, I might perchance have had power to discover that which to
every man considering himself, without a study of the individual parts,
is perfectly evident, namely, that everything we are said to know and to
understand, we comprehend either by bodily sense or by mental
operation.  That the five bodily senses are commonly enumerated as
sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, than all of which intellect is
immeasurably more noble and excellent, who would have been so ungrateful
and impious as not to concede to me; which being established and
confirmed, we should have seen how it follows, that whatsoever things
are perceived by touch or sight or in any bodily manner at all, are by
so much inferior to those things that we comprehend intellectually as
the senses are inferior to the intellect.  Wherefore, since all life,
and so every soul, can be perceived by no bodily sense, but by the
intellect alone, whereas while yonder sun and moon and every luminary
that is beheld by these mortal eyes, the Manichæans themselves also say
must be attributed to the true and good God, it is the height of madness
to claim that that belongs to God which we observe bodily; but, on the
other hand, to think that what we receive not only by the mind, but by
the highest form of mind, <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193)
namely, reason and intellect, <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194)
that is life, whatsoever it may be called, nevertheless life, should be
deprived and bereft of the same God as its author.  For if having
invoked God, I had asked myself what living is, how inscrutable it is to
every bodily sense, how absolutely incorporeal it is, could not I have
answered?  Or would not the Manichæans also confess not only that the
souls they detest live, but that they live also immortally? and that
Christ’s saying:  "Send the dead to bury their dead,"  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) was uttered not with reference to
those not living at all, but with reference to sinners, which is the
only death of the immortal soul; as when Paul writes:  "The widow that
giveth herself to pleasure is dead while she liveth," <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) he says that she at the same time is
dead, and alive.  Wherefore I should have directed attention not to the
great degree of contamination in which the sinful soul lives, but only
to the fact itself that it lives.  But if I cannot perceive except by an
act of intelligence, I believe it would have come into the mind, that by
as much as any mind whatever is to be preferred to the light which we
see through these eyes, by so much we should give to intellect the
preference over the eyes themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[95:193](1040083.htm#fr_192) <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p3"></span> It will aid the reader in following the
thread of Augustin’s argument, if he will bear in mind that throughout
this treatise the writer considers the points of antagonism between
Manichæism and Catholicism from the point of view of his early
entanglement in Manichæan error.  Considering the opportunities that he
had for knowing the truth, the helps to have been expected from God in
answer to prayer, the capacities of the unperverted intellect to arrive
at truth, he inquires how he should have guarded himself from the
insinuation of Manichæan error, how he should have defended the truth,
and how he should have been the means of liberating others.—A.H.N.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[96:194](1040083.htm#fr_193) <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p4"></span> *Sublimitate animi*.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[96:195](1040083.htm#fr_194) <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p5"></span> *Mente atque intelligentia*.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[96:196](1040083.htm#fr_195) <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p6"></span> [Matt. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022)<span id="iv.vi.iii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[96:197](1040083.htm#fr_196) <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p7"></span> [1 Tim. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span id="iv.vi.iii-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1040084)
