[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040225)  [Next](1040227) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.xliv"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xliv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.x.xliv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 42.—Manichæan Blasphemies Concerning
the Nature of God.</span>

<span id="iv.x.xliv-p2"></span>What can be compared to those
blasphemies?  Absolutely nothing, unless the errors of other sectaries
be considered; but if that error be compared with itself in another
aspect, of which we have not yet spoken, it will be convicted of far
worse and more execrable blasphemy.  For they say that some souls, which
they will have to be of the substance of God and of absolutely the same
nature, which have not sinned of their own accord, but have been
overcome and oppressed by the race of darkness, which they call evil,
for combating which they descended not of their own accord, but at the
command of the Father, are fettered forever in the horrible sphere of
darkness.  So according to their sacrilegious vaporings, God liberated
Himself in a certain part from a great evil, but again condemned Himself
in another part, which He could not liberate, and triumphed over the
enemy itself as if it had been vanquished from above.  O criminal,
incredible audacity, to believe, to speak, to proclaim such things about
God!  Which when they endeavor to defend, that with their eyes shut they
may rush headlong into yet worse things, they say that the commingling
of the evil nature does these things, in order that the good nature of
God may suffer so great evils:  for that this good nature in its own
sphere could or can suffer no one of these things.  As if a nature were
lauded <span id="page_361">p. 361</span> <span
id="iv.x.xliv-Page_361"></span>as incorruptible, because it does not
hurt itself, and not because it cannot suffer hurt from another.  Then
if the nature of God hurt the nature of darkness, and the nature of
darkness hurt the nature of God, there are therefore two evil things
which hurt each other in turn, and the race of darkness was the better
disposed, because if it committed hurt it did it unwillingly; for it did
not wish to commit hurt, but to enjoy the good which belonged to God. 
But God wished to extinguish it, as Manichæus most openly raves forth in
his epistle of the ruinous *Foundation*.  For forgetting that he had
shortly before said:  "But His most resplendent realms were so founded
upon the shining and happy land, that they could never be either moved
or shaken by any one;" he afterwards said:  "But the Father of the most
blessed light, knowing that great ruin and desolation which would arise
from the darkness, threaten his holy worlds, unless he should send in
opposition a deity excellent and renowned, mighty in strength, by whom
he might at the same time overcome and destroy the race of darkness,
which having been extinguished, the inhabitants of light would enjoy
perpetual rest."  Behold, he feared ruin and desolation that threatened
his worlds!  Assuredly they were so founded upon the shining and happy
land that they never could be either moved or shaken by any one? 
Behold, from fear he wished to hurt the neighboring race, which he
endeavored to destroy and extinguish, in order that the inhabitants of
light might enjoy perpetual rest.  Why did he not add, and perpetual
bondage?  Were not these souls that he fettered forever in the sphere of
darkness, the inhabitants of light, of whom he says plainly, that "they
have suffered themselves to err from their former bright nature?" when
against his will he is compelled to say, that they sinned by free will,
while he wishes to ascribe sin only to the necessity of the contrary
nature:  everywhere ignorant what to say, and as if he were himself
already in the sphere of darkness which he invented, seeking, and not
finding, how he may escape.  But let him say what he will to the seduced
and miserable men by whom he is honored far more highly than Christ,
that at this price he may sell to them such long and sacrilegious
fables.  Let him say what he will, let him shut up, as it were, in a
sphere, as in a prison, the race of darkness, and let him fasten outside
the nature of light, to which he promised perpetual rest on the
extinction of the enemy:  behold, the penalty of light is worse than
that of darkness; the penalty of the divine nature is worse than that of
the adverse race.  But since although the latter is in the midst of
darkness it pertains to its nature to dwell in darkness; but souls which
are the very same thing that God is, cannot be received, he says, into
those peaceful realms, and are alienated from the life and liberty of
the holy light, and are fettered in the aforesaid horrible sphere: 
whence he says, "Those souls shall adhere to the things that they have
loved, having been left in the same sphere of darkness, bringing this
upon themselves by their own deserts."  Is not this assuredly free
voluntary choice?  See how insanely he ignores what he says, and by
making self-contradictory statements wages a worse war against himself
than against the God of the race of darkness itself.  Accordingly, if
the souls of light are damned, because they loved darkness, the race of
darkness, which loved light, is unjustly damned.  And the race of
darkness indeed loved light from the beginning, violently, it may be,
but yet so as to wish for its possession, not its extinction:  but the
nature of light wished to extinguish in war the darkness; therefore when
vanquished it loved darkness.  Choose which you will:  whether it was
compelled by necessity to love darkness, or seduced by free will.  If by
necessity, wherefore is it damned? if by free will, wherefore is the
nature of God involved in so great iniquity?  If the nature of God was
compelled by necessity to love darkness, it did not vanquish, but was
vanquished:  if by free will, why do the wretches hesitate any longer to
attribute the will to sin to the nature which God made out of nothing,
lest they should thereby attribute it to the light which He begat?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 43](1040227)
