[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040226)  [Next](1040228) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.xlv"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.x.xlv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 43.—Many Evils Before His Commingling
with Evil are Attributed to the Nature of God by the Manichæans.</span>

<span id="iv.x.xlv-p2"></span>What if we should also show that before
the commingling of evil, which stupid fable they have most madly
believed, great evils were in what they call the nature of light? what
will it seem possible to add to these blasphemies?  For before the
conflict, there was the hard and inevitable necessity of fighting:  here
is truly a great evil, before evil is commingled with good.  Let them
say whence this is, when as yet no commingling had taken place?  But if
there was no necessity, there was therefore free will:  whence also this
so great evil, that God himself should wish to hurt his own nature,
which could not be hurt by the enemy, by sending it to be cruelly
commingled, to be basely purged, to be unjustly damned?  Behold, the
great evil of a pernicious, noxious, and savage will, before <span
id="page_362">p. 362</span> <span id="iv.x.xlv-Page_362"></span>any evil
from the contrary nature was mingled with it!  Or perchance he did not
know that this would happen to his members, that they should love
darkness and become hostile to holy light, as Manichæus says, that is,
not only to their own God, but also to the Father from whom they had
their being?  Whence therefore this so great evil of ignorance, before
any evil from the nature of darkness was mingled with it?  But if he
knew that this would happen, either there was in him everlasting
cruelty, if he did not grieve over the contamination and damnation of
his own nature that was to take place, or everlasting misery, if he did
so grieve:  whence also this so great evil of your supreme good before
any commingling with your supreme evil?  Assuredly that part of the
nature itself which was fettered in the eternal chain of that sphere, if
it knew not that this fate awaited it, even so was there everlasting
ignorance in the nature of God, but if it knew, then everlasting
misery:  whence this so great evil before any evil from the contrary
nature was commingled?  Or perchance did it, in the greatness of its
love (charity), rejoice that through its punishment perpetual rest was
prepared for the residue of the inhabitants of light?  Let him who sees
how abominable it is to say this, pronounce an anathema.  But if this
should be done so that at least the good nature itself should not become
hostile to the light, it might be possible, perchance, not for the
nature of God indeed, but for some man, as it were, to be regarded as
praiseworthy, who for the sake of his country should be willing to
suffer something of evil, which evil indeed could be only for a time,
and not forever:  but now also they speak of that fettering in the
sphere of darkness as eternal, and not indeed of a certain thing but of
the nature of God; and assuredly it were a most unrighteous, and
execrable, and ineffably sacrilegious joy, if the nature of God rejoiced
that it should love darkness, and should become hostile to holy light. 
Whence this so monstrous and abominable evil before any evil from the
contrary nature was commingled?  Who can endure insanity so perverse and
so impious, as to attribute so great good things to supreme evil, and so
great evils to supreme good, which is God?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 44](1040228)
