[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040279)  [Next](1040281) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—</span>2.  Nevertheless, I see
what may still be required of me, viz., that I should answer those
plausible arguments, by which, in even earlier times, Agrippinus, or
Cyprian himself, or those in Africa who agreed with them, or any others
in far distant lands beyond the sea, were moved, not indeed by the
authority of any plenary or even regionary Council, but by a mere
epistolary correspondence, to think that they ought to adopt a custom
which had no sanction from the ancient custom of the Church, and which
was expressly forbidden by the most unanimous resolution of the Catholic
world in order that an error which had begun to creep into the minds of
some men, through discussions of this kind, might be cured by the more
powerful truth and universal healing power of unity coming on the side
of safety.  And so they may see with what security I approach this
discourse.  If I am unable to gain my point, and show how those
arguments may be refuted which they bring forward from the Council and
the epistles of Cyprian, to the effect that Christ’s baptism may not be
given by the hands of heretics, I shall still remain safely in the
Church, in whose communion Cyprian himself remained with those who
differed from him.

<span id="v.iv.v.ii-p2"></span>3.  But if they say that the Catholic
Church existed then, because there were a few, or, if they prefer it,
even a considerable number, who denied the validity of any baptism
conferred in an heretical body, and baptized all who came from thence,
what then?  Did the Church not exist at all before Agrippinus, with whom
that new kind of system began, at variance with all previous custom?  Or
how, again after the time of Agrippinus, when, unless there had been a
return to the primitive custom, there would have been no need for
Cyprian to set on foot another Council?  Was there no Church then,
because such a custom as this prevailed everywhere, that the baptism of
Christ should be considered nothing but the baptism of Christ, even
though it were proved to have been conferred in a body of heretics or
schismatics?  But if the Church existed even then, and had not perished
through a breach of its continuity, but was, on the contrary, holding
its ground, and receiving increase in every nation, surely it is the
safest plan to abide by this same custom, which then embraced good and
bad alike in unity.  But if there was then no Church in existence,
because sacrilegious heretics were received without baptism, and this
prevailed by universal custom, whence has Donatus made his appearance? 
From what land did <span id="page_437">p. 437</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.ii-Page_437"></span>he spring? or from what sea did he
emerge? or from what sky did he fall?  And so we, as I had begun to say,
are safe in the communion of that Church, throughout the whole extent of
which the custom now prevails, which prevailed in like manner through
its whole extent before the time of Agrippinus, and in the interval
between Agrippinus and Cyprian, and whose unity neither Agrippinus nor
Cyprian ever deserted, nor those who agreed with them, although they
entertained different views from the rest of their brethren—all of them
remaining in the same communion of unity with the very men from whom
they differed in opinion.  But let the Donatists themselves consider
what their true position is, if they neither can say whence they derived
their origin, if the Church had already been destroyed by the
plague-spot of communion with heretics and schismatics received into her
bosom without baptism; nor again agree with Cyprian himself, for he
declared that he remained in communion with those who received heretics
and schismatics, and so also with those who were received as well: 
while they have separated themselves from the communion of the whole
world, on account of the charge of having delivered up the sacred books,
which they brought against the men whom they maligned in Africa, but
failed to convict when brought to trial beyond the sea; although, even
had the crimes which they alleged been true, they were much less heinous
than the sins of heresy and schism; and yet these could not defile
Cyprian in the persons of those who came from them without baptism, as
he conceived, and were admitted without baptism into the Catholic
communion.  Nor, in the very point in which they say that they imitate
Cyprian, can they find any answer to make about acknowledging the
baptism of the followers of Maximianus, together with those whom, though
they belonged to the party that they had first condemned in their own
plenary Council, and then gone on to prosecute even at the tribunal of
the secular power, they yet received back into their communion, in the
episcopate of the very same bishop under whom they had been condemned. 
Wherefore, if the communion of wicked men destroyed the Church in the
time of Cyprian, they have no source from which they can derive their
own communion; and if the Church was not destroyed, they have no excuse
for their separation from it.  Moreover, they are neither following the
example of Cyprian, since they have burst the bond of unity, nor abiding
by their own Council, since they have recognized the baptism of the
followers of Maximianus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1040281)
