[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040533)  [Next](1040535) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xlvii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 47.—</span>109.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"But the same Psalmist has sung the praises of our baptism.  ‘The Lord
is my shepherd, I shall not want.  He maketh me to lie down in the green
pastures:  He leadeth me beside the still waters.  He restoreth my
soul:  He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for His name’s sake. 
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,’—though
the persecutor, he means, should slay me,—‘I will fear no evil:  for
Thou art with me; Thy rod and Thy staff comfort me.’  It was by this
that it conquered Goliath, being armed with the anointing oil.  ‘Thou
hast prepared a table before me in the presence of mine enemies:  Thou
anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.  Surely goodness and
mercy shall follow me all the days of my life; and I will dwell in the
house of the Lord for ever.’" <span id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126)

<span id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p3"></span>110.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p3.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  This psalm
speaks of those who receive baptism aright, and use as holy what is so
holy.  For those words have no reference even to Simon Magus, who yet
received the same holy baptism; and because he would not use it in a
holy way, he did not therefore pollute it, or show that in such cases it
should be repeated.  But since you have made mention of Goliath, listen
to the psalm which treats of Goliath himself, and see that he is
portrayed in a new song; for there it is said, "I will sing a new song
unto Thee, O God:  upon a psaltery, and an instrument of ten strings,
will I sing praise unto Thee." <span
id="fr_2127"></span>[2128](#fn_2127)   And see whether he belongs to
this song who refuses to communicate with the whole earth.  For
elsewhere it is said, "O sing unto the Lord a new song; sing unto the
Lord, all the earth." <span id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128)  
Therefore the whole earth, with whom you are not in unity, <span
id="page_559">p. 559</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xlvii-Page_559"></span>sings the new song.  And these too are
the words of the whole earth, "The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not
want," etc.  These are not the words of the tares, though they be
endured until the harvest in the same crop.  They are not the words of
the chaff, but of the wheat, although they are nourished by one and the
same rain, and are threshed out on the same threshing-floor at the same
time, till they shall be separated the one from the other by the
winnowing at the last day.  And yet these both assuredly have the same
baptism, though they are not the same themselves.  But if your party
also were the Church of God, you would certainly confess that this psalm
has no application to the infuriated bands of the Circumcelliones.  Or
if they too themselves are led through the paths of righteousness, why
do you deny that they are your associates, when you are reproached with
them, although, for the most part, you console yourselves for the
scantiness of your section, not by the rod and staff of the Lord, but by
the cudgels of the Circumcelliones, with which you think that you are
safe even against the Roman laws,—to bring oneself into collision with
which is surely nothing less than to walk through the valley of the
shadow of death?  But he with whom the Lord is, fears no evils.  Surely,
however, you will not venture to say that the words which are sung in
this song belong even to those infuriated men, and yet you not only
acknowledge, but ostentatiously set forth the fact that they have
baptism.  These words, therefore, are not used by any who are not
refreshed by the holy water, as are all the righteous men of God; not by
those who are brought to destruction by using it, as was that magician
when baptized by Philip:  and yet the water itself in both kinds of men
is the same, and of the same degree of sanctity.  These words are not
used except by those who will belong to the right hand; but yet both
sheep and goats feed in the same pasture under one Shepherd, until they
shall be separated, that they may receive their due reward.  These words
are not used except by those who, like Peter, receive life from the
table of the Lord, not judgment, as did Judas; and yet the supper was
itself the same to both, but it was not of the same profit to both,
because they were not one.  These words are not used except by those
who, by being anointed with the sacred oil, are blessed in spirit also,
as was David; not merely consecrated in the body only, as was Saul:  and
yet, as they had both received the same outward sign, it was not the
sacrament, but the personal merit that was different in the two cases. 
These words are not used except by those who, with converted heart,
receive the cup of the Lord unto eternal life; not by those who eat and
drink damnation to themselves, as the apostle says: <span
id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129)   and yet, though they are not one,
the cup which they receive is one, exerting its power on the martyrs
that they should obtain a heavenly reward, not on the Circumcelliones,
that they should mark precipices with death.  Remember, therefore, that
the characters of bad men in no wise interfere with the virtue of the
sacraments, so that their holiness should either be destroyed, or even
diminished; but that they injure the unrighteous men themselves, that
they should have them as witnesses of their damnation, not as aids to
health.  For beyond all doubt you should have taken into consideration
the actual concluding words of this psalm, and have understood that, on
account of those who forsake the faith after they have been baptized, it
cannot be said by all who receive holy baptism that "I will dwell in the
house of the Lord for ever:"  and yet, whether they abide in the faith,
or whether they have fallen away, though they themselves are not one,
their baptism is one, and though they themselves are not both holy, yet
the baptism in both is holy; because even apostates, if they return, are
not baptized as though they had lost the sacrament, but undergo
humiliation, because they have done a despite to it which remains in
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[558:2127](1040534.htm#fr_2126) <span
id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p2"></span> [Ps.
xxiii](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2127"></span>[558:2128](1040534.htm#fr_2127) <span
id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p4"></span> [Ps. cxliv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#009)<span id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[558:2129](1040534.htm#fr_2128) <span
id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p5"></span> [Ps. xcvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)<span id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[559:2130](1040534.htm#fr_2129) <span
id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)<span
id="v.v.iv.xlvii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 48](1040535)
