[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040626)  [Next](1040628) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xxx"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xxx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 30.—</span>35.  Accordingly this
precedent is wholly without bearing on the matter in hand.  We might
rather say that the declaration of the apostle sufficiently inculcates
this care, when he says, "Let these also first be proved; then let them
use the office of a deacon, being found blameless." <span
id="fr_2387"></span>[2388](#fn_2387)   And since this is done anxiously
and habitually in both parties, by almost all concerned, how comes it
that so many are found to be reprobates subsequently to the time of
having undertaken this ministry, except that, on the one hand, human
care is often deceived, and, on the other hand, those who have begun
well occasionally deteriorate?  And since things of this sort happen so
frequently as to allow no man to hide them or to forget them, what is
the <span id="page_611">p. 611</span> <span
id="v.v.v.xxx-Page_611"></span>reason that Petilianus now teaches us
insultingly, in a few words, that the baptizer ought to be examined by
the candidate for baptism, since our question is, by what means the
conscience of the recipient is to be cleansed, when the stain on the
conscience of him that gives, but not in holiness, has been concealed
from view, if the conscience of one that gives in holiness is what we
look for to cleanse the conscience of the recipient.  "Since I see," he
says, "that you are unacquainted with the order of the sacrament, I tell
you this as shortly as I can:  you were bound both to examine your
baptizer, and to be examined by him."  What an answer to make!  He is
surrounded in so many places by such a multitude of men that have been
baptized by ministers who, having in the first instance seemed righteous
and chaste, have subsequently been convicted and degraded in consequence
of the disclosure of their faults:  and he thinks that he is avoiding
the force of this question, in which we ask by what means the conscience
of the recipient is to be cleansed, when he is unacquainted with the
stain upon the conscience of him that gives but not in holiness, if the
conscience of one that gives in holiness is what we look for to cleanse
the conscience of the recipient,—he thinks, I say, that he is avoiding
the force of this question, by saying shortly that the baptizer ought to
be examined.  Nothing is more unfortunate than not to be consistent with
truth, by which every one is so shut in, that he cannot find a means of
escape.  We ask from whom he is to receive faith who is baptized by one
that is faithless?  The answer is, "He ought to have examined his
baptizer."  Is it therefore the case that, since he does not examine
him, and so even unwittingly receives his faith from one that is
faithless, he receives not faith but guilt?  Why then are those men not
baptized afresh, who are found to have been baptized by men that are
detected and convicted reprobates, while their true character was yet
concealed?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2387"></span>[610:2388](1040627.htm#fr_2387) <span
id="v.v.v.xxx-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xxx-p2"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#010)<span id="v.v.v.xxx-p2.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](1040628)
