[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040487)  [Next](1040489) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.i"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.i-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—</span>1.  That we made a full and
sufficient answer to the first part of the letter of Petilianus, which
was all that we had been able to find, will be remembered by all who
were able to read or hear what we replied.  But since the whole of it
was afterwards found and copied by our brethren, and sent to us with the
view that we should answer it as a whole, this task was one which our
pen could not escape,—not that he says anything new in it, to which
answer has not been already made in many ways and at various times; but
still, on account of the brethren of slower comprehension, who, when
they read a matter in any place, cannot always refer to everything that
has been said upon the same subject, I will comply with those who urge
me by all means to reply to every point, and that as though we were
carrying on the discussion face to face in the form of a dialogue.  I
will set down the words of his epistle under his name, and I will give
the answer under my own name, as though it had all been taken down by
reporters while we were debating.  And so there will be no one who can
complain either that I have passed anything over, or that they have been
unable to understand it for want of distinction between the parties to
the discussion; at the same time that the Donatists themselves, who are
unwilling to argue the question in our presence, as is shown by the
letters which they have circulated among their party, may thus not fail
to find the truth answering them point by point, just as though they
were discussing the matter with us face to face.

<span id="v.v.iv.i-p2"></span>2.  In the very beginning of the letter
<span class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.i-p2.1"></span>Petilianus</span>
said:  "Petilianus, a bishop, to his well-beloved brethren,
fellow-priests, and deacons, appointed ministers with us throughout our
diocese in the gospel, grace be to you and peace, from God our Father
and from the Lord Jesus Christ."

<span id="v.v.iv.i-p3"></span>3.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.i-p3.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  I acknowledge the
apostolic greeting.  You see who you are that employ it, but see from
what source you have learned what you say.  For in these terms Paul
salutes the Romans, and in the same terms the Corinthians, the
Galatians, the Ephesians, the Colossians, the Philippians, the
Thessalonians.  What madness is it, therefore, to be unwilling to share
the salvation of peace with those very Churches in whose epistles you
learned its form of salutation?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1040489)
