[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040158)  [Next](1040160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p1.1"></span>Book XI.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p2"></span>Faustus quotes passages to show that the
Apostle Paul abandoned belief in the incarnation, to which he earlier
held.  Augustin shows that the apostle was consistent with himself in
the utterances quoted.

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p3.1"></span>Faustus</span> said:  Assuredly I believe
the apostle.  And yet I do not believe that the Son of God was born of
the seed of David according to the flesh, <span
id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) because I do not believe that God’s
apostle could contradict himself, and have one opinion about our Lord at
one time, and another at another.  But, granting that he wrote
this,—since you will not hear of anything being spurious in his <span
id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-Page_178"></span>writings,—it is not against us.  For
this seems to be Paul’s old belief about Jesus, when he thought, like
everybody else, that Jesus was the son of David.  Afterwards, when he
learned that this was false, he corrects himself; and in his Epistle to
the Corinthians he says:  "We know no man after the flesh; yea, though
we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him no
more." <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377)   Observe the difference
between these two verses.  In one he asserts that Jesus was the son of
David after the flesh; in the other he says that now he knows no man
after the flesh.  If Paul wrote both, it can only have been in the way I
have stated.  In the next verse he adds:  "Therefore, if any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature; old things are passed away; behold, all
things are become new."  The belief that Jesus was born of the seed of
David according to the flesh is of this old transitory kind; whereas the
faith which knows no man after the flesh is new and permanent.  So, he
says elsewhere:  "When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood
as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put away
childish things." <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378)   We are thus
warranted in preferring the new and amended confession of Paul to his
old and faulty one.  And if you hold by what is said in the Epistle to
the Romans, why should not we hold by what is said to the Corinthians? 
But it is only by your insisting on the correctness of the text that we
are made to represent Paul as building again the things which he
destroyed, in spite of his own repudiation of such prevarication.  If
the verse is Paul’s, he has corrected himself.  If Paul should not be
supposed to have written anything requiring correction, the verse is not
his.

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p7"></span>2.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p7.1"></span>Augustin</span> replied:  As I said a little
ago, when these men are beset by clear testimonies of Scripture, and
cannot escape from their grasp, they declare that the passage is
spurious.  The declaration only shows their aversion to the truth, and
their obstinacy in error.  Unable to answer these statements of
Scripture, they deny their genuineness.  But if this answer is admitted,
or allowed to have any weight, it will be useless to quote any book or
any passage against your errors.  It is one thing to reject the books
themselves, and to profess no regard for their authority, as the Pagans
reject our Scriptures, and the Jews the New Testament, and as we reject
any books peculiar to your sect, or any other heretical sect, and also
the apocryphal books, which are so called, not because of any mysterious
regard paid to them, but because they are mysterious in their origin,
and in the absence of clear evidence, have only some obscure presumption
to rest upon; and it is another thing to say, This holy man wrote only
the truth, and this is his epistle, but some verses are his, and some
are not.  And then, when you are asked for a proof, instead of referring
to more correct or more ancient manuscripts, or to a greater number, or
to the original text, your reply is, This verse is his, because it makes
for me; and this is not his, because it is against me.  Are you, then,
the rule of truth?  Can nothing be true that is against you?  But what
answer could you give to an opponent as insane as yourself, if he
confronts you by saying, The passage in your favor is spurious, and that
against you is genuine?  Perhaps you will produce a book, all of which
can be explained so as to support you.  Then, instead of rejecting a
passage, he will reply by condemning the whole book as spurious.  You
have no resource against such an opponent.  For all the testimony you
can bring in favor of your book from antiquity or tradition will avail
nothing.  In this respect the testimony of the Catholic Church is
conspicuous, as supported by a succession of bishops from the original
seats of the apostles up to the present time, and by the consent of so
many nations.  Accordingly, should there be a question about the text of
some passage, as there are a few passages with various readings well
known to students of the sacred Scriptures, we should first consult the
manuscripts of the country where the religion was first taught; and if
these still varied, we should take the text of the greater number, or of
the more ancient.  And if any uncertainty remained, we should consult
the original text.  This is the method employed by those who, in any
question about the Scriptures, do not lose sight of the regard due to
their authority, and inquire with the view of gaining information, not
of raising disputes. <span id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379)

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p9"></span>3.  As regards the passage from Paul’s
epistle which teaches, in opposition to your *heresy*, that the Son of
God was born of the seed of David, it is found in all manuscripts both
new and old of all Churches, and in all languages.  So the profession
which Faustus makes of believing the apostle is hypocritical.  Instead
of saying, "Assuredly I believe," he should have said, Assuredly I do
not believe, as he would have said if he had not wished to deceive
people.  What part of his belief does <span id="page_179">p. 179</span>
<span id="iv.ix.xiii-Page_179"></span>he get from the apostle?  Not the
first man, of whom the apostle says that he is of the earth, earthy; and
again, "The first man Adam was made a living soul."  Faustus’ First Man
is neither of the earth, earthy, nor made a living soul, but of the
substance of God, and the same in essence as God; and this being is said
to have mixed up with the race of darkness his members, or vesture, or
weapons, that is, the five elements, which also are part of the
substance of God, so that they became subject to confinement and
pollution.  Nor does Faustus get from Paul his Second Man, of whom Paul
says that He is from heaven, and that He is the last Adam, and a
quickening spirit; and also that He was born of the seed of David after
the flesh, that He was made of a woman, made under the law, that He
might redeem them that were under the law. <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380)   Of Him Paul says to Timothy: 
"Remember that Jesus Christ, of the seed of David, was raised from the
dead, according to my gospel." <span id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381)  
And this resurrection he quotes as an example of our resurrection:  "I
delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that
Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures; and that He was
buried, and that He rose again the third day, according to the
Scriptures."  And a little further on he draws an inference from this
doctrine:  "Now, if Christ be preached that He rose from the dead, how
say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?"  <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382)   Our professed believer in Paul
believes nothing of all this.  He denies that Jesus was born of the seed
of David, that He was made of a woman (by the word woman is not meant a
wife in the common sense of the word, but merely one of the female sex,
as in the book of Genesis, where it is said that God made a woman before
she was brought to Adam <span id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) ); he
denies His death, His burial, and His resurrection.  He holds that
Christ had not a mortal body, and therefore could not really die; and
that the marks of His wounds which He showed to His disciples when He
appeared to them alive after His resurrection, which Paul also
mentions, <span id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) were not real.  He
denies, too, that our mortal body will be raised again, changed into a
spiritual body; as Paul teaches:  "It is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body."  To illustrate this distinction between the
natural and the spiritual body, the apostle adds what I have quoted
already about the first and the last Adam.  Then he goes on:  "But this
I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
God."  And to explain what he means by flesh and blood, that it is not
the bodily substance, but corruption, which will not enter into the
resurrection of the just, he immediately says, "Neither shall corruption
inherit incorruption."  And in case any one should still suppose that it
is not what is buried that is to rise again, but that it is as if one
garment were laid aside and a better taken instead, he proceeds to show
distinctly that the same body will be changed for the better, as the
garments of Christ on the mount were not displaced, but transfigured: 
"Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall not all be changed, but we shall
all rise." <span id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385)   Then he shows who
are to be changed:  "In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the
last trumpet:  for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall rise
incorruptible, and we shall be changed."  And if it should be said that
it is not as regards our mortal and corruptible body, but as regards our
soul, that we are to be changed, it should be observed that the apostle
is not speaking of the soul, but of the body, as is evident from the
question he starts with:  "But some one will say, How are the dead
raised, and with what body do they come?"  So also, in the conclusion of
his argument, he leaves no doubt of what he is speaking:  "This
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality." <span id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386)   Faustus denies
this; and the God whom Paul declares to be "immortal, incorruptible, to
whom alone is glory and honor," <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387)
he makes corruptible.  For in this monstrous and horrible fiction of
theirs, the substance and nature of God was in danger of being wholly
corrupted by the race of darkness, and to save the rest part actually
was corrupted.  And to crown all this, he tries to deceive the ignorant
who are not learned in the sacred Scriptures, by making this
profession:  I assuredly believe the Apostle Paul; when he ought to have
said, I assuredly do not believe.

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p18"></span>4.  But Faustus has a proof to show
that Paul changed his mind, and, in writing to the Corinthians,
corrected what he had written to the Romans; or else that he never wrote
the passage which appears as his, about Jesus Christ being born of the
seed of David according to the flesh.  And what is this proof?  If the
passage, he says, in the Epistle to the Romans is true, "the Son of God,
who was made of the seed of David according to the flesh," what he says
to the Corinthians cannot be true, "Henceforth know we no man after the
flesh; yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now
henceforth know we <span id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-Page_180"></span>Him no more."  We must therefore show
that both these passages are true, and not opposed to one another.  The
agreement of the manuscripts proves both to be genuine.  In some Latin
versions the word "born" <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) is used
instead of "made," <span id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) which is not
so literal a rendering, but gives the same meaning.  For both these
translations, as well as the original, teach that Christ was of the seed
of David after the flesh.  We must not for a moment suppose that Paul
corrected himself on account of a change of opinion.  Faustus himself
felt the impropriety and impiety of such an explanation, and preferred
to say that the passage was spurious, instead of that Paul was mistaken.

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p21"></span>5.  As regards our writings, which are
not a rule of faith or practice, but only a help to edification, we may
suppose that they contain some things falling short of the truth in
obscure and recondite matters, and that these mistakes may or may not be
corrected in subsequent treatises.  For we are of those of whom the
apostle says:  "And if ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even
this unto you." <span id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390)   Such writings
are read with the right of judgment, and without any obligation to
believe.  In order to leave room for such profitable discussions of
difficult questions, there is a distinct boundary line separating all
productions subsequent to apostolic times from the authoritative
canonical books of the Old and New Testaments.  The authority of these
books has come down to us from the apostles through the successions of
bishops and the extension of the Church, and, from a position of lofty
supremacy, claims the submission of every faithful and pious mind.  If
we are perplexed by an apparent contradiction in Scripture, it is not
allowable to say, The author of this book is mistaken; but either the
manuscript is faulty, or the translation is wrong, or you have not
understood.  In the innumerable books that have been written latterly we
may sometimes find the same truth as in Scripture, but there is not the
same authority.  Scripture has a sacredness peculiar to itself.  In
other books the reader may form his own opinion, and perhaps, from not
understanding the writer, may differ from him, and may pronounce in
favor of what pleases him, or against what he dislikes.  In such cases,
a man is at liberty to withhold his belief, unless there is some clear
demonstration or some canonical authority to show that the doctrine or
statement either must or may be true.  But in consequence of the
distinctive peculiarity of the sacred writings, we are bound to receive
as true whatever the canon shows to have been said by even one prophet,
or apostle, or evangelist.  Otherwise, not a single page will be left
for the guidance of human fallibility, if contempt for the wholesome
authority of the canonical books either puts an end to that authority
altogether, or involves it in hopeless confusion. <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391)

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p24"></span>6.  With regard, then, to this apparent
contradiction between the passage which speaks of the Son of God being
of the seed of David, to the words, "Though we have known Christ after
the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him no more," even though both
quotations were not from the writings of one apostle,—though one were
from Paul, and the other from Peter, or Isaiah, or any other apostle or
prophet,—such is the equality of canonical authority, that it would not
be allowable to doubt of either.  For the utterances of Scripture,
harmonious as if from the mouth of one man, commend themselves to the
belief of the most accurate and clear-sighted piety, and demand for
their discovery and confirmation the calmest intelligence and the most
ingenious research.  In the case before us both quotations are from the
canonical, that is, the genuine epistles of Paul.  We cannot say that
the manuscript is faulty, for the best Latin translations substantially
agree; or that the translations are wrong, for the best texts have the
same reading.  So that, if any one is perplexed by the apparent
contradiction, the only conclusion is that he does not understand. 
Accordingly it remains for me to explain how both passages, instead of
being contradictory, may be harmonized by one rule of sound faith.  The
pious inquirer will find all perplexity removed by a careful
examination.

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p25"></span>7.  That the Son of God was made man of
the seed of David, is not only said in other places by Paul, but is
taught elsewhere in sacred Scripture.  As regards the words, "Though we
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him no
more," the context shows what is the apostle’s meaning.  Here, or
elsewhere, he views with an assured hope, as if it were already present
and in actual possession, our future life, which is now fulfilled in our
risen Head and Mediator, the man Christ Jesus.  This life will certainly
not be after the flesh, even as Christ’s life is now not after the
flesh.  For by flesh the apostle here means not the substance of our
bodies, in which sense the Lord used the <span id="page_181">p.
181</span> <span id="iv.ix.xiii-Page_181"></span>word when, after His
resurrection, He said, "Handle me, and see, for a spirit hath not flesh
and bones, as ye see me have," <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392)
but the corruption and mortality of flesh, which will then not be in us,
as now it is not in Christ.  The apostle uses the word flesh in the
sense of corruption in the passage about the resurrection quoted
before:  "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither
shall corruption inherit incorruption."  So, after the event described
in the next verse, "Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall all rise, but
we shall not all be changed.  In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
at the last trump (for the trumpet shall sound); and the dead shall be
raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.  For this corruptible
must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality," <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) —then flesh, in
the sense of the substance of the body, will, after this change, no
longer have flesh, in the sense of the corruption of mortality; and yet,
as regards its own nature, it will be the same flesh, the same which
rises and which is changed.  What the Lord said after His resurrection
is true, "Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as
ye see me have;" and what the apostle says is true, "Flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom of God."  The first is said of the bodily
substance, which exists as the subject of the change:  the second is
said of the corruption of the flesh, which will cease to exist, for,
after its change, flesh will not be corrupted.  So, "we have known
Christ after the flesh," that is, after the mortality of flesh, before
His resurrection; "now henceforth we know Him no more," because, as the
same apostle says, "Christ being risen from the dead, dieth no more, and
death hath no more dominion over Him."  <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394)   The words, "we have known Christ
after the flesh," strictly speaking, imply that Christ was after the
flesh, for what never was cannot be known.  And it is not "we have
supposed," but "we have known."  But not to insist on a word, in case
some one should say that known is used in the sense of supposed, it is
astonishing, if one could be surprised at want of sight in a blind man,
that these blind people do not perceive that if what the apostle says
about not knowing Christ after the flesh proves that Christ had not
flesh, then what he says in the same place of not knowing any one
henceforth after the flesh proves that all those here referred to had
not flesh.  For when he speaks of not knowing any one, he cannot intend
to speak only of Christ; but in his realization of the future life with
those who are to be changed at the resurrection, he says, "Henceforth we
know no man after the flesh;" that is, we have such an assured hope of
our future incorruption and immortality, that the thought of it makes us
rejoice even now.  So he says elsewhere:  "If ye then be risen with
Christ, seek those things that are above, where Christ sitteth at the
right hand of God.  Set your affections upon things above, and not on
things on the earth." <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395)   It is
true we have not yet risen as Christ has, but we are said to have risen
with Him on account of the hope which we have in Him.  So again he
says:  "According to His mercy He saved us, by the washing of
regeneration." <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396)   Evidently what
we obtain in the washing of regeneration is not the salvation itself,
but the hope of it.  And yet, because this hope is certain, we are said
to be saved, as if the salvation were already bestowed.  Elsewhere it is
said explicitly:  "We groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption,
even the redemption of our body.  For we are saved by hope.  But hope
which is seen is not hope; for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope
for?  But if we hope for what we see not, then do we with patience wait
for it." <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397)   The apostle says not,
"we are to be saved," but, "We are now saved," that is, in hope, though
not yet in reality.  And in the same way it is in hope, though not yet
in reality, that we now know no man after the flesh.  This hope is in
Christ, in whom what we hope for as promised to us has already been
fulfilled.  He is risen, and death has no more dominion over Him. 
Though we have known Him after the flesh, before His death, when there
was in His body that mortality which the apostle properly calls flesh,
now henceforth know we Him no more; for that mortal of His has now put
on immortality, and His flesh, in the sense of mortality, no longer
exists.

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p32"></span>8.  The context of the passage
containing this clause of which our adversaries make such a bad use,
brings out its real meaning.  "The love of Christ," we read, "constrains
us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then all died; and
He died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but to Him who died for them, and rose again.  Therefore
henceforth know we no man after the flesh; and though we have known
Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him no more."  The
words, "that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves,
but unto <span id="page_182">p. 182</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-Page_182"></span>Him who died for them, and rose again,"
show plainly that the resurrection of Christ is the ground of the
apostle’s statement.  To live not to themselves, but to Him, must mean
to live not after the flesh, in the hope of earthly and perishable
goods, but after the spirit, in the hope of resurrection,—a resurrection
already accomplished in Christ.  Of those, then, for whom Christ died
and rose again, and who live henceforth not to themselves, but to Him,
the Apostle says that he knows no one after the flesh, on account of the
hope of future immortality to which they were looking forward,—a hope
which in Christ was already a reality.  So, though he has known Christ
after the flesh, before His death, now he knows Him no more; for he
knows that He has risen, and that death has no more dominion over Him. 
And because in Christ we all are even now in hope, though not in
reality, what Christ is, he adds:  "Therefore if any man be in Christ,
he is a new creature:  old things are passed away; behold, all things
are become new.  And all things are of God, who has reconciled us to
Himself by Christ." <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398)   What the
new creature—that is, the people renewed by faith—hopes for regarding
itself, it has already in Christ; and the hope will also hereafter be
actually realized.  And, as regards this hope, old things have passed
away, because we are no longer in the times of the Old Testament,
expecting a temporal and carnal kingdom of God; and all things are
become new, making the promise of the kingdom of heaven, where there
shall be no death or corruption, the ground of our confidence.  But in
the resurrection of the dead it will not be as a matter of hope, but in
reality, that old things shall pass away, when the last enemy, death,
shall be destroyed; and all things shall become new when this
corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal has put on
immortality.  This has already taken place in Christ, whom Paul
accordingly, in reality, knew no longer after the flesh.  But not yet in
reality, but only in hope, did he know no one after the flesh of those
for whom Christ died and rose again.  For, as he says to the Ephesians,
we are already saved by grace.  The whole passage is to the purpose: 
"But God, who is rich in mercy, for His great love wherewith He loved
us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with
Christ, by whose grace we have been saved."  The words, "hath quickened
us together with Christ," correspond to what he said to the Corinthians,
"that they which live should no longer live to themselves, but to Him
that died for them and rose again."  And in the words, "by whose grace
we have been saved," he speaks of the thing hoped for as already
accomplished.  So, in the passage quoted above, he says explicitly, "We
have been saved by hope."  And here he proceeds to specify future events
as if already accomplished.  "And has raised us up together," he says,
"and has made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus." 
Christ is certainly already seated in heavenly places, but we not yet. 
But as in an assured hope we already possess the future, he says that we
sit in heavenly places, not in ourselves, but in Him.  And to show that
it is still future, in case it should be thought that what is spoken of
as accomplished in hope has been accomplished in reality, he adds, "that
He might show in the ages to come the exceeding riches of His grace in
His kindness towards us in Christ Jesus." <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399)   So also we must understand the
following passage:  "For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins,
which were by the law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto
death." <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400)   He says, "when we were
in the flesh," as if they were no longer in the flesh.  He means to say,
when we were in the hope of fleshly things, referring to the time when
the law, which can be fulfilled only by spiritual love, was in force, in
order that by transgression the offence might abound, that after the
revelation of the New Testament, grace and the gift by grace might much
more abound.  And to the same effect he says elsewhere, "They which are
in the flesh cannot please God;" and then, to show that he does not mean
those not yet dead, he adds, "But ye are not in the flesh, but in the
Spirit." <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401)   The meaning is, those
who are in the hope of fleshly good cannot please God; but you are not
in the hope of fleshly things, but in the hope of spiritual things, that
is, of the kingdom of heaven, where the body itself, which now is
natural, will, by the change in the resurrection, be, according to the
capacity of its nature, a spiritual body.  For "it is sown a natural
body, it will be raised a spiritual body."  If, then, the apostle knew
no one after the flesh of those who were said to be not in the flesh,
because they were not in the hope of fleshly things, although they still
were burdened with corruptible and mortal flesh; how much more
significantly could he say of Christ that he no longer knew Him after
the flesh, seeing that in the body of Christ what they hoped for had
already been accomplished!  Surely it is better and more <span
id="page_183">p. 183</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-Page_183"></span>reverential to examine the passages of
sacred Scripture so as to discover their agreement with one another,
than to accept some as true, and condemn others as false, whenever any
difficulty occurs beyond the power of our weak intellect to solve.  As
to the apostle in his childhood understanding as a child, this is said
merely as an illustration. <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402)   And
when he was a child he was not a spiritual man, as he was when he
produced for the edification of the churches those writings which are
not, as other books, merely a profitable study, but which
authoritatively claim our belief as part of the ecclesiastical canon.

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p38"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_376"></span>[177:377](1040159.htm#fr_376) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p4"></span> [Rom. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[178:378](1040159.htm#fr_377) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p5"></span> [2 Cor. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[178:379](1040159.htm#fr_378) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[178:380](1040159.htm#fr_379) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p8"></span> \[The extremely subjective method of
dealing with Scripture which Augustin ascribes to Faustus, was
characteristic of Manichæism in general.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_380"></span>[179:381](1040159.htm#fr_380) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p10"></span> [Gal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[179:382](1040159.htm#fr_381) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p11"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[179:383](1040159.htm#fr_382) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p12"></span> [1 Cor.
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#004),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[179:384](1040159.htm#fr_383) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p13"></span> [Gen. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#022)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[179:385](1040159.htm#fr_384) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p14"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[179:386](1040159.htm#fr_385) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p15"></span> Vulg.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[179:387](1040159.htm#fr_386) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p16"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
35-53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#035)<span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[179:388](1040159.htm#fr_387) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p17"></span> [1 Tim. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[180:389](1040159.htm#fr_388) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p19"></span> *Natus*.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[180:390](1040159.htm#fr_389) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p20"></span> *Factus*.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[180:391](1040159.htm#fr_390) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p22"></span> [Phil. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[180:392](1040159.htm#fr_391) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p23"></span> \[This is an excellent statement of
the doctrine of Scriptural authority, that has been held to by
Protestants with far more consistency than by Catholics.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_392"></span>[181:393](1040159.htm#fr_392) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p26"></span> [Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[181:394](1040159.htm#fr_393) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p27"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
50-53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#050)<span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[181:395](1040159.htm#fr_394) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p28"></span> [Rom. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[181:396](1040159.htm#fr_395) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p29"></span> [Col.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[181:397](1040159.htm#fr_396) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p30"></span> [Tit. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[181:398](1040159.htm#fr_397) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p31"></span> [Rom. viii.
23-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[182:399](1040159.htm#fr_398) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p33"></span> [2 Cor. v.
14-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[182:400](1040159.htm#fr_399) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p34"></span> [Eph. ii.
4-7](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[182:401](1040159.htm#fr_400) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p35"></span> [Rom. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[182:402](1040159.htm#fr_401) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p36"></span> [Rom.
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[183:403](1040159.htm#fr_402) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p37"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011)<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p37.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XII](1040160)
