[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040152)  [Next](1040154) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="iv.ix.vii-p1.1"></span>Book V.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p2"></span>Faustus claims that the Manichæans and
not the Catholics are consistent believers in the Gospel, and seeks to
establish this claim by comparing Manichæan and Catholic obedience to
the precepts of the Gospel.  Augustin exposes the hypocrisy of the
Manichæans and praises the asceticism of Catholics.

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.vii-p3.1"></span>Faustus</span> said:  Do I believe the
gospel?  You ask me if I believe it, though my obedience to its commands
shows that I do.  I should rather ask you if you believe it, since you
give no proof of your belief.  I have left my father, mother, wife, and
children, and all else that the gospel requires; <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) and do you ask if I believe the
gospel?  Perhaps you do not know what is called the gospel.  The gospel
is nothing else than the preaching and the precept of Christ.  I have
parted with all gold and silver, and have left off carrying money in my
purse; content with daily food; without anxiety for tomorrow; and
without solicitude about how I shall be fed, or where-withal I shall be
clothed:  and do you ask if I believe the gospel?  You see in me the
blessings of the gospel;  <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) and do
you ask if I believe the gospel?  You see me poor, meek, a peacemaker,
pure in heart, mourning, hungering, thirsting, bearing persecutions and
enmity for righteousness’ sake; and do you doubt my belief in the
gospel?  One can understand now how John the Baptist, after seeing
Jesus, and also hearing of His works, yet asked whether He was Christ. 
Jesus properly and justly did not deign to reply that He was; but
reminded him of the works of which he had already heard:  "The blind
see, the deaf hear, the dead are raised." <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) <span id="page_163">p. 163</span>
<span id="iv.ix.vii-Page_163"></span>In the same way, I might very well
reply to your question whether I believe the gospel, by saying, I have
left all, father, mother, wife, children, gold, silver, eating,
drinking, luxuries, pleasures; take this as a sufficient answer to your
questions, and believe that you will be blessed if you are not offended
in me. <span id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322)

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p8"></span>2.  But, according to you, to believe the
gospel is not only to obey its commands, but also to believe in all that
is written in it; and, first of all, that God was born.  But neither is
believing the gospel only to believe that Jesus was born, but also to do
what He commands.  So, if you say that I do not believe the gospel
because I disbelieve the incarnation, much more do you not believe
because you disregard the commandments.  At any rate, we are on a par
till these questions are settled.  If your disregard of the precepts
does not prevent you from professing faith in the gospel, why should my
rejection of the genealogy prevent me?  And if, as you say, to believe
the gospel includes both faith in the genealogies and obedience to the
precepts, why do you condemn me, since we both are imperfect?  What one
wants the other has.  But if, as there can be no doubt, belief in the
gospel consists solely in obedience to the commands of God, your sin is
twofold.  As the proverb says, the deserter accuses the soldier.  But
suppose, since you will have it so, that there are these two parts of
perfect faith, one consisting in word, or the confession that Christ was
born, the other in deed or the observance of the precepts; it is plain
that my part is hard and painful, yours light and easy.  It is natural
that the multitude should flock to you and away from me, for they know
not that the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.  Why, then, do
you blame me for taking the harder part, and leaving to you, as to a
weak brother, the easy part?  You have the idea that your part of faith,
or confessing that Christ was born, has more power to save the soul than
the other parts.

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p9"></span>3.  Let us then ask Christ Himself, and
learn from His own mouth, what is the chief means of our salvation.  Who
shall enter, O Christ, into Thy kingdom?  He that doeth the will of my
Father in heaven, <span id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) is His reply;
not, "He that confesses that I was born."  And again, He says to His
disciples, "Go, teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe
all things which I have commanded you." <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324)   It is not, "teaching them that I was
born," but, "to observe my commandments."  Again, "Ye are my friends if
ye do what I command you;" <span id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) not,
"if you believe that I was born."  Again, "If ye keep my commandments,
ye shall abide in my love," <span id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) and
in many other places.  Also in the sermon on the mount, when He taught,
"Blessed are the poor, blessed are the meek, blessed are the
peacemakers, blessed are the pure in heart, blessed are they that mourn,
blessed are they that hunger, blessed are they that are persecuted for
righteousness’ sake," <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) He nowhere
says, "Blessed are they that confess that I was born."  And in the
separation of the sheep from the goats in the judgment, He says that He
will say to them on the right hand, "I was hungry, and ye gave me meat;
I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink," <span
id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) and so on; therefore "inherit the
kingdom."  Not, "Because ye believe that I was born, inherit the
kingdom."  Again, to the rich man seeking for eternal life, He says,
"Go, sell all that thou hast, and follow me;" <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) not, "Believe that I was born, that
you may have eternal life."  You see, the kingdom, life, happiness, are
everywhere promised to the part I have chosen of what you call the two
parts of faith, and nowhere to your part.  Show, if you can, a place
where it is written that whoso confesses that Christ was born of a woman
is blessed, or shall inherit the kingdom, or have eternal life.  Even
supposing, then, that there are two parts of faith, your part has no
blessing.  But what if we prove that your part is not a part of faith at
all?  It will follow that you are foolish, which indeed will be proved
beyond a doubt.  At present, it is enough to have shown that our part is
crowned with the beatitudes.  Besides, we have also a beatitude for a
confession in words:  for we confess that Jesus Christ is the Son of the
living God; and Jesus declares with His own lips that this confession
has a benediction, when He says to Peter, "Blessed art thou, Simon
Barjona; for flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee, but my
Father which is in heaven." <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330)   So
that we have not one, but both these parts of faith, and in both alike
are we pronounced blessed by Christ; for in one we reduce faith to
practice, while in the other our confession is unmixed with blasphemy.

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p18"></span>4.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.vii-p18.1"></span>Augustin</span> replied:  I have already
said that the Lord Jesus Christ repeatedly calls Himself the Son of man,
and that the Manichæans have contrived a silly story about some fabulous
First Man, who figures in their impious heresy, not earthly, but
combined <span id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span
id="iv.ix.vii-Page_164"></span>with spurious elements, in opposition to
the apostle, who says, "The first man is of the earth, earthy;" <span
id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) and that the apostle carefully warns
us, "If any one preaches to you differently from what we have preached,
let him be accursed." <span id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332)   So that
we must believe Christ to be the Son of man according to apostolic
truth, not according to Manichæan error.  And since the evangelists
assert that Christ was born of a woman, of the seed of David, and Paul
writing to Timothy says, "Remember that Jesus Christ, of the seed of
David, was raised from the dead, according to my gospel," <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) it is clear what sense we must believe
Christ to be the Son of man; for being the Son of God by whom we were
made, He also by His incarnation became the Son of man, that He might
die for our sins, and rise again for our justification. <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334)   Accordingly He calls Himself both
Son of God and Son of man.  To take only one instance out of many, in
the Gospel of John it is written, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, The
hour cometh, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God; and they that hear shall live.  For as the Father hath life in
Himself, so He hath given to the Son to have life in Himself; and hath
given Him power to execute judgment also, because He is the Son of man."
 <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335)   He says, "They shall hear the
voice of the Son of God;" and He says, "because He is the Son of man." 
As the Son of man, He has received power to execute judgment, because He
will come to judgment in human form, that He may be seen by the good and
the wicked.  In this form He ascended into heaven, and that voice was
heard by His disciples, "He shall so come as ye have seen Him go into
heaven." <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336)   As the Son of God, as
God equal to and one with the Father, He will not be seen by the wicked;
for "blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God."  Since,
then, He promises eternal life to those that believe in Him, and since
to believe in Him is to believe in the true Christ, such as He declares
Himself and His apostles declare Him to be, true Son of God and true Son
of man; you, Manichæans, who believe on a false and spurious son of a
false and spurious man, and teach that God Himself, from fear of the
assault of the hostile race, gave up His own members to be tortured, and
after all not to be wholly liberated, are plainly far from that eternal
life which Christ promises to those who believe in Him.  It is true, He
said to Peter when he confessed Him to be the Son of God, "Blessed art
thou, Simon. Barjona."  But does He promise nothing to those who believe
Him to be the Son of man, when the Son of God and the Son of man are the
same?  Besides, eternal life is expressly promised to those who believe
in the Son of man.  "As Moses," He says, "lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever
believeth in Him should not perish, but have eternal life." <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337)   What more do you wish?  Believe then
in the Son of man, that you may have eternal life; for He is also the
Son of God, who can give eternal life:  for He is "the true God and
eternal life," as the same John says in his epistle.  John also adds,
that he is antichrist who denies that Christ has come in the
flesh. <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338)

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p27"></span>5.  There is no need, then that you
should extol so much the perfection of Christ’s commands, because you
obey the precepts of the gospel.  For the precepts, supposing you really
to fulfill them, would not profit you without true faith.  Do you not
know that the apostle says, "If I distribute all my goods to the poor,
and give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me
nothing?" <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339)   Why do you boast of
having Christian poverty, when you are destitute of Christian charity? 
Robbers have a kind of charity to one another, arising from a mutual
consciousness of guilt and crime; but this is not the charity commended
by the apostle.  In another passage he distinguishes true charity from
all base and vicious affections, by saying, "Now the end of the
commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and
faith unfeigned."  <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340)   How then
can you have true charity from a fictitious faith? <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341)   You persist in a faith corrupted by
falsehood:  for your First Man, according to you, used deceit in the
conflict by changing his form, while his enemies remained in their own
nature; and, besides, you maintain that Christ, who says, "I am the
truth," feigned His incarnation, His death on the cross, the wounds of
His passion, the marks shown after His resurrection.  If you speak the
truth, and your Christ speaks falsehood, you must be better than he. 
But if you really follow your own Christ, your truthfulness may be
doubted, and your obedience to the precepts you speak of may be only a
pretence.  Is it true, as Faustus says, that you have no money in your
purses?  He means, probably, that your money is in boxes and bags; nor
would we blame you for this, if you did not profess one thing and
practise <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> <span
id="iv.ix.vii-Page_165"></span>another.  Constantius, who is still
alive, and is now our brother in Catholic Christianity, once gathered
many of your sect into his house at Rome, to keep these precepts of
Manichæus, which you think so much of, though they are very silly and
childish.  The precepts proved too much for your weakness, and the
gathering was entirely broken up.  Those who persevered separated from
your communion, and are called Mattarians, because they sleep on mats,—a
very different bed from the feathers of Faustus and his goatskin
coverlets, and all the grandeur that made him despise not only the
Mattarians, but also the house of his poor father in Mileum.  Away,
then, with this accursed hypocrisy from your writing, if not from your
conduct; or else your language will conflict with your life by your
deceitful words, as your First Man with the race of darkness by his
deceitful elements.

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p31"></span>6.  I am, however, addressing not merely
men who fail to do what they are commanded, but the members of a deluded
sect.  For the precepts of Manichæus are such that, if you do not keep
them, you are deceivers; if you do keep them, you are deceived.  Christ
never taught you that you should not pluck a vegetable for fear of
committing homicide; for when His disciples were hungry when passing
through a field of corn, He did not forbid them to pluck the ears on the
Sabbath-day; which was a rebuke to the Jews of the time since the action
was on Sabbath; and a rebuke in the action itself to the future
Manichæans.  The precept of Manichæus, however, only requires you to do
nothing while others commit homicide for you; though the real homicide
is that of ruining miserable souls by such doctrines of devils.

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p32"></span>7.  The language of Faustus has the
typhus of heresy in it, and is the language of overweening arrogance. 
"You see in me" he says, "the beatitudes of the gospel; and do you ask
if I believe the gospel?  You see me poor, meek, a peacemaker, pure in
heart, mourning, hungering, thirsting, bearing persecution and enmity
for righteousness’ sake; and do you doubt my belief in the gospel?"  If
to justify oneself were to be just, Faustus would have flown to heaven
while uttering these words.  I say nothing of the luxurious habits of
Faustus, known to all the followers of the Manichæans, and especially to
those at Rome.  I shall suppose a Manichæan such as Constantius sought
for, when he enforced the observance of these precepts with the sincere
desire to see them observed.  How can I see him to be poor in spirit,
when he is so proud as to believe that his own soul is God, and is not
ashamed to speak of God as in bondage?  How can I see him meek, when he
affronts all the authority of the evangelists rather than believe?  How
a peacemaker, when he holds that the divine nature itself by which God
is whatever is, and is the only true existence, could not remain in
lasting peace?  How pure in heart, when his heart is filled with so many
impious notions?  How mourning, unless it is for his God captive and
bound till he be freed and escape, with the loss, however, of a part
which is to be united by the Father to the mass of darkness, and is not
to be mourned for?  How hungering and thirsting for righteousness, which
Faustus omits in his writings lest, no doubt, he should be thought
destitute of righteousness?  But how can they hunger and thirst after
righteousness, whose perfect righteousness will consist in exulting over
their brethren condemned to darkness, not for any fault of their own,
but for being irremediably contaminated by the pollution against which
they were sent by the Father to contend?

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p33"></span>8.  How do you suffer persecution and
enmity for righteousness’ sake, when, according to you, it is righteous
to preach and teach these impieties?  The wonder is, that the gentleness
of Christian times allows such perverse iniquity to pass wholly or
almost unpunished.  And yet, as if we were blind or silly, you tell us
that your suffering reproach and persecution is a great proof of your
righteousness.  If people are just according to the amount of their
suffering, atrocious criminals of all kinds suffer much more than you. 
But, at any rate, if we are to grant that suffering endured on account
of any sort of profession of Christianity proves the sufferer to be in
possession of true faith and righteousness, you must admit that any case
of greater suffering that we can show proves the possession of truer
faith and greater righteousness.  Of such cases you know many among our
martyrs, and chiefly Cyprian himself, whose writings also bear witness
to his belief that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary.  For this faith,
which you abhor, he suffered and died along with many Christian
believers of that day, who suffered as much, or more.  Faustus, when
shown to be a Manichæan by evidence, or by his own confession, on the
intercession of the Christians themselves, who brought him before the
proconsul, was, along with some others, only banished to an island,
which can hardly be called a punishment at all, for it is what God’s
servants do of their own accord every day when they wish to retire from
the tumult of the world.  Besides, earthly sovereigns often by a public
decree <span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span
id="iv.ix.vii-Page_166"></span>give release from this banishment as an
act of mercy.  And in this way all were afterwards released at once. 
Confess, then, that they were in possession of a truer faith and a more
righteous life, who were accounted worthy to suffer for it much more
than you ever suffered.  Or else, cease boasting of the abhorrence which
many feel for you, and learn to distinguish between suffering for
blasphemy and suffering for righteousness.  What it is you suffer for,
your own books will show in a way that deserves your most particular
attention.

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p34"></span>9.  Those evangelical precepts of
peculiar sublimity which you make people who know no better believe that
you obey, are really obeyed by multitudes in our communion.  Are there
not among us many of both sexes who have entirely refrained from sexual
intercourse, and many formerly married who practise continence?  Are
there not many others who give largely of their property, or give it up
altogether, and many who keep the body in subjection by fasts, either
frequent or daily, or protracted beyond belief?  Then there are
fraternities whose members have no property of their own, but all things
common, including only things necessary for food and clothing, living
with one soul and one heart towards God, inflamed with a common feeling
of charity.  In all such professions many turn out to be deceivers and
reprobates, while many who are so are never discovered; many, too, who
at first walk well, fall away rapidly from willfulness.  Many are found
in times of trial to have adopted this kind of life with another
intention than they professed; and again, many in humility and
steadfastness persevere in their course to the end, and are saved. 
There are apparent diversities in these societies; but one charity
unites all who, from some necessity, in obedience to the apostle’s
injunction, have their wives as if they had them not, and buy as if they
bought not, and use this world as if they used it not.  With these are
joined, in the abundant riches of God’s mercy, the inferior class of
those to whom it is said, "Defraud not one another, except it be with
consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to prayer; and come
together again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency.  But I
speak this by permission, and not of commandment." <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342)   To such the same apostle also says,
"Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, that ye go to law one
with another;" while, in consideration of their infirmity, he adds, "If
ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set them to judge
who are least esteemed in the Church." <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343)   For in the kingdom of heaven there
are not only those who, that they may be perfect, sell or leave all they
have and follow the Lord; but others in the partnership of charity are
joined like a mercenary force to the Christian army, to whom it will be
said at last, "I was hungry, and ye gave me meat," and so on. 
Otherwise, there would be no salvation for those to whom the apostle
gives so many anxious and particular directions about their families,
telling the wives to be obedient to their husbands, and husbands to love
their wives; children to obey their parents, and parents to bring up
their children in the instruction and admonition of the Lord; servants
to obey with fear their masters according to the flesh, and masters to
render to their servants what is just and equal.  The apostle is far
from condemning such people as regardless of gospel precepts, or
unworthy of eternal life.  For where the Lord exhorts the strong to
attain perfection, saying, "If any man take not up his cross and follow
me, he cannot be my disciple," He immediately adds, for the consolation
of the weak, "Whoso receiveth a just man in the name of a just man shall
receive a just man’s reward; and whoso receiveth a prophet in the name
of a prophet, shall receive a prophet’s reward."  So that not only he
who gives Timothy a little wine for his stomach’s sake, and his frequent
infirmities, but he who gives to a strong man a cup of cold water only
in the name of a disciple, shall not lose his reward. <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344)

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p38"></span>10.  If it is true that a man cannot
receive the gospel without giving up everything, why do you delude your
followers, by allowing them to keep in your service their wives, and
children, and households, and houses, and fields?  Indeed, you may well
allow them to disregard the precepts of the gospel:  for all you promise
them is not a resurrection, but a change to another mortal existence, in
which they shall live the silly, childish, impious life of those you
call the Elect, the life you live yourself, and are so much praised for;
or if they possess greater merit, they shall enter into melons or
cucumbers, or some eatables which you will masticate, that they may be
quickly purified by your digestion.  Least of all should you who teach
such doctrines profess any regard for the gospel.  For if the faith of
the gospel had any connection with such nonsense, the Lord should have
said, not, "I was hungry, and ye gave me meat;" but, "Ye were hungry,
and ye ate me," or, "I was hungry, and I ate you." <span
id="page_167">p. 167</span> <span id="iv.ix.vii-Page_167"></span>For, by
your absurdities, a man will not be received into the kingdom of God for
the service of giving food to the saints, but, because he has eaten them
and belched them out, or has himself been eaten and belched into
heaven.  Instead of saying, "Lord, when saw we Thee hungry, and fed
Thee?" the righteous must say, "When saw we Thee hungry, and were eaten
by Thee?"  And He must answer, not, "When ye gave food to one of the
least of these my brethren, you gave to me;" but, "When you were eaten
by one of the least of these my brethren, you were eaten by me."

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p39"></span>11.  Believing and teaching such
monstrosities, and living accordingly, you yet have the boldness to say
that you obey the precepts of the gospel, and to decry the Catholic
Church, which includes many weak as well as strong, both of whom the
Lord blesses, because both according to their measure obey the precepts
of the gospel and hope in its promises.  The blindness of hostility
makes you see only the tares in our harvest:  for you might easily see
wheat too, if you were willing that there should be any.  But among you,
those who are pretended Manichæans are wicked, and those who are really
Manichæans are silly.  For where the faith itself is false, he who
hypocritically professes it acts deceitfully, while he who truly
believes is deceived.  Such a faith cannot produce a good life, for
every man’s life is good or bad according as his heart is engaged.  If
your affections were set upon spiritual and intellectual good, instead
of material forms, you would not pay homage to the material sun as a
divine substance, and as the light of wisdom, which every one knows you
do, though I now only mention it in passing.

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p40"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_319"></span>[162:320](1040153.htm#fr_319) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p4"></span> [Matt. xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[162:321](1040153.htm#fr_320) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p5"></span> [Matt. v.
3-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[162:322](1040153.htm#fr_321) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p6"></span> [Matt. xi.
2-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[163:323](1040153.htm#fr_322) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p7"></span> \[This is a good description of ideal
Manichæan religious life.  Whether Faustus lived up to the claims here
set forth is another question.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_323"></span>[163:324](1040153.htm#fr_323) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p10"></span> [Matt. vii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[163:325](1040153.htm#fr_324) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p11"></span> [Matt.
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[163:326](1040153.htm#fr_325) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p12"></span> [John xv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#014)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[163:327](1040153.htm#fr_326) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p13"></span> [John xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[163:328](1040153.htm#fr_327) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p14"></span> [Matt v.
3-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ix.vii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[163:329](1040153.htm#fr_328) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p15"></span> [Matt. xxv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[163:330](1040153.htm#fr_329) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p16"></span> [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[163:331](1040153.htm#fr_330) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p17"></span> [Matt. xvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[164:332](1040153.htm#fr_331) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p19"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[164:333](1040153.htm#fr_332) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p20"></span> [Gal.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[164:334](1040153.htm#fr_333) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p21"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[164:335](1040153.htm#fr_334) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p22"></span> [Rom. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[164:336](1040153.htm#fr_335) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p23"></span> [John v.
25-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ix.vii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[164:337](1040153.htm#fr_336) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p24"></span> [Acts. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#014)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[164:338](1040153.htm#fr_337) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p25"></span> [John
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#015)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[164:339](1040153.htm#fr_338) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p26"></span> [1 John
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020), [1 John
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[164:340](1040153.htm#fr_339) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p28"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[164:341](1040153.htm#fr_340) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p29"></span> [1 Tim. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[164:342](1040153.htm#fr_341) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p30"></span> \[Augustin confounds saving faith with
orthodox doctrine, as has been too commonly done since.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_342"></span>[166:343](1040153.htm#fr_342) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p35"></span> [1 Cor.
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[166:344](1040153.htm#fr_343) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p36"></span> [1 Cor.
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#007),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[166:345](1040153.htm#fr_344) <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p37"></span> [Matt. x.
38-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038)<span
id="iv.ix.vii-p37.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI](1040154)
