[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040244)  [Next](1040246) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—</span>4.  There are two
propositions, moreover, which we affirm,—that baptism exists in the
Catholic Church, and that in it alone can it be rightly received,—both
of which the Donatists deny.  Likewise there are two other propositions
which we affirm,—that baptism exists among the Donatists, but that with
them it is not rightly received, of which two they strenuously confirm
the former, that baptism exists with them; but they are unwilling to
allow the latter, that in their Church it cannot be rightly received. 
Of these four propositions, three are peculiar to us; in one we both
agree.  For that baptism exists in the Catholic Church, that it is
rightly received there, and that it is not rightly received among the
Donatists, are assertions made only by ourselves; but that baptism
exists also among the Donatists, is asserted by them and allowed by us. 
If any one, therefore, is desirous of being baptized, and is already
convinced that he ought to choose our Church as a medium for Christian
salvation, and that the baptism of Christ is only profitable in it, even
when it has been received elsewhere, but yet wishes to be baptized in
the schism of Donatus, because not they only, nor we only, but both
parties alike say that baptism exists with them, let him pause and look
to the other three points.  For if he has made up his mind to follow us
in the points which they deny, though he prefers what both of us
acknowledge, to what only we assert, it is enough for our purpose that
he prefers what they do not affirm and we alone assert, to what they
alone assert.  That baptism exists in the Catholic Church, we assert and
they deny.  That it is rightly received in the Catholic Church, we
assert and they deny.  That it is not rightly received in the schism of
Donatus, we assert and they deny.  As, therefore, he is the more ready
to believe what we alone assert should be believed, so let him be the
more ready to do what we alone declare should be done.  But let him
believe more firmly, if he be so disposed, what both parties assert
should be believed, than what we alone maintain.  For he is inclined to
believe more firmly that the baptism of Christ exists in the schism of
Donatus, because that is acknowledged by both of us, than that it exists
in the Catholic Church, an assertion made alone by the Catholics.  But
again, he is more ready to believe that the baptism of Christ exists
also with us, as we alone assert, than that it does not exist with us,
as they alone assert.  For he has already determined and is fully
convinced, that where we differ, our authority is to be preferred to
theirs.  So that he is more ready to believe what we alone assert, that
baptism is rightly received with us, than that it is not rightly so
received, since that rests only on their assertion.  And, by the same
rule, he is more ready to believe what we alone assert, that it is not
rightly received with them, than as they alone assert, that it is
rightly so received.  He finds, therefore, that his confidence in being
baptized among the Donatists is somewhat profitless, seeing that, though
we both acknowledge that baptism exists with them, yet we do not both
declare that it ought to be received from them.  But he has made up his
mind to cling rather to us in matters where we disagree.  Let him
therefore feel confidence in receiving baptism in our communion, where
he is assured that it both exists and is rightly received; and let him
not receive it in a communion, where those whose opinion he has
determined to follow acknowledge indeed that it exists, but say that it
cannot rightly be received.  Nay, even if he should hold it to be <span
id="page_414">p. 414</span> <span id="v.iv.iii.iii-Page_414"></span>a
doubtful question, whether or no it is impossible for that to be rightly
received among the Donatists which he is assured can rightly be received
in the Catholic Church, he would commit a grievous sin, in matters
concerning the salvation of his soul, in the mere fact of preferring
uncertainty to certainty.  At any rate, he must be quite sure that a man
can be rightly baptized in the Catholic Church, from the mere fact that
he has determined to come over to it, even if he be baptized elsewhere. 
But let him at least acknowledge it to be matter of uncertainty whether
a man be not improperly baptized among the Donatists, when he finds this
asserted by those whose opinion he is convinced should be preferred to
theirs; and, preferring certainty to uncertainty, let him be baptized
here, where he has good grounds for being assured that it is rightly
done, in the fact that when he thought of doing it elsewhere, he had
still determined that he ought afterwards to come over to this side.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1040246)
