[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040016)  [Next](1040018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="iv.ii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—Outline of Manichæan History. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) </span>

<span id="iv.ii.x-p3"></span>In the *East* Mani’s followers were
involved in the persecution that resulted in his death, and many of them
fled to Transoxiania.  Their headquarters and the residence of the chief
of the sect continued to be Babylon.  They returned to Persia in 661,
but were driven back, 908–32.  They seem to have become very numerous in
the Transoxiania.  Albîrûnî, 973–1048, speaks of the Manichæans as still
existing in large numbers throughout all Mohammedan lands, and
especially in the region of Samarkand, where they were known as
Sabeans.  He also relates that they were prevalent among the Eastern
Turks, in China, Thibet and India.  In Armenia and Cappadocia they
gained many followers, and thence made their way into Europe.  The
Paulicians are commonly represented as a Manichæan party, but the
descriptions that have come down to us would seem to indicate
Marcionitic rather than Manichæan elements.  Yet contemporary Catholic
writers such as Peter Siculus and Photius constantly assail them as
Manichæans.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p4"></span>In the *West* we have traces of their
existence from 287 onwards.  Diocletian, according to a somewhat
doubtful tradition, condemned its leaders to the stake, and its
adherents to decapitation with confiscation of goods.  The edict is
supposed to have been directed to the pro-consul of Africa where
Manichæans were making great progress.  According to an early account,
Mani sent a special envoy to Africa.  Valentinian (372) and Theodosius
(381) issued bloody edicts against them, yet we find them still
aggressive in the time of Augustin.  From Africa Manichæism spread into
Spain, Gaul and Aquitaine.  Leo the Great and Valentinian III. took
measures against them in Italy (440 sq.).  They appear, however, to have
continued their work, for Gregory the Great mentions them (590 sq.). 
From this time onwards their influence is to be traced in such parties
as the Euchites, Enthusiasts, Bogomiles, Catharists, Beghards, etc.  But
it is not safe to attach too much importance to the mere fact that these
parties were stigmatized as Manichæans by their enemies.  Even in the
Reformation time and since, individuals and small parties have appeared
which in some features strongly resembled the ancient Manichæans. 
Manichæism was a product of the East, and in the East it met with most
acceptance.  To the spirit of the West it was altogether foreign, and
only in a greatly modified form could it ever have flourished there.  It
might persist for centuries as a secret society, but it could not endure
the light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[31:19](1040017.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iv.ii.x-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.x-p2"></span> Compare Professor George T. Stokes’
excellent article *Manichæans*, in <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii.x-p2.1"></span>Smith</span> and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii.x-p2.2"></span>Wace</span>:  *Dict. of Chr. Biography*, vol.
III. p. 798 sq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to the Anti-Manichæan Writings.](1040018)
