[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040115)  [Next](1040117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—Manichæus Promises the Knowledge
of Undoubted Things, and Then Demands Faith in Doubtful Things.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xv-p2"></span>In the next place, if faith is what is
required of me, I should prefer to keep to the Scripture, which tells me
that the Holy Spirit came and inspired the apostles, to whom the Lord
had promised to send Him.  You must therefore prove, either that what
Manichæus says is true, and so make clear to me what I am unable to
believe; or that Manichæus is the Holy Spirit, and so lead me to believe
in what you cannot make clear.  For I profess the Catholic faith, and by
it I expect to attain certain knowledge.  Since, then, you try to
overthrow my faith, you must supply me with certain knowledge, if you
can, that you may convict me of having adopted my present belief without
consideration.  You make two distinct propositions,—one when you say
that the speaker is the Holy Spirit, and another when you say that what
the speaker teaches is <span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xv-Page_136"></span>evidently true.  I might fairly ask
undeniable proof for both propositions.  But I am not greedy and require
to be convinced only of one.  Prove this person to be the Holy Spirit,
and I will believe what he says to be true, even without understanding
it; or prove that what he says is true, and I will believe him to be the
Holy Spirit, even without evidence.  Could anything be fairer or kinder
than this?  But you cannot prove either one or other of these
propositions.  You can find nothing better than to praise your own faith
and ridicule mine.  So, after having in my turn praised my belief and
ridiculed yours, what result do you think we shall arrive at as regards
our judgment and our conduct, but to part company with those who promise
the knowledge of indubitable things, and then demand from us faith in
doubtful things? while we shall follow those who invite us to begin with
believing what we cannot yet fully perceive, that, strengthened by this
very faith, we may come into a position to know what we believe by the
inward illumination and confirmation of our minds, due no longer to men,
but to God Himself.

<span id="iv.viii.xv-p3"></span>18.  And as I have asked this writer to
prove these things to me, I ask him now where he learned them himself. 
If he replies that they were revealed to him by the Holy Spirit, and
that his mind was divinely enlightened that he might know them to be
certain and evident, he himself points to the distinction between
knowing and believing.  The knowledge is his to whom these things are
fully made known as proved; but in the case of those who only hear his
account of these things, there is no knowledge imparted, but only a
believing acquiescence required.  Whoever thoughtlessly yields this
becomes a Manichæan, not by knowing undoubted truth, but by believing
doubtful statements.  Such were we when in our inexperienced youth we
were deceived.  Instead, therefore, of promising knowledge, or clear
evidence, or the settlement of the question free from all uncertainty,
Manichæus ought to have said that these things were clearly proved to
him, but that those who hear his account of them must believe him
without evidence.  But were he to say this, who would not reply to him,
If I must believe without knowing, why should I not prefer to believe
those things which have a widespread notoriety from the consent of
learned and unlearned, and which among all nations are established by
the weightiest authority?  From fear of having this said to him,
Manichæus bewilders the inexperienced by first promising the knowledge
of certain truths, and then demanding faith in doubtful things.  And
then, if he is asked to make it plain that these things have been proved
to himself, he fails again, and bids us believe this too.  Who can
tolerate such imposture and arrogance?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1040117)
