[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040164)  [Next](1040166) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="iv.ix.xix-p1.1"></span>Book XVII.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p2"></span>Faustus rejects Christ’s declaration that
He came not to destroy the law and the prophets but to fulfill them, on
the ground that it is found only in Matthew, who was not present when
the words purport to have been spoken.  Augustin rebukes the folly of
refusing to believe Matthew and yet believing Manichæus, and shows what
the passage of scripture really means.

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xix-p3.1"></span>Faustus</span> said:  You ask why we do not
receive the law and the prophets, when Christ said that he came not to
destroy them, but to fulfill them.  Where do we learn that Jesus said
this?  From Matthew, who declares that he said it on the mount.  In
whose presence was it said?  In the presence of Peter, Andrew, James,
and John—only these four; for the rest, including Matthew himself, were
not yet chosen.  Is it not the case that one of these four—John,
namely—wrote a Gospel?  It is.  Does he mention this saying of Jesus? 
No.  How, then, does it happen that what is not recorded by John, who
was on the mount, is recorded by Matthew, who became a follower of
Christ long after He came down from the mount?  In the first place,
then, we must doubt whether Jesus ever said these words, since the
proper witness is silent on the matter, and we have only the authority
of a less trustworthy witness.  But, besides this, we shall find that it
is not Matthew that has imposed upon us, but some one else under his
name, as is evident from the indirect style of the narrative.  Thus we
read:  "As Jesus passed by, He saw a man, named Matthew, sitting at the
receipt of custom, and called him; and he immediately rose up, and
followed Him." <span id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633)   No one writing
of himself would say, He saw a man, and called him; and he followed Him;
but, He saw me, and called me, and I followed Him.  Evidently this was
written not by Matthew himself, but by some one else under his name. 
Since, then, the passage already quoted would not be true even if it had
been written by Matthew, since he was not present when Jesus spoke on
the mount; much more is its falsehood evident from the fact that the
writer was not Matthew himself, but some one borrowing the names both of
Jesus and of Matthew.

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p5"></span>2.  The passage itself, in which Christ
tells the Jews not to think that He came to destroy the law, is rather
designed to show that He did destroy it.  For, had He not done something
of the kind, the Jews would not have suspected Him.  His words are: 
"Think not that I am come to destroy the law."  Sup<span
id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span id="iv.ix.xix-Page_235"></span>pose
the Jews had replied, What actions of thine might lead us to suspect
this?  Is it because thou exposest circumcision, breakest the Sabbath,
discardest sacrifices, makest no distinction in foods? this would be the
natural answer to the words, Think not.  The Jews had the best possible
reason for thinking that Jesus destroyed the law.  If this was not to
destroy the law, what is?  But, indeed, the law and the prophets
consider themselves already so faultlessly perfect, that they have no
desire to be fulfilled.  Their author and father condemns adding to them
as much as taking away anything from them; as we read in Deuteronomy: 
"These precepts which I deliver unto thee this day, O Israel, thou shalt
observe to do; thou shalt not turn aside from them to the right hand or
to the left; thou shalt not add thereto nor diminish from it, that thy
God may bless thee." <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634)   Whether,
therefore, Jesus turned aside to the right by adding to the law and the
prophets in order to fulfill them, or to the left in taking away from
them to destroy them, either way he offended the author of the law.  So
this verse must either have some other meaning, or be spurious.

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p7"></span>3.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xix-p7.1"></span>Augustin</span> replied:  What amazing folly,
to disbelieve what Matthew records of Christ, while you believe
Manichæus!  If Matthew is not to be believed because he was not present
when Christ said, "I came not to destroy the law and the prophets, but
to fulfill," was Manichæus present, was he even born, when Christ
appeared among men?  According, then, to your rule, you should not
believe anything that Manichæus says of Christ.  On the other hand, we
refuse to believe what Manichæus says of Christ; not because he was not
present as a witness of Christ’s words and actions, but because he
contradicts Christ’s disciples, and the Gospel which rests on their
authority.  The apostle, speaking in the Holy Spirit, tells us that such
teachers would arise.  With reference to such, he says to believers: 
"If any man preaches to you another gospel than that ye have received,
let him be accursed." <span id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635)   If no
one can say what is true of Christ unless he has himself seen and heard
Him, no one now can be trusted.  But if believers can now say what is
true of Christ because the truth has been handed down in word or writing
by those who saw and heard, why might not Matthew have heard the truth
from his fellow-disciple John, if John was present and he himself was
not, as from the writings of John both we who are born so long after and
those who shall be born after us can learn the truth about Christ?  In
this way, the Gospels of Luke and Mark, who were companions of the
disciples, as well as the Gospel of Matthew, have the same authority as
that of John.  Besides, the Lord Himself might have told Matthew what
those called before him had already been witnesses of.  Your idea is,
that John should have recorded this saying of the Lord, as he was
present on the occasion.  As if it might not happen that, since it was
impossible to write all that be heard from the Lord, he set himself to
write some, omitting this among others.  Does he not say at the close of
his Gospel:  "And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the
which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the
world itself could not contain the books that should be written"? <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636)   This proves that he omitted many
things intentionally.  But if you choose John as an authority regarding
the law and the prophets, I ask you only to believe his testimony to
them.  It is John who writes that Isaiah saw the glory of Christ. <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637)   It is in his Gospel we find the text
already treated of:  "If ye believed Moses, ye would also believe me;
for he wrote of me." <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638)   Your
evasions are met on every side.  You ought to say plainly that you do
not believe the gospel of Christ.  For to believe what you please, and
not to believe what you please, is to believe yourselves, and not the
gospel.

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p12"></span>4.  Faustus thinks himself wonderfully
clever in proving that Matthew was not the writer of this Gospel,
because, when speaking of his own election, he says not, He saw me, and
said to me, Follow me; but, He saw him, and said to him, Follow me. 
This must have been said either in ignorance or from a design to
mislead.  Faustus can hardly be so ignorant as not to have read or heard
that narrators, when speaking of themselves, often use a construction as
if speaking of another.  It is more probable that Faustus wished to
bewilder those more ignorant than himself, in the hope of getting hold
on not a few unacquainted with these things.  It is needless to resort
to other writings to quote examples of this construction from profane
authors for the information of our friends, and for the refutation of
Faustus.  We find examples in passages quoted above from Moses by
Faustus himself, without any denial, or rather with the assertion, that
they were written by Moses, only not written of Christ.  When Moses,
then, writes of himself, does he say, I said this, or I did that, and
not rather, <span id="page_236">p. 236</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xix-Page_236"></span>Moses said, and Moses did?  Or does he
say, The Lord called me, The Lord said to me, and not rather, The Lord
called Moses, The Lord said to Moses, and so on?  So Matthew, too,
speaks of himself in the third person.  And John does the same; for
towards the end of his book he says:  "Peter, turning, saw the disciple
whom Jesus loved, who also lay on His breast at supper, and who said to
the Lord, Who is it that shall betray Thee?"  Does he say, Peter,
turning, saw me?  Or will you argue from this that John did not write
this Gospel?  But he adds a little after:  "This is the disciple that
testifies of Jesus, and has written these things; and we know that his
testimony is true." <span id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639)   Does he
say, I am the disciple who testify of Jesus, and who have written these
things, and we know that my testimony is true?  Evidently this style is
common in writers of narratives.  There are innumerable instances in
which the Lord Himself uses it.  "When the Son of man," He says,
"cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?" <span
id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640)   Not, When I come, shall I find? 
Again, "The Son of man came eating and drinking;" <span
id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641) not, I came.  Again, "The hour shall
come, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God,
and they that hear shall live;" <span id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642)
not, My voice.  And so in many other places.  This may suffice to
satisfy inquirers and to refute scoffers.

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p17"></span>5.  Every one can see the weakness of
the argument that Christ could not have said, "Think not that I am come
to destroy the law and the prophets:  I came not to destroy, but to
fulfill," unless He had done something to create a suspicion of this
kind.  Of course, we grant that the unenlightened Jews may have looked
upon Christ as the destroyer of the law and the prophets; but their very
suspicion makes it certain that the true and truthful One, in saying
that He came not to destroy the law and the prophets, referred to no
other law than that of the Jews.  This is proved by the words that
follow:  "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass,
one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law till all be
fulfilled.  Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least of these
commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven.  But whosoever shall do and teach them, shall be
called great in the kingdom of heaven."  This applied to the Pharisees,
who taught the law in word, while they broke it in deed.  Christ says of
the Pharisees in another place, "What they say, that do; but do not
after their works:  for they say, and do not." <span
id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643)   So here also He adds, "For I say
unto you, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven;" <span id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644) that is, Unless ye
shall both do and teach what they teach without doing, ye shall not
enter into the kingdom of heaven.  This law, therefore, which the
Pharisees taught without keeping it, Christ says He came not to destroy,
but to fulfill; for this was the law connected with the seat of Moses in
which the Pharisees sat, who because they said without doing, are to be
heard, but not to be imitated.

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p20"></span>6.  Faustus does not understand, or
pretends not to understand, what it is to fulfill the law.  He supposes
the expression to mean the addition of words to the law, regarding which
it is written that nothing is to be added to or taken away from the
Scriptures of God.  From this Faustus argues that there can be no
fulfillment of what is spoken of as so perfect that nothing can be added
to it or taken from it.  Faustus requires to be told that the law is
fulfilled by living as it enjoins.  "Love is the fulfilling of the
law," <span id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645) as the apostle says.  The
Lord has vouchsafed both to manifest and to impart this love, by sending
the Holy Spirit to His believing people.  So it is said by the same
apostle:  "The love of God is shed abroad in our heart by the Holy
Ghost, which is given unto us." <span id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646)
  And the Lord Himself says:  "By this shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye have love one to another." <span
id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647)   The law, then, is fulfilled both by
the observance of its precepts and by the accomplishment of its
prophecies.  For "the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came
by Jesus Christ." <span id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648)   The law
itself, by being fulfilled, becomes grace and truth.  Grace is the
fulfillment of love, and truth is the accomplishment of the prophecies. 
And as both grace and truth are by Christ, it follows that He came not
to destroy the law, but to fulfill it; not by supplying any defects in
the law, but by obedience to what is written in the law.  Christ’s own
words declare this.  For He does not say, One jot or one tittle shall in
no wise pass from the law till its defects are supplied, but "till all
be fulfilled."

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p25"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_633"></span>[234:634](1040165.htm#fr_633) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p4"></span> [Matt. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[235:635](1040165.htm#fr_634) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p6"></span> [Deut. xii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#032)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[235:636](1040165.htm#fr_635) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p8"></span> [Gal. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[235:637](1040165.htm#fr_636) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p9"></span> [John xxi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[235:638](1040165.htm#fr_637) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p10"></span> [John xii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[235:639](1040165.htm#fr_638) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p11"></span> [John v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[236:640](1040165.htm#fr_639) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p13"></span> [John xxi.
20-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ix.xix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[236:641](1040165.htm#fr_640) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p14"></span> [Luke xviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[236:642](1040165.htm#fr_641) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p15"></span> [Matt. xi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[236:643](1040165.htm#fr_642) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p16"></span> [John v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[236:644](1040165.htm#fr_643) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p18"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[236:645](1040165.htm#fr_644) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p19"></span> [Matt. v.
17-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ix.xix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[236:646](1040165.htm#fr_645) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p21"></span> [Rom. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[236:647](1040165.htm#fr_646) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p22"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[236:648](1040165.htm#fr_647) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p23"></span> [John xiii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[236:649](1040165.htm#fr_648) <span
id="iv.ix.xix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xix-p24"></span> [John i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix.xix-p24.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XVIII](1040166)
