[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040327)  [Next](1040329) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter</span>. 3.—3.  But in what Cyprian
adds, saying, "Nor yet because men once have erred must there be always
error, since it rather befits wise and God-fearing men gladly and
unhesitatingly to follow truth, when it is clearly laid before their
eyes, than obstinately and persistently to fight for heretics against
their brethren and their fellow-priests," <span
id="fr_1472"></span>[1473](#fn_1472) he is uttering the most perfect
truth; and the man who resists the manifest truth is opposing himself
rather than his neighbors.  But, so far as I can judge, it is perfectly
clear and certain, from the many arguments which I have already adduced,
that the baptism of Christ cannot be invalidated even by the perversity
of heretics, when it is given or received among them.  But, granting
that it is not yet certain, at any rate no one who has considered what
has been said, even from a hostile point of view, will assert that the
question has been decided the other way.  Therefore we are not striving
against manifest truth, but either, as I think, we are striving in
behalf of what is clearly true, or, at any rate, as those may hold who
think that the question has not yet been solved, we are seeking for the
truth.  And therefore, if the truth be other than we think, yet we are
receiving those baptized by heretics with the same honesty of heart with
which those received them whom, Cyprian supposed, in virtue of their
cleaving to the unity of the Church, to be capable of pardon.  But if
the baptism of Christ, as is indicated by the many arguments used above,
can retain its integrity amid any defect either of life or faith,
whether on the part of those who seem to be within, and yet do not
belong to the members of the one dove or on the part of those whose
severance from her extends to being openly without, then those who
sought its repetition in those former days deserved the same pardon for
their charity in clinging to unity, which Cyprian thought that those
deserved for charity of the same kind whom he believed to have been
admitted without baptism.  They therefore who, without any cause (since,
as Cyprian himself shows, the bad cannot hurt the good in the unity of
the Church), have cut themselves off from the charity which is shown in
this unity, have lost all place of pardon, and whilst they would incur
destruction by the very crime of schism, even though they did not
rebaptize those who had been baptized in the Catholic Church, of how
bitter punishment are they deserving, who are either endeavoring to give
to the Catholics who have it what Cyprian affirms that they themselves
<span id="page_465">p. 465</span> <span
id="v.iv.vii.iii-Page_465"></span>have not, or, as is clear from the
facts of the case, are bringing as a charge against the Catholic Church
that she has not what even they themselves possess?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[464:1473](1040328.htm#fr_1472) <span
id="v.iv.vii.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.iii-p2"></span> Cypr. *Ep*. lxxiii. 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1040329)
