[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040355)  [Next](1040357) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.viii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—</span>3.  Again, if any one
not having charity, and walking in the abandoned paths of a most wicked
life, seems to be within while he really is without, and at the same
time does not seek for the repetition of baptism even in the case of
heretics, it in no wise helps his barrenness, because he is not rendered
fruitful with his own fruit, but laden with that of others.  But it is
possible that some one may flourish in the root of charity, and may be
most rightly minded in the point in which Cyprian was otherwise minded,
and yet there may be more that is fruitful in Cyprian than in him, more
that requires purging in him than in Cyprian.  Not only, therefore, do
we not compare bad Catholics with the blessed Cyprian, but even good
Catholics we do not hastily pronounce to be on an equality with him whom
our pious mother Church counts among the few rare men of surpassing
excellence and grace, although these others may recognize the baptism of
Christ even among heretics, while he thought otherwise; so that, by the
instance of Cyprian, who saw one point less clearly, and yet remained
most firm in the unity of the Church, it might be shown more clearly to
heretics what a sacrilegious crime it was to break the bond of peace. 
For neither were the blind Pharisees, although they sometimes enjoined
what was right to be done, to be compared to the Apostle Peter, though
he at times enjoined what was not right.  But not only is their dryness
not to be compared to his greenness, but even the fruit of others may
not be deemed equal to his fertility.  For no one now compels the
Gentiles to judaize, and yet no one now in the Church, however great his
progress in goodness, may be compared with the apostleship of Peter. 
Wherefore, while rendering due reverence, and paying, so far as I can,
the fitting honor to the peaceful bishop and glorious martyr Cyprian, I
yet venture to say that his view concerning the baptism of schismatics
and heretics was contrary to that which was afterwards brought to light
by a decision, not of mine, but of the whole Church, confirmed and
strengthened by the authority of a plenary Council:  just as, while
paying the reverence he deserves to Peter, the first of the apostles and
most eminent of martyrs, I yet venture to say that he did not do right
in compelling the Gentiles to judaize; for this also, I say, not of my
own teaching, but according to the wholesome doctrine of the Apostle
Paul, retained and preserved through out the whole Church. <span
id="fr_1586"></span>[1587](#fn_1586)

<span id="v.iv.viii.ii-p3"></span>4.  Therefore, in discussing the
opinion of Cyprian, though myself of far inferior merit to Cyprian, I
say that good and bad alike can have, can give, can receive the
sacrament of baptism,—the good, indeed, to their health and profit; the
bad to their destruction and ruin,—while the sacrament itself is of
equal perfectness in both of them; and that it is of no consequence to
its equal perfectness in all, how much worse the man may be that has it
among the bad, just as it makes no difference how much better he may be
that has it among the good.  And accordingly it makes no difference
either how much worse he may be that confers it, as it makes no
difference how much better he may be; and so it makes no difference how
much worse he may be that receives it, as it makes no difference how
much better he may be.  For the sacrament is equally holy, in virtue of
its own excellence, both in those who are unequally just, and in those
who are unequally unjust.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[480:1587](1040356.htm#fr_1586) <span
id="v.iv.viii.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.ii-p2"></span> [Gal. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.viii.ii-p2.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1040357)
