[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040175)  [Next](1040177) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.xxx"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="iv.ix.xxx-p1.1"></span>Book XXVIII.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p2"></span>Faustus recurs to the genealogy and
insists upon examining it as regards its consistency with itself. 
Augustin takes his stand on Scripture authority and maintains that
Matthew’s statements as to the birth of Christ must be accepted as
final.

<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xxx-p3.1"></span>Faustus</span> said:  Christ, you say, could
not have died, had He not been born.  I reply, If He was born, He cannot
have been God; or if He could both be God and be born, why could He not
both be born and die?  Plainly, arguments and necessary consequences are
not applicable to those matters, where the question is of the account to
be given of Jesus.  The answer must be obtained from His own statements,
or from the statements of His apostles regarding Him.  The genealogy
must be examined as regards its consistency with itself, instead of
arguing from the supposition of Christ’s death to the <span
id="page_325">p. 325</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxx-Page_325"></span>fact of
His birth; for He might have suffered without having been born, or He
might have been born, and yet never have suffered; for you yourselves
acknowledge that with God nothing is impossible, which is inconsistent
with the denial that Christ could have suffered without having been
born.

<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p4"></span>2.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xxx-p4.1"></span>Augustin</span> replied:  You are always
answering arguments which no one uses, instead of our real arguments,
which you cannot answer.  No one says that Christ could not die if He
had not been born; for Adam died though he had not been born.  What we
say is, Christ was born, because this is said not by this or that
heretic, but in the holy Gospel; and He died, for this too is written,
not in some heretical production, but in the holy Gospel.  You set aside
argument on the question of the true account to be given of Jesus, and
refer to what He says of Himself, and what His apostles say of Him; and
yet, when I begin to quote the Gospel of His apostle Matthew, where we
have the whole narrative of Christ’s birth, you forthwith deny that
Matthew wrote the narrative, though this is affirmed by the continuous
testimony of the whole Church, from the days of apostolic presidency to
the bishops of our own time.  What authority will you quote against
this?  Perhaps some book of Manichæus, where it is denied that Jesus was
born of a virgin.  As, then, I believe your book to be the production of
Manichæus, since it has been kept and handed down among the disciples of
Manichæus, from the time when he lived to the present time, by a regular
succession of your presidents, so I ask you to believe the book which I
quote to have been written by Matthew, since it has been handed down
from the days of Matthew in the Church, without any break in the
connection between that time and the present.  The question then is,
whether we are to believe the statements of an apostle who was in the
company of Christ while He was on earth, or of a man away in Persia,
born long after Christ.  But perhaps you will quote some other book
bearing the name of an apostle known to have been chosen by Christ; and
you will find there that Christ was not born of Mary.  Since, then, one
of the books must be false, the question in this case is, whether we are
to yield our belief to a book acknowledged and approved as handed down
from the beginning in the Church founded by Christ Himself, and
maintained through the apostles and their successors in an unbroken
connection all over the world to the present day; or to a book which
this Church condemns as unknown, and which, moreover, is brought forward
by men who prove their veracity by praising Christ for falsehood.

<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p5"></span>3.  Here you will say, Examine the
genealogy as given in the two Gospels, and see if it is consistent with
itself.  The answer to this has been given already. <span
id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008)   Your difficulty is how Joseph
could have two fathers.  But even if you could not have thought of the
explanation, that one was his own father, and the other adopted, you
should not have been so ready to put yourself in opposition to such high
authority.  Now that this explanation has been given you, I call upon
you to acknowledge the truth of the Gospel, and above all to cease your
mischievous and unreasonable attacks upon the truth.

<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p7"></span>4.  Faustus most plausibly refers to what
Jesus said of Himself.  But how is this to be known except from the
narratives of His disciples?  And if we do not believe them when they
tell us that Christ was born of a virgin, how shall we believe what they
record as said by Christ of Himself?  For, as regards any writing
professing to come immediately from Christ Himself, if it were really
His, how is it not read and acknowledged and regarded as of supreme
authority in the Church, which, beginning with Christ Himself, and
continued by His apostles, who were succeeded by the bishops, has been
maintained and extended to our own day, and in which is found the
fulfillment of many former predictions, while those concerning the last
days are sure to be accomplished in the future?  In regard to the
appearance of such a writing, it would require to be considered from
what quarter it issued.  Supposing it to have issued from Christ
Himself, those in immediate connection with Him might very well have
received it, and have transmitted it to others.  In this case, the
authority of the writing would be fully established by the traditions of
various communities, and of their presidents, as I have already said. 
Who, then, is so infatuated as in our day to believe that the Epistle of
Christ issued by Manichæus is genuine, or to disbelieve Matthew’s
narrative of Christ’s words and actions?  Or, if the question is of
Matthew being the real author, who would not, in this also, believe what
he finds in the Church, which has a distinct history in unbroken
connection from the days of Matthew to the present time, rather than a
Persian interloper, who comes more than two hundred years after, and
wishes us to believe his account of Christ’s words and actions rather
than that of Matthew; whereas, even in the case of the Apostle Paul, who
was called from <span id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxx-Page_326"></span>heaven after the Lord’s ascension, the
Church would not have believed him, had there not been apostles in life
with whom he might communicate, and compare his gospel with theirs, so
as to be recognized as belonging to the same society?  When it was
ascertained that Paul preached what the apostles preached, and that he
lived in fellowship and harmony with them, and when God’s testimony was
added by Paul’s working miracles like those done by the apostles, his
authority became so great, that his words are now received in the
Church, as if, to use his own appropriate words, Christ were speaking in
him. <span id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009)   Manichæus, on the
other hand, thinks that the Church of Christ should believe what he says
in opposition to the Scriptures, which are supported by such strong and
continuous evidence, and in which the Church finds an emphatic
injunction, that whoever preaches to her differently from what she has
received must be anathema. <span id="fr_1010"></span>[1011](#fn_1010)

<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p10"></span>5.  Faustus tells us that he has good
grounds for concluding that these Scriptures are unworthy of credit. 
And yet he speaks of not using arguments.  But the argument too shall be
refuted.  The end of the whole argument is to bring the soul to believe
that the reason of its misery in this world is, that it is the means of
preventing God from being deprived of His kingdom, and that God’s
substance and nature is so exposed to change, corruption, injury, and
contamination, that part of it is incurably defiled, and is consigned by
Himself to eternal punishment in the mass of darkness, though, when it
was in harmless union with Himself, and guilty of no crime, He knowingly
sent it where it was to suffer defilement.  This is the end of all your
arguments and fictions; and would that there were an end of them as
regards your heart and your lips, that you might sometime desist from
believing and uttering those execrable blasphemies!  But, says Faustus,
I prove from the writings themselves that they cannot be in all points
trustworthy, for they contradict one another.  Why not say, then, that
they are wholly untrustworthy, if their testimony is inconsistent and
self-contradictory?  But, says Faustus, I say what I think to be in
accordance with truth.  With what truth?  The truth is only your own
fiction, which begins with God’s battle, goes on to His contamination,
and ends with His damnation.  No one, says Faustus, believes writings
which contradict themselves.  But if you think they do this, it is
because you do not understand them; for your ignorance has been
manifested in regard to the passages you have quoted in support of your
opinion, and the same will appear in regard to any quotations you may
still make.  So there is no reason for our not believing these writings,
supported as they are by such weighty testimony; and this is itself the
best reason for pronouncing accursed those whose preaching differs from
what is there written.

<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p11"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[325:1009](1040176.htm#fr_1008) <span
id="iv.ix.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p6"></span> III. 3.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[326:1010](1040176.htm#fr_1009) <span
id="iv.ix.xxx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p8"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[326:1011](1040176.htm#fr_1010) <span
id="iv.ix.xxx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p9"></span> [Gal.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.xxx-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXIX](1040177)
