[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040130)  [Next](1040132) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxx"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 29.—The Refutation of This
Absurdity.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxx-p2"></span>32.  Whose arrangement, then, is this? 
Who made the distinctions and the classification?  Who gave the number,
the qualities, the forms, the life?  For all these things are in
themselves good, nor could each of the natures have them except from the
bestowal of God, the author of all good things.  For this is not like
the descriptions or suppositions of poets about an imaginary chaos, as
being a shapeless mass, without form, without quality, without
measurement, without weight and number, without order and variety; a
confused something, absolutely destitute of qualities, so that some
Greek writers call it <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.xxx-p2.1"></span>ἄποιον</span>.  So far from being like this
is the Manichæan description of the region of darkness, as they call it,
that, in a directly contrary style, they add side to side, and join
border to border; they number five natures; they separate, arrange, and
assign to each its own qualities.  Nor do they leave the natures barren
or waste, but people them with their proper inhabitants; and to these,
again, they give suitable forms, and adapted to their place of
habitation, besides giving the chief of all endowments, life.  To
recount such good things as these, and to speak of them as having no
connection with God, the author of all good things, is to lose sight of
the excellence of the order in the things, and of the great evil of the
error which leads to such a conclusion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30](1040132)
