[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040637)  [Next](1040639) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xli"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xli-p1.1"></span>Chapter 41.—</span>49.  Lastly, he has ended
his epistle with an exhortation and warning to his own party, that they
should not be deceived by us, and with a lamentation over those of our
party, that we had made them worse than they had been before.  Having
therefore carefully considered and discussed these points, as appears
with sufficient clearness from the words of the epistle which he wrote,
Petilianus has made no answer at all to the position which I advanced to
begin with in my epistle, when I asked, Supposing it to be true, as he
asserts, that the conscience of one that gives—or rather, to add what he
considers so great a support to his argument—that the conscience of one
that gives in holiness is what we look for to cleanse the conscience of
the recipient, by what means he who receives baptism is to be cleansed,
when, if the conscience of the giver is polluted, it is without the
knowledge of the proposed recipient?  Whence it is not surprising that a
man resisting in the cause of falsehood, pressed hard in the straits of
the truth that contradicts it, should have chosen rather to gasp forth
mad abuse, than to walk in the path of that truth which cannot be
overcome.

<span id="v.v.v.xli-p2"></span>50.  And now I would beg of you to pay
especial attention to the next few words, that I may show you clearly
what he has been afraid of in not answering this, and that I may bring
into the light what he has endeavored to shroud in obscurity.  It
certainly was in his power, when we asked by what means he is to be
cleansed, who receives baptism when the conscience of the giver is
polluted without the knowledge of the proposed recipient, to answer with
the greatest ease, From our Lord God; and at any rate to say with the
utmost confidence, God wholly cleanses the conscience of the recipient,
when he is un<span id="page_617">p. 617</span> <span
id="v.v.v.xli-Page_617"></span>acquainted with the stain upon the
conscience of him that gives but not in holiness.  But when a man had
already been compelled by the tenets of your sect to rest the cleansing
of the recipient on the conscience of the giver, in that he had said,
"For the conscience of him that gives," or "of him that gives in
holiness, is looked for to cleanse the conscience of the recipient," he
was naturally afraid lest any one should seem to be better baptized by a
wicked man who concealed his wickedness, than by one that was genuinely
and manifestly good; for in the former case his cleansing would depend
not on the conscience of one that gave in holiness, but on the most
excellent holiness of God Himself.  With this apprehension, therefore,
that he might not be involved in so great an absurdity, or rather
madness, as not to know where he could make his escape, he was unwilling
to say by what means the conscience of the recipient should be cleansed,
when he does not know of the stain upon the conscience of him that gives
but not in holiness; and he thought it better, by making a general
confusion with his quarrelsome uproar, to conceal what was asked of him,
than to give a reply to his question, which should at once discomfit
him; never, however, thinking that our letter could be read by men of
such good understanding, or that his would be read by those who had read
ours as well, to which he has professed to make an answer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 42](1040639)
