[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040030)  [Next](1040032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xii"></span> <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="iv.iv.xii-Page_46"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—What the Church Teaches About
God.  The Two Gods of the Manichæans.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p2"></span>16.  Will you say that you grant that we
are bound to love God, but not the God worshipped by those who
acknowledge the authority of the Old Testament?  In that case you refuse
to worship the God who made heaven and earth, for this is the God set
forth all through these books.  And you admit that the whole of the
world, which is called heaven and earth, had God and a good God for its
author and maker.  For in speaking to you about God we must make a
distinction.  For you hold that there are two gods, one good and the
other bad.

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p3"></span>But if you say that you worship and
approve of worshipping the God who made heaven and earth, but not the
God supported by the authority of the Old Testament, you act
impertinently in trying, though vainly, to attribute to us views and
opinions altogether unlike the wholesome and profitable doctrine we
really hold.  Nor can your silly and profane discourses be at all
compared with the expositions in which learned and pious men of the
Catholic Church open up those Scriptures to the willing and worthy.  Our
understanding of the law and the prophets is quite different from what
you suppose.  Mistake us no longer.  We do not worship a God who
repents, or is envious, or needy, or cruel, or who takes pleasure in the
blood of men or beasts, or is pleased with guilt and crime, or whose
possession of the earth is limited to a little corner of it.  These and
such like are the silly notions you are in the habit of denouncing at
great length.  Your denunciation does not touch us.  The fancies of old
women or of children you attack with a vehemence that is only
ridiculous.  Any one whom you persuade in this way to join you shows no
fault in the teaching of the Church, but only proves his own ignorance
of it.

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p4"></span>17.  If, then, you have any human
feeling,—if you have any regard for your own welfare,—you should rather
examine with diligence and piety the meaning of these passages of
Scripture.  You should examine, unhappy beings that you are; for we
condemn with no less severity and copiousness any faith which attributes
to God what is unbecoming Him, and in those by whom these passages are
literally understood we correct the mistake of ignorance, and look upon
persistence in it as absurd.  And in many other things which you cannot
understand there is in the Catholic teaching a check on the belief of
those who have got beyond mental childishness, not in years, but in
knowledge and understanding—old in the progress towards wisdom.  For we
learn the folly of believing that God is bounded by any amount of space,
even though infinite; and it is held unlawful to think of God, or any
part of Him, as moving from one place to another.  And should any one
suppose that anything in God’s substance or nature can suffer change or
conversion, he will be held guilty of wild profanity.  There are thus
among us children who think of God as having a human form, which they
suppose He really has, which is a most degrading idea; and there are
many of full age to whose mind the majesty of God appears in its
inviolableness and unchangeableness as not only above the human body,
but above their own mind itself.  These ages, as we said, are
distinguished not by time, but by virtue and discretion. <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54)   Among you, again, there is no one who
will picture God in a human form; but neither is there one who sets God
apart from the contamination of human error.  As regards those who are
fed like crying babies at the breast of the Catholic Church, if they are
not carried off by heretics, they are nourished according to the vigor
and capacity of each, and arrive at last, one in one way and another in
another, first to a perfect man, and then to the maturity and hoary
hairs of wisdom, when they may get life as they desire, and life in
perfect happiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[46:55](1040031.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iv.iv.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p5"></span> \[Augustin’s *virtus* takes the place of
the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.xii-p5.1"></span>δυυάμεις</span> and the Vulgate *virtutes*. 
It is not quite certain what meaning he attached to the expression.  He
seems to waver between the idea of *power* and that of *virtue* in the
ethical sense, and finally settles down to the use of the term in the
latter sense.  That this does not accord with the meaning of the Apostle
is evident.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1040032)
