[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040643)  [Next](1040645) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xlvii"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 47.—</span>57.  Furthermore, in
like manner as those who denied the resurrection of the dead could in no
way defend themselves from the evil consequences which the apostle
proved to follow from their premises, in order to refute their error,
saying, "Then is not Christ raised," with the other conclusions of
similar atrocity, unless they changed their opinions, and acknowledged
that there was a resurrection of the dead; so is it necessary that you
should change your opinion, and cease to rest on man the hope of those
who are baptized, if you do not wish to have imputed to you what we say
for your refutation and correction, that they are justified with greater
holiness who are baptized by undetected evil men than those that are
baptized by men that are genuinely and manifestly good.  For if you make
your first assertion, see what I say, unless some one shall suppress
this a second time, and make out that I have entertained the opinion
which I quote for your refutation and correction.  See what I lay down
as my premiss, from which hangs the statement which I shall subsequently
make:  If you rest the hope of those who are to be baptized on the man
by whom they are baptized, and if you maintain, as Petilianus wrote,
that the man who baptizes is the origin and root and head of him that is
baptized; if you receive as the good tree the good man who baptizes, and
as his good fruit the man who has been baptized by him; then you put it
into our heads to ask from what origin he springs, from what root he
shoots up, to what head he is joined, from what tree he is born, who is
baptized by an undetected bad man?  For to this inquiry, belongs also
the following, to which I have over and over again maintained that
Petilianus has given no reply:  By what means is a man to be cleansed
who receives baptism while he is ignorant of the stain upon the
conscience of him that gives but not in holiness? for this conscience of
him that gives, or of him that gives in holiness, Petilianus wishes to
be the origin, root, head, seed, tree from which the sanctification of
the baptized has its existence,—springs, begins, sprouts forth, is born.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 48](1040645)
