[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040242)  [Next](1040244) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.iii.i"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—</span>1.  In the treatise which
we wrote against the published epistle of Parmenianus <span
id="fr_1144"></span>[1145](#fn_1144) to Tichonius, <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[1146](#fn_1145) we promised that at some future
time we would treat the question of baptism more thoroughly; <span
id="fr_1146"></span>[1147](#fn_1146) and indeed, even if we had not made
this promise, we are not unmindful that this is a debt fairly due from
us to the prayers of our brethren.  Wherefore in this treatise we have
undertaken, with the help of God, not only to refute the objections
which the Donatists have been wont to urge against us in this matter,
but also to advance what God may enable us to say in respect of the
authority of the blessed martyr Cyprian, which they endeavor to use as a
prop, to prevent their perversity from falling before the attacks of
truth. <span id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147)   And this we propose
to do, in order that all whose judgment is not blinded by party spirit
may understand that, so far from Cyprian’s authority being in their
favor, it tends directly to their refutation and discomfiture.

<span id="v.iv.iii.i-p6"></span>2.  In the treatise above mentioned, it
has already been said that the grace of baptism can be conferred outside
the Catholic communion, just as it can be also there retained.  But no
one of the Donatists themselves denies that even apostates retain the
grace of baptism; for when they return within the pale of the Church,
and are converted through re<span id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span
id="v.iv.iii.i-Page_412"></span>pentance, it is never given to them a
second time, and so it is ruled that it never could have been lost.  So
those, too, who in the sacrilege of schism depart from the communion of
the Church, certainly retain the grace of baptism, which they received
before their departure, seeing that, in case of their return, it is not
again conferred on them whence it is proved, that what they had received
while within the unity of the Church, they could not have lost in their
separation.  But if it can be retained outside, why may it not also be
given there?  If you say, "It is not rightly given without the pale;" we
answer, "As it is not rightly retained, and yet is in some sense
retained, so it is not indeed rightly given, but yet it is given."  But
as, by reconciliation to unity, that begins to be profitably possessed
which was possessed to no profit in exclusion from unity, so, by the
same reconciliation, that begins to be profitable which without it was
given to no profit.  Yet it cannot be allowed that it should be said
that that was not given which was given, nor that any one should
reproach a man with not having given this, while confessing that he had
given what he had himself received.  For the sacrament of baptism is
what the person possesses who is baptized; and the sacrament of
conferring baptism is what he possesses who is ordained.  And as the
baptized person, if he depart from the unity of the Church, does not
thereby lose the sacrament of baptism, so also he who is ordained, if he
depart from the unity of the Church, does not lose the sacrament of
conferring baptism.  For neither sacrament may be wronged.  If a
sacrament necessarily becomes void in the case of the wicked, both must
become void; if it remain valid with the wicked, this must be so with
both.  If, therefore, the baptism be acknowledged which he could not
lose who severed himself from the unity of the Church, that baptism must
also be acknowledged which was administered by one who by his secession
had not lost the sacrament of conferring baptism.  For as those who
return to the Church, if they had been baptized before their secession,
are not rebaptized, so those who return, having been ordained before
their secession, are certainly not ordained again; but either they again
exercise their former ministry, if the interests of the Church require
it, or if they do not exercise it, at any rate they retain the sacrament
of their ordination; and hence it is, that when hands are laid on
them, <span id="fr_1148"></span>[1149](#fn_1148) to mark their
reconciliation, they are not ranked with the laity.  For
Felicianus, <span id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149) when he separated
himself from them with Maximianus, was not held by the Donatists
themselves to have lost either the sacrament of baptism or the sacrament
of conferring baptism.  For now he is a recognized member of their own
body, in company with those very men whom he baptized while he was
separated from them in the schism of Maximianus.  And so others could
receive from them, whilst they still had not joined our society, what
they themselves had not lost by severance from our society.  And hence
it is clear that they are guilty of impiety who endeavor to rebaptize
those who are in Catholic unity; and we act rightly who do not dare to
repudiate God’s sacraments, even when administered in schism.  For in
all points in which they think with us, they also are in communion with
us, and only are severed from us in those points in which they dissent
from us.  For contact and disunion are not to be measured by different
laws in the case of material or spiritual affinities.  For as union of
bodies arises from continuity of position, so in the agreement of wills
there is a kind of contact between souls.  If, therefore, a man who has
severed himself from unity wishes to do anything different from that
which had been impressed on him while in the state of unity, in this
point he does sever himself, and is no longer a part of the united
whole; but wherever he desires to conduct himself as is customary in the
state of unity, in which he himself learned and received the lessons
which he seeks to follow, in these points he remains a member, and is
united to the corporate whole.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[411:1145](1040243.htm#fr_1144) <span
id="v.iv.iii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.i-p2"></span> Parmenianus was successor to Donatus
the Great in the See of Carthage, circ. 350 <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iii.i-p2.1"></span> A.D.</span>, and died circ. 392 <span
class="c11"><span id="v.iv.iii.i-p2.2"></span> A.D.</span>

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[411:1146](1040243.htm#fr_1145) <span
id="v.iv.iii.i-p2.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.i-p3"></span> Tichonius, who flourished circ. 380,
was the leader of a reformatory movement in Donatism, which Parmenianus
opposed, in the writing here alluded to.  The reformer was
excommunicated.  He had the clearest ideas concerning the church and
concerning interpretation of any of the ancients.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[411:1147](1040243.htm#fr_1146) <span
id="v.iv.iii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.i-p4"></span> *Contra Epist. Parmen*. ii. 14, also
written circ. 400 <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iii.i-p4.1"></span>A.D.</span>

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[411:1148](1040243.htm#fr_1147) <span
id="v.iv.iii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.i-p5"></span> Cyprian, in his controversy with Pope
Stephen of Rome, denied the validity of heretical or schismatical
baptism.  The Donatists denied the validity of Catholic baptism.  See
Schaff, *Church History*, vol. ii. 262 sqq.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[412:1149](1040243.htm#fr_1148) <span
id="v.iv.iii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.i-p7"></span> Comp. v. 23, and iii. 16, note.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[412:1150](1040243.htm#fr_1149) <span
id="v.iv.iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.i-p8"></span> Felicianus, bishop of Musti, headed the
revolt against Primianus, the successor of Parmenianus in the
Carthaginian See.  Listening to the complaint of the deacon Maximianus,
who had been deposed by Primianus, a synod was convened in 393 at
Cabarsussis, which ordained Maximianus as bishop of Carthage.  Hence the
title Maximianistæ.  Primianus, in 394, at the council of Bagai, was
recognized by 310 bishops.  The larger fraction, according to the
Catholics, was subsequently forced into reunion.  Prætextatus, bp. of
Assuris, was also one of the leaders in this separation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1040244)
