[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040564)  [Next](1040566) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxviii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.lxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 78.—</span>171.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.lxxviii-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span>
said:  "For what kind of faith is that which is in you which is devoid
of charity? when Paul himself says, ‘Though I speak with the tongues of
men, and have the knowledge of angels, and have not charity, I am become
as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.  And though I have the gift of
prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I
have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity,
I am nothing.  And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and
though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth
me nothing.’"

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxviii-p2"></span>172.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.lxxviii-p2.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  This is what
I said just now, that you were desirous to be clad in sheep’s clothing,
that, if possible, the sheep might feel your bite before it had any
consciousness of your approach.  Is it not that praise of charity in
which you indulge that commonly proves your calumny in the clearest
light of truth?  Will you bring it about that those arms shall be no
longer ours, because you endeavor to appropriate them first? 
Furthermore, these arms are endowed with life:  from whatever quarter
they are launched, they recognize whom they should destroy.  If they
have been sent forth from our hands, they will fix themselves in you; if
they are aimed by you, they recoil upon yourselves.  For in these
apostolic words, which commend the excellence of charity, we are wont to
show to you how profitless it is to man that he should <span
id="page_570">p. 570</span> <span id="v.v.iv.lxxviii-Page_570"></span>be
in possession of faith or of the sacraments, when he has not charity,
that, when you come to Catholic unity, you may understand what it is
that is conferred on you, and how great a thing it is of which you were
at least to some extent in want; for Christian charity cannot be
preserved except in the unity of the Church:  and that so you may see
that without it you are nothing, even though you may be in possession of
baptism and faith, and through this latter may be able even to remove
mountains.  But if this is your opinion as well, let us not repudiate
and reject in you either the sacraments of God which we know, or faith
itself, but let us hold fast charity, without which we are nothing even
with the sacraments and with faith.  But we hold fast charity if we
cling to unity; while we cling to unity, if we do not make a fictitious
unity in a party by our own words, but recognize it in a united whole
through the words of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 79](1040566)
