[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040017)  [Next](1040019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii"></span> <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span
id="iv.iii-Page_33"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span><span class="c7"><span
id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Preface to the Anti-Manichæan Writings.</span>

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span>No reader of the accompanying volume can be
expected to take a very lively interest in its contents, unless he has
before his mind some facts regarding the extraordinary genius to whom
the heresy of Manichæism owes its origin and its name.  His history is
involved in considerable obscurity, owing to the suspicious nature of
the documents from which it is derived, and the difficulty of
constructing a consistent and probable account out of the contradictory
statements of the Asiatics and the Greeks.  The ascertained facts,
therefore, are few, and may be briefly stated. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

<span id="iv.iii-p5"></span>According to the Chronicle of Edessa, Mani
was born <span class="c11"><span id="iv.iii-p5.1"></span>A.D</span>.
240. <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20)   From his original name,
Corbicius or Carcubius, Beausobre conjectures that he was born in
Carcub, a town of Chaldæa.  He belonged to a Magian family, and while
still a youth won a distinguished place among the sages of Persia.  He
was master of all the lore peculiar to his class, and was, besides, so
proficient a mathematician and geographer, that he was able to construct
a globe.  He was a skilled musician, and had some knowledge of the Greek
language,—an accomplishment rare among his countrymen.  But his fame,
and even his ultimate success as a teacher, was due in great measure to
his skill in painting, which was so considerable as to earn for him
among the Persians the distinctive title, Mani the painter.  His
disposition was ardent and lively but patient and self-restrained.  His
appearance was striking, as he wore the usual dress of a Persian sage: 
the high-soled shoes, the one red, the other green; the mantle of azure
blue, that changed color as he moved; the ebony staff in his right hand,
and the Babylonish book under his left arm.

<span id="iv.iii-p7"></span>The meaning of his name, Mani, Manes, or
Manichæus, has been the subject of endless conjectures.  Epiphanius
supposes that he was providentially so named, that men might be warned
against the mania of his heresy. <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21)  
Hyde, whose opinion on any Oriental subject must have weight, tells us
that in Persian *mani* means painter, and that he was so called from his
profession.  Archbishop Usher conjectured that it was a form of *Manaem*
or *Menahem*, which means Paraclete or Comforter; founding this
conjecture on the fact that Sulpicius Severus calls the Israelitish king
Menahem, <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) Mane.  Gataker supplements
this idea by the conjecture that Mani took this name at his own
instance, and in pursuance of his claim to be the Paraclete.  It is more
probable that, if his name was really given on account of this meaning,
he received it from the widow who seems to have adopted him when a boy,
and may have called him her Consolation.  But it is also possible that
Mani was not an uncommon Persian name, and that he adopted it for some
reason too trifling to discover. <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23)

<span id="iv.iii-p11"></span>While still a young man he was ordained as
a Christian priest, and distinguished himself in that capacity by his
knowledge of Scripture, and the zeal with which he discharged his sacred
functions. <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24)   His heretical
tendencies, however, were very soon manifested, stimulated, we may
suppose, by his anxiety to make the Christian religion more acceptable
to those who adhered to the Eastern systems.  Excommunicated from the
Christian Church, Mani found asylum with Sapor, and won his confidence
by presenting only the Magian side of his system.  But no sooner did he
permit the Christian element to appear, and call himself the apostle of
the Lord, and show a desire to reform Magianism, than his sovereign
determined to put him to death as a revolutionist.  Forced to flee, he
took refuge in Turkestan, and gained influence there, partly by
decorating the temples with paintings.  To lend his doctrines the
appearance of divine authority, he adopted the same device as Zoroaster
<span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span id="iv.iii-Page_34"></span>and
Mohammed.  Having discovered a cave through which there ran a rill of
water, he laid up in it a store of provisions, and retired there for a
year, giving out that he was on a visit to heaven.  In this retirement
he produced his Gospel, <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) —a work
illustrated with symbolical drawings the ingenuity of which has been
greatly praised.  This book Mani presented to Hormizdas, the son and
successor of Sapor, who professed himself favorable to his doctrine, and
even built him a castle as a place of shelter and retirement. 
Unfortunately for Mani, Hormizdas died in the second year of his reign;
and though his successor, Varanes, was at first willing to shield him
from persecution, yet, finding that the Magians were alarmed for their
religion, he appointed a disputation to be held between the opposing
parties.  Such trials of dialectic in Eastern courts have not
unfrequently resulted in very serious consequences to the parties
engaged in them.  In this instance the result was fatal to Mani. 
Worsted in argument, he was condemned to die, and thus perished in some
sense as a martyr.  The mode of his death is uncertain, <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) but it seems that his skin was stuffed
with chaff, and hung up in public *in terrorem*.  This occurred in the
year 277, and the anniversary was commemorated as the great religious
festival of the Manichæans.

<span id="iv.iii-p15"></span>This is not the place to attempt any
account or criticism of the strange eclecticism of Mani. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27)   An adequate idea of the system may be
gathered from the accompanying treatises.  It may, however, be desirable
to give some account of the original sources of information regarding
it.

<span id="iv.iii-p17"></span>We study the systems of heresiarchs at a
disadvantage when our only means of ascertaining their opinions is from
the fragmentary quotations and hostile criticism which occur in the
writings of their adversaries.  Such, however, is our only source of
information regarding the teaching of Mani.  Originally, indeed, this
heresy was specially active in a literary direction, assailing the
Christian Scriptures with an ingenuity of unbelief worthy of a later
age, and apparently ambitious of promulgating a rival canon.  Certainly
the writings of its early supporters were numerous; <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) and from the care and elegance with which
they were transcribed, the sumptuous character of the manuscripts, and
the mysterious emblems with which they were adorned, we should fancy it
was intended to inspire the people with respect for an authoritative
though as yet undefined code.  It is, indeed, nowhere said or implied
that the sacred books of the Manichæans were reserved for the eye only
of the initiated or elect; and their reception of the New Testament
Scriptures (subject to their own revision and emendation) would make it
difficult for them to establish any secret code apart from these
writings.  They were certainly, however, doctrines of an esoteric kind,
which were not divulged to the catechumens or hearers; and many of their
books, being written in Persian, Syriac, or Greek, were practically
unavailable for the instruction of the Latin speaking population.  It
was not always easy, therefore, to obtain an accurate knowledge of their
opinions.  Commentaries on the whole of the Old and New Testaments were
written by Hierax; <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) a *Theosophy* by
Aristocritus; a book of memoirs, or rather *Memorabilia*, of Mani, and
other works, by Heraclides, Aphthonius, Adas, and Agapius. 
Unfortunately all of these books have perished, whether in the flames to
which the Christian authorities commanded that all Manichæan books
should be consigned, or by the slower if not more critical and impartial
processes of time.

<span id="iv.iii-p20"></span>Mani himself was the author of several
works:  a *Gospel*, the *Treasury of Life* (and probably an abridgment
of the same), the *Mysteries*, the *Foundation Fpistle*, a book of
*Articles* or heads of doctrine, one or two works on astronomy or
astrology, and a collection of letters so dangerous, that Manichæans who
sought restoration to the Church were required to anathematize them.

<span id="iv.iii-p21"></span>Probably the most important of these
writings was the *Foundation Epistle*, so called because it contained
the leading articles of doctrine on which the new system was built. 
This letter was written in Greek or Syriac; but a Latin version of it
was current in Africa, and came into the hands of Augustin, who
undertook its refutation.  To accomplish this with the greater precision
and effect, he quotes the entire text of each passage of the *Epistle*
before proceeding to criticise it.  Had Augustin accomplished the whole
of his task, we should accordingly have been in possession of the whole
of this important document.  Unfortunately, for reasons unknown,
Augustin stops short at an early point in the *Epistle*; and though he
tells us he had notes on the remainder, and would some day expand and
publish them, this promise lay unredeemed for thirty years till the day
of his death.  Extracts from the same *Epistle* and from the *Treasury*
are also given by Augustin in the treatise *De Natura Boni*. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30)

<span id="iv.iii-p23"></span><span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span
id="iv.iii-Page_35"></span>Next, we have in the *Opus Imperfectum* of
Augustin some extracts from a letter of Mani to Menoch, which Julian had
unearthed and republished to convict Augustin of being still tainted
with Manichæan sentiments.  These extracts give us some insight into the
heresiarch’s opinions regarding the corruption of nature and the evils
of sexual love.

<span id="iv.iii-p24"></span>Again, we have Mani’s letter to Marcel,
preserved by Epiphanius, and given in full by Beausobre; <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) which, however, merely reiterates two of
the doctrines most certainly identified with Mani,—the assertion of two
principles, and the tenet that the Son of God was man only in
appearance.

<span id="iv.iii-p26"></span>Finally, Fabricius has inserted in the
fifth volume of his *Bibliotheca Græca* the fragments, such as they are,
collected by Grabe.

<span id="iv.iii-p27"></span>Such is the fragmentary character of the
literary remains of Mani:  for fuller information regarding his opinions
we must depend on Theodoret, Epiphanius, Alexander of Lycopolis, Titus
of Bostra, and Augustin.  Beausobre is of opinion that the Fathers
derived all that they knew of Manichæus from the *Acts of
Archelaus*. <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32)   This professes to be
a report of a disputation held between Manes and Archelaus, bishop of
Caschar in Mesopotamia.  Grave doubts have been cast on the authenticity
of this document, and Burton and Milman seem inclined to consider it an
imaginary dialogue, and use it on the understanding that while some of
its statements are manifestly untrustworthy, a discriminating reader may
gather from it some reliable material. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33)

<span id="iv.iii-p30"></span>In the works of Augustin there are some
other pieces which may well be reckoned among the original sources.  In
the reply to Faustus, which is translated in this volume, the book of
Faustus is not indeed reproduced; but there is no reason for doubting
that his arguments are fairly represented, and we think there is
evidence that even the original expression of them is preserved. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)   Augustin had been acquainted with
Faustus for many years.  He first met him at Carthage in 383, and found
him nothing more than a clever and agreeable talker, making no
pretension to science or philosophy, and with only slender
reading. <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)   His cleverness is
sufficiently apparent in his debate with Augustin; the objections he
leads are plausible, and put with acuteness, but at the same time with a
flippancy which betrays a want of earnestness and real interest in the
questions.  In his reply to Faustus, Augustin is very much on the
defensive, and his statements are apologetic rather than
systematic. <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36)

<span id="iv.iii-p34"></span>But in an age when the ability to read was
by no means commensurate with the interest taken in theological
questions, written discussions were necessarily supplemented by public
disputations.  These theological contests seem to have been a popular
entertainment in North Africa; the people attending in immense crowds,
while reporters took down what was said on either side for the sake of
appeal as well as for the information of the absent.  In two such
disputations Augustin engaged in connection with Manichæism. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37)   The first was held on the 28th and 29th
of August, 392, with a Manichæan priest, Fortunatus.  To this encounter
Augustin was invited by a deputation of Donatists and Catholics, <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) who were alike alarmed at the progress
which this heresy was making in the district of Hippo.  Fortunatus at
first showed some reluctance to meet so formidable an antagonist, but
was prevailed upon by his own sectaries, and shows no nervousness during
the debate.  His incompetence, however, was manifest to the Manichæans
themselves; and so hopeless was it to think of any further proselytizing
in Hippo, that he left that city, and was too much ashamed of himself
ever to return.  The character of his reasoning is shifty; he evades
Augustin’s questions and starts fresh ones.  Augustin pushes his usual
and fundamental objection to the Manichæan system.  If God is impassable
and incorruptible, how could He be injured by the assaults of the
kingdom of darkness?  In opposition to the statement of Fortunatus, that
the Almighty produces no evil, he explains that God made no nature evil,
but made man free, and that voluntary <span id="page_36">p. 36</span>
<span id="iv.iii-Page_36"></span>sin is the grand original evil.  The
most remarkable circumstance in the discussion is the desire of
Fortunatus to direct the conversation to the conduct of the Manichæans,
and the refusal of Augustin to make good the charges which had been made
against them, or to discuss anything but the doctrine. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)

<span id="iv.iii-p38"></span>Twelve years after this, a similar
disputation was held between Augustin and one of the elect among the
Manichæans, who had come to Hippo to propagate his religion.  This man,
Felix, is described by Augustin <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) as
being ill-educated, but more adroit and subtle than Fortunatus.  After a
keen discussion, which occupied two days, the proceedings terminated by
Felix signing a recantation of his errors in the form of an anathema on
Mani, his doctrines, and the seducing spirit that possessed him.  These
two disputations are valuable, as exhibiting the points of the Manichæan
system to which its own adherents were accustomed to direct attention,
and the arguments on which they specially relied for their support.

<span id="iv.iii-p40"></span>The works given in the accompanying volume
comprehend by no means the whole of Augustin’s writings against this
heresy.  Before his ordination he wrote five anti-Manichæan books,
entitled, *De Libero Arbitrio, De Genesi contra Manichæos, De Moribus
Ecclesiæ Catholicæ, De Moribus Manichæorum*, and *De Vera Religione*. 
These Paulinus called his anti-Manichæan Pentateuch.  After his
ordination he was equally diligent, publishing a little treatise in the
year 391, under the title *De Utilitate Credendi*, <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) which was immediately followed by a small
work, *De Duabus Animabus*.  In the following year the report of the
*Disputatio contra Fortunatum* was published; and after this, at short
intervals, there appeared the books *Contra Adimantum, Contra Epistolam
Manichæi quam vocant Fundamenti, Contra Faustum, Disputatio contra
Felicem, De Naturo Boni*, and *Contra Secundinum*.

<span id="iv.iii-p42"></span>Besides these writings, which are
exclusively occupied with Manichæism, there are others in which the
Manichæan doctrines are handled with more or less directness.  These are
the *Confessions*, the 79th and 236th Letters, the Lecture on [Psalm
140](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#000)<span id="iv.iii-p42.1"></span>,
Sermons 1, 2, 12, 50, 153, 182, 237, *the Liber de Agone Christiano*,
and the *De Continentia*.

<span id="iv.iii-p43"></span>Of these writings, Augustin himself
professed a preference for the reply to the letter of Secundinus. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42)   It is a pleasing feature of the times,
that a heretic whom he did not know even by sight should write to
Augustin entreating him to abstain from writing against the Manichæans,
and reconsider his position, and ally himself with those whom he had
till now fancied to be in error.  His language is respectful, and
illustrates the esteem in which Augustin was held by his contemporaries;
though he does not scruple to insinuate that his conversion from
Manichæism was due to motives not of the highest kind.  We have not
given this letter and its reply, because the preference of Augustin has
not been ratified by the judgment of his readers.

<span id="iv.iii-p45"></span>The present volume gives a fair sample of
Augustin’s controversial powers.  His nine years’ personal experience of
the vanity of Manichæism made him thoroughly earnest and sympathetic in
his efforts to disentangle other men from its snares, and also equipped
him with the knowledge requisite for this task.  No doubt the Pelagian
controversy was more congenial to his mind.  His logical acuteness and
knowledge of Scripture availed him more in combating men who fought with
the same weapons, than in dealing with a system which threw around its
positions the mist of Gnostic speculation, or veiled its doctrine under
a grotesque mythology, or based itself on a cosmogony too fantastic for
a Western mind to tolerate. <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43)   But
however Augustin may have misconceived the strange forms in which this
system was presented, there is no doubt that he comprehended and
demolished its fundamental principles; <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) that he did so as a necessary part of his
own personal search for the truth; and that in doing so he gained
possession, vitally and permanently of ideas and principles which
subsequently entered into all he thought and wrote.  In finding his way
through the mazes of the obscure region into which Mani had led him, he
once for all ascertained the true relation subsisting between God and
His creatures, formed his opinion regarding the respective provinces of
reason and faith, and the connection of the Old and New Testaments, and
found the root of all evil in the created will.

<span id="iv.iii-p48"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iii-p48.1"></span>The</span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iii-p48.2"></span>Editor</span>.

<span id="iv.iii-p49"></span>Some knowledge of the Magianism of the time
of Mani may be obtained from the sacred books of the Parsis, especially
from the *Vendidad Sade*, an account of which is given by Dr. Wilson, of
Bombay, in his book on the Parsi Religion.—<span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iii-p49.1"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="iv.iii-p50"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[33:20](1040018.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p4"></span> Beausobre (*<span
id="iv.iii-p4.1"></span>Histoire Critique de Manichée et du
Manichéisme*, Amst. 1734, 2 vols.) has collected everything that is
known of Mani.  The original sources are here sifted with unusual
acuteness, and with great and solid learning, though the author’s strong
"bias in favor of a heretic" frequently leads him to make unwarranted
statements.  Burton’s estimate of this entertaining and indispensable
work (*Heresies of Apostol. Age*, p. xxi.), is much fairer than Pusey’s
(*Aug. Conf*. p. 314).  A brief account of Mani and his doctrines is
given by Milman with his usual accuracy, impartiality and lucidity
(*Hist. of Christianity*, ii. 259, ed. 1867).  For any one who wishes to
investigate the subject further, ample references are there given.  A
specimen of the confusion that involves the history of Mani will be
found in the account given by Socrates (*Hist*. i. 22).

<span id="fn_20"></span>[33:21](1040018.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iv.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p6"></span> \[For the Oriental accounts of Mani’s
parentage and youth, see the *Introductory Essay*, and the works there
referred to.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_21"></span>[33:22](1040018.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p8"></span> See also <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iii-p8.1"></span>Eusebius</span>:  *Hist. Eccl*. vii. 31, with
Heinichen’s note.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[33:23](1040018.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iv.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p9"></span> [2 Kings xv.
14.](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#014)<span id="iv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="fn_23"></span>[33:24](1040018.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iv.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p10"></span> "*<span id="iv.iii-p10.1"></span>Peut-être
cherchons nous du mystere, ou il n’y en a point.*"—Beausobre, i. 79.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[33:25](1040018.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p12"></span> \[This is in the highest degree
improbable.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_25"></span>[34:26](1040018.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p13"></span> Called Erteng or Arzeng, *i.e*., according
to Renaudot, an illustrated book.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[34:27](1040018.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iv.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p14"></span> Böhringer adopts the more horrible
tradition.  "*<span id="iv.iii-p14.1"></span>Sein Schicksal war, dass er
von den Christen, von den Magiern verfolgt, nach mannig fachem Wechsel
unter Bahram lebendig geschunden wurde*" (p. 386).

<span id="fn_27"></span>[34:28](1040018.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p16"></span> Böhringer characterizes it briefly in the
words:  "*<span id="iv.iii-p16.1"></span>Es ist der alte heidnische
Dualismus mit seiner Naturtheologie, der in Mani’s Systeme seine letzten
Kräfte sammelt und unter der gleissenden Hülle christlicher Worte und
Formen an den reinen Monotheismus des Christenthums und dessen reine
Ethik sich heranwagt* "

<span id="fn_28"></span>[34:29](1040018.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iv.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p18"></span> Aug. *c. Faustum*, xiii. 6 and 18.  \[See
full list of Mani’s writings in <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iii-p18.1"></span>Kessler’s</span> art. in *Herzog*,
R.E.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_29"></span>[34:30](1040018.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iv.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p19"></span> Lardner, however, seems to prove that
Hierax was not a Manichæan, though some of his opinions approximated to
this heresy.  The whole subject of the Manichæan literature is treated
by Lardner (*Works*, iii. p. 374), with the learning of Beausobre and
more than Beausobre’s impartiality.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[34:31](1040018.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iv.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p22"></span> The *De Natura Boni*, written in the year
405, is necessarily very much a reproduction of what is elsewhere
affirmed, that all natures are good, and created by God, who alone is
immutable and incorruptible.  It presents concisely the leading
positions of Augustin in this controversy, and concludes with an
eloquent prayer that his efforts may be blessed to the conversion of the
heretics,—not the only passage which demonstrates that he wrote not for
the glory of victory so much as for the deliverance of men from fatal
error.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[35:32](1040018.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iv.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p25"></span> *<span id="iv.iii-p25.1"></span>Histoire*,
i. 91.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[35:33](1040018.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iv.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p28"></span> Published by Zaccagni in his *Collectanea
Monumentorum Veterum*, Romæ, 1698; and by Routh his *Reliquiæ Sacræ*,
vol. v., in which all the material for forming an opinion regarding it
is collected.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[35:34](1040018.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iv.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p29"></span> Any one who consults Beausobre on this
point will find that historical criticism is not of so recent an origin
as some persons seem to think.  It is worth transcribing his own account
of the spirit in which he means to do his work:  "*<span
id="iv.iii-p29.1"></span>Je traiterai mon sujet en Critique, suivant la
Regle de S. Paul, Examinez toutes choses, et ne retenez que ce qui est
bon.  L’Histoire en general, et l’Histoire Ecclesiastique en
particulier, n’est bien souvent qu’un mélange confus de faux et de vrai,
entasse par des Ecrivains mal instruits, credules ou passionez.  Cela
convient surtout a l’Histoire des Heretiques et des Heresies.  C’est au
Lecteur attentif et judicieux d’en faire le discernement, a l’aide d’une
critique, qui ne soit trop timide, ni temeraire.  Sans le secours de cet
art, on erre dans l’Histoire comme un Pilote sur les mers, lorsqu’il n’a
ni boussole, ni carte marine*" (i. 7).

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35:35](1040018.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iv.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p31"></span> Beausobre and Cave suppose that we have
the whole of Faustus’ book embodied in Augustin’s review of it.  Lardner
is of opinion that the commencement, and perhaps the greater part, of
the work is given, but not the whole.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[35:36](1040018.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iv.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p32"></span> See the interesting account of Faustus in
the *Confessions*, v. 10.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[35:37](1040018.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iv.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p33"></span> \[This estimate of Faustus is somewhat too
disparaging.  For fuller bibliography, see *Introductory
Essay*.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_37"></span>[35:38](1040018.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iv.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p35"></span> His willingness to do so, and the success
with which he encountered the most renowned champions of this heresy,
should have prevented Beausobre from charging him with misunderstanding
or misrepresenting the Manichæan doctrine.  The retractation of Felix
tells strongly against this view of Augustin’s incompetence to deal with
Manichæism.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[35:39](1040018.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iv.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p36"></span> Possidius. *Vita Aug*. vi.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[36:40](1040018.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iv.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p37"></span> This cannot but make us cautious in
receiving the statements of the tract, On the Morals of the Manichæans. 
There can be little doubt that many of the Manichæans practiced the
ascetic virtues, and were recognizable by the gauntness and pallor of
their looks, so that *Manichæan* became a by-word for any one who did
not appreciate the felicity of good living.  Thus Jerome says of a
certain class of women, *"quam viderint pallentem atque tristem,
Miseram, Monacham, et Manichæan vocant"* (*De Custod. Virg. Ep.* 18). 
Lardner throws light on the practices of the Manichæans, and effectually
disposes of some of the calumnies uttered regarding them.  Pusey’s
appendix to his translation of the *Confessions* may also be referred to
with advantage.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[36:41](1040018.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iv.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p39"></span> *Retract*. ii. 8.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[36:42](1040018.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iv.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p41"></span> *Epist. August.* xxv.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[36:43](1040018.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iv.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p44"></span> *Retract*. ii. 10:  *"quod, mea sententia,
omnibus quœ adversus illam pestem scribere potui, facile præpono."*  The
reason of this preference is explained by Bindemann<span
id="iv.iii-p44.1"></span>, *Der heilige Augstinus*, iii. 168.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[36:44](1040018.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iv.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p46"></span> *"<span id="iv.iii-p46.1"></span>Wo
Entwickelungen, dialektische Begriffe sein sollten, stellt sich ein
Bild, ein Mythus ein."*—Böhringer, p. 390.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[36:45](1040018.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iv.iii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p47"></span> Some have thought Augustin more successful
here than elsewhere.  Cassiodorus may have thought so when he said: 
*"diligentius atque vivacius adversus eos quam contra hæreses alias
disseruit"* (*Instit.* i. quoted by Lardner).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Morals of the Catholic Church.](1040019)
