[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040061)  [Next](1040063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.v.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—If Evil is Defined as that Which is
Hurtful, This Implies Another Refutation of the Manichæans.</span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p2"></span>5.  Let us then inquire more carefully, and,
if possible, more plainly.  I ask you again, What is evil?  If you say
it is that which is hurtful, here, too, you will not answer amiss.  But
consider, I pray you; be on your guard, I beg of you; be so good as to
lay aside party spirit, and make the inquiry for the sake of finding the
truth, not of getting the better of it.  Whatever is hurtful takes away
some good from that to which it is hurtful; for without the loss of good
there can be no hurt.  What, I appeal to you, can be plainer than this?
what more intelligible?  What else is required for complete
demonstration to one of average understanding, if he is not perverse? 
But, if this is granted, the consequence seems plain.  In that race
which you take for the chief evil, nothing can be liable to be hurt,
since there is no good in it.  But if, as you assert, there are two
natures,—the kingdom of light and the kingdom of darkness; since you
make the kingdom of light to be God, attributing to it an uncompounded
nature, <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) so that it has no part
inferior to another, you must grant, however decidedly in opposition to
yourselves, you must grant, nevertheless, that this nature, which you
not only do not deny to be the chief good, but spend all your strength
in trying to show that it is so, is immutable, incorruptible,
impenetrable, inviolable, for otherwise it would not be the chief good;
for the chief good is that than which there is nothing better, and for
such a nature to be hurt is impossible.  Again, if, as has been shown,
to hurt is to deprive of good, there can be no hurt to the kingdom of
darkness, for there is no good in it.  And as the kingdom of light
cannot be hurt, as it is inviolable, what can the evil you speak of be
hurtful to?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_161"></span>[70:162](1040062.htm#fr_161) <span
id="iv.v.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p3"></span> \[It is probable that Mani thought of the
Kingdom of Light pantheistically, and that the principles personified in
his mythological system were the result of efforts on his part to
connect the infinite with the finite.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1040063)
