[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040616)  [Next](1040618) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xx"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—</span>23.  All these statements
in my letter Petilianus set before himself for refutation.  Let us see,
therefore, whether he has refuted them; whether he has made any answer
to them at all.  For I add the words which he calumniously accuses me of
having suppressed, and, having done so, I ask him again the same
question in an even shorter form; for by adding these two words he has
helped me much in shortening this proposition.  If the conscience of him
who gives in holiness is what we look for to cleanse that of the
recipient, and if he who has received his faith wittingly from one that
is faithless, receives not faith but guilt, where shall we find means to
cleanse the conscience of the recipient, when he has not known that the
conscience of the giver is stained with guilt, and when he receives his
faith unwittingly from one that is faithless?  I ask, where shall we
find means to cleanse it?  Let him tell us; let him not pass off into
another subject; let him not cast a mist over the eyes of the
inexperienced.  To end with, at any rate, after many tortuous
circumlocutions have been interposed and thoroughly worked out, let him
at last tell us where we shall find means to cleanse the conscience of
the recipient when the stains of guilt in the conscience of the
faithless baptizer are concealed from view, if the conscience of him who
gives in holiness is what we look for to cleanse that of the recipient,
and if he who has received his faith wittingly from one that is
faithless, receives not faith but guilt?  For the man in question
receives it from a faithless man who has not the conscience of one who
gives in holiness, but a conscience stained with guilt, and veiled from
view.  Where then shall we find means to cleanse his conscience? whence
then does he receive his faith?  For if he is neither then cleansed, nor
then receives faith, when the faithlessness and guilt of the baptizer
are concealed, why, when these are afterwards brought to light and
condemned, is he not then baptized afresh, that he may be cleansed and
receive faith?  But if, while the faithlessness and guilt of the other
are concealed, he is cleansed and does receive faith, whence does he
obtain his cleansing, whence does he receive faith, when there is not
the conscience of one that gives in holiness to cleanse the conscience
of the recipient?  Let him tell us this; let him make reply to this: 
Whence does he obtain his cleansing, whence does he receive faith, if
the conscience of him that gives in holiness is what we look for to
cleanse the conscience of the recipient, seeing that this does not
exist, when the baptizer conceals his character of faithlessness and
guilt?  To this no answer has been made whatever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1040618)
