[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040106)  [Next](1040108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—Against the Title of the Epistle
of Manichæus.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p2"></span>6.  Let us see then what Manichæus
teaches me; and particularly let us examine that treatise which he calls
the Fundamental Epistle, <span id="page_131">p. 131</span> <span
id="iv.viii.vi-Page_131"></span>in which almost all that you believe is
contained.  For in that unhappy time when we read it we were in your
opinion enlightened.  The epistle begins thus:—"Manichæus, an apostle of
Jesus Christ, by the providence of God the Father.  These are wholesome
words from the perennial and living fountain."  Now, if you please,
patiently give heed to my inquiry.  I do not believe Manichæus to be an
apostle of Christ.  Do not, I beg of you, be enraged and begin to
curse.  For you know that it is my rule to believe none of your
statements without consideration.  Therefore I ask, who is this
Manichæus?  You will reply, An apostle of Christ.  I do not believe it. 
Now you are at a loss what to say or do; for you promised to give
knowledge of the truth, and here you are forcing me to believe what I
have no knowledge of.  Perhaps you will read the gospel to me, and will
attempt to find there a testimony to Manichæus.  But should you meet
with a person not yet believing the gospel, how would you reply to him
were he to say, I do not believe?  For my part, I should not believe the
gospel except as moved by the authority of the Catholic Church. <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266)   So when those on whose authority I
have consented to believe in the gospel tell me not to believe in
Manichæus, how can I but consent?  Take your choice.  If you say,
Believe the Catholics:  their advice to me is to put no faith in you; so
that, believing them, I am precluded from believing you;—If you say, Do
not believe the Catholics:  you cannot fairly use the gospel in bringing
me to faith in Manichæus; for it was at the command of the Catholics
that I believed the gospel;—Again, if you say, You were right in
believing the Catholics when they praised the gospel, but wrong in
believing their vituperation of Manichæus:  do you think me such a fool
as to believe or not to believe as you like or dislike, without any
reason?  It is therefore fairer and safer by far for me, having in one
instance put faith in the Catholics, not to go over to you, till,
instead of bidding me believe, you make me understand something in the
clearest and most open manner.  To convince me, then, you must put aside
the gospel.  If you keep to the gospel, I will keep to those who
commanded me to believe the gospel; and, in obedience to them, I will
not believe you at all.  But if haply you should succeed in finding in
the gospel an incontrovertible testimony to the apostleship of
Manichæus, you will weaken my regard for the authority of the Catholics
who bid me not to believe you; and the effect of that will be, that I
shall no longer be able to believe the gospel either, for it was through
the Catholics that I got my faith in it; and so, whatever you bring from
the gospel will no longer have any weight with me.  Wherefore, if no
clear proof of the apostleship of Manichæus is found in the gospel, I
will believe the Catholics rather than you.  But if you read thence some
passage clearly in favor of Manichæus, I will believe neither them nor
you:  not them, for they lied to me about you; nor you, for you quote to
me that Scripture which I had believed on the authority of those liars. 
But far be it that I should not believe the gospel; for believing it, I
find no way of believing you too.  For the names of the apostles, as
there recorded, <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) do not include
the name of Manichæus.  And who the successor of Christ’s betrayer was
we read in the Acts of the Apostles; <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) which book I must needs believe if I
believe the gospel, since both writings alike Catholic authority
commends to me.  The same book contains the well-known narrative of the
calling and apostleship of Paul. <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269)
  Read me now, if you can, in the gospel where Manichæus is called an
apostle, or in any other book in which I have professed to believe. 
Will you read the passage where the Lord promised the Holy Spirit as a
Paraclete, to the apostles?  Concerning which passage, behold how many
and how great are the things that restrain and deter me from believing
in Manichæus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_266"></span>[131:267](1040107.htm#fr_266) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p3"></span> \[This is one of the earliest distinct
assertions of the dependence of the Scriptures for authority on the
Church.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_267"></span>[131:268](1040107.htm#fr_267) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p4"></span> [Matt.
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002), [Mark
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#013), [Luke
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.viii.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[131:269](1040107.htm#fr_268) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p5"></span> [Acts i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#026)<span id="iv.viii.vi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[131:270](1040107.htm#fr_269) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p6"></span> [Acts
ix](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#000)<span id="iv.viii.vi-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1040108)
