[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040122)  [Next](1040124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—This Region of Light Must Be
Material If It is Joined to the Region of Darkness.  The Shape of the
Region of Darkness Joined to the Region of Light.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxii-p2"></span>What, then, bordered on the side of
the region which you call shining and sacred?  The region, you reply, of
darkness.  Do you then allow this latter region to have been material? 
Of course you must, since you as<span id="page_139">p. 139</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xxii-Page_139"></span>sert that all bodies derive their
origin from it.  How then is it that, dull and carnal as you are, you do
not see that unless both regions were material, they could not have
their sides joined to one another?  How could you ever be so blinded in
mind as to say that only the region of darkness was material, and that
the so-called region of light was immaterial and spiritual?  My good
friends, let us open our eyes for once, and see, now that we are told of
it, what is most obvious, that two regions cannot be joined at their
sides unless both are material.

<span id="iv.viii.xxii-p3"></span>23.  Or if we are too dull and stupid
to see this, let us hear whether the region of darkness too has one
side, and is boundless in the other directions, like the region of
light.  They do not hold this from fear of making it seem equal to God. 
Accordingly they make it boundless in depth and in length; but upwards,
above it, they maintain that there is an infinity of empty space.  And
lest this region should appear to be a fraction equal in amount to half
of that representing the region of light, they narrow it also on two
sides.  As if, to give the simplest illustration, a piece of bread were
made into four squares, three white and one black; then suppose the
three white pieces joined as one, and conceive them as infinite upwards
and downwards, and backwards in all directions:  this represents the
Manichæan region of light.  Then conceive the black square infinite
downwards and backwards, but with infinite emptiness above it:  this is
their region of darkness.  But these are secrets which they disclose to
very eager and anxious inquirers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1040124)
