[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040060)  [Next](1040062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.v.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—What Evil is.  That Evil is that
Which is Against Nature.  In Allowing This, the Manichæans Refute
Themselves.</span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p2"></span>2.  You Manichæans often, if not in every
case, ask those whom you try to bring over to your heresy, Whence is
evil?  Suppose I had now met you for the first time, I would ask you, if
you please, to follow my example in putting aside for a little the
explanation you suppose yourselves to have got of these subjects, and to
commence this great inquiry with me as if for the first time.  You ask
me, Whence is evil?  I ask you in return, What is evil?  Which is the
more reasonable question?  Are those right who ask whence a thing is,
when they do not know what it is; or he who thinks it necessary to
inquire first what it is, in order to avoid the gross absurdity of
searching for the origin of a thing unknown?  Your answer is quite
correct, when you say that evil is that which is contrary to nature; for
no one is so mentally blind as not to see that, in every kind, evil is
that which is contrary to the nature of the kind.  But the establishment
of this doctrine is the overthrow of your heresy.  For evil is no
nature, <span id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span
id="iv.v.iv-Page_70"></span>if it is contrary to nature.  Now, according
to you, evil is a certain nature and substance.  Moreover, whatever is
contrary to nature must oppose nature and seek its destruction.  For
nature means nothing else than that which anything is conceived of as
being in its own kind.  Hence is the new word which we now use derived
from the word for being,—essence namely, or, as we usually say,
substance,—while before these words were in use, the word nature was
used instead.  Here, then, if you will consider the matter without
stubbornness, we see that evil is that which falls away from essence and
tends to non-existence.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p3"></span>3.  Accordingly, when the Catholic Church
declares that God is the author of all natures and substances, those who
understand this understand at the same time that God is not the author
of evil.  For how can He who is the cause of the being of all things be
at the same time the cause of their not being,—that is, of their falling
off from essence and tending to non-existence?  For this is what reason
plainly declares to be the definition of evil.  Now, how can that race
of evil of yours, which you make the supreme evil, be against nature,
that is, against substance, when it, according to you, is itself a
nature and substance?  For if it acts against itself, it destroys its
own existence; and when that is completely done, it will come at last to
be the supreme evil.  But this cannot be done, because you will have it
not only to be, but to be everlasting.  That cannot then be the chief
evil which is spoken of as a substance.  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160)

<span id="iv.v.iv-p5"></span>4.  But what am I to do?  I know that many
of you can understand nothing of all this.  I know, too, that there are
some who have a good understanding and can see these things, and yet are
so stubborn in their choice of evil,—a choice that will ruin their
understanding as well,—that they try rather to find what reply they can
make in order to impose upon inactive and feeble minds, instead of
giving their assent to the truth.  Still I shall not regret having
written either what one of you may come some day to consider
impartially, and be led to abandon your error, or what men of
understanding and in allegiance to God, and who are still untainted with
your errors, may read and so be kept from being led astray by your
addresses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_160"></span>[70:161](1040061.htm#fr_160) <span
id="iv.v.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p4"></span> \[On Augustin’s view of negativity of evil
and on the relation of this view to Neo-Platonism, see Introduction,
chapter IX.  Augustin’s view seems to exclude the permanence of evil in
the world, and so everlasting punishment and everlasting rebellion
against God.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1040062)
