[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040064)  [Next](1040066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.v.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—What Corruption Affects and What
It is.</span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p2"></span>8.  What further does the Catholic light
say?  What do you suppose, but what is the actual truth, that it is the
created substance which can be corrupted, for the uncreated, which is
the chief good, is incorruptible; and corruption, which is the chief
evil, cannot be corrupted; besides, that it is not a substance?  But if
you ask what corruption is, consider to what it seeks to bring the
things which it corrupts; for it affects those things according to its
own nature.  Now all things by corruption fall away from what they were,
and are brought to non-continuance, to non-existence; for existence
implies continuance.  Thus the supreme and chief existence is so called
because it continues in itself, or is self-contained.  In the case of a
thing changing for the better, the change is not from continuance, but
from perversion to the worse, that is, from falling away from essence;
the author of which falling away is not He who is the author of the
essence.  So in some things there is change for the better, and so a
tendency towards existence.  And this change is not called a perversion,
but reversion or conversion; for perversion is opposed to orderly
arrangement.  Now things which tend towards existence tend towards
order, and, attaining order they attain existence, as far as that is
possible to a creature.  For order reduces to a certain uniformity that
which it arranges; and existence is nothing else than being one.  Thus,
so far as anything acquires unity, so far it exists.  For uniformity and
harmony are the effects of unity, and by these compound things exist as
far as they have existence.  For simple things exist by themselves, for
they are one.  But things not simple imitate unity by the agreement of
their parts; and so far as they attain this, so far they exist.  This
arrangement is the cause of existence, disorder of non-existence; and
perversion or corruption are the other names for disorder.  So whatever
is corrupted tends to non-existence.  You may now be left to reflect
upon the effect of corruption, that you may discover what is the chief
evil; for it is that which corruption aims at accomplishing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1040066)
