[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040666)  [Next](1040668) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.x"></span>

<span id="v.vi.x-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.vi.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—</span>32.  But they, as we have
sometimes said before in other places, do not charge themselves with
what they do to us; while, on the other hand, they charge us with what
they do to themselves.  For which of our party is there who would
desire, I do not say that one of them should perish, but should even
lose any of his possessions?  But if the house of David could not earn
peace on any other terms except that Absalom his son should have been
slain in the war which he was waging against his father, although he had
most carefully given strict injunctions to his followers that they
should use their utmost endeavors to preserve him alive and safe, that
his paternal affection might be able to pardon him on his repentance,
what remained for him except to weep for the son that he had lost, and
to console himself in his sorrow by reflecting on the acquisition of
peace for his kingdom? <span id="fr_2527"></span>[2528](#fn_2527)   The
same, then, is the case with the Catholic Church, our mother; for when
war is waged against her by men who are certainly different from sons,
since it must be acknowledged that from the great tree, which by the
spreading of its branches is extended over all the world, this little
branch in Africa is broken off, whilst she is willing in her love to
give them birth, that they may return to the root, without which they
cannot have the true life, at the same time if she collects the
remainder in so large a number by the loss of some, she soothes and
cures the sorrow of her maternal heart by the thoughts of the
deliverance of such mighty nations; especially when she considers that
those who are lost perish by a death which they brought upon themselves,
and not, like Absalom, by the fortune of war.  And if you were to see
the joy of those who are delivered in the peace of Christ, their crowded
assemblies, their eager zeal, the gladsomeness with which they flock
together, both to hear and sing hymns, and to be instructed in the word
of God; the great grief with which many of them recall to mind their
former error, the joy with which they come to the consideration of the
truth which they have learned, with the indignation and detestation
which they feel towards their lying teachers, now that they have found
out what falsehoods they disseminated concerning our sacraments; and how
many of them, moreover, acknowledge that they long ago desired to be
Catholics, but dared not take the step in the midst of men of such
violence,—if, I say, you were to see the congregations of these nations
delivered from such perdition, then you would say that it would have
been the extreme of cruelty, if in the fear that certain desperate men,
in number not to be compared with the multitudes of those who were
rescued, might be burned in fires which they voluntarily kindled for
themselves, these others had been left to be lost for ever, and to be
tortured in fires which shall not be quenched.

<span id="v.vi.x-p3"></span>33.  For if two men were dwelling together
in one house, which we knew with absolute certainty to be upon the point
of falling down, and they were unwillingly to believe us when we warned
them of the danger, and persisted in remaining in the house; if it were
in our power to rescue them, even against their will, and we were
afterwards to show them the ruin threatening their house, so that they
should not dare to return again within its reach, I think that if we
abstained from doing it, we should well deserve the charge of cruelty. 
And further, if one of them should say to us, Since you have entered the
house to save our lives, I shall forthwith kill myself; while the other
was not indeed willing to come forth from the house, nor to be rescued,
but yet had not the hardihood to kill himself:  which alternative should
we choose,—to leave both of them to be overwhelmed in the ruin, or that,
while one at any rate was delivered by our merciful efforts, the other
should perish by no fault of ours, but rather by his own?  No one is so
unhappy as not to find it easy enough to deride what should be done in
such a case.  And I have proposed the question of two individuals,—one,
that is to say, who is lost, and one who is delivered; what then must we
think of the case where some few are lost, and an innumerable multitude
of nations are delivered?  For there are actually not so many persons
who thus perish of their own free will, as there are estates, villages,
streets, fortresses, municipal towns, cities, that are delivered by the
laws under consideration from that fatal and eternal destruction.

<span id="v.vi.x-p4"></span>34.  But if we were to consider the matter
<span id="page_646">p. 646</span> <span
id="v.vi.x-Page_646"></span>under discussion with yet greater care, I
think that if there were a large number of persons in the house which
was going to fall, and any single one of them could be saved, and when
we endeavored to effect his rescue, the others were to kill themselves
by jumping out of the windows, we should console ourselves in our grief
for the loss of the rest by the thoughts of the safety of the one; and
we should not allow all to perish without a single rescue, in the fear
lest the remainder should destroy themselves.  What then should we think
of the work of mercy to which we ought to apply ourselves, in order that
men may attain eternal life and escape eternal punishment, if true
reason and benevolence compel us to give such aid to men, in order to
secure for them a safety which is not only temporal, but very short,—for
the brief space of their life on earth?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2527"></span>[645:2528](1040667.htm#fr_2527) <span
id="v.vi.x-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.x-p2"></span> [2 Sam.
18:0](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#000), [2 Sam.
22:0](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#000)<span id="v.vi.x-p2.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1040668)
