[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040085)  [Next](1040087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—How Vicious Souls, However Worthy
of Condemnation They May Be, Excel the Light Which is Praiseworthy in
Its Kind.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p2"></span>Certainly nobody doubts that whatever is
an object of intellectual perception, by virtue of divine laws surpasses
in excellence every sensible object and consequently also this light. 
For what, I ask, do we perceive by thought, if not that it is one thing
to know with the mind, and another thing to experience bodily
sensations, and that the former is incomparably more sublime than the
latter, and so that intelligible things must needs be preferred to
sensible things, since the intellect itself is so highly exalted above
the senses?

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p3"></span>5.  Hence this also I should perchance
have known, which manifestly follows, since injustice and intemperance
and other vices of the mind are not objects of sense, but of intellect,
how it comes about that these too which we detest and consider
condemnable, yet in as much as they are objects of intellect, can
outrank this light however praiseworthy it may be in its kind.  For it
is borne in upon the mind subjecting itself well to God, that, first of
all, not everything that we praise is to be preferred to everything that
we find fault with.  For in praising the purest lead, I do not therefore
put a higher value upon it than upon the gold that I find fault with. 
For everything must be considered in its kind.  I disapprove of a lawyer
ignorant of many statutes, yet I so prefer him to the most approved
tailor, that I should think him incomparably superior.  But I praise the
tailor because he is thoroughly skilled in his own craft, while I
rightly blame the lawyer because he imperfectly fulfills the functions
of his profession.  Wherefore I should have found out that the light
which in its own kind is perfect, is rightly to be praised; yet because
it is included in the number of sensible things, which class must needs
yield to the class of intelligible things, it must be ranked below
unjust and intemperate souls, since these are intelligible; although we
may without injustice judge these to be most worthy of condemnation. 
For in the case of these we ask that they be reconciled to God, not that
they be preferred to that lightning.  Wherefore, if any one had
contended that this luminary is from God, I should not have opposed; but
rather I should have said, that souls, even vicious ones, not in so far
as they are vicious, but in so far as they are souls, must be
acknowledged to be creatures of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1040087)
