[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040117)  [Next](1040119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—The Soul, Though Mutable, Has
No Material Form.  It is All Present in Every Part of the Body.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p2"></span>But why speak of truth and wisdom
which <span id="page_137">p. 137</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xvii-Page_137"></span>surpass all the powers of the soul,
when the nature of the soul itself, which is known to be mutable, still
has no kind of material extension in space?  For whatever consists of
any kind of gross matter must necessarily be divisible into parts,
having one in one place, and another in another.  Thus, the finger is
less than the whole hand, and one finger is less than two; and there is
one place for this finger, and another for that, and another for the
rest of the hand.  And this applies not to organized bodies only, but
also to the earth, each part of which has its own place, so that one
cannot be where the other is.  So in moisture, the smaller quantity
occupies a smaller space, and the larger quantity a larger space; and
one part is at the bottom of the cup, and another part near the mouth. 
So in air, each part has its own place; and it is impossible for the air
in this house to have along with itself, in the same house at the same
moment, the air that the neighbors have.  And even as regards light
itself, one part pours through one window, and another through another;
and a greater through the larger, and a smaller through the smaller. 
Nor, in fact, can there be any bodily substance, whether celestial or
terrestrial, whether aerial or moist, which is not less in part than in
whole, or which can possibly have one part in the place of another at
the same time; but, having one thing in one place and another in
another, its extension in space is a substance which has distinct limits
and parts, or, so to speak, sections.  The nature of the soul, on the
other hand, though we leave out of account its power of perceiving
truth, and consider only its inferior power of giving unity to the body,
and of sensation in the body, does not appear to have any material
extension in space.  For it is all present in each separate part of its
body when it is all present in any sensation.  There is not a smaller
part in the finger, and a larger in the arm, as the bulk of the finger
is less than that of the arm; but the quantity everywhere is the same,
for the whole is present everywhere.  For when the finger is touched,
the whole mind feels, though the sensation is not through the whole
body.  No part of the mind is unconscious of the touch, which proves the
presence of the whole.  And yet it is not so present in the finger or in
the sensation as to abandon the rest of the body, or to gather itself up
into the one place where the sensation occurs.  For when it is all
present in the sensation in a finger, if another part, say the foot, be
touched, it does not fail to be all present in this sensation too:  so
that at the same moment it is all present in different places, without
leaving one in order to be in the other, and without having one part in
one, and another in the other; but by this power showing itself to be
all present at the same moment in separate places.  Since it is all
present in the sensations of these places, it proves that it is not
bound by the conditions of space. <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_280"></span>[137:281](1040118.htm#fr_280) <span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p3"></span> \[Modern mental physiologists differ
among themselves as regards the presence of the mind throughout the
entire nervous system; some maintaining the view here presented, and
others making the brain to be the seat of sensation, and the nerves
telegraphic lines, so to speak, for the communication of impressions
from the various parts of the body to the brain.  Compare <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.viii.xvii-p3.1"></span>Carpenter</span>: 
*Mental Physiology*, and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p3.2"></span>Calderwood</span>:  *Mind and
Brain*.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1040119)
