[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040092)  [Next](1040094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xiii"></span> <span id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span
id="iv.vi.xiii-Page_104"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—From the Definitions Given of
Sin and Will, He Overthrows the Entire Heresy of the Manichæans. 
Likewise from the Just Condemnation of Evil Souls It Follows that They
are Evil Not by Nature But by Will.  That Souls are Good By Nature, to
Which the Pardon of Sins is Granted.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p2"></span>16.  Come now, let us see in what
respect these things would have aided us.  Much every way, so that I
should have desired nothing more; for they end the whole cause; for
whoever consulting in the inner mind, where they are more pronounced and
assured, the secrets of his own conscience, and the divine laws
absolutely imposed upon nature, grants that these two definitions of
will and sin are true, condemns without any hesitation by the fewest and
the briefest, but plainly the most invincible reasons, the whole heresy
of the Manichæans.  Which can be thus considered.  They say that there
are two kinds of souls, the one good, which is in such a way from God,
that it is said not to have been made by Him out of any material or out
of nothing, but to have proceeded as a certain part from the very
substance itself of God; the other evil, which they believe and strive
to get others to believe pertains to God in no way whatever; and so they
maintain that the one is the perfection of good, but the other the
perfection of evil, and that these two classes were at one time distinct
but are now commingled.  The character and the cause of this commingling
I had not yet heard; but nevertheless I could have inquired whether that
evil kind of souls, before it was mingled with the good, had any will. 
For if not, it was without sin and innocent, and so by no means
evil. <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212)   But if evil in such a
way, that though without will, as fire, yet if it should touch the good
it would violate and corrupt it; how impious it is to believe that the
nature of evil is powerful enough to change any part of God, and that
the Highest Good is corruptible and violable!  But if the will was
present, assuredly there was present, no one compelling, a movement of
the mind either towards not losing something or obtaining something. 
But this something was either good, or was thought to be good, for not
otherwise could it be earnestly desired.  But in supreme evil, before
the commingling which they maintain, there never was any good.  Whence
then could there be in it either the knowledge or the thought of good? 
Did they wish for nothing that was in themselves, and earnestly desire
that true good which was without?  That will must truly be declared
worthy of distinguished and great praise by which is earnestly desired
the supreme and true good.  Whence then in supreme evil was this
movement of mind most worthy of so great praise?  Did they seek it for
the sake of injuring it?  In the first place, the argument comes to the
same thing.  For he who wishes to injure, wishes to deprive another of
some good for the sake of some good of his own.  There was therefore in
them either a knowledge of good or an opinion of good, which ought by no
means to belong to supreme evil.  In the second place, whence had they
known, that good placed outside of themselves, which they designed to
injure, existed at all.  If they had intellectually perceived it, what
is more excellent than such a mind?  Is there anything else for which
the whole energy of good men is put forth except the knowledge of that
supreme and sincere good?  What therefore is now scarcely conceded to a
few good and just men, was mere evil, no good assisting, then able to
accomplish?  But if those souls bore bodies and saw the supreme good
with their eyes, what tongues, what hearts, what intellects suffice for
lauding and proclaiming those eyes, with which the minds of just men can
scarcely be compared?  How great good things we find in supreme evil! 
For if to see God is evil, God is not a good; but God is a good;
therefore to see God is good; and I know not what can be compared to
this good.  Since to see anything is good, whence can it be made out
that to be able to see is evil?  Therefore whatever in those eyes or in
those minds brought it about, that the divine essence could be seen by
them, brought about a great thing and a good thing most worthy of
ineffable praise.  But if it was not brought about, but it was such in
itself and eternal, it is difficult to find anything better than this
evil.

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p4"></span>17.  Lastly, that these souls may have
nothing of these praiseworthy things which by the reasonings of the
Manichæans they are compelled to have, I should have asked, whether God
condemns any or no souls.  If none, there is no judgment of rewards and
punishments, no providence, and the world is administered by chance
rather than by reason, or rather is not administered at all.  For the
name administration must not be given to chances.  But if it is impious
for all those that are bound by any religion to believe <span
id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span id="iv.vi.xiii-Page_105"></span>this,
it remains either that there is condemnation of some souls, or that
there are no sins.  But if there are no sins, neither is there any
evil.  Which if the Manichæans should say, they would slay their heresy
with a single blow.  Therefore they and I agree that some souls are
condemned by divine law and judgment.  But if these souls are good, what
is that justice?  If evil, are they so by nature, or by will?  But by
nature souls can in no way be evil.  Whence do we teach this.  From the
above definitions of will and sin.  For to speak of souls, and that they
are evil, and that they do not sin, is full of madness; but to say that
they sin without will, is great craziness, and to hold any one guilty of
sin for not doing what he could not do, belongs to the height of
iniquity and insanity.  Wherefore whatever these souls do, if they do it
by nature not by will, that is, if they are wanting in a movement of
mind free both for doing and not doing, if finally no power of
abstaining from their work is conceded to them; we cannot hold that the
sin is theirs. <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213)   But all confess
both that evil souls are justly, and souls that have not sinned are
unjustly condemned; therefore they confess that those souls are evil
that sin.  But these, as reason teaches, do not sin.  Therefore the
extraneous class of evil souls of the Manichæans, whatever it may be, is
a non-entity.

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p6"></span>18.  Let us now look at that good class
of souls, which again they exalt to such a degree as to say that it is
the very substance of God.  But how much better it is that each one
should recognize his own rank and merit, nor be so puffed up with
sacrilegious pride as to believe that as often as he experiences a
change in himself it is the substance of that supreme good, which devout
reason holds and teaches to be unchangeable!  For behold! since it is
manifest that souls do not sin in not being such as they cannot be; it
follows that these supposititious souls, whatever they may be, do not
sin at all, and moreover that they are absolutely non-existent; it
remains that since there are sins, they find none to whom to attribute
them except the good class of souls and the substance of God.  But
especially are they pressed by Christian authority; for never have they
denied that forgiveness of sins is granted when any one has been
converted to God; never have they said (as they have said of many other
passages) that some corrupter has interpolated this into the divine
Scriptures.  To whom then are sins attributed?  If to those evil souls
of the alien class, these also can become good, can possess the kingdom
of God with Christ.  Which denying, they \[the Manichæans\] have no
other class except those souls which they maintain are of the substance
of God.  It remains that they acknowledge that not only these latter
also, but these alone sin.  But I make no contention about their being
alone in sinning; yet they sin.  But are they compelled to sin by being
commingled with evil?  If so compelled that there was no power of
resisting, they do not sin.  If it is in their power to resist, and they
voluntarily consent, we are compelled to find out through their \[the
Manichæan\] teaching, why so great good things in supreme evil, why this
evil in supreme good, unless it be that neither is that which they bring
into suspicion evil, nor is that which they pervert by superstition
supreme good?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_212"></span>[104:213](1040093.htm#fr_212) <span
id="iv.vi.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p3"></span> In his *Retractations*, Augustin
replies to the Pelagian denial of the sinfulness of infants, in support
of which they had quoted the above sentence.  "They \[infants\] are held
guilty not by propriety of will but by origin.  For what is every
earthly man in origin but Adam?"  The will of the whole human race was
in Adam, and when Adam sinned the whole race voluntarily sinned, seems
to be his meaning.—A.H.N.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[105:214](1040093.htm#fr_213) <span
id="iv.vi.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p5"></span> In his *Retractations*, Augustin
explains that by nature is to be understood the state in which we were
created without vice.  He transfers the entire argument from the actual
condition of man to the primitive Adamic condition.  It is evident,
however, that this was not his meaning when he combated the Manichæans. 
The question of infant sinfulness arises here also, and is discussed in
the usual Anti-Pelagian way.—A.H.N.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1040094)
