[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040621)  [Next](1040623) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xxv"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—</span>29.  And yet Petilianus,
to avoid answering what I have said, sets before himself what I have
not, and draws men’s attention away from the consideration of his debt,
lest they should exact the answer which he ought to make.  He constantly
introduces the expressions, "I have been unacquainted with," "I say,"
and makes answer, "But if you were unacquainted with;" and, as though
convicting me, so that it should be out of my power to say, "I was
unacquainted with," he quotes Mensurius, Cæcilianus, Macarius, Taurinus,
Romanus, and declares that "they had acted in opposition to the Church
of God, as I could not fail to know, seeing that I am an African, and
already well advanced in years," whereas, so far as I hear, Mensurius
died in the unity of the communion of the Church, before the faction of
Donatus separated itself therefrom; whilst I had read the history of
Cæcilianus, that they themselves had referred his case to Constantine,
and that he had been once and again acquitted by the judges whom that
emperor had appointed to try the matter, and again a third time by the
sovereign himself, when they appealed to him.  But whatever Macarius and
Taurinus and Romanus did, either in their judicial or executive
functions, in behalf of unity as against their pertinacious madness, it
is beyond doubt that it was all done in accordance with the laws, which
these same persons made it unavoidable should be passed and put in
force, by referring the case of Cæcilianus to the judgment of the
emperor.

<span id="v.v.v.xxv-p2"></span>30.  Among many other things which are
wholly irrevelant, he says that "I was so hard hit by the decision of
the proconsul Messianus, that I was forced to fly from Africa."  And in
consequence of this falsehood (to which, if he was not the author of it,
he certainly lent malicious ears when others maliciously invented it),
how many other falsehoods had he the hardihood not only to utter, but
actually to write with wondrous rashness, seeing that I went to Milan
before the consulship of Banto, and that, in pursuance of the profession
of rhetorician which I then followed, I recited a panegyric in his honor
as consul on the first of January, in the presence of a vast assembly of
men; and after that journey I only returned to Africa after the death of
the tyrant Maximus:  whereas the proconsul Messianus heard the case of
the Manichæans after the consulship of Banto, as the day of the
chronicles inserted by Petilianus himself sufficiently shows.  And if it
were necessary to prove this for the satisfaction of those who are in
doubt, or believe the contrary, I could produce many men, illustrious in
their generation, as most sufficient witnesses to all that period of my
life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1040623)
