[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040599)  [Next](1040601) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—</span>4.  These comparisons of
the gospel you doubtless recognize.  Nor can we suppose them given for
any other purpose, except that no one should make his boast in man, and
that no one should be puffed up for one against another, or divided one
against another, saying, "I am of Paul," when certainly Paul was not
crucified for you, nor were you baptized in the name of Paul, much less
in that of Cæcilianus, or of any one of us,  <span
id="fr_2334"></span>[2335](#fn_2334) that you may learn, that so long as
the chaff is being bruised with the corn, so long as the bad fishes swim
together with the good in the nets of the Lord, till the time of
separation shall come, it is your duty rather to endure the admixture of
the bad out of consideration for the good, than to violate the principle
of brotherly love towards the good from any consideration of the bad. 
For this admixture is not for eternity, but for time alone; nor is it
spiritual, but corporal.  And in this the angels will not be liable to
err, when they shall collect the bad from the midst of the good, and
commit them to the burning fiery furnace.  For the Lord knoweth those
which are His.  And if a man cannot depart bodily from those who
practise iniquity so long as time shall last, at any rate, let every one
that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity itself. <span
id="fr_2335"></span>[2336](#fn_2335)   For in the meantime he may
separate himself from the wicked in life, and in morals, and in heart
and will, and in the same respects depart from his society; and
separation such as this should always be maintained.  But let the
separation in the body be waited for till the end of time, faithfully,
patiently, bravely.  In consideration of which expectation it is said,
"Wait on the Lord; be of good courage, and He shall strengthen thine
heart; wait, I say, upon the Lord."  <span
id="fr_2336"></span>[2337](#fn_2336)   For the greatest palm of
toleration is won by those who, among false brethren that have crept in
unawares, seeking their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ, yet
show that they on their part seek not to disturb the love which is not
their own, but Jesus Christ’s, by any turbulent or rash dissension, nor
to break the unity of the Lord’s net, in which are gathered together
fish of every kind; till it is drawn to the shore, that is, till the end
of time, by any wicked strife fostered in the spirit of pride:  whilst
each might think himself to be something, being really nothing, and so
might lead himself astray, and wish that sufficient reason might be
found for the separation of Christian peoples in the judgment of himself
or of his friends, who declare that they know beyond all question
certain wicked men unworthy of communion in the sacraments of the
Christian religion:  though whatever it may be that they know of them,
they cannot persuade the universal Church, which, as it was foretold, is
spread abroad throughout all nations, to give credit to their tale.  And
when they refuse communion with these men, as men whose character they
know, they desert the unity of the Church; whereas they ought rather, if
there really were in them that charity which endureth all things,
themselves to bear what they know in one nation, lest they should
separate themselves from the good whom they were unable throughout all
nations to fill with the teaching of evil alien to them.  Whence even,
without discussing the case, in which they are convicted by the
weightiest proofs of having uttered calumnies against the innocent, they
are believed with greater probability to have invented false charges of
giving up the sacred books, when they are found to have themselves
committed the far more heinous crime of wicked division in the Church. 
For even, if whatever imputations they have cast of giving up the sacred
books were true, yet they in no wise ought to have abandoned the society
of Christians, who are commended by holy Scripture even to the ends of
the world, on considerations which they have been familiar with, while
these men showed that they were not acquainted with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2334"></span>[598:2335](1040600.htm#fr_2334) <span
id="v.v.v.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.iii-p2"></span> [1 Cor.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)<span id="v.v.v.iii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2335"></span>[598:2336](1040600.htm#fr_2335) <span
id="v.v.v.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.iii-p3"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span id="v.v.v.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2336"></span>[598:2337](1040600.htm#fr_2336) <span
id="v.v.v.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.iii-p4"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#014)<span id="v.v.v.iii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1040601)
