[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040270)  [Next](1040272) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—</span>14.  "This, moreover,"
says he, "Agrippinus, a man of excellent memory, with the rest, bishops
with him, who at that time governed the Church of the Lord in the
province of Africa and Numidia, did establish and, after the
investigation of a mutual Council had weighed it, confirm; whose
sentence, being both religious and legitimate and salutary in accordance
with the Catholic faith and Church, we also have followed."  <span
id="fr_1243"></span>[1244](#fn_1243)   By this witness he gives
sufficient proof how much more ready he would have been to bear his
testimony, had any Council been held to discuss this matter which either
embraced the whole Church, or at least represented our brethren beyond
the sea. <span id="fr_1244"></span>[1245](#fn_1244)   But such a Council
had not yet been held, because the whole world was bound together by the
powerful bond of custom; and this was deemed sufficient to oppose to
those who wished to introduce what was new, because they could not
comprehend the truth.  Afterwards, however, while the question became
matter for discussion and investigation amongst many on either side, the
new practice was not only invented, but even submitted to the authority
and power of a plenary Council,—after the martyrdom of Cyprian, it is
true, but before we were born. <span
id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245)   But that this was indeed the
<span id="page_432">p. 432</span> <span
id="v.iv.iv.ix-Page_432"></span>custom of the Church, which afterwards
was confirmed by a plenary Council, in which the truth was brought to
light, and many difficulties cleared away, is plain enough from the
words of the blessed Cyprian himself in that same letter to Jubaianus,
which was quoted as being read in the Council. <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246)   For he says, "But some one asks,
What then will be done in the case of those who, coming out of heresy to
the Church, have already been admitted without baptism?" where certainly
he shows plainly enough what was usually done, though he would have
wished it otherwise; and in the very fact of his quoting the Council of
Agrippinus, he clearly proves that the custom of the Church was
different.  Nor indeed was it requisite that he should seek to establish
the practice by this Council, if it was already sanctioned by custom;
and in the Council itself some of the speakers expressly declare, in
giving their opinion, that they went against the custom of the Church in
deciding what they thought was right.  Wherefore let the Donatists
consider this one point, which surely none can fail to see, that if the
authority of Cyprian is to be followed, it is to be followed rather in
maintaining unity than in altering the custom of the Church; but if
respect is paid to his Council, it must at any rate yield place to the
later Council of the universal Church, of which he rejoiced to be a
member, often warning his associates that they should all follow his
example in upholding the coherence of the whole body.  For both later
Councils are preferred among later generations to those of earlier date;
and the whole is always, with good reason, looked upon as superior to
the parts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[431:1244](1040271.htm#fr_1243) <span
id="v.iv.iv.ix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.ix-p2"></span> Cypr. *Ep*. lxxi. 4.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[431:1245](1040271.htm#fr_1244) <span
id="v.iv.iv.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.ix-p3"></span> *Transmarinum vel universale
Concilium*.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[431:1246](1040271.htm#fr_1245) <span
id="v.iv.iv.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.ix-p4"></span> The plenary Council, on whose authority
Augustin relies in many places in this work, was either that of Arles,
in 314 <span class="c11"><span id="v.iv.iv.ix-p4.1"></span>A.D.</span>,
or of Nicæa, in 325 <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iv.ix-p4.2"></span>A.D.</span>, both of them being before his
birth, in 354 <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iv.ix-p4.3"></span>A.D.</span>  He quotes the decision of the
same council, *contra Parmenianum*, ii. 13, 30; *de Hæresibus*  69: 
*Ep.* xliii. 7, 19.  *Contra Parmenianum*, iii. 4, 21:  "They
condemned," he says, "some few in Africa, by whom they were in turn
vanquished by the judgment of the whole world;" and he adds, that "the
Catholics trusted ecclesiastical judges like these in preference to the
defeated parties in the suit."  *Ib*. 6, 30:  He says that the
Donatists, "having made a schism in the unity of the Church, were
refuted, not by the authority of 310 African bishops, but by that of the
whole world."  And in the sixth chapter of the first book of the same
treatise, he says that the Donatists, after the decision at Arles, came
again to Constantine, and there were defeated "by a final decision,"
*i.e.* at Milan, as is seen from *Ep.* xliii. 7, 20, in the year 316
<span class="c11"><span id="v.iv.iv.ix-p4.4"></span> A.D.</span> 
Substance of note in Benedictine ed. reproduced in Migne.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[432:1247](1040271.htm#fr_1246) <span
id="v.iv.iv.ix-p4.5"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.ix-p5"></span> See above, ch. ii. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1040272)
