[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040575)  [Next](1040577) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxix"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 89.—</span>194.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span>
said:  "Here you have the fullest possible proof that a Christian may
take no part in the destruction of another.  But the first establishing
of this principle was in the case of Peter, as it is written, ‘Simon
Peter having a sword, drew it, and smote the high priest’s servant, and
cut off his right ear.  Then said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword
into the sheath.  For all they that take the sword shall perish with the
sword.’" <span id="fr_2213"></span>[2214](#fn_2213)

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p3"></span>195.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p3.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  Why then do
you not restrain the weapons of the Circumcelliones with such words as
these?  Should you think that you were going beyond the words of the
gospel if you should say, All they that take the cudgel shall perish
with the cudgel?  Withhold not then your pardon, if our ancestors were
unable to restrain the men by whom you complain that Marculus was thrown
down a precipice; for neither is it written in the gospel, He that useth
to throw men down a precipice shall be cast therefrom.  And would that,
as your charges are either false or out of date, so the cudgels of those
friends of yours would cease!  And yet, perhaps, you take it ill that,
if not by force of law, at any rate in words, we take away their armor
from your legions in saying that they manifest their rage with sticks
alone.  For that was the ancient fashion of their wickedness, but now
they have advanced too far.  For amid their drunken revellings, and amid
the free license of assembling together, wandering in the streets,
jesting, drinking, passing the whole night in company with women who
have no husbands, they have learned not only to brandish cudgels, but to
wield swords and whirl slings.  But why should I not say to them (God
knows with what feelings I say it and with what feelings they receive
it!), Madmen, the sword of Peter, though drawn from motives not yet free
from fleshly impurity, was yet drawn in defence of the body of Christ
against the body of His persecutor, but your arms are portioned out
against the cause of Christ; but the body of which He is the head, that
is, His Church, extends throughout all nations.  He Himself has said
this, and has ascended into heaven, whither the fury of the Jews could
not follow Him; and it is your fury which attacks His members in the
body, which on His ascension He commended to our care.  In defense of
those members all men rage against you, all men resist you, as many as
being in the Catholic Church, and possessing as yet but little faith,
are influenced by the same motives as Peter was when he drew his sword
in the name of Christ.  But there is a great difference between your
persecution and theirs.  You are like the servant of the Jews’ high
priest; for in the service of your princes you arm yourselves against
the Catholic Church, that is, against the body of Christ.  But they are
such as Peter then was, fighting even with the strength of their bodies
for the body of Christ, that is, the Church.  But if they are bidden to
be still, as Peter then was bidden, how much more should you be warned
that, laying aside the madness of heresy, you should join the unity of
those members for which they so fight?  But, being wounded by such men
as these, you hate us also; and, as though you had lost your right ears,
you do not hear the voice of Christ as He sits at the right hand of the
Father.  But to whom shall I address myself, or how shall I address
myself to them, seeing that in them I find no time wherein to speak? for
even early in the morning they are reeking with wine, drunk, it may be
already in the day, it may be still from overnight.  Moreover, they
utter threats, and not they only, but their own bishops utter threats
concerning them, being ready to deny that what they have done has any
bearing on them.  May the Lord grant to us a song of degrees, in which
we may say, "When I am with those who hate peace, I am peaceful.  When I
would speak with them, they are wont to fight me without cause." <span
id="fr_2214"></span>[2215](#fn_2214)   For thus says the body of Christ,
which throughout the whole world is assailed by heretics, by some here,
by others there, and by all alike wherever they may be. <span
id="fr_2215"></span>[2216](#fn_2215)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2213"></span>[576:2214](1040576.htm#fr_2213) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p2"></span> [John
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011), [Matt.
26:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052)<span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2214"></span>[576:2215](1040576.htm#fr_2214) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p4"></span> [Ps.
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007)<span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p4.1"></span>, cp. Hieron.

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[576:2216](1040576.htm#fr_2215) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxix-p5"></span> See *Contr. Cresc*. l. III. c. 67,
l. IV. cc. 60, 61.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 90](1040577)
