[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040120)  [Next](1040122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—If the Mind Has No Material
Extension, Much Less Has God.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xx-p2"></span>21.  So then, if the mind, so liable to
change, whether from a multitude of dissimilar desires, or from feelings
varying according to the abundance or the want of desirable things, or
from these endless sports of the fancy, or from forgetfulness and
remembrance, or from learning and ignorance; if the mind, I say, exposed
to frequent change from these and the like causes, is perceived to be
without any local or material extension, and to have a vigor of action
which surmounts these material conditions, what must we think or
conclude of God Himself, who remains superior to all intelligent beings
in His freedom from perturbation and from change, giving to every one
what is due?  Him the mind dares to express more easily than to see; and
the clearer the sight, the less is the power of expression.  And yet
this God, if, as the Manichæan fables are constantly asserting, He were
limited in extension in one direction and unlimited in others, could be
measured by so many subdivisions or fractions of greater or less size,
as every one might fancy; so that, for example, a division of the extent
of two feet would be less by eight parts than one of ten feet.  For this
is the property of all natures which have extension in space, and
therefore cannot be all in one place.  But even with the mind this is
not the case; and this degrading and perverted idea of the mind is found
among people who are unfit for such investigations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1040122)
