[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040400)  [Next](1040402) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.ix.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.ix.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—</span>2.  Marcus of
Mactaris <span id="fr_1760"></span>[1761](#fn_1760) said: <span
id="page_500">p. 500</span> <span id="v.iv.ix.ii-Page_500"></span>"It is
not to be wondered at if heretics, being enemies and opponents of the
truth, claim to themselves what has been entrusted and vouchsafed to
other men.  What is marvellous is that some of us, traitors to the
truth, uphold heretics and oppose Christians; therefore we decree that
heretics should be baptized." <span id="fr_1761"></span>[1762](#fn_1761)

<span id="v.iv.ix.ii-p4"></span>3.  To him we answer:  It is indeed much
more to be wondered at, and deserving of expressions of great praise,
that Cyprian and his colleagues had such love for unity that they
continued in unity with those whom they considered to be traitors to the
truth, without any apprehension of being polluted by them.  For when
Marcus said, "It is marvellous that some of us, traitors to the truth,
uphold heretics and oppose Christians," it seemed natural that he should
add, Therefore we decree that communion should not be held with them. 
This he did not say; but what he does say is, "Therefore we decree that
heretics should be baptized," adhering to what the peaceful Cyprian had
enjoined in the first instance, saying, "Judging no man, nor removing
any from the right of communion if he entertain a different opinion." 
While, therefore, the Donatists calumniate us and call us *traditors*, I
should be glad to know, supposing that any Jew or pagan were found, who,
after reading the records of that Council should call both us and them,
according to their own rules, traitors to the truth, how we should be
able to make our joint defense so as to refute and wash away so grave a
charge.  They give the name of *traditors* to men whom they were never
able in times past to convict of the offense, and whom they cannot now
show to be involved in it, being themselves rather shown to be liable to
the same charge.  But what has this to do with us?  What shall we say of
them who, by their own showing, are unquestionably traitors?  For if we,
however falsely, are called *traditors*, because, as they allege, we
took part in the same communion with *traditors*, we have all taken part
with the *traditors* in question, seeing that in the time of the blessed
Cyprian the party of Donatus had not yet separated itself from unity. 
For the delivery of the sacred books, from which they began to be called
*traditors*, occurred somewhat more than forty years after his
martyrdom.  If, therefore, we are *traditors*, because we sprang from
*traditors*, as they believe or pretend, we both of us derive our origin
from those other traitors.  For there is no room for saying that they
did not communicate with these traitors, since they call them men of
their own party.  In the words of the Council which they are most
forward to quote, "Some of us," it declares, "traitors to the truth,
uphold heretics."  To this is added the testimony of Cyprian, showing
clearly that he remained in communion with them, when he says, "Judging
no man, nor removing any from the right of communion if he entertain a
different opinion."  For those who entertained a different opinion were
the very persons whom Marcus calls traitors to the truth because they
upheld heretics, as he maintains, by receiving them into the Church
without baptism.  That it was, moreover, the custom that they should be
so received, is testified both by Cyprian himself in many passages, and
by some bishops in this Council.  Whence it is evident that, if heretics
have not baptism, the Church of Christ of those days was full of
traitors, who upheld them by receiving them in this way.  I would urge,
therefore, that we plead our cause in common against the charge of
treason which they cannot disavow, and therein our special case will be
argued against the charge of delivering the books, which they could not
prove against us.  But let us argue the point as though they had
convicted us; and what we shall answer jointly to those who urge against
both of us the general treason of our forefathers, that we will answer
to these men who urge against us that our forefathers gave up the sacred
books.  For as we were dead because our forefathers delivered up the
books, which caused them to divide themselves from us, so both we and
they themselves are dead through the treason of our forefathers, from
whom both we and they are sprung.  But since they say they live, they
hold that that treason does not in any way affect them, therefore
neither are we affected by the delivery of the books.  And it should be
observed that, according to them, the treason is indisputable:  while,
according to us, there is no truth either in the former charge of
treason, because we say that heretics also may have the baptism of
Christ; nor in the latter charge of delivering the books, because in
that they were themselves beaten.  They have therefore no reason for
separating themselves by the wicked sin of schism, because, if our
forefathers were not guilty of delivering up the books, as we say, there
is no charge which can affect us at all; but if they were guilty of the
sin, as these men say, then it is just as far from affecting us as the
sin of those other traitors is from affecting either us or them.  And
hence, since there is no charge that can implicate us from the
unrighteousness of our forefathers, the charge arising against them from
their own schism is manifestly proved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1760"></span>[499:1761](1040401.htm#fr_1760) <span
id="v.iv.ix.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.ii-p2"></span> Mactaris (Macthari) was in
ecclesiastical province of Byzacium.  This bishop is probably the Marcus
of Cypr. Ep. lxx.<span id="v.iv.ix.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1761"></span>[500:1762](1040401.htm#fr_1761) <span
id="v.iv.ix.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.ii-p3"></span> Conc. Carth. sec. 38.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1040402)
