[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040237)  [Next](1040239) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii"></span> <span id="page_405">p. 405</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_405"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span><span class="c7"><span
id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>Preface</span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="v.iii-p3.1"></span>The</span> schism of the Donatists, with which
the treatises in the present volume are concerned, arose indirectly out
of the persecution under Diocletian at the beginning of the fourth
century.  At that time Mensurius, bishop of Carthage, and his archdeacon
Cæcilianus, had endeavored to check the fanatical spirit in which many
of the Christians courted martyrdom; and consequently, on the death of
Mensurius in 311, and the elevation of Cæcilianus to the see of Carthage
in his place, the opposing party, alleging that Felix, bishop of
Aptunga, by whom Cæcilianus had been consecrated, had been a *traditor*,
and that therefore his consecration was invalid, set up against him
Majorinus, who was succeeded in 315 by Donatus.  The party had by this
time gained strength, through the professions that they made of extreme
purity in the discipline which they maintained, and had gone so far,
under the advice of another Donatus, bishop of Casæ Nigræ in Numidia, as
to accuse Cæcilianus before the Roman Emperor Constantine,—thus setting
the first precedent for referring a spiritual cause to the decision of a
civil magistrate.  Constantine accepted the appeal, and in 313 the
matter was laid for decision before Melchiades, bishop of Rome, and
three bishops of the province of Gaul.  They decided in favor of the
validity of the consecration of Cæcilianus; and a similar verdict was
given by a council held at Arles, by direction of the Emperor, in the
following year.  The party of Majorinus then appealed to the personal
judgment of the Emperor, which was likewise given against them, not
without strong expressions of his anger at their pertinacity.  This was
followed by severe laws directed against their schism; but so far from
crushing them, the attack seemed only to increase their enthusiasm and
develope their resources.  And, under the leadership of Donatus, the
successor of Majorinus, their influence spread widely throughout Africa,
and continued to prevail, in spite of various efforts at their forcible
suppression, during the whole of the fourth century.  They especially
brought on themselves the vengeance of the civil powers, by the
turbulence of certain fanatical ascetics who embraced their cause, and
who, under the name of Circumcelliones, spread terror through the
country, seeking martydom for themselves, and offering violence to every
one who opposed them.

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span>Towards the close of the century, this schism
attracted the attention of Augustin, then a priest of Hippo Regius in
Numidia.  The controversy seems to have had for him a special
attraction, not merely because of its intrinsic importance, but also
because of the field which it presented for his unrivalled powers as a
dialectician.  These the Donatists had recently provoked, by
inconsistently receiving back into their body a deacon of Carthage named
Maximianus who had separated himself from them, and by recognizing as
valid all baptism administered by his followers.  Hence they naturally
shrank from engaging in a contest with an antagonist who was sure to
make the most of such a deviation from the very principles on which they
based their schism; and, on the other hand, Augustin was so firmly
convinced that his own position was impregnable, that he seems to have
thought that if he could only secure a thorough and dispassionate
discussion of the matter, the Donatists must necessarily be brought to
acknowledge not only their theoretical errors, but also the practical
sinfulness of their separation from the Church.  Throughout the
controversy, however, he appears to have put out of sight two
considerations:  first, the influence of party spirit and prejudice in
blinding men to argument; and, secondly, the necessity of treating his
opponents in a logical discussion as on an equal footing with himself. 
The first was in some degree an unavoidable element of disappointment;
but Augustin made concession yet more difficult on the part of his
opponents, by expecting them to acknowledge his superior position as a
member of the Catholic Church, whose duty it was to expose the error of
their views.  He practically begs the very point at issue, by assuming
that he, and not the Donatists, was in the Catholic communion; and
though his argument is conducted independently of this premise, yet it
naturally rendered them more unwilling to admit its force.

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span>This dogmatism was of less consequence in the
first pamphlet which Augustin published on the subject,—his
*Alphabetical Psalm*, in which he set forth the history and errors of
the Donatists in a popular form,—since it was not intended as a
controversial treatise, but only as a means of enlightening the less
educated as to the Catholic tenets on the question in dispute.  His next
work, written in answer to a letter of Donatus of Carthage, in which the
latter tried to prove that the baptism of Christ existed only in his
communion, is unfortunately lost; <span id="page_406">p. 406</span>
<span id="v.iii-Page_406"></span>and we can only gather hints as to the
further part which he took in the controversy during the next few years
from certain of his letters, especially those to the Donatist Bishops
Honoratus and Crispinus. <span id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141)  
From the former he claims the admission that the exclusiveness of the
Donatists proves that they are not the Church of Christ; and his letter
to the latter contains an invitation to discuss the leading points at
issue, which Crispinus seems to have declined.

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span>In the year 400 he wrote two books *Against
the Party of Donatus*, which are also lost; and about the same time he
published his refutation of the letter of Parmenianus in answer to
Tichonius, in which he handles and solves the famous question, whether,
while abiding in unity in the communion of the same sacraments, the
wicked pollute the good by their society. <span
id="fr_1142"></span>[1143](#fn_1142)

<span id="v.iii-p9"></span>Then followed his seven books *On Baptism*,
included in this volume, in which he shows the emptiness of the
arguments of the Donatists for the repetition of baptism; and proves
that so far was Cyprian from being on their side, that his letters and
conduct are of the highest value as overthrowing their position, and
utterly condemning their separation from the Church.

<span id="v.iii-p10"></span>Not long after this, Petilianus, bishop of
Cirta or Constantina, the most eminent theologian among the Donatist
divines, wrote a letter to his clergy against the Catholics, of which
Augustin managed to obtain a copy, though the Donatists used their
utmost care to keep it from him; and he replied to it in two books,
written at different times,—the first in the year 400, before he was in
possession of the whole letter, the remainder in 402.  To the first book
Petilianus made an answer, of which we gather the main tenor from a
third book written by Augustin in reply to it.  It appears to have been
full of vehement abuse, and to have assumed the question in dispute,
that the existence of the true Church, and the catholicity of any branch
of it, depended on the purity and orthodoxy of all its ministers; so
that the guilt or heresy of any minister would invalidate the whole of
his ministerial acts.  Hence he argued that Cæcilianus being the
spiritual father of the so-called Catholics, and having been a
*traditor*, none of them could possibly have been lawfully baptized,
much less rightfully ordained.

<span id="v.iii-p11"></span>Augustin admits neither of his assumptions;
but, leaving the guilt or innocence of Cæcilianus as a point which was
irrelevant (though practically the case against him utterly broke down),
he addresses himself to the other point, and argues most conclusively
that all the functions of the clergy in celebrating the rites of the
Church being purely ministerial, the efficacy of those rites could in no
way depend upon the excellence of the individual minister, but was
derived entirely from Christ.  Hence there was a certainty of the grace
bestowed through the several ordinances, which otherwise there could not
possibly have been, had their virtue depended on the character of any
man, in whom even an unblemished reputation might have been the fruit of
a skilled hypocrisy.

<span id="v.iii-p12"></span>The third treatise in this volume belongs to
a later period, being a letter written to Bonifacius, the Roman Count of
Africa under Valentinian the Third.  He had written to Augustin to
consult him as to the best means of dealing with the Donatists; and
Augustin in his reply points out to him his mistake in supposing that
the Donatists shared in the errors of the Arians, whilst he urges him to
use moderation in his coercive measures; though both here and in his
answer to Petilianus we find him countenancing the theory that the State
has a right to interfere in constraining men to keep within the Church. 
Starting with a forced interpretation of the words, "*Compel* them to
come in," in [Luke 14.23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#023)<span
id="v.iii-p12.1"></span>, he enunciates principles of coercion which,
though in him they were subdued and rendered practically of little
moment by the spirit of love which formed so large an element in his
character, yet found their natural development in the despotic
intolerance of the Papacy, and the horrors of the Inquisition.  It is
probable that he was himself in some degree misled by confounding the
necessity of repressing the violence of the Circumcelliones, which was a
real offense against the State, with the expediency of enforcing
spiritual unity by temporal authority.

<span id="v.iii-p13"></span>The Donatist treatises have met with little
attention from individual editors.  There is a dissertation, *De Aur.
Augustino adversario Donatistarum*, by Adrien Roux, published at Louvain
in 1838; <span id="fr_1143"></span>[1144](#fn_1143) but it is believed
that no treatises of this series have ever before been translated into
English, nor are they separately edited.  They are in themselves a
valuable authority for an important scene in the history of the Church,
and afford a good example both of the strength and the weakness of
Augustin’s writing,—its strength, in the exhaustive way in which he
tears to pieces his opponent’s arguments, and the clearness with which
he exposes the fallacies of their reasoning; its weakness, in the
persistency with which he pursues a point long after its discussion
might fairly have been closed, as though he hardly knew when he had
gained the victory; and his tendency to claim, by right of his position,
a vantage-ground which did not in reality belong to him till the
superiority of his cause was proved.

<span id="v.iii-p15"></span>J. R. <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iii-p15.1"></span>King</span>

<span id="v.iii-p16"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="v.iii-p16.1"></span>Oxford</span>, *March*, 1870.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[406:1142](1040238.htm#fr_1141) <span
id="v.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span> *Epist*. xlix. li.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[406:1143](1040238.htm#fr_1142) <span
id="v.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span> Bened. Ed. Vol. ix. pp. 7-52.  Migne, Vol.
ix. pp. 33-108.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[406:1144](1040238.htm#fr_1143) <span
id="v.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p14"></span> The other works bearing on this controversy
are mentioned in the exhaustive volume of Ferd. Ribbeck, *<span
id="v.iii-p14.1"></span>Donatus und Augustinus*  (Elberfeld,
1858).—<span class="c11"><span id="v.iii-p14.2"></span>Ed</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Baptism, Against the Donatists.](1040239)
