[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040399)  [Next](1040401) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.ix.i"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.i-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.ix.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—</span>1.  Let us not be
considered troublesome to our readers, if we discuss the same question
often and from different points of view.  For although the Holy Catholic
Church throughout all nations be fortified by the authority of primitive
custom and of a plenary Council against those arguments which throw some
darkness over the question about baptism, whether it can be the same
among heretics and schismatics that it is in the Catholic Church, yet,
since a different opinion has at one time been entertained in the unity
of the Church itself, by men who are in no wise to be despised, and
especially by Cyprian, whose authority men endeavor to use against us
who are far removed from his charity, we are therefore compelled to make
use of the opportunity of examining and considering all that we find on
this subject in his Council and letters, in order, as it were, to handle
at some considerable length this same question, and to show how it has
more truly been the decision of the whole body of the Catholic Church,
that heretics or schismatics, who have received baptism already in the
body from which they came, should be admitted with it into the communion
of the Catholic Church, being corrected in their error and rooted and
grounded in the faith, that, so far as concerns the sacrament of
baptism, there should not be an addition of something that was wanting,
but a turning to profit of what was in them.  And the holy Cyprian
indeed, now that the corruptible body no longer presseth down the soul,
nor the earthly tabernacle presseth down the mind that museth upon many
things, <span id="fr_1758"></span>[1759](#fn_1758) sees with greater
clearness that truth to which his charity made him deserving to attain. 
May he therefore help us by his prayers, while we labor in the mortality
of the flesh as in a darksome cloud, that if the Lord so grant it, we
may imitate so far as we can the good that was in him.  But if he
thought otherwise than right on any point, and persuaded certain of his
brethren and colleagues to entertain his views in a matter which he now
sees clearly through the revelation of Him whom he loved, let us, who
are far inferior to his merits, yet following, as our weakness will
allow, the authority of the Catholic Church of which he was himself a
conspicuous and most noble member, strive our utmost against heretics
and schismatics, seeing that they, being cut off from the unity which he
maintained, and barren of the love with which he was fruitful, and
fallen away from the humility in which he stood, are disavowed and
condemned the more by him, in proportion as he knows that they wish to
search out his writings for purposes of treachery, and are unwilling to
imitate what he did for the maintainance of peace,—like those who,
calling themselves Nazarene Christians, and circumcising the foreskin of
their flesh after the fashion of the Jews, being heretics by birth in
that error from which Peter, when straying from the truth, was called by
Paul <span id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759) persist in the same to
the present day.  As therefore they have remained in their perversity
cut off from the body of the Church, while Peter has been crowned in the
primacy of the apostles through the glory of martyrdom, so these men,
while Cyprian, through the abundance of his love, has been received into
the portion of the saints through the brightness of his passion, are
obliged to recognize themselves as exiles from unity, and, in defence of
their calumnies, set up a citizen of unity as an opponent against the
very home of unity.  Let us, therefore, go on to examine the other
judgments of that Council after the same fashion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1758"></span>[499:1759](1040400.htm#fr_1758) <span
id="v.iv.ix.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.i-p2"></span> [Wisd. ix.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span id="v.iv.ix.i-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[499:1760](1040400.htm#fr_1759) <span
id="v.iv.ix.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.i-p3"></span> [Gal. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011)<span id="v.iv.ix.i-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1040401)
