[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040048)  [Next](1040050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xxx"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xxx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 28.—On Doing Good to the Soul of Our
Neighbor.  Two Parts of Discipline, Restraint and Instruction.  Through
Good Conduct We Arrive at the Knowledge of the Truth.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxx-p2"></span>55.  As regards discipline, by which the
health of the mind is restored, without which bodily health avails
nothing for security against misery, the subject is one of great
difficulty.  And as in the body we said it is one thing to cure diseases
and wounds, which few can do properly, and another thing to meet the
cravings of hunger and thirst, and to give assistance in all the other
ways in which any man may at any time help another; so in the mind there
are some things in which the high and rare offices of the teacher are
not much called for,—as, for instance, in advice and exhortation to give
to the needy the things already mentioned as required for the body.  To
give such advice is to aid the mind by discipline, as giving the things
themselves is aiding the body by our resources.  But there are other
cases where diseases of the mind, many and various in kind, are healed
in a way strange and indescribable.  Unless His medicine were sent from
heaven to men, so heedlessly do they go on in sin, there would be no
hope of salvation; and, indeed, even bodily health, if you go to the
root of the matter, can have come to men from none but God, who gives to
all things their being and their well-being.

<span id="iv.iv.xxx-p3"></span>56.  This discipline, then, which is the
medicine of the mind, as far as we can gather from the sacred
Scriptures, includes two things, restraint and instruction.  Restraint
implies fear, and instruction love, in the person benefited by the
discipline; for in the giver of the benefit there is the love without
the fear.  In both of these God Himself, by whose goodness and mercy it
is that we are anything, has given us in the two Testaments a rule of
discipline.  For though both are found in both Testaments, still fear is
prominent in the Old, and love in the New; which the apostle calls
bondage in the one, and liberty in the other.  Of the marvellous order
and divine harmony of these Testaments it would take long to speak, and
many pious and learned men have discoursed on it.  The theme demands
many books to set it forth and explain it as far as is possible for
man.  He, then, who loves his neighbor endeavors all he can to procure
his safety in body and in soul, making the health of the mind the
standard in his treatment of the body.  And as regards the mind, his
endeavors are in this order, that he should first fear and then love
God.  This is true excellence of conduct, and thus the knowledge of the
truth is acquired which we are ever in the pursuit of.

<span id="iv.iv.xxx-p4"></span>57.  The Manichæans agree with me as
regards the duty of loving God and our neighbor, but they deny that this
is taught in the Old Testament.  How greatly they err in this is, I
think, clearly shown by the passages quoted above on both these duties. 
But, in a single word, and one which only stark madness can oppose, do
they not see the unreasonableness of denying that these very two
precepts which they commend are quoted by the Lord in the Gospel from
the Old Testament, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind;" and the other, "Thou
<span id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span
id="iv.iv.xxx-Page_57"></span>shalt love thy neighbor as thyself?" <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131)   Or if they dare not deny this, from
the light of truth being too strong for them, let them deny that these
precepts are salutary; let them deny, if they can, that they teach the
best morality; let them assert that it is not a duty to love God, or to
love our neighbor; that all things do not issue in good to them that
love God; that it is not true that the love of our neighbor worketh no
ill (a two-fold regulation of human life which is most salutary and
excellent).  By such assertions they cut themselves off not only from
Christians, but from mankind.  But if they dare not speak thus, but must
confess the divinity of the precepts, why do they not desist from
assailing and maligning with horrible profanity the books from which
they are quoted?

<span id="iv.iv.xxx-p6"></span>58.  Will they say, as they often do,
that although we find these precepts in the books, it does not follow
that all is good that is found there?  How to meet and refute this
quibble I do not well see.  Shall I discuss the words of the Old
Testament one by one, to prove to stubborn and ignorant men their
perfect agreement with the New Testament?  But when will this be done? 
When shall I have time, or they patience?  What, then, is to be done? 
Shall I desert the cause, and leave them to escape detection in an
opinion which, though false and impious, is hard to disprove?  I will
not.  God will Himself be at hand to aid me; nor will He suffer me in
those straits to remain helpless or forsaken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_131"></span>[57:132](1040049.htm#fr_131) <span
id="iv.iv.xxx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxx-p5"></span> [Deut.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005), [Lev.
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018), [Matt.
22:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#039)<span id="iv.iv.xxx-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](1040050)
