[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040206)  [Next](1040208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.xxv"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.x.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—Whence a Bad Measure, a Bad Form,
a Bad Order May Sometimes Be Spoken of.</span>

<span id="iv.x.xxv-p2"></span>Therefore a bad measure, a bad form, a bad
order, are either so called because they are less than they should be,
or because they are not adapted to those things to which they should be
adapted; so that they may be called bad as being alien and incongruous;
as if any one should be said not to have done in a good measure because
he has done less than he ought, or because he has done in such a thing
as he ought not to have done, or more than was fitting, or not
conveniently; so that the very fact of that being reprehended which is
done in a bad measure, is justly reprehended for no other cause than
that the measure is not there maintained.  Likewise a form is called bad
either in comparison with something more handsome or more beautiful,
this form being less, that greater, not in size but <span
id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span id="iv.x.xxv-Page_356"></span>in
comeliness; or because it is out of harmony with the thing to which it
is applied, so that it seems alien and unsuitable.  As if a man should
walk forth into a public place naked, which nakedness does not offend if
seen in a bath.  Likewise also order is called bad when order itself is
maintained in an inferior degree.  Hence not order, but rather disorder,
is bad; since either the ordering is less than it should be, or not as
it should be.  Yet where there is any measure, any form, any order,
there is some good and some nature; but where there is no measure, no
form, no order, there is no good, no nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1040208)
