[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040354)  [Next](1040356) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.viii.i"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.viii.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—</span>1.  It might perhaps have
been sufficient, that after the reasons have been so often repeated, and
considered, and discussed with such variety of treatment, supplemented
too, with the addition of proofs from holy Scripture, and the concurrent
testimony of so many passages from Cyprian himself, even those who are
slow of heart should thus understand, as I believe they do, that the
baptism of Christ cannot be rendered void by any perversity on the part
of man, whether in administering or receiving it.  And when we find that
in those times, when the point in question was decided in a manner
contrary to ancient custom, after discussions carried on without
violation of saving charity and unity, it appeared to some even eminent
men who were bishops of Christ, among whom the blessed Cyprian was
specially conspicuous, that the baptism of Christ could not exist among
heretics or schismatics, this simply arose from their not distinguishing
the sacrament from the effect or use of the sacrament; and because its
effect and use were not found among heretics in freeing them from their
sins and setting their hearts right, the sacrament itself was also
thought to be wanting among them.  But if we turn our eyes to the
multitude of chaff within the Church, since these also who are perverse
and lead an abandoned life in unity itself appear to have no power
either of giving or retaining remission of sins, seeing that it is not
to the wicked but the good sons that it was said, "Whosesoever sins ye
remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they
are retained," <span id="fr_1581"></span>[1582](#fn_1581) yet that such
persons both have, and give, and receive the sacrament of baptism, was
sufficiently manifest to the pastors of the Catholic Church dispersed
over the whole world, through whom the original custom was afterwards
confirmed by the authority of a plenary Council; so that even the sheep
which was straying outside, and had received the mark of the Lord from
false plunderers outside, if it seek the salvation of Christian unity,
is purified from error, is freed from captivity, is healed of its wound,
and yet the mark of the Lord is recognized rather than rejected in it;
since the mark itself is often impressed both by wolves and on wolves,
who seem indeed to be within the fold, but yet are proved by the fruits
of their conduct, in which they persevere even to the end, not to belong
to that sheep which is one in many; because, according to the
foreknowledge of God, as many sheep wander outside, so many wolves lurk
treacherously within, among whom the Lord yet knoweth them that are His,
which hear only the voice of the Shepherd, even when He calls by the
voice of men like the Pharisees, of whom it was said, "Whatsoever they
bid you observe that observe and do." <span
id="fr_1582"></span>[1583](#fn_1582)

<span id="v.iv.viii.i-p4"></span>2.  For as the spiritual man, keeping
"the end of the commandment," that is, "charity out of a pure heart, and
of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned," <span
id="fr_1583"></span>[1584](#fn_1583) can see some things less clearly
out of a body which is yet "corruptible and presseth down the
soul," <span id="fr_1584"></span>[1585](#fn_1584) and is liable to be
otherwise minded in some things which God will reveal <span
id="fr_1585"></span>[1586](#fn_1585) to him in His own good time if he
abide in the same charity, so in a carnal and perverse man something
good and useful may be found, which has its origin not in the man
himself, but in some other source.  For as in the fruitful branch there
is found something which must be purged that it may bring forth more
fruit, so also a grape is often found to hang on a cane that is barren
and dry or fettered.  And so, as it is foolish to love the portions
which require purg<span id="page_480">p. 480</span> <span
id="v.iv.viii.i-Page_480"></span>ing in the fruitful branch, while he
acts wisely who does not reject the sweet fruit wherever it may hang,
so, if any one cuts himself off from unity by rebaptizing, simply
because it seemed to Cyprian that one ought to baptize again those who
came from the heretics, such a man turns aside from what merits praise
in that great man, and follows what requires correction, and does not
even attain to the very thing he follows after.  For Cyprian, while
grievously abhorring, in his zeal for God, all those who severed
themselves from unity, thought that thereby they were separated from
baptism itself; while these men, thinking it at most a slight offense
that they themselves are severed from the unity of Christ, even maintain
that His baptism is not in that unity, but issued forth with them. 
Therefore they are so far from the fruitfulness of Cyprian, as not even
to be equal to the parts in him which needed purging.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[479:1582](1040355.htm#fr_1581) <span
id="v.iv.viii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.i-p2"></span> [John xx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023)<span id="v.iv.viii.i-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[479:1583](1040355.htm#fr_1582) <span
id="v.iv.viii.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.i-p3"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.viii.i-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[479:1584](1040355.htm#fr_1583) <span
id="v.iv.viii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.i-p5"></span> [1 Tim. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span id="v.iv.viii.i-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1584"></span>[479:1585](1040355.htm#fr_1584) <span
id="v.iv.viii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.i-p6"></span> [Wisd. ix.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span id="v.iv.viii.i-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1585"></span>[479:1586](1040355.htm#fr_1585) <span
id="v.iv.viii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.i-p7"></span> [Phil. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015)<span id="v.iv.viii.i-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1040356)
