[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040579)  [Next](1040581) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 93.—</span>202.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"But what have you to do with the kings of this world, in whom
Christianity has never found anything save envy towards her?  And to
teach you shortly the truth of what I say, A king persecuted the
brethren of the Maccabees. <span id="fr_2221"></span>[2222](#fn_2221)  
A king also condemned the three children to the sanctifying flames,
being ignorant what he did, seeing that he himself was fighting against
God. <span id="fr_2222"></span>[2223](#fn_2222)   A king sought the life
of the infant Saviour. <span id="fr_2223"></span>[2224](#fn_2223)   A
king exposed Daniel, as he thought, to be eaten by wild beasts. <span
id="fr_2224"></span>[2225](#fn_2224)   And the Lord Christ Himself was
slain by a king’s most wicked judge. <span
id="fr_2225"></span>[2226](#fn_2225)   Hence it is that the apostle
cries out, ‘We speak wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the
wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to
nought:  but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, which was hidden,
which God ordained before the world unto our glory; which none of the
princes of this world knew:  for had they known it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory.’ <span id="fr_2226"></span>[2227](#fn_2226)
  But grant that this was said of the heathen kings of old.  Yet you,
rulers of this present age, because you desire to be Christians, do not
allow men to be Christians, seeing that, when they are believing in all
honesty of heart, you draw them by the defilement and mist of your
falsehood wholly over to your wickedness, that with their arms, which
were provided against the enemies of the state, they should assail the
Christians, and should think that, at your instigation, they are doing
the work of Christ if they kill us whom you hate, according to the
saying of the Lord Christ:  ‘The time cometh,’ He says, ‘that whosoever
killeth you will think that he doeth God service.’ <span
id="fr_2227"></span>[2228](#fn_2227)   It makes no matter therefore to
you, false teachers, whether the kings of this world desire to be
heathens, which God forbid, or Christians, so long as you cease not in
your efforts to arm them against the family of Christ.  But do you not
know, or rather, have you not read, that the guilt of one who instigates
a murder is greater than the guilt of him who carries it out?  Jezebel
had excited the king her husband to the murder of a poor and <span
id="page_578">p. 578</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-Page_578"></span>righteous man, yet husband and wife
alike perished by an equal punishment. <span
id="fr_2228"></span>[2229](#fn_2228)   Nor indeed is your mode of urging
on kings different from that by which the subtle persuasion of women has
often urged kings on to guilt.  For the wife of Herod earned and
obtained the boon by means of her daughter, that the head of John should
be brought to table in a charger. <span
id="fr_2229"></span>[2230](#fn_2229)   Similarly the Jews forced on
Pontius Pilate that he should crucify the Lord Jesus, whose blood Pilate
prayed might remain in vengeance upon them and on their children. <span
id="fr_2230"></span>[2231](#fn_2230)   So therefore you also overwhelm
yourselves with our blood by your sin.  For it does not follow that
because it is the hand of the judge that strikes the blow, your
calumnies therefore are not rather guilty of the deed.  For the prophet
David says, speaking in the person of Christ, ‘Why do the heathen rage,
and the people imagine a vain thing?  The kings of the earth set
themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and
against His Anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast
away their cords from us.  He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: 
the Lord shall have them in derision.  Then shall He speak unto them in
His wrath, and vex them in His sore displeasure.  Yet have I set my King
upon my holy hill of Zion.  I will declare the decree:  the Lord hath
said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten Thee.  Ask of
me, and I shall give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession.  Thou shalt rule them
with a rod of iron; Thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s
vessel.’  And he warned the kings themselves in the following precepts,
that they should not, like ignorant men devoid of understanding, seek to
persecute the Christians, lest they should themselves be
destroyed,—which precepts I would that we could teach them, seeing that
they are ignorant of them; or, at least, that you would show them to
them, as doubtless you would do if you desired that they should live;
or, at any rate, if neither of the other courses be allowed, that your
malice would have permitted them to read them for themselves.  The first
Psalm of David would certainly have persuaded them that they should live
and reign as Christians; but meanwhile you deceive them, so long as they
entrust themselves to you.  For you represent to them things that are
evil, and you hide from them what is good.  Let them then at length read
this, which they should have read already long ago.  For what does he
say, ‘Be wise now therefore, O ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the
earth.  Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.  Lay hold
of instruction lest the Lord be angry, and ye perish from the right
way.  Since how quickly has His wrath kindled over you?  Blessed are all
they that put their trust in Him.’ <span
id="fr_2231"></span>[2232](#fn_2231)   You urge on emperors, I say, with
your persuasions, even as Pilate, whom, as we showed above, the Jews
urged on, though he himself cried aloud, as he washed his hands before
them all, ‘I am innocent of the blood of this just person,’ <span
id="fr_2232"></span>[2233](#fn_2232) —as though a person could be clear
from the guilt of a sin who had himself committed it.  But, to say
nothing of ancient examples, observe, from instances taken from your own
party, how very many of your emperors and judges have perished in
persecuting us.  To pass over Nero, who was the first to persecute the
Christians, Domitian perished almost in the same way as Nero, as also
did Trajan, Geta, <span id="fr_2233"></span>[2234](#fn_2233) Decius,
Valerian, Diocletian; Maximian also perished, at whose command that men
should burn incense to their gods, burning the sacred volumes,
Marcellinus indeed first, but after him also Mensurius of Carthage, and
Cæcilianus, escaped death from the sacrilegious flames, surviving like
some ashes or cinders from the burning.  For the consciousness of the
guilt of burning incense involved you all, as many as agreed with
Mensurius.  Macarius perished, Ursacius  <span
id="fr_2234"></span>[2235](#fn_2234) perished, and all your counts
perished in like manner by the vengeance of God.  For Ursacius was slain
in a battle with the barbarians, after which birds of prey with their
savage talons, and the greedy teeth of dogs with their biting, tore him
limb from limb.  Was not he too a murderer at your suggestion, who, like
king Ahab, whom we showed to have been persuaded by a woman, slew a poor
and righteous man? <span id="fr_2235"></span>[2236](#fn_2235)   So you
too do not cease to murder us, who are just and poor (poor, that is, in
worldly wealth; for in the grace of God no one of us is poor).  For
<span id="page_579">p. 579</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-Page_579"></span>even if you do not murder a man with
your hands, you do not cease to do so with your butcherous tongues.  For
it is written, ‘Death and life are in the power of the tongue.’ <span
id="fr_2236"></span>[2237](#fn_2236)   All, therefore, who have been
murdered, you, the instigator of the deed, have slain.  Nor indeed does
the hand of the butcher glow save at the instigation of your tongue; and
that terrible heat of the breast is inflamed by your words to take the
blood of others,—blood that shall take a just vengeance upon him who
shed it."

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p18"></span>203.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p18.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  If I were to
answer adequately, and as I ought, to this passage, which has been
exaggerated and arranged at such length by you, where you speak in
invidious terms against us concerning the kings of this world, I am much
afraid that you would accuse me too of having wished to excite the anger
of kings against you.  And yet, whilst you are borne after your own
fashion by the violence of this invective against all Catholics, you
certainly do not pass me by.  I will endeavor, however, to show, if I
can, that it is rather you who have been guilty of this offense by
speaking as you have done, than myself by answering as I shall do.  And
first of all, see how you yourself oppose your self; for certainly you
prefaced the passage which you quoted with the words, "What have you to
do with the kings of this world, in whom Christianity has never found
anything save envy towards her?"  In these words you certainly cut off
from us all access to the kings of this world.  And a little later you
say, "And he warned the kings themselves in the following precepts, that
they should not, like ignorant men devoid of understanding, seek to
persecute the Christians, lest they should be themselves
destroyed,—which precepts I would that we could teach them, seeing that
they are ignorant of them; or, at least, that you would show them to
them, as doubtless you would do if you desired that they should live." 
In what way then do you wish us to be the instructors of kings?  And
indeed those of our body who have any friendship with Christian kings
commit no sin if they make a right use of that friendship; but if any
are elated by it, they yet sin far less grievously than you.  For what
had you, who thus reproach us,—what had you to do with a heathen king,
and what is worse, with Julian, the apostate and enemy of the name of
Christ, to whom, when you were begging that the basilicas should be
restored to you as though they were your own, you ascribed this meed of
praise, "that in him justice alone was found to have a place"?—in which
words (for I believe that you understand the Latin tongue) both the
idolatry and the apostasy of Julian are styled justice.  I hold in my
hands the petition which your ancestors presented; the memorial <span
id="fr_2237"></span>[2238](#fn_2237) which embodied their request; the
chronicles, where they made their representation.  Watch and attend.  To
the enemy of Christ, to the apostate, the antagonist of Christians, the
servant of the devil, that friend, that representative, that Pontius of
yours, made supplication in such words as these:  "Go to then, and say
to us, What have you to do with the kings of this world?" that as deaf
men you may read to the deaf nations what you as well as they refuse to
hear;" Thou beholdest the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye." <span
id="fr_2238"></span>[2239](#fn_2238)

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p21"></span>204.  "What," say you, "have you to
do with the kings of this world, in whom Christianity has never found
anything save envy towards her?"  Having said this, you endeavored to
reckon up what kings the righteous had found to be their enemies, and
did not consider how many more might be enumerated who have proved their
friends.  The patriarch Abraham was both most friendly treated, and
presented with a token of friendship, by a king who had been warned from
heaven not to defile his wife. <span
id="fr_2239"></span>[2240](#fn_2239)   Isaac his son likewise found a
king most friendly to him. <span id="fr_2240"></span>[2241](#fn_2240)  
Jacob, being received with honor by a king in Egypt, went so far as to
bless him. <span id="fr_2241"></span>[2242](#fn_2241)   What shall I say
of his son Joseph, who, after the tribulation of a prison, in which his
chastity was tried as gold is tried in the fire, being raised by Pharaoh
to great honors, <span id="fr_2242"></span>[2243](#fn_2242) even swore
by the life of Pharaoh, <span id="fr_2243"></span>[2244](#fn_2243) —not
as though puffed up with vain conceit, but being not unmindful of his
kindness.  The daughter of a king adopted Moses. <span
id="fr_2244"></span>[2245](#fn_2244)   David took refuge with a king of
another race, compelled thereto by the unrighteousness of the king of
Israel. <span id="fr_2245"></span>[2246](#fn_2245)   Elijah ran before
the chariot of a most wicked king,—not by the king’s command, but from
his own loyalty. <span id="fr_2246"></span>[2247](#fn_2246)   Elisha
thought it good to offer of his own accord to the woman who had
sheltered him anything that she might wish to have obtained from the
king through his intercession. <span
id="fr_2247"></span>[2248](#fn_2247)   But I will come to the actual
times when the people of <span id="page_580">p. 580</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-Page_580"></span>God were in captivity, in which, to
use a mild expression, a strange forgetfulness came over you.  For,
wishing to prove that Christianity has never found anything in kings
saving envy towards her, you made mention of the three children and
Daniel, who suffered at the hands of persecuting kings, and you could
not derive instruction from circumstances not occurring near, but in the
very same passages, viz., from the conduct of the king himself after the
miracle of the flames which did no hurt, whether as shown in praising
and setting forth the name of God, or in honoring the three children
themselves, or from the esteem in which the king held Daniel, and the
gifts with which he honored him, nothing loth to receive them, when he,
rendering the honor that was due to the king’s power, as sufficiently
appears from his own words, did not hesitate to use the gift with which
he was endowed by God, in interpreting the king’s dream.  And when, in
consequence, the king was compelled by the men who envied the holy
prophet, and heaped calumnies upon him with sacrilegious madness, most
unwillingly to cast him into the den of lions, sadly though he did it,
yet he had the conviction that he would be safe through the help and
protection of his God.  Accordingly, when Daniel, by the miraculous
repression of the lions’ rage, had been preserved unhurt, when the
friendly voice of the king spoke first to him, in accents of anxiety, he
himself replied with benediction from the den, "O king, live for
ever!" <span id="fr_2248"></span>[2249](#fn_2248)   How came it that,
when your argument was turning on the very same subject, when you were
yourself quoting the examples of the servants of God in whose case these
things were done, you either failed to see, or were unwilling to see, or
seeing and knowing, were silent, in a manner which I know not how you
will defend, about those instances of friendship felt by kings for the
saints?  But if it were not that, as a defender of the basest cause, you
are hindered by the desire of building up falsehood, and thereby turned
away either as unwilling or as ignorant from the light of truth, there
can be no doubt that you could, without any difficulty, recall some good
kings as well as some bad ones, and some friendly to the saints as well
as some unfriendly.  And we cannot but wonder that your Circumcelliones
thus throw themselves from precipices.  Who was running after you, I
pray?  What Macarius, what soldier was pursuing you?  Certainly none of
our party thrust you into this abyss of falsehood.  Why then did you
thus run headlong with your eyes shut, so that when you said, "What have
you to do with the kings of this world?" you did not add, In whom
Christianity has often found envy towards herself, instead of boldly
venturing to say, "In whom Christianity has never found anything save
envy towards her?"  Was it really true that you neither thought
yourself, nor considered that those who read your writings would think,
how many instances of kings there were that went against your views? 
Does he not know what he says?

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p32"></span>205.  Or do you think that, because
those whom I have mentioned belonged to olden times, therefore they form
no argument against you, because you did not say, In whom
*righteousness* has never found anything save envy towards her, but "In
whom *Christianity* has never found anything saving envy towards
her,"—meaning, perhaps, that it should be understood that they began to
show envy towards the righteous from the time when they began to bear
the name of Christians?  What then is the meaning of those examples from
olden times, by which you even more imprudently wished to prove what you
had so imprudently ventured to assert?  For was it not before Christ was
born in the world that the Maccabees, and the three children, and
Daniel, did and suffered what you told of them?  And again, why was it,
as I asked just now, that you offered a petition to Julian, the
undoubted foe of Christianity?  Why did you seek to recover the
basilicas from him?  Why did you declare that only righteousness found a
place with him?  If it is the foe of Christianity that hears such things
as these, what then are they from whom he hears them?  But it should be
observed that Constantine, who was certainly no foe to the name of
Christian, but rather rendered glorious by it, being mindful of the hope
which he maintained in Christ, and deciding most justly on behalf of His
unity, was not worthy to be acknowledged by you, even when you
yourselves appealed to him.  Both these were emperors in Christian
times, but yet not both of them were Christians.  But if both of them
were foes of Christianity, why did you thus appeal to one of them? why
did you thus present a petition to the other?  For on your ancestors
making their petition, Constantine had given an episcopal judgment both
at Rome and at Arles; and yet the first of them you accused before him,
from the other you appealed to him.  But if, as is the case, one of them
had believed in Christ, the other had apostatized from Christ, why is
the Christian despised while furthering the interests of unity, the
apostate praised while fav<span id="page_581">p. 581</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-Page_581"></span>oring deceit?  Constantine ordered
that the basilicas should be taken from you, Julian that they should be
restored.  Do you wish to know which of these actions is conducive to
Christian peace?  The one was done by a man who had believed in Christ,
the other by one who had abandoned Christ.  O how you would wish that
you could say, It was indeed ill done that supplication should so be
made to Julian, but what has that to do with us?  But if you were to say
this, the Catholic Church would also conquer in these same words, whose
saints dispersed throughout the world are much less concerned with what
you say of those towards whom you feel as you may be disposed to feel. 
But it is beyond your power to say, It was ill done that supplication
should so be made to Julian.  Your throat is closed; your tongue is
checked by an authority close at home.  It was Pontius that did it. 
Pontius presented the petition; Pontius declared that the apostate was
most righteous; Pontius set forth that only righteousness found a place
with the apostate.  That Pontius made a petition to him in these words,
we have the express evidence of Julian himself, mentioning him by name,
without any disguise.  Your representations still exist.  It is no
uncertain rumor, but public documents that bear witness to the fact.
 Can it be, that because the apostate made some concession to your
prayer, to the detriment of the unity of Christ, you therefore find
truth in what was said, that only righteousness found a place with him?
but because Christian emperors decide against your wishes, since this
appears to them most likely to contribute to the unity of Christ,
therefore they are called the foes of Christianity?  Such folly may all
heretics display; and may they regain wisdom, so that they should be no
longer heretics.

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p33"></span>206.  And when is that fulfilled, you
will say, which the Lord declares, "The time cometh, that whosoever
killeth you will think that he doeth God service"? <span
id="fr_2249"></span>[2250](#fn_2249)   At any rate neither can this be
said of the heathen, who persecuted Christians, not for the sake of God,
but for the sake of their idols.  You do not see that if this had been
said of these emperors who rejoice in the name of Christian, their chief
command would certainly have been this, that you should have been put to
death; and this command they never gave at all.  But the men of your
party, by opposing the laws in hostile fashion, bring deserved
punishment on themselves; and their own voluntary deaths, so long as
they think that they bring odium on us, they consider in no wise ruinous
to themselves.  But if they think that that saying of Christ refers to
kings who honor the name of Christ, let them ask what the Catholic
Church suffered in the East, when, Valens the Arian was emperor.  There
indeed I might find what I should understand to be sufficient
fulfillment of the saying of the Lord, "The time cometh, that whosoever
killeth you will think that he doeth God service," that heretics should
not claim, as conducing to their especial glory, the injunctions issued
against their errors by Catholic emperors.  But we remember that that
time was fulfilled after the ascension of our Lord, of which holy
Scripture is known by all to be a witness.  The Jews thought that they
were doing a service to God when they put the apostles to death.  Among
those who thought that they were showing service to God was even our
Saul, though not ours as yet; so that among his causes for confidence
which were past and to be forgotten, he enumerates the following:  "An
Hebrew," he says, "of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee;
concerning zeal, persecuting the Church." <span
id="fr_2250"></span>[2251](#fn_2250)   Here was one who thought that he
did God service when he did what presently he suffered himself.  For
forty Jews bound themselves by an oath that they would slay him, when he
caused that this should be made known to the tribune, so that under the
protection of a guard of armed men he escaped their snares. <span
id="fr_2251"></span>[2252](#fn_2251)   But there was no one yet to say
to him, What have you to do (not with kings, but) with tribunes and the
arms of kings?  There was no one to say to him, Dare you seek protection
at the hand of soldiers, when your Lord was dragged by them to undergo
His sufferings?  There were as yet no instances of madness such as
yours; but there were already examples being prepared, which should be
sufficient for their refutation.

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p37"></span>207.  Moreover, with what terrible
force did you venture to set forth and utter the following:  "But to say
nothing of ancient examples, observe, from instances taken from your own
party, how very many of your emperors and judges have perished in
persecuting us."  When I read this in your letter, I waited with the
most earnest expectation to see what you were going to say, and whom you
were going to enumerate, when, lo and behold! as though passing them
over; you began to quote to me Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Geta, Decius,
Valerian, Diocletian, Maximian.  I acknowledge that there were more; but
you have altogether forgotten against whom you are <span
id="page_582">p. 582</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-Page_582"></span>arguing.  Were not all of these
pagans, persecuting generally the Christian name on behalf of their
idols?  Be vigilant, then; for the men whom you mention were not of our
communion.  They were persecuting the whole aggregate of unity itself,
from which we as you think, or you, as Christ teaches, have gone forth. 
But you had proposed to show that our emperors and judges had perished
in consequence of persecuting you.  Or is it that you yourself do not
require that we should reckon these, because, in mentioning them, you
passed them over, saying, "To pass over Nero;" and with this reservation
did you mean to run through all the rest?  What then was the use of
their being quoted, if they had nothing to do with the matter?  But what
has it to do with me?  I now join with you in leaving these.  Next, let
that larger number which you promised to us be produced, unless, indeed,
it may be that they cannot be found, inasmuch as you said that they had
perished.

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p38"></span>208.  For now you go on to make
mention of the bishops whom you are wont to accuse of having delivered
up the sacred books, concerning whom we on our part are wont to answer: 
Either you fail in your proof, and so it concerns no one at all; or you
succeed and then it still has no concern with us.  For they have borne
their own burden, whether it be good or bad; and we indeed believe that
it was good.  But of whatever character it was, yet it was their own;
just as your bad men have borne their own burden, and neither you theirs
nor they yours.  But the common and most evil burden of you all is
schism.  This we have already often said before.  Show us, therefore,
not the names of bishops, but the names of our emperors and judges, who
have perished in persecuting you.  For this, is what you had proposed,
this is what you had promised, this is what you had caused us most
eagerly to expect.  "Hear," he says, "Macarius perished, Ursacius
perished, and all your counts perished in like manner, by the vengeance
of God."  You have mentioned only two by name, and neither of them was
emperor.  Who would be satisfied with this, I ask?  Are you not utterly
dissatisfied with yourself?  You promise that you will mention a vast
number of emperors and judges of our party who perished in persecuting
you; and then, without a word of emperors, you mention two who were
either judges or counts.  For as to what you add, "And all your counts
perished in like manner by the vengeance of God," it has nothing to do
with the matter.  For on this principle you might some time ago have
closed your argument, without mentioning the name of any one at all. 
Why then have you not made mention of our emperors, that is to say, of
emperors of our communion?  Were you afraid that you should be indicted
for high treason?  Where is the fortitude that marks the
Circumcelliones?  And further, what do you mean by introducing those
whom you mentioned above in such numbers?  They might with more right
say to you, Why did you seek us out?  For they did nothing to assist
your cause, and yet you mentioned them by name.  What kind of man, then,
must you be, who fear to mention those by name, who, as you say, have
perished?  At any rate, you might mention more of the judges and counts,
of whom you seem to feel no fear.  But yet you stopped at Macarius and
Ursacius.  Are these two whom you mention the vast number of whom you
spoke?  Are you thinking of the lesson which we learned as boys?  For if
you were to ask of me what number two is, singular or plural, what could
I answer, except that it was plural?  But even so I am still not without
the means of reply.  I take away Macarius from your list; for you
certainly have not told us how he perished.  Or do you maintain that any
one who persecutes you, unless he be immortal on the face of this earth,
is to be deemed when he dies to have died because of you?  What if
Constantine had not lived to enjoy so long a reign, and such prolonged
prosperity, who was the first to pass many decrees against your errors? 
And what if Julian, who gave you back the basilicas, had not been so
speedily snatched away from life? <span
id="fr_2252"></span>[2253](#fn_2252)   In that case, when would you make
an end of talking such nonsense as you do, seeing that even now you are
unwilling to hold your tongues?  And yet neither do we say that Julian
died so soon because he gave back the basilicas to you.  For we might be
equally prolix with you in this, but we are unwilling to be equally
foolish.  Well, then, as I had begun to say, from these two we will take
away Macarius.  For when you had mentioned the names of two, Macarius
and Ursacius, you repeated the name of Ursacius with the view of showing
us how he deserved his death; and you said, "For Ursacius was slain in a
battle with the barbarians, after which birds of prey with their savage
talons, and the greedy teeth of dogs with their biting, tore him limb
from limb."  Whence it is quite clear, since it is your custom to excite
greater odium against us on account of Macarius, insomuch that you call
<span id="page_583">p. 583</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-Page_583"></span>us not Ursacians but Macarians, that
you would have been sure to say by far the most concerning him, had you
been able to say anything of the sort about his death.  Of these two,
therefore, when you used the plural number, if you take away Macarius,
there remains Ursacius alone, a proper name of the singular number. 
Where is therefore the fulfillment of your threatening and tremendous
promise of so many who should support your argument?

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p40"></span>209.  By this time all men who are in
any degree acquainted with the meaning of words must understand, it
seems to me, how ridiculous it is that, when you had said, "Macarius
perished, Ursacius perished, and all your counts perished in like
manner, by the vengeance of God," as though men were calling upon you to
prove the fact, whereas, in reality, neither hearer nor reader was
calling on you for anything further whatsoever, you immediately strung
together a long argument in order to prove that all our counts perished
in like manner by the vengeance of God.  "For Ursacius," you say, "was
slain in a battle with the barbarians, after which birds of prey with
their savage talons, and the greedy teeth of dogs with their biting,
tore him limb from limb."  In the same way, any one else, who was
similarly ignorant of the meaning of what he says, might assert that all
your bishops perished in prison by the vengeance of God; and when asked
how he could prove this fact, he might at once add, For Optatus, having
been accused of belonging to the company of Gildo, was put to death in a
similar way.  Frivolous charges such as these we are compelled to listen
to, to consider, to refute; only we are apprehensive for the weak, lest,
from the greater slowness of their intellect, they should fall speedily
into your toils.  But Ursacius, of whom you speak, if it be the case
that he lived a good life, and really died as you assert, will receive
consolation from the promise of God, who says, "Surely your blood of
your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast will I require
it." <span id="fr_2253"></span>[2254](#fn_2253)

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p42"></span>210.  But as to the calumnious
charges which you bring against us, saying that by us the wrath of the
kings of the world is excited against you, so long as we do not teach
them the lesson of holy Scripture, but rather suggest our own desire of
war, I do not imagine that you are so absolutely deaf to the eloquence
of the sacred books themselves as that you should not rather fear that
they should be acquainted with it.  But whether you so will or no, they
gain entrance to the Church; and even if we hold our tongues, they give
heed to the readers; and, to say nothing of the rest, they especially
listen with the most marked attention to that very psalm which you
quoted.  For you said that we do not teach them, nor, so far as we can
help it, allow them to become acquainted with the words of Scripture: 
"Be wise now therefore, O ye kings; be instructed ye judges of the
earth.  Serve the Lord with fear and rejoice with trembling.  Take hold
of instruction lest the Lord be angry, <span
id="fr_2254"></span>[2255](#fn_2254) etc.  Believe that even this is
sung, and that they hear it.  But, at any rate, they hear what is
written above in the same psalm, which you, unless I am mistaken, were
only unwilling to pass over, for fear you should be understood to be
afraid.  They hear therefore this as well "The Lord hath said unto me,
Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten Thee.  Ask of me, and I shall
give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for Thy possession." <span
id="fr_2255"></span>[2256](#fn_2255)   On hearing which, they cannot but
marvel that some should be found to speak against this inheritance of
Christ, endeavoring to reduce it to a little corner of the earth; and in
their marvel they perhaps ask, on account of what they hear in what
follows, "Serve the Lord with fear," wherein they can serve Him, in so
far as they are kings.  For all men ought to serve God,—in one sense, in
virtue of the condition common to them all, in that they are men; in
another sense, in virtue of their several gifts, whereby this man has
one function on the earth, and that man has another.  For no man, as a
private individual, could command that idols should be taken from the
earth, which it was so long ago foretold should come to pass. <span
id="fr_2256"></span>[2257](#fn_2256)   Accordingly, when we take into
consideration the social condition of the human race, we find that
kings, in the very fact that they are kings, have a service which they
can render to the Lord in a manner which is impossible for any who have
not the power of kings.

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p46"></span>211.  When, therefore, they think
over what you quote, they hear also what you yourself quoted concerning
the three children, and hear it with circumstances of marvellous
solemnity.  For that same Scripture is most of all sung in the Church at
a time when the very festal nature of the season excites additional
fervor even in those who, during the rest of the year, are more given to
be sluggish.  What then do you think must be the feelings of Christian
emperors, when they hear of the three children being cast into the
burning fiery furnace because they were unwilling to <span
id="page_584">p. 584</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-Page_584"></span>consent to the wickedness of
worshipping the image of the king, <span
id="fr_2257"></span>[2258](#fn_2257) unless you suppose that they
consider that the pious liberty of the saints cannot be overcome either
by the power of kings, or by any enormity of punishment, and that they
rejoice that they are not of the number of those kings who used to
punish men that despised idols as though they were guilty of sacrilege? 
But, further, when they hear in what follows that the same king,
terrified by the marvellous sight of, not only the three children, but
the very flames performing service unto God, himself too began to serve
God in fear, and to rejoice with reverence, and to lay hold of
instruction, do they not understand that the reason that this was
recorded, and set forth with such publicity, was that an example might
be set both before the servants of God, to prevent them from committing
sacrilege in obedience to kings, and before kings themselves, that they
should show themselves religious by belief in God?  Being willing,
therefore, on their part, from the admonition of the very psalm which
you yourself inserted in your writings, both to be wise, and to receive
instruction, and to serve God with fear and to rejoice unto Him with
reverence, and to lay hold of instruction, with what attention do they
listen to what that king said afterwards!  For he said that he would
make a decree for all the people over whom he ruled, that whosoever
should speak blasphemy against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego should perish, and their house be utterly destroyed.  And if
they know that he made this decree that blasphemy should not be uttered
against the God who tempered the force of the fire, and liberated the
three children, they surely go on to consider what decrees they ought to
make in their kingdom, that the same God who has granted remission of
sins, and given freedom to the whole earth, should not be treated with
scorn among the faithful in their realm.

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p48"></span>212.  See therefore, when Christian
kings make any decree against you in defence of Catholic unity, that it
be not the case that with your lips you are accusing them of being
unlearned, as it were, in holy Scripture, while in your hearts you are
grieving that they are so well acquainted with its teaching.  For who
could put up with the sacrilegious and hateful fallacy which you advance
in the case of one and the same Daniel, to find fault with kings because
he was cast into the den of lions, and to refuse praise to kings in that
he was raised to exalted honor, seeing that, even when he was cast into
the den of lions, the king himself was more inclined to believe that he
would be safe than that he would be destroyed, and, in anxiety for him,
refused to eat his food?  And then do you dare to say to Christians,
"What have you to do with the kings of the world?" because Daniel
suffered persecution at a king’s hands, and yet not look back upon the
same Daniel faithfully interpreting dreams to kings, calling a king
lord, receiving gifts and honors from a king?  And so again do you dare,
in the case of the aforesaid three children, to excite the flames of
odium against kings, because, when they refused to worship the statue,
they were cast into the flames, while at the same time you hold your
tongue, and say nothing about their being thus extolled and honored by
the king?  Granted that the king was a persecutor when he cast Daniel
into the lions’ den; but when, on receiving him safely out again, in his
joy and congratulations he cast in his enemies to be torn in pieces and
devoured by the same lions, what was he then,—a persecutor, or
not? <span id="fr_2258"></span>[2259](#fn_2258)   I call on you to
answer me.  For if he was, why did not Daniel himself resist him, as he
might so easily have done in virtue of his great friendship for him,
while yet you bid us restrain kings from persecuting men?  But if he was
not a persecutor, because he avenged with prompt justice the outrage
committed against a holy man, what kind of vengeance, I would ask, must
be exacted from kings for indignities offered to the sacraments of
Christ, if the limbs of the prophet required such a vengeance because
they were exposed to danger?  Again, I acknowledge that the king, as
indeed is manifest, was a persecutor when he cast the three children
into the furnace because they refused to worship his image; but I ask
whether he was still a persecutor when he set forth the decree that all
who should blaspheme against the one true God should be destroyed, and
their whole house laid waste?  For if he was a persecutor, why do you
answer *Amen* to the words of a persecutor? <span
id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259)   But if he was not a persecutor,
why do you call those persecutors who deter you from the madness of
blasphemy?  For if they compel you to worship an idol, then they <span
id="page_585">p. 585</span> <span id="v.v.iv.xciii-Page_585"></span>are
like the impious king, and you are like the three children; but if they
are preventing you from fighting against Christ, it is you who are
impious if you attempt to do this.  But what they may be if they forbid
this with terrible threats, I do not presume to say.  Do you find some
other name for them, if you will not call them pious emperors.

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p51"></span>213.  If I had been the person to
bring forward these examples of Daniel and the three children, you would
perhaps resist, and declare that they ought not to have been brought
from those times in illustration of our days; but God be thanked that
you yourself brought them forward, to prove the point, it is true, which
you desired to establish, but you see that their force was rather in
favor of what you least would wish to prove.  Perhaps you will say that
this proceeds from no deceit of yours, but from the fallibility of human
nature.  Would that this were true!  Amend it, then You will not lose in
reputation nay, it marks unquestionably the higher mind to extinguish
the fire of animosity by a frank confession, than merely to escape the
mist of falsehood by acuteness of the understanding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2221"></span>[577:2222](1040580.htm#fr_2221) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p2"></span> [2 Mac.
vii](../../../bib/apo/ma2007.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2222"></span>[577:2223](1040580.htm#fr_2222) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p3"></span> [Dan.
iii](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2223"></span>[577:2224](1040580.htm#fr_2223) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p4"></span> [Matt. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2224"></span>[577:2225](1040580.htm#fr_2224) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p5"></span> [Dan.
vi](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2225"></span>[577:2226](1040580.htm#fr_2225) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p6"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#026)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2226"></span>[577:2227](1040580.htm#fr_2226) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p7"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2227"></span>[577:2228](1040580.htm#fr_2227) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p8"></span> [John xvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002)<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2228"></span>[578:2229](1040580.htm#fr_2228) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p9"></span> [1 Kings
xxi](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2229"></span>[578:2230](1040580.htm#fr_2229) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p10"></span> [Matt.
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#009)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2230"></span>[578:2231](1040580.htm#fr_2230) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p11"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
24-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2231"></span>[578:2232](1040580.htm#fr_2231) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p12"></span> [Ps.
ii](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p12.1"></span>., cp. Hieron.

<span id="fn_2232"></span>[578:2233](1040580.htm#fr_2232) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p13"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2233"></span>[578:2234](1040580.htm#fr_2233) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p14"></span> Some editions have Varius in the
place of Geta, referring to Aurelius Antoninus Heliogabalus, of whom
Lampridius asserts that he derived the name of Varius from the
doubtfulness of his parentage.  Aelii Lampridii Antoninus Heliogabalus,
in *S.S. Historiæ Augustæ*.  The <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p14.1"></span>Mss.</span> agree, however, in the
reading "Geta," which was a name of the second son of Severus, the
brother of Caracalla.

<span id="fn_2234"></span>[578:2235](1040580.htm#fr_2234) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p15"></span> Optatus defends the cause of
Macarius at great length in his third book against Parmenianus.  Of
Ursacius he says in the same place:  "You are offended at the times of a
certain Leontius, of Ursacius, Macarius and others."  And Augustin, in
his third book against Cresconius, c. 20, introduces an objection of the
Donatists against himself:  "But so soon as Silvanus, bishop of Cirta,
had refused to communicate with Ursacius and Zenophilus the persecutors,
he was driven into exile."  Usuardus, deceived by a false story made up
by the Donatists, enters in his Martyrology, that a pseudo-martyr
Donatus suffered on the 1st of March, under Ursacius and Marcellinus, to
this effect:  "On the same day of the holy martyr Donatus, who suffered
under Ursacius the judge (or *dux*), and the tribune Marcellinus."

<span id="fn_2235"></span>[578:2236](1040580.htm#fr_2235) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p16"></span> [1 Kings
xxi](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[579:2237](1040580.htm#fr_2236) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p17"></span> [Prov. xviii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#021)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[579:2238](1040580.htm#fr_2237) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p19"></span> *Constitutio quam impetraverunt*. 
Some editions have *"quam dederunt Constantio;"* but there is no place
for Constantius in this history of the Donatists, nor was any boon
either sought or obtained from him in their name.  The Louvain editors
therefore restored *"constitutio,"* which is the reading of the Gallic
<span class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p19.1"></span>Mss.</span>

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[579:2239](1040580.htm#fr_2238) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p20"></span> [Matt. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[579:2240](1040580.htm#fr_2239) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p22"></span> [Gen.
xx](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2240"></span>[579:2241](1040580.htm#fr_2240) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p23"></span> [Gen. xxvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#011)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2241"></span>[579:2242](1040580.htm#fr_2241) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p24"></span> [Gen.
xlvii](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2242"></span>[579:2243](1040580.htm#fr_2242) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p25"></span> [Gen.
39:0](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#000), [Gen.
41:0](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2243"></span>[579:2244](1040580.htm#fr_2243) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p26"></span> [Gen. xlii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#015)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2244"></span>[579:2245](1040580.htm#fr_2244) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p27"></span> [Ex. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2245"></span>[579:2246](1040580.htm#fr_2245) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p28"></span> [1 Sam.
xxvii](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2246"></span>[579:2247](1040580.htm#fr_2246) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p29"></span> [1 Kings xviii.
44-46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#044)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2247"></span>[579:2248](1040580.htm#fr_2247) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p30"></span> [2 Kings iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#013)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2248"></span>[580:2249](1040580.htm#fr_2248) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p31"></span> [Dan.
iii.-vi](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2249"></span>[581:2250](1040580.htm#fr_2249) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p34"></span> [John xvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2250"></span>[581:2251](1040580.htm#fr_2250) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p35"></span> [Phil.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2251"></span>[581:2252](1040580.htm#fr_2251) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p36"></span> [Acts xxiii.
12-33](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2252"></span>[582:2253](1040580.htm#fr_2252) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p39"></span> The reign of Constantine lasted
about thirty-two years, from 306 to 337 <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p39.1"></span>A.D</span>.  Julian succeeded
Constantius, and reigned one year and seven months, dying at the age of
thirty, in a war against the Persians, in 363 <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p39.2"></span>A.D.</span>

<span id="fn_2253"></span>[583:2254](1040580.htm#fr_2253) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p41"></span> [Gen. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#005)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2254"></span>[583:2255](1040580.htm#fr_2254) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p43"></span> [Ps. ii.
10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2255"></span>[583:2256](1040580.htm#fr_2255) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p44"></span> [Ps.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2256"></span>[583:2257](1040580.htm#fr_2256) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p45"></span> [Isa.
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#018), [Zech.
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#002)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2257"></span>[584:2258](1040580.htm#fr_2257) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p47"></span> *Simulacri;* and so the <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p47.1"></span>Mss.</span>  The older
editions have *"adorandi simulacra;"* but the singular is more forcible
in its special reference to the image on the plain of Dura.  [Dan.
iii.](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2258"></span>[584:2259](1040580.htm#fr_2258) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p49"></span> [Dan.
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[584:2260](1040580.htm#fr_2259) <span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p50"></span> This is illustrated by the words of
Augustin, *Epist.* 105*, ad Donatistas*, c. I. 7:  "Do ye not know that
the words of the king were:  ‘I thought it good to show the signs and
wonders that the high God hath wrought toward me.  How great are His
signs! and how mighty are His wonders!  His kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom, and His dominion from generation to generation’ ([Dan.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#003)<span
id="v.v.iv.xciii-p50.1"></span>)?  Do you not, when you hear this,
answer *Amen*, and by saying this in a loud voice, place your seal on
the king’s decree by a holy and solemn act?"  In the Gothic liturgy this
declaration was made on Easter Eve (when the [Dan.
3](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#000)<span id="v.v.iv.xciii-p50.2"></span>
is still read in the Roman Church), and the people answered "*Amen.*"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 94](1040581)
