[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040075)  [Next](1040077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.v.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—Description of the Symbol of the
Hands Among the Manichæans.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xix-p2"></span>54.  We must now notice and discuss the
<span id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span
id="iv.v.xix-Page_84"></span>symbol of the hands.  And, in the first
place, your abstaining from the slaughter of animals and from injuring
plants is shown by Christ to be mere superstition; for, on the ground
that there is no community of rights between us and brutes and trees, He
both sent the devils into an herd of swine, <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) and withered by His curse a tree in
which He had found no fruit. <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181)  
The swine assuredly had not sinned, nor had the tree.  We are not so
insane as to think that a tree is fruitful or barren by its own choice. 
Nor is it any reply to say that our Lord wished in these actions to
teach some other truths; for every one knows that.  But assuredly the
Son of God would not commit murder to illustrate truth, if you call the
destruction of a tree or of an animal murder.  The signs which Christ
wrought in the case of men, with whom we certainly have a community of
rights, were in healing, not in killing them.  And it would have been
the same in the case of beasts and trees, if we had that community with
them which you imagine.

<span id="iv.v.xix-p5"></span>55.  I think it right to refer here to the
authority of Scripture, because we cannot here enter on a profound
discussion about the soul of animals, or the kind of life in trees.  But
as you preserve the right to call the Scriptures corrupted, in case you
should find them too strongly opposed to you,—although you have never
affirmed the passages about the tree and the herd of swine to be
spurious,—still, lest some day you should wish to say this of them too,
when you find how much they are against you, I will adhere to my plan,
and will ask you, who are so liberal in your promises of evidence and
truth, to tell me first what harm is done to a tree, I say not by
plucking a leaf or an apple,—for which, however, one of you would be
condemned at once as having abused the symbol, if he did it
intentionally, and not accidentally,—but if you tear it up by the root. 
For the soul in trees, which, according to you, is a rational soul, is,
in your theory, freed from bondage when the tree is cut down,—a bondage,
too, where it suffered great misery and got no profit.  For it is well
known that you, in the words of your founder, threaten as a great,
though not the greatest punishment, the change from a man to a tree; and
it is not probable that the soul in a tree can grow in wisdom as it does
in a man.  There is the best reason for not killing a man, in case you
should kill one whose wisdom or virtue might be of use to many, or one
who might have attained to wisdom, whether by the advice of another
without himself, or by divine illumination in his own mind.  And the
more wisdom the soul has when it leaves the body, the more profitable is
its departure, as we know both from well-grounded reasoning and from
wide-spread belief.  Thus to cut down a tree is to set free the soul
from a body in which it makes no progress in wisdom.  You—the holy men,
I mean—ought to be mainly occupied in cutting down trees, and in leading
the souls thus emancipated to better things by prayers and psalms.  Or
can this be done only with the souls which you take into your belly,
instead of aiding them by your understanding?

<span id="iv.v.xix-p6"></span>56.  And you cannot escape the admission
that the souls in trees make no progress in wisdom while they are there,
when you are asked why no apostle was sent to teach trees as well as
men, or why the apostle sent to men did not preach the truth to trees
also.  Your reply must be, that the souls while in such bodies cannot
understand the divine precepts.  But this reply lands you in great
difficulties; for you declare that these souls can hear your voices and
understand what you say, and see bodies and their motions, and even
discern thoughts.  If this is true, why could they learn nothing from
the apostle of light?  Why could they not learn even much better than
we, since they can see into the mind?  Your master, who, as you say, has
difficulty in teaching you by speech, might have taught these souls by
thought; for they could see his ideas in his mind before he expressed
them.  But if this is untrue, consider into what errors you have fallen.

<span id="iv.v.xix-p7"></span>57.  As for your not plucking fruits or
pulling up vegetables yourselves, while you get your followers to pluck
and pull and bring them to you, that you may confer benefits not only on
those who bring the food but on the food which is brought, what
thoughtful person can bear to hear this?  For, first, it matters not
whether you commit a crime yourself, or wish another to commit it for
you.  You deny that you wish this!  How then can relief be given to the
divine part contained in lettuce and leeks, unless some one pull them
and bring them to the saints to be purified.  And again, if you were
passing through a field where the right of friendship permitted you to
pluck anything you wished, what would you do if you saw a crow on the
point of eating a fig?  Does not, according to your ideas, the fig
itself seem to address you and to beg of you piteously to pluck it
yourself and give it burial in a holy belly, where it may be purified
and restored, rather than that the crow should swallow it and make it
<span id="page_85">p. 85</span> <span id="iv.v.xix-Page_85"></span>part
of his cursed body, and then hand it over to bondage and torture in
other forms?  If this is true, how cruel you are!  If not, how silly! 
What can be more contrary to your opinions than to break the symbol? 
What can be more unkind to the member of God than to keep it?

<span id="iv.v.xix-p8"></span>58.  This supposes the truth of your false
and vain ideas.  But you can be shown guilty of plain and positive
cruelty flowing from the same error.  For were any one lying on the
road, his body wasted with disease, weary with journeying, and half-dead
from his sufferings, and able only to utter some broken words, and if
eating a pear would do him good as an astringent, and were he to beg you
to help him as you passed by, and were he to implore you to bring the
fruit from a neighboring tree, with no divine or human prohibition to
prevent your doing so, while the man is sure to die for the want of it,
you, a Christian man and a saint, will rather pass on and abandon a man
thus suffering and entreating, lest the tree should lament the loss of
its fruit, and you should be doomed to the punishment threatened by
Manichæus for breaking the symbol.  Strange customs, and strange
harmlessness!

<span id="iv.v.xix-p9"></span>59.  Now, as regards killing animals, and
the reasons for your opinion, much that has been said will apply also to
this.  For what harm will be done to the soul of a wolf by killing the
wolf, since the wolf, as long as it lives, will be a wolf, and will not
listen to any preacher, or give up, in the least, shedding the blood of
sheep; and, by killing it, the rational soul, as you think, will be set
free from its confinement in the body?  But you make this slaughter
unlawful even for your followers; for you think it worse than that of
trees.  And in this there is not much fault to be found with your
senses,—that is, your bodily senses.  For we see and hear by their cries
that animals die with pain, although man disregards this in a beast,
with which, as not having a rational soul, we have no community of
rights.  But as to your senses in the observation of trees, you must be
entirely blind.  For not to mention that there are no movements in the
wood expressive of pain, what is clearer than that a tree is never
better than when it is green and flourishing, gay with flowers, and rich
in fruit?  And this comes generally and chiefly from pruning.  But if it
felt the iron, as you suppose, it ought to die of wounds so many, so
severe, instead of sprouting at the places, and reviving with such
manifest delight.

<span id="iv.v.xix-p10"></span>60.  But why do you think it a greater
crime to destroy animals than plants, although you hold that plants have
a purer soul than animals?  There is a compensation, we are told, when
part of what is taken from the fields is given to the elect and the
saints to be purified.  This has already been refuted; and it has, I
think, been proved sufficiently that there is no reason for saying that
more of the good part is found in vegetables than in flesh.  But should
any one support himself by selling butcher-meat, and spend the whole
profit of his business in purchasing food for your elect, and bring
larger supplies for those saints than any peasant or farmer, will he not
plead this compensation as a warrant for his killing animals?  But there
is, we are told, some other mysterious reason; for a cunning man can
always find some resource in the secrets of nature when addressing
unlearned people.  The story, then, is that the heavenly princes who
were taken from the race of darkness and bound, and have a place
assigned them in this region by the Creator of the world, have animals
on the earth specially belonging to them, each having those coming from
his own stock and class; and they hold the slaughterers of those animals
guilty, and do not allow them to leave the earth, but harass them as
much as they can with pains and torments.  What simple man will not be
frightened by this, and, seeing nothing in the darkness shrouding these
things, will not think that the fact is as described?  But I will hold
to my purpose, with God’s help, to rebut mysterious falsehood by the
plainest truth.

<span id="iv.v.xix-p11"></span>61.  Tell me, then, if animals on land
and in water come in regular succession by ordinary generation from this
race of princes, since the origin of animal life is traced to the
abortive births in that race;—tell me, I say, whether bees and frogs,
and many other creatures not sprung from sexual intercourse, <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) may be killed with impunity.  We are
told they cannot.  So it is not on account of their relation to certain
princes that you forbid your followers to kill animals.  Or if you make
a general relationship to all bodies, the princes would be equally
concerned about trees, which you do not require your followers to
spare.  You are brought back to the weak reply, that the injuries done
in the case of plants are atoned for by the fruits which your followers
bring to your church.  For this implies that those who slaughter
animals, and sell their flesh in the market, if they are your followers,
and if they bring to you vegetables bought with their gains, may think
nothing <span id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span
id="iv.v.xix-Page_86"></span>of the daily slaughter, and are cleared of
any sin that may be in it by your repasts.

<span id="iv.v.xix-p13"></span>62.  But if you say that, in order to
expiate the slaughter, the thing must be given as food, as in the case
of fruits and vegetables,—which cannot be done, because the elect do not
eat flesh, and so your followers must not slaughter animals,—what reply
will you give in the case of thorns and weeds, which farmers destroy in
clearing their fields, while they cannot bring any food to you from
them?  How can there be pardon for such destruction, which gives no
nourishment to the saints?  Perhaps you also put away any sin committed,
for the benefit of the fruits and vegetables, by eating some of these. 
What then if the fields are plundered by locusts, mice, or rats, as we
see often happen?  Can your rustic follower kill these with impunity,
because he sins for the good of his crops?  Here you are at a loss; for
you either allow your followers to kill animals, which your founder
prohibited, or you forbid them to be cultivators, which he made lawful. 
Indeed, you sometimes go so far as to say that an usurer is more
harmless than a cultivator,—you feel so much more for melons than for
men.  Rather than hurt the melons, you would have a man ruined as a
debtor.  Is this desirable and praiseworthy justice, or not rather
atrocious and damnable error?  Is this commendable compassion, or not
rather detestable barbarity?

<span id="iv.v.xix-p14"></span>63.  What, again, of your not abstaining
yourselves from the slaughter of lice, bugs, and fleas?  You think it a
sufficient excuse for this to say that these are the dirt of our
bodies.  But this is clearly untrue of fleas and bugs; for every one
knows that these animals do not come from our bodies.  Besides, if you
abhor sexual intercourse as much as you pretend to do, you should think
those animals all the cleaner which come from our bodies without any
other generation; for although they produce offspring of their own, they
are not produced in ordinary generation from us.  Again, if we must
consider as most filthy the production of living bodies, still worse
must be the production of dead bodies.  There must be less harm,
therefore, in killing a rat, a snake, or a scorpion, which you
constantly say come from our dead bodies.  But to pass over what is less
plain and certain, it is a common opinion regarding bees that they come
from the carcases of oxen; so there is no harm in killing them.  Or if
this too is doubted, every one allows that beetles, at least, are bred
in the ball of mud which they make and bury. <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)   You ought therefore to consider
these animals, and others that it would be tedious to specify, more
unclean than your lice; and yet you think it sinful to kill them, though
it would be foolish not to kill the lice.  Perhaps you hold the lice
cheap because they are small.  But if an animal is to be valued by its
size, you must prefer a camel to a man.

<span id="iv.v.xix-p16"></span>64.  Here we may use the gradation which
often perplexed us when we were your followers.  For if a flea may be
killed on account of its small size, so may the fly which is bred in
beans.  And if this, so also may one of a little larger size, for its
size at birth is even less.  Then again, a bee may be killed, for its
young is no larger than a fly.  So on to the young of a locust, and to a
locust; and then to the young of a mouse, and to a mouse.  And, to cut
short, it is clear we may come at last to an elephant; so that one who
thinks it no sin to kill a flea, because of its small size, must allow
that it would be no sin in him to kill this huge creature.  But I think
enough has been said of these absurdities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_180"></span>[84:181](1040076.htm#fr_180) <span
id="iv.v.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xix-p3"></span> [Matt. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#032)<span id="iv.v.xix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[84:182](1040076.htm#fr_181) <span
id="iv.v.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xix-p4"></span> [Matt. xxi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#019)<span id="iv.v.xix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[85:183](1040076.htm#fr_182) <span
id="iv.v.xix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xix-p12"></span> \[This is, of course, a physiological
blunder, but Augustin doubtless states what was the common view at the
time.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_183"></span>[86:184](1040076.htm#fr_183) <span
id="iv.v.xix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xix-p15"></span> *V. Retract*. i. 7. § 6, where Augustin
allows that this is doubtful, and that many have not even heard of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1040077)
