[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040047)  [Next](1040049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xxix"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—On Doing Good to the Body of Our
Neighbor.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxix-p2"></span>52.  Man, then, as viewed by his
fellow-man, is a rational soul with a mortal and earthly body in its
service.  Therefore he who loves his neighbor does good partly to the
man’s body, and partly to his soul.  What benefits the body is called
medicine; what benefits the soul, discipline.  Medicine here includes
everything that either preserves or restores bodily health.  It
includes, therefore, not only what belongs to the art of medical men,
properly so called, but also food and drink, clothing and shelter, and
every means of covering and protection to guard our bodies against
injuries and mishaps from without as well as from within.  For hunger
and thirst, and cold and heat, and all violence from without, produce
loss of that health which is the point to be considered.

<span id="iv.iv.xxix-p3"></span>53.  Hence those who seasonably and
wisely supply all the things required for warding off <span
id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span id="iv.iv.xxix-Page_56"></span>these
evils and distresses are called compassionate, although they may have
been so wise that no painful feeling disturbed their mind in the
exercise of compassion. <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130)   No
doubt the word compassionate implies suffering in the heart of the man
who feels for the sorrow of another.  And it is equally true that a wise
man ought to be free from all painful emotion when he assists the needy,
when he gives food to the hungry and water to the thirsty, when he
clothes the naked, when he takes the stranger into his house, when he
sets free the oppressed, when, lastly, he extends his charity to the
dead in giving them burial.  Still the epithet compassionate is a proper
one, although he acts with tranquillity of mind, not from the stimulus
of painful feeling, but from motives of benevolence.  There is no harm
in the word compassionate when there is no passion in the case.

<span id="iv.iv.xxix-p5"></span>54.  Fools, again, who avoid the
exercise of compassion as a vice, because they are not sufficiently
moved by a sense of duty without feeling also distressful emotion, are
frozen into hard insensibility, which is very different from the calm of
a rational serenity.  God, on the other hand, is properly called
compassionate; and the sense in which He is so will be understood by
those whom piety and diligence have made fit to understand.  There is a
danger lest, in using the words of the learned, we harden the souls of
the unlearned by leading them away from compassion instead of softening
them with the desire of a charitable disposition.  As compassion, then,
requires us to ward off these distresses from others, so harmlessness
forbids the infliction of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_130"></span>[56:131](1040048.htm#fr_130) <span
id="iv.iv.xxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxix-p4"></span> *Retract*. i. 7. § 4:—"This does not
mean that there are actually in this life wise men such as are here
spoken of.  My words are not, ‘although they are so wise,’ but ‘although
they were so wise.’"  \[Augustin’s ideal wise man was evidently the
"Gnostic" of Clement of Alexandria.  The conception is Stoical and
Neo-Platonic.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1040049)
