[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040072)  [Next](1040074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.v.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—Three Good Reasons for Abstaining
from Certain Kinds of Food.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p2"></span>31.  But, you reply, the apostle says, "It
is good, brethren, neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine." <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171)   No one denies that this is good,
provided that it is for the end already mentioned, of which it is said,
"Make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof;" <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) or for the ends pointed out by the
apostle, namely, either to check the appetite, which is apt to go to a
more wild and uncontrollable excess in these things than in others, or
lest a brother should be offended, or lest the weak should hold
fellowship with an idol.  For at the time when the apostle wrote, the
flesh of sacrifices was often sold in the market.  And because wine,
too, was used in libations to the gods of the Gentiles, many weaker
brethren, accustomed to purchase such things, preferred to abstain
entirely from flesh and wine rather than run the risk of having
fellowship, as they considered it, with idols, even ignorantly.  And,
for their sakes, even those who were stronger, and had faith enough to
see the insignificance of these things, knowing that nothing is unclean
except from an evil conscience, and holding by the saying of the Lord,
"Not that which entereth into your mouth defileth you, but that which
cometh out of it,"  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) still, lest
these weaker brethren should stumble, were bound to abstain from these
things.  And this is not a mere theory, but is clearly taught in the
epistles of the apostle himself.  For you are in the habit of quoting
only the words, "It is good, brethren, neither to eat flesh, nor to
drink wine," without adding what follows, "nor anything whereby thy
brother stumbleth, or is offended or is made weak."  These words show
the intention of the apostle in giving the admonition.

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p6"></span>32.  This is evident from the preceding
and succeeding context.  The passage is a long one to quote, but, for
the sake of those who are indolent in reading and searching the sacred
Scriptures, we must give the whole of it.  "Him that is weak in the
faith," says the apostle, "receive ye, but not to doubtful
disputations.  For one believeth that he may eat <span id="page_78">p.
78</span> <span id="iv.v.xvi-Page_78"></span>all things:  another, who
is weak, eateth herbs.  Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth
not; and let not him that eateth not judge him that eateth, for God hath
received him.  Who art thou that judgest another man’s servant? to his
own master he standeth or falleth; yea, he shall be holden up:  for God
is able to make him stand.  One man esteemeth one day above another;
another esteemeth every day alike.  Let every man be fully persuaded in
his own mind.  He that regardeth the day, regardeth it to the Lord.  He
that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks; and he that
eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks.  For none
of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself.  For whether we
live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord: 
whether we live, therefore, or die, we are the Lord’s.  For to this end
Christ both lived, and died and rose again, that He might be Lord both
of the dead and living.  But why dost thou judge thy brother? or why
dost thou set at nought thy brother? for we shall all stand before the
judgment-seat of God.  For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord,
every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174)   So then every one of us shall give
account of himself to God.  Let us not, therefore, judge one another any
more:  but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling-block, or
occasion to fall, in his brother’s way.  I know, and am persuaded in the
Lord Jesus, that there is nothing common of itself:  but to him that
esteemeth anything to be common, to him it is common.  But if thy
brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou not charitably. 
Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.  Let not then our
good be evil spoken of.  For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink;
but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.  For he who in
this serveth Christ is acceptable to God, and approved of men.  Let us
therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and things
whereby one may edify another.  For meat destroys not the work of God. 
All things indeed are pure; but it is evil for that man who eateth with
offense.  It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor
anything whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made
weak.  Hast thou faith? have it to thyself before God.  Happy is he who
condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth.  And he that
distinguishes is damned if he eats, because he eateth not of faith:  for
whatsoever is not of faith is sin.  We then that are strong ought to
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves.  Let
every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification.  For
even Christ pleased not Himself." <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175)

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p9"></span>33.  Is it not clear that what the apostle
required was, that the stronger should not eat flesh nor drink wine,
because they gave offense to the weak by not going along with them, and
made them think that those who in faith judged all things to be pure,
did homage to idols in not abstaining from that kind of food and drink? 
This is also set forth in the following passage of the Epistle to the
Corinthians:  "As concerning, therefore, the eating of those things that
are offered in sacrifice unto idols, we know that an idol is nothing in
the world, and that there is none other God but one.  For though there
be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth, but to us there
is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in Him; and
one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by Him.  Howbeit
there is not in every man that knowledge:  for some, with conscience of
the idol unto this hour, eat it as a thing offered to an idol; and their
conscience being weak is defiled.  But meat commendeth us not to God: 
for neither, if we eat, shall we abound; neither, if we eat not, shall
we suffer want.  But take heed, lest by any means this liberty of yours
become a stumbling-block to them that are weak.  For if any man see one
who has knowledge sit at meat in the idol’s temple, shall not his
conscience being weak be emboldened to eat those things which are
offered to idols; and through thy knowledge shall the weak brother
perish, for whom Christ died?  But when ye sin so against the brethren,
and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.  Wherefore, if
meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh forever, lest I make
my brother to offend." <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176)

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p11"></span>34.  Again, in another place:  "What say
I then? that the idol is anything? or that which is offered in sacrifice
to idols is anything?  But the things which the Gentiles sacrifice they
sacrifice to devils, and not to God:  and I would not that ye should
have fellowship with devils.  Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and
the cup of devils:  ye cannot be partakers of the Lord’s table and of
the table of devils.  Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we
stronger than He?  All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient:  all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not.  Let
no man seek his own, but every man what is another’s.  Whatso<span
id="page_79">p. 79</span> <span id="iv.v.xvi-Page_79"></span>ever is
sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question for conscience sake. 
But if any man say unto you, This is offered in sacrifice unto idols,
eat not for his sake that shows it, and for conscience sake: 
conscience, I say, not thine own, but another’s:  for why is my liberty
judged of another man’s conscience?  For if I be a partaker with
thanksgiving, why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks? 
Whether, therefore, ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God.  Give none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the
Greeks, nor to the Church of God:  even as I please all men in all
things not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many that they may
be saved.  Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ."  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177)

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p13"></span>35.  It is clear, then, I think, for what
end we should abstain from flesh and wine.  The end is threefold:  to
check indulgence, which is mostly practised in this sort of food, and in
this kind of drink goes the length of intoxication; to protect weakness,
on account of the things which are sacrificed and offered in libation;
and, what is most praiseworthy of all, from love, not to offend the
weakness of those more feeble than ourselves, who abstain from these
things.  You, again, consider a morsel of meat unclean; whereas the
apostle says that all things are clean, but that it is evil to him that
eateth with offence.  And no doubt you are defiled by such food, simply
because you think it unclean.  For the apostle says, "I know, and am
persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing common of itself: 
but to him that esteemeth anything common, to him it is common."  And
every one can see that by common he means unclean and defiled.  But it
is folly to discuss passages of Scripture with you; for you both mislead
people by promising to prove your doctrines, and those books which
possess authority to demand our homage you affirm to be corrupted by
spurious interpolations.  Prove then to me your doctrine that flesh
defiles the eater, when it is taken without offending any one, without
any weak notions, and without any excess. <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[77:172](1040073.htm#fr_171) <span
id="iv.v.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p3"></span> [Rom. xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#021)<span id="iv.v.xvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[77:173](1040073.htm#fr_172) <span
id="iv.v.xvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p4"></span> [Rom. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span id="iv.v.xvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[77:174](1040073.htm#fr_173) <span
id="iv.v.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p5"></span> [Matt. xv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#002)<span id="iv.v.xvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[78:175](1040073.htm#fr_174) <span
id="iv.v.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p7"></span> [Isa.
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#024)<span id="iv.v.xvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[78:176](1040073.htm#fr_175) <span
id="iv.v.xvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p8"></span> [Rom.
14:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#000), [Rom.
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.xvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[78:177](1040073.htm#fr_176) <span
id="iv.v.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p10"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004)<span id="iv.v.xvi-p10.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[79:178](1040073.htm#fr_177) <span
id="iv.v.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p12"></span> [1 Cor.
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#019),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#028), [1 Cor.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.xvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[79:179](1040073.htm#fr_178) <span
id="iv.v.xvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p14"></span> \[Augustin’s comparison of Manichæan
with Christian asceticism is thoroughly just and admirable.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1040074)
