[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040066)  [Next](1040068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.x"></span>

<span id="iv.v.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.v.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Evil is Not a Substance, But a
Disagreement Hostile to Substance.</span>

<span id="iv.v.x-p2"></span>11.  For what other answer will you give to
the question, What is evil? but either that it is against nature, or
that it is hurtful, or that it is corruption, or something similar?  But
I have shown that in these replies you make shipwreck of your cause,
unless, indeed, you will answer in the childish way in which you
generally speak to children, that evil is fire, poison, a wild beast,
and so on.  For one of the leaders of this heresy, whose instructions we
attended with great familiarity and frequency, used to say with
reference to a person who held that evil was not a substance, "I should
like to put a scorpion in the man’s hand, and see whether he would not
withdraw his hand; and in so doing he would get a proof, not in words
but in the thing itself, that evil is a substance, for he would not deny
that the animal is a substance."  He said this not in the presence of
the person, but to us, when we repeated to him the remark which had
troubled us, giving, as I said, a childish answer to children.  For who
with the least tincture of learning or science does not see that these
things hurt by disagreement with the bodily temperament, while at other
times they agree with it, so as not only not to hurt, but to produce the
best effects?  For if this poison were evil in itself, the scorpion
itself would suffer first and most.  In fact, if the poison were quite
taken from the animal, it would die.  So for its body it is evil to lose
what it is evil for our body to receive; and it is good for it to have
what it is good for us to want.  Is the same thing then both good and
evil?  By no means; but evil is what is against nature, for this is evil
both to the animal and to us.  This evil is the disagreement, which
certainly is not a substance, but hostile to substance.  Whence then is
it?  See what it leads to, and you will learn, if any inner light lives
in you.  It leads all that it destroys to non-existence.  Now God is the
author of existence; and there is no existence which, as far as it is
existing, leads to non-existence:  Thus we learn whence disagreement is
not; as to whence it is, nothing can be said.

<span id="iv.v.x-p3"></span>12.  We read in history of a female criminal
in Athens, who succeeded in drinking the quantity of poison allotted as
a fatal draught for the condemned with little or no injury to her
health, by taking it at intervals.  So being condemned, she took the
poison in the prescribed quantity like the rest, but rendered it
powerless by accustoming herself to it, and did not die like the rest. 
And as this excited great wonder, she was banished.  If poison is an
evil, are we to think that she made it to be no evil to her?  What could
be more absurd than this?  But because disagreement is an evil, what she
did was to make the poisonous matter agree with her own body by a
process of habituation.  For how could she by any amount of cunning have
brought it <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span
id="iv.v.x-Page_73"></span>about that disagreement should not hurt her? 
Why so?  Because what is truly and properly an evil is hurtful both
always and to all.  Oil is beneficial to our bodies, but very much the
opposite to many six-footed animals.  And is not hellebore sometimes
food, sometimes medicine, and sometimes poison.  Does not every one
maintain that salt taken in excess is poisonous?  And yet the benefits
to the body from salt are innumerable and most important.  Sea-water is
injurious when drunk by land animals, but it is most suitable and useful
to many who bathe their bodies in it and to fish it is useful and
wholesome in both ways.  Bread nourishes man, but kills hawks.  And does
not mud itself, which is offensive and noxious when swallowed or smelt,
serve as cooling to the touch in hot weather, and as a cure for wounds
from fire?  What can be nastier than dung, or more worthless than
ashes?  And yet they are of such use to the fields, that the Romans
thought divine honors due to the discoverer, Stercutio, from whose name
the word for dung \[*stercus*\] is derived.

<span id="iv.v.x-p4"></span>13.  But why enumerate details which are
countless?  We need not go farther than the four elements themselves,
which, as every one knows, are beneficial when there is agreement, and
bitterly opposed to nature when there is disagreement in the objects
acted upon.  We who live in air die under earth or under water, while
innumerable animals creep alive in sand or loose earth, and fish die in
our air.  Fire consumes our bodies, but, when suitably applied, it both
restores from cold, and expels diseases without number.  The sun to
which you bow the knee, and than which, indeed, there is no fairer
object among visible things, strengthens the eyes of eagles, but hurts
and dims our eyes when we gaze on it; and yet we too can accustom
ourselves to look upon it without injury.  Will you, then, allow the sun
to be compared to the poison which the Athenian woman made harmless by
habituating herself to it?  Reflect for once, and consider that if a
substance is an evil because it hurts some one, the light which you
worship cannot be acquitted of this charge.  See the preferableness of
making evil in general to consist in this disagreement, from which the
sun’s ray produces dimness in the eyes, though nothing is pleasanter to
the eyes than light. <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_166"></span>[73:167](1040067.htm#fr_166) <span
id="iv.v.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.x-p5"></span> \[The reasoning here is admirably adapted
to Augustin’s purpose, which is to refute the Manichæan notion of the
evil nature of material substance.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1040068)
