[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040086)  [Next](1040088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.vi.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—Whether Even Vices Themselves as
Objects of Intellectual Apprehension are to Be Preferred to Light as an
Object of Sense Perception, and are to Be Attributed to God as
Their</span> <span id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span
id="iv.vi.vii-Page_98"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.vi.vii-p1.2"></span>Author.  Vice of the Mind and Certain Defects
are Not Rightly to Be Counted Among Intelligible Things.  Defects
Themselves Even If They Should Be Counted Among Intelligible Things
Should Never Be Put Before Sensible Things.  If Light is Visible by God,
Much More is the Soul, Even If Vicious, Which in So Far as It Lives is
an Intelligible Thing.  Passages of Scripture are Adduced by the
Manichæans to the Contrary.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p2"></span>At this point, in case some one of them,
cautious and watchful, now also more studious than pertinacious, had
admonished me that the inquiry is not about vicious souls but about
vices themselves, which, seeing that they are not known by corporeal
sense, and yet are known, can only be received as objects of
intellectual apprehension, which if they excel all objects of sense, why
can we not agree in attributing light to God as its author, but only a
sacrilegious person would say that God is the author of vices; I should
have replied to the man, if either on the spur of the moment, as is
customary to the worshippers of the good God, a solution of this
question had darted like lightning from on high, or a solution had been
previously prepared.  If I had not deserved or was unable to avail
myself of either of these methods, I should have deferred the
undertaking, and should have confessed that the thing propounded was
difficult to discern and arduous.  I should have withdrawn to myself,
prostrated myself before God, groaned aloud asking Him not to suffer me
to halt in mid space, when I should have moved forward with assured
arguments, asking Him that I might not be compelled by a doubtful
question either to subordinate intelligible things to sensible, and to
yield, or to call Himself the author of vices; since either of these
alternatives would have been absolutely full of falsehood and impiety. 
I can by no means suppose that He would have deserted me in such a frame
of mind.  Rather, in His own ineffable way, He would have admonished me
to consider again and again whether vices of mind concerning which I was
so troubled should be reckoned among intelligible things.  But that I
might find out, on account of the weakness of my inner eye, which
rightly befell me on account of my sins, I should have devised some sort
of stage for gazing upon spiritual things in visible things themselves,
of which we have by no means a surer knowledge, but a more confident
familiarity.  Therefore I should straightway have inquired, what
properly pertains to the sensation of the eyes.  I should have found
that it is the color, the dominion of which the light holds.  For these
are the things that no other sense touches, for the motions and
magnitudes and intervals and figures of bodies, although they also can
be perceived by the eyes, yet to perceive such is not their peculiar
function, but belongs also to touch.  Whence I should have gathered that
by as much as yonder light excels other corporeal and sensible things,
by so much is sight more noble than the other senses.  The light
therefore having been selected from all the things that are perceived by
bodily sense, by this \[light\] I should have striven, and in this of
necessity I should have placed that stage of my inquiry.  I should have
gone on to consider what might be done in this way, and thus I should
have reasoned with myself:  If yonder sun, conspicuous by its brightness
and sufficing for day by its light, should little by little decline in
our sight into the likeness of the moon, would we perceive anything else
with our eyes than light however refulgent, yet seeking light by reason
of not seeing what had been, and using it for seeing what was present? 
Therefore we should not see the decline, but the light that should
survive the decline.  But since we should not see, we should not
perceive; for whatever we perceive by sight must necessarily be seen;
wherefore if that decline were perceived neither by sight nor by any
other sense, it cannot be reckoned among objects of sense.  For nothing
is an object of sense that cannot be perceived by sense.  Let us apply
now the consideration to virtue, by whose intellectual light we most
fittingly say the mind shines.  Again, a certain decline from this light
of virtue, not destroying the soul, but obscuring it, is called vice. 
Therefore also vice can by no means be reckoned among objects of
intellectual perception, as that decline of light is rightly excluded
from the number of objects of sense perception.  Yet what remains of
soul, that is that which lives and is soul is just as much an object of
intellectual perception as that is an object of sense perception which
should shine in this visible luminary after any imaginable degree of
decline.  And so the soul, in so far as it is soul and partakes of life,
without which it can in no way be soul, is most correctly to be
preferred to all objects of sense perception.  Wherefore it is most
erroneous to say that any soul is not from God, from whom you boast that
the sun and moon have their existence.

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p3"></span>7.  But if now it should be thought fit
to designate as objects of sense perception not <span id="page_99">p.
99</span> <span id="iv.vi.vii-Page_99"></span>only all those things that
we perceive by the senses, but also all those things that though not
perceiving by the senses we judge of by means of the body, as of
darkness through the eyes, of silence through the ears,—for not by
seeing darkness and not by hearing silence do we know of their
existence,—and again, in the case of objects of intellectual perception,
not those things only which we see illuminated by the mind, as is wisdom
itself, but also those things which by the illumination itself we avoid,
such as foolishness, which I might fittingly designate mental darkness;
I should have made no controversy about a word, but should have
dissolved the whole question by an easy division, and straightway I
should have proved to those giving good attention, that by the divine
law of truth intelligible subsistences are to be preferred to sensible
subsistences, not the decline of these subsistences, even though we
should choose to call these intelligible, those sensible.  Wherefore,
that those who acknowledge that these visible luminaries and those
intelligible souls are subsistences, are in every way compelled to grant
and to attribute the sublimer part to souls; but that defects of either
kind cannot be preferred the one to the other, for they are only
privative and indicate nonexistence, and therefore have precisely the
same force as negations themselves.  For when we say, It is not gold,
and, It is not virtue, although there is the greatest possible
difference between gold and virtue, yet there is no difference between
the negations that we adjoin to them.  But that it is worse indeed not
to be virtue than not to be gold, no sane man doubts.  Who does not know
that the difference lies not in the negations themselves, but in the
things to which they are adjoined?  For by as much as virtue is more
excellent than gold, by so much is it more wretched to be in want of
virtue than of gold.  Wherefore, since intelligible things excel
sensible things, we rightly feel greater repugnance towards defect in
intelligible than in sensible things, esteeming not the defects, but the
things that are deficient more or less precious.  From which now it
appears, that defect of light, which is intelligible, is far more
wretched than defect of the sensible light, because, forsooth, life
which is known is by far more precious than yonder light which is seen.

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p4"></span>8.  This being the case, who will dare,
while attributing sun and moon, and whatever is refulgent in the stars,
nay in this fire of ours and in this visible earthly life, to God, to
decline to grant that any souls whatsoever, which are not souls except
by the fact of their being perfectly alive, since in this fact alone
life has the precedence of light, are from God.  And since he speaks
truth who says, In as far as a thing shines it is from God, would I
speak falsely, mighty God, if I should say, In so far as a thing lives
it is from God?  Let not, I beseech thee, blindness of intellect and
perversions of mind be increased to such an extent that men may fail to
know these things.  But however great their error and pertinacity might
have been, trusting in these arguments and armed therewith, I believe
that when I should have laid the matter before them thus considered and
canvassed, and should have calmly conferred with them, I should have
feared lest any one of them should have seemed to me to be of any
consequence, should he endeavor to subordinate or even to compare to
bodily sense, or to those things that pertain to bodily sense as objects
of knowledge, either intellect or those things that are perceived (not
by way of defect) by the intellect.  Which point having been settled,
how would he or any other have dared to deny that such souls as he would
consider evil, yet since they are souls, are to be reckoned in the
number of intelligible things, nor are objects of intellectual
perception by way of defect?  This is on the supposition that souls are
souls only by being alive.  For if they were intellectually perceived as
vicious through defect, being vicious by lack of virtue, yet they are
perceived as souls not through defect, for they are souls by reason of
being alive.  Nor can it be maintained that presence of life is a cause
of defect, for by as much as anything is defective, by so much is it
severed from life.

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p5"></span>9.  Since therefore it would have been
every way evident that no souls can be separated from that Author from
whom yonder light is not separated, whatever they might have now adduced
I should not have accepted, and should rather have admonished them that
they should choose with me to follow those who maintain that whatever
is, since it is, and in whatever degree it is, has its existence from
the one God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1040088)
