[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040467)  [Next](1040469) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—</span>12.  Of these I would
ask, whether by coming to their sea they were restored to life, or
whether they are still dead there?  For if still they are none the less
corpses, then the laver cannot in any way profit those who are baptized
by such dead men.  But if they have been restored to life, yet how can
the laver profit those whom they baptized before outside, while they
were lying without life, if the passage, "He who is baptized by the
dead, of what profit is his baptism to him," is to be understood in the
way in which they think?  For those whom Prætextatus and Felicianus
baptized while they were yet in communion with Maximianus are now
retained among them, sharing in their communion, without being again
baptized, together with the same men who baptized them—I mean Felicianus
and Prætextatus:  taking occasion by which fact, if it were not that
they cherish the beginning of their own obstinacy, instead of
considering the certain end of their spiritual salvation, they would
certainly be bound to vigilance, and ought to recover the soundness of
their senses, so as to breathe again in Catholic peace; if only, laying
aside the swelling of their pride, and overcoming the madness of their
stubbornness, they would take heed and see what monstrous sacrilege it
is to curse the baptism of the foreign churches, which we have learned
from the sacred books were planted in primitive times, and to receive
the baptism of the followers of Maximianus, whom they have condemned
with their own lips.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1040469)
