[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040474)  [Next](1040476) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—</span>20.  He says:  "You
who are a most abandoned *traditor* have come out in the character of a
persecutor and murderer of us who keep the law."  If the followers of
Maximianus kept the law when they separated from you, then we may
acknowledge you as a keeper of the law, when you are separated from the
Church spread abroad throughout the world.  But if you raise the
question of persecutions, I at once reply:  If you have suffered
anything unjustly, this does not concern those who, though they
disapprove of men who act in such a way, <span
id="fr_1948"></span>[1949](#fn_1948) yet endure them for the peace that
is in unity, in a manner deserving of all praise.  Wherefore you have
nothing to bring up against the Lord’s wheat, who endure the chaff that
is among them till the last winnowing, from whom you never would have
separated yourself, had you not shown yourself lighter than chaff by
flying away under the blast of temptation before the coming of the
Winnower.  But not to leave this one example, which the Lord hath thrust
back in their teeth, to close the mouths of these men, for their
correction if they will show themselves to be wise, but for their
confusion if they remain in their folly:  if those are more just that
suffer persecution than those who inflict it, then those same followers
of Maximianus are the more just, whose basilica was utterly overthrown,
and who were grievously maltreated by the military following of Optatus,
when the mandates of the proconsul, ordering that all of them should be
shut out of the basilicas, were manifestly procured by the followers of
Primianus.  Wherefore, if, when the emperors hated their communion, they
ventured on such violent measures for the persecution of the followers
of Maximianus, what would they do if they <span id="page_526">p.
526</span> <span id="v.v.iii.xviii-Page_526"></span>were enabled to work
their will by being in communion with kings?  And if they did such
things as I have mentioned for the correction of the wicked, why are
they surprised that Catholic emperors should decree with greater power
that they should be worked upon and corrected who endeavor to rebaptize
the whole Christian world, when they have no ground for differing from
them? seeing that they, themselves bear witness that it is right to bear
with wicked men even where they have true charges to bring against them
in the cause of peace, since they received those whom they had
themselves condemned, acknowledging the honors conferred among
themselves, and the baptism administered in schism.  Let them at length
consider what treatment they deserve at the hands of the Christian
powers of the world, who are the enemies of Christian unity throughout
the world.  If, therefore, correction be bitter, yet let them not fail
to be ashamed; lest when they begin to read what they themselves have
written, they be overcome with laughter, when they do not find in
themselves what they wish to find in others, and fail to recognize <span
id="fr_1949"></span>[1950](#fn_1949) in their own case what they find
fault with in their neighbors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1948"></span>[525:1949](1040475.htm#fr_1948) <span
id="v.v.iii.xviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii.xviii-p2"></span> *Qui talia facientes quamvis
improbent*.  A comparison of the explanation of this passage in *Contra
Crescon*. III. 41, 45, shows the probability of Migne’s conjecture,
*"quamvis improbe,"* "who endure the men that act in such a way, however
monstrous their conduct may be."

<span id="fn_1949"></span>[526:1950](1040475.htm#fr_1949) <span
id="v.v.iii.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii.xviii-p3"></span> *Nec in se agnoscunt*.  The reading
of the Louvain edition gives better sense, *"Et in se agnoscunt,"* "and
discover in themselves."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1040476)
