[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040585)  [Next](1040587) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xcix"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xcix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xcix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 99.—</span>225.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xcix-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"On you, yes you, you wretched men, I call, who, being dismayed with the
fear of persecution, whilst you seek to save your riches, not your
souls, love not so much the faithless faith of the traitors, as the
wickedness of the very men whose protection you have won unto
yourselves,—just in the same way as sailors, shipwrecked in the waves,
plunge into the waves by which they must be overwhelmed, and in the
great danger of their lives seek unmistakeably the very object of their
dread; just as the madness of a tyrant, that he may be free from
apprehension of any person whatsoever, desires to be feared, though this
is fraught with peril to himself:  so, so you fly for refuge to the
citadel of wickedness, being willing to look on the loss or punishment
of the innocent if you may escape fear for yourselves.  If you consider
that you escape danger when you plunge into ruin, truly also it is a
faith that merits condemnation to observe the faith of a robber. 
Lastly, it is trafficking in a madman’s gains to lose your own souls in
order not to lose your wealth.  For the Lord Christ says, ‘If a man
shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul, what shall a man give
in exchange for his soul?’" <span id="fr_2266"></span>[2267](#fn_2266)

<span id="v.v.iv.xcix-p3"></span>226.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xcix-p3.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  That exhortation
of yours would be useful, I cannot but acknowledge, if any one were to
employ it in a good cause.  It is undoubtedly well that you have tried
to deter men from preferring their riches to their souls.  But I would
have you, who have heard these words, listen also for a time to us; for
we also say this, but listen in what sense.  If kings threaten to take
away your riches, because you are not Jews according to the flesh, or
because you do not worship idols or devils, or because you are not
carried about into any heresies, but abide in Catholic unity, then
choose rather that your riches should perish, that you perish not
yourselves; but be careful to prefer neither anything else, nor the life
of this world itself, to eternal salvation, which is in Christ.  But if
kings threaten you with loss or condemnation, simply on the ground that
you are heretics, such things are terrifying you not in cruelty, but in
mercy; and your determination not to fear is a sign not of bravery, but
of obstinacy.  Hear then the words of Peter, where he says, "What glory
is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye take it
patiently?" <span id="fr_2267"></span>[2268](#fn_2267) so that herein
you have neither <span id="page_588">p. 588</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xcix-Page_588"></span>consolation upon earth, nor in the
world to come life everlasting; but you have here the miseries of the
unfortunate, and there the hell of heretics.  Do you see, therefore, my
brother, with whom I am now arguing, that you ought first to show
whether you hold the truth, and then to exhort men that in upholding it
they should be ready to give up all the blessings which they possess in
this present world?  And so, when you do not show this, because you
cannot,—not that the talent is wanting, but because the cause is
bad,—why do you hasten by your exhortations to make men both beggars and
ignorant, both in want and wandering from the truth, in rags and
contentions, household drudges and heretics, both losing their temporal
goods in this world, and finding eternal evils in the judgment of
Christ?  But the cautious son, who, while he stands in dread of his
father’s rod, keeps away from the lair of the serpent, escapes both
blows and destruction; whereas he who despises the pains of discipline,
when set in rivalry with his own pernicious will, is both beaten and
destroyed.  Do you not now understand, O learned man, that he who has
resigned all earthly goods in order to maintain the peace of Christ,
possesses God; whereas he who has lost even a very few coins in behalf
of the party of Donatus is devoid of heart?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2266"></span>[587:2267](1040586.htm#fr_2266) <span
id="v.v.iv.xcix-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xcix-p2"></span> [Matt. xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026)<span id="v.v.iv.xcix-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2267"></span>[587:2268](1040586.htm#fr_2267) <span
id="v.v.iv.xcix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xcix-p4"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#020)<span id="v.v.iv.xcix-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 100](1040587)
