[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040184)  [Next](1040186) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.x.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—God the Highest and Unchangeable
Good, from Whom are All Other Good Things, Spiritual and
Corporeal.</span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.x.iii-p2.1"></span>The</span> highest good, than which there is
no higher, is God, and consequently He is unchangeable good, hence truly
eternal and truly immortal.  All other good things are only from Him,
not of Him.  For what is of Him, is Himself.  And consequently if He
alone is unchangeable, all things that He has made, because He has made
them out of nothing, are changeable.  For He is so omnipotent, that even
out of nothing, that is out of what is absolutely non-existent, He is
able to make good things both great and small, both celestial and
terrestrial, both spiritual and corporeal.  But because He is also just,
He has not put those things that He has made out of nothing on an
equality with that which He begat out of Himself.  Because, therefore,
no good things whether great or small, through whatever gradations of
things, can exist except from God; but since every nature, so far as it
is nature, is good, it follows that no nature can exist save from the
most high and true God:  because all things even not in the highest
degree good, but related to the highest good, and again, because all
good things, even those of most recent origin, which are far from the
highest good, can have their existence only from the highest good. 
Therefore every spirit, though subject to change, and every corporeal
entity, is from God, and all this, having been made, is nature.  For
every nature is either spirit or body.  Unchangeable spirit is God,
changeable spirit, having been made, is nature, but is better than body;
but body is not spirit, unless when the wind, because it is invisible to
us and yet its power is felt as something not inconsiderable, is in a
certain sense called spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1040186)
