[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040050)  [Next](1040052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 30.—The Church Apostrophised as
Teacher of All Wisdom.  Doctrine of the Catholic Church.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxii-p2"></span>62.  But why say more on this?  For who
but sees that men who dare to speak thus against the Christian
Scriptures, though they may not be what they are suspected of being, are
at least no Christians?  For to Christians this rule of life is given,
that we should love the Lord Our God with all the heart, with all the
soul, and with all the mind, and our neighbor as ourselves; for on these
two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.  Rightly, then,
Catholic Church, most true mother of Christians, dost thou not only
teach that God alone, to find whom is the happiest life, must be
worshipped in perfect purity and chastity, bringing in no creature as an
object of adoration whom we should be required to serve; and from that
incorrupt and inviolable eternity to which alone man should be made
subject, in cleaving to which alone the rational soul escapes misery,
excluding everything made, everything liable to change, everything under
the power of time; without confounding what eternity, and truth, and
peace itself keeps separate, or separating what a common majesty
unites:  but thou dost also contain love and charity to our neighbor in
such a way, that for all kinds of diseases with which souls are for
their sins afflicted, there is found with thee a medicine of prevailing
efficacy.

<span id="iv.iv.xxxii-p3"></span>63.  Thy training and teaching are
childlike for children, forcible for youths, peaceful for the aged,
taking into account the age of the mind as well as of the body.  Thou
subjectest women to their husbands in chaste and faithful obedience, not
to gratify passion, but for the propagation of offspring, <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) and for domestic society.  Thou givest
to men authority over their wives, not to mock the weaker sex, but in
the laws of unfeigned love.  Thou dost subordinate children to their
parents in a kind of free bondage, and dost set parents over their
children in a godly rule.  Thou bindest brothers to brothers in a
religious tie stronger and closer than that of blood.  Without violation
of the connections of nature and of choice, thou bringest within the
bond of mutual love every relationship of kindred, and every alliance of
affinity.  Thou teachest servants to cleave to their masters from
delight in their task rather than from the necessity of their position. 
Thou renderest masters forbearing to their servants, from a regard to
God their common Master, and more disposed to advise than to compel. 
Thou unitest citizen to citizen, nation to nation, yea, man to man, from
the recollection of their first parents, not only in society but in
fraternity.  Thou teachest kings to seek the good of their peoples; thou
counsellest peoples to be subject to their kings.  Thou teachest
carefully to whom honor is due, to whom regard, to whom reverence, to
whom fear, to whom consolation, to whom admonition, to whom
encouragement, to whom discipline, to whom rebuke, to whom punishment;
showing both how all are not due to all, and how to all love is due, and
how injury is due to none. <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135)

<span id="iv.iv.xxxii-p6"></span>64.  Then, after this human love has
nourished and invigorated the mind cleaving to thy breast, and fitted it
for following God, when the divine majesty has begun to disclose itself
as far as suffices for man while a dweller on the earth, such fervent
charity is produced, and such a flame of divine love is kindled, that by
the burning out of all vices, and by the purification and sanctification
of the man, it becomes plain how divine are these words, "I am a
consuming fire," <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) and, "I have
come to send fire on the earth." <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137)
  These two utterances of one God stamped on both Testaments, exhibit
with harmonious testimony, the sanctification of the soul, pointing
forward to the accomplishment of that which <span id="page_59">p.
59</span> <span id="iv.iv.xxxii-Page_59"></span>is also quoted in the
New Testament from the Old:  "Death is swallowed up in victory.  O
death, where is thy sting?  Where, O death, is thy contest?" <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138)   Could these heretics understand this
one saying, no longer proud but quite reconciled, they would worship God
nowhere but with thee and in thy bosom.  In thee, as is fit, divine
precepts are kept by widely-scattered multitudes.  In thee, as is fit,
it is well understood how much more heinous sin is when the law is known
than when it is unknown.  For "the sting of death is sin, and the
strength of sin is the law," <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139)
which adds to the force with which the consciousness of disregard of the
precept strikes and slays.  In thee it is seen, as is fit, how vain is
effort under the law, when lust lays waste the mind, and is held in
check by fear of punishment, instead of being overborne by the love of
virtue.  Thine, as is fit, are the many hospitable, the many friendly,
the many compassionate, the many learned, the many chaste, the many
saints, the many so ardent in their love to God, that in perfect
continence and amazing indifference to this world they find happiness
even in solitude.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_134"></span>[58:135](1040051.htm#fr_134) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxii-p4"></span> \[This view of the marriage relation
seems to have been almost universal in the ancient Church.  Tertullian
and Clement of Alexandria are fond of dwelling upon it.  For Augustin’s
views more fully stated see his *De Bono Conjugali*, 6.  See also an
interesting excursus on "Continence in Married Life" in <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.iv.xxxii-p4.1"></span>Cunningham’s</span> *St.*
*Austin*, p. 168. sq.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_135"></span>[58:136](1040051.htm#fr_135) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxii-p5"></span> \[If this apostrophe had been
addressed to "Christianity" rather than to the "Catholic Church," no
Christian could fail to see in it one of the noblest tributes ever
bestowed on the religion of Christ.  Augustin identified Christianity
with the organized body which was far from realizing the ideal that he
here sets forth.  As an apostrophe to ideal Christianity nothing could
be finer.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_136"></span>[58:137](1040051.htm#fr_136) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxii-p7"></span> [Deut. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.xxxii-p7.1"></span>.  *Retract.* i. 7, § 5:—"The Pelagians may
think that I have spoken of perfection as attainable in this life.  But
they must not think so.  For the fervor of charity which is fitted for
following God, and of force enough to consume all vices, can have its
origin and growth in this life; but it does not follow that it can here
accomplish the purpose of its origin, so that no vice shall remain in
the man; although this great effect is produced by this same fervor of
charity, when and where this is possible, that as the laver of
regeneration purifies from the guilt of all the sins which attach to
man’s birth, or come from his evil conduct, so this perfection may
purify him from all stain from the vices which necessarily attend human
infirmity in this world.  So we must understand the words of the
apostle:  ‘Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it; cleansing
it with the washing of water by the word, that He might present it to
Himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such
thing’ ([Eph. v. 25-27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.xxxii-p7.2"></span>).  For in this world there is the washing
of water by the word which purifies the Church.  But as the whole
Church, as long as it is here, says, ‘Forgive us our debts,’ it
certainly is not while here without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing;
but from that which it here receives, it is led on to the glory which is
not here, and to perfection."

<span id="fn_137"></span>[58:138](1040051.htm#fr_137) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxii-p8"></span> [Luke xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049)<span id="iv.iv.xxxii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[59:139](1040051.htm#fr_138) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxii-p9"></span> [Hos.
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014), [1 Cor.
15:54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054),
[55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055)<span
id="iv.iv.xxxii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[59:140](1040051.htm#fr_139) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxii-p10"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
56](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#056)<span
id="iv.iv.xxxii-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](1040052)
