[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040341)  [Next](1040343) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vii.xvii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—</span>22.  But, having
considered and handled all these points, we have now come to that
peaceful utterance of Cyprian at the end of the epistle, with which I am
never sated, though I read and re-read it again and again,—so great is
the pleasantness of brotherly love which breathes forth from it, so
great the sweetness of charity in which it abounds.  "These things," he
says, "we have written unto you, dearest brother, shortly, according to
our poor ability, prescribing to or prejudging no one, lest each bishop
should not do what he thinks right, in the free exercise of his own
will.  We, so far as in us lies, do not contend on the subject of
heretics with our colleagues and fellow-bishops, with whom we maintain
concord and peace in the Lord; especially as the apostle also says, ‘If
any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the
churches of God.’ <span id="fr_1511"></span>[1512](#fn_1511)   We
observe patiently and gently charity of spirit, the honor of our
brotherhood, the bond of faith, the harmony of the priesthood.  For this
reason also, to the best of our poor ability, by the permission and the
inspiration of God we have written this treatise on ‘The Good of
Patience,’ which we have sent to you in consideration of our mutual
love." <span id="fr_1512"></span>[1513](#fn_1512)

<span id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p4"></span>23.  There are many things to be
considered in these words, wherein the brightness of Christian charity
shines forth in this man, who "loved the beauty of the Lord’s house, and
the place of the tabernacle of His habitation." <span
id="fr_1513"></span>[1514](#fn_1513)   First, that he did not conceal
what he felt; then, that he set it forth so gently and peacefully, in
that he maintained the peace of the Church with those who thought
otherwise, because he understood how great healthfulness was bound up in
the bond of peace, loving it so much, and maintaining it with sobriety,
seeing and feeling that even men who think differently may entertain
their several sentiments with saving charity.  For he would not say that
he could maintain divine concord or the peace of the Lord with evil men;
for the good man can observe peace towards wicked men, but he cannot be
united with them in the peace which they have not.  Lastly, that
prescribing to no one, and prejudging no one, lest each bishop should
not do what he thinks right in the free exercise of his own will, he has
left for us also, whatsoever we may be, a place for treating peacefully
of those things with him.  For he is present, not only in his letters,
but by that very charity which existed in so extraordinary a degree in
him, and which can never die.  Longing, therefore, with the aid of his
prayers, to cling to and be in union with him, if I be not hindered by
the unmeetness of my sins, I will learn if I can through his letters
with how great peace and comfort the Lord administered His Church
through him; and, putting on the bowels of humility through the moving
influence of his discourse, if, in common with the Church at large, I
entertain any doctrine more true than his, I will not prefer my heart to
his, even in the point in which he, though holding different views, was
yet not severed from the Church throughout the world.  For in that, when
that question was yet undecided for want of full discussion, though his
sentiments differed from those of many of his colleagues, yet he
observed so great moderation, that he would not mutilate the sacred
fellowship of the Church of God by any stain of schism, a greater
strength of excellence appeared in him than would have been shown if,
without that virtue, he had held views on every point not only true, but
coinciding with their own.  Nor should I be acting as he would wish, if
I were to pretend to prefer his talent and his fluency of discourse and
copiousness of learning to the holy Council of all nations, whereat he
was assuredly present through the unity of his spirit, especially as he
is now placed in such full light of truth as to see with perfect
certainty what he was here seeking in the spirit of perfect peace.  For
out of that rich abundance he smiles at all that here seems eloquence in
us, as though it were the first essay of infancy; there he sees by what
rule of piety he acted here, that nothing should be dearer in the Church
to him than unity.  There, too, with unspeakable delight he beholds with
what prescient and most merciful providence the Lord, that He might heal
our swellings, "chose the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise,"  <span id="fr_1514"></span>[1515](#fn_1514) and, in the ordering
of the members of His Church, placed all things in such a healthful way,
that men should not say <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="v.iv.vii.xvii-Page_472"></span>that they were chosen to the help of
the gospel for their own talent or learning, of whose source they yet
were ignorant, and so be puffed up with deadly pride.  Oh, how Cyprian
rejoices!  With how much more perfect calmness does he behold how
greatly it conduces to the health of the human race, that in the
writings even of Christian and pious orators there should be found what
merits blame, and in the writings of the fishermen there should nothing
of the sort be found!  And so I, being fully assured of this joy of that
holy soul, neither in any way venture to think or say that my writings
are free from every kind of error, nor, in opposing that opinion of his,
wherein it seemed to him that those who came from among heretics were to
be received otherwise than either they had been in former days, as he
himself bears witness, or are now received, as is the reasonable custom,
confirmed by a plenary Council of the whole Christian world, do I set
against him my own view, but that of the holy Catholic Church, which he
so loved and loves, in which he brought forth such abundant fruit with
tolerance, whose entirety he himself was not, but in whose entirety he
remained; whose root he never left, but, though he already brought forth
fruit from its root, he was purged by the heavenly Husbandman that he
should bring forth more fruit; <span
id="fr_1515"></span>[1516](#fn_1515) for whose peace and safety, that
the wheat might not be rooted out together with the tares, he both
reproved with the freedom of truth, and endured with the grace of
charity, so many evils on the part of men who were placed in unity with
himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[471:1512](1040342.htm#fr_1511) <span
id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p2"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016)<span
id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[471:1513](1040342.htm#fr_1512) <span
id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p3"></span> Cypr. *Ep*. lxxiii. 26.

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[471:1514](1040342.htm#fr_1513) <span
id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p5"></span> [Ps. xxvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008)<span
id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[471:1515](1040342.htm#fr_1514) <span
id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)<span
id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[472:1516](1040342.htm#fr_1515) <span
id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p7"></span> [John xv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002)<span
id="v.iv.vii.xvii-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1040343)
