[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040660)  [Next](1040662) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—</span>6.  I would add, moreover,
that they themselves, by making it the subject of an accusation,
referred the case of Cæcilianus to the decision of the Emperor
Constantine; and that, even after the bishops had pronounced their
judgment, <span id="fr_2479"></span>[2480](#fn_2479) finding that they
could not crush Cæcilianus, they brought him in person before the
above-named emperor for trial, in the most determined spirit of
persecution.  And so they were themselves the first to do what they
censure in us, in order that they may deceive the unlearned, saying that
Christians ought not to demand any assistance from Christian emperors
against the enemies of Christ.  And this, too, they did not dare to deny
in the conference which we held at the same time in Carthage:  nay, they
even venture to make it a matter of boasting that their fathers had laid
a criminal indictment against Cæcilianus before the emperor; adding
furthermore a lie, to the effect that they had there worsted him, and
procured his condemnation.  How then can they be otherwise than
persecutors, seeing that when they persecuted Cæcilianus by their
accusations, and were overcome by him, they sought to claim false glory
for themselves by a most shameless life; not only considering it no
reproach, but glorying in it as conducive to their praise, if they could
prove that Cæcilianus had been condemned on the accusation of their
fathers?  But in regard to the manner in which they were overcome at
every turn in the conference itself, seeing that the records are
exceedingly voluminous, and it would be a serious matter to have them
read to you while you are occupied in other matters that are essential
to the peace of Rome, perhaps it may be possible to have a digest  <span
id="fr_2480"></span>[2481](#fn_2480) of them read to you, which I
believe to be in the possession of my brother and fellow-bishop Optatus;
or if he has not a copy, he might easily procure one from the church at
Sitifa; for I can well believe that even that volume will prove
wearisome enough to you from its lengthiness, amid the burden of your
many cares.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p4"></span>7.  For the Donatists met with the same
fate as the accusers of the holy Daniel. <span
id="fr_2481"></span>[2482](#fn_2481)   For as the lions were turned
against them, so the laws by which they had proposed to crush an
innocent victim were turned against the Donatists; save that, through
the mercy of Christ, the laws which seemed to be opposed to them are in
reality their truest friends; for through their operation many of them
have been, and are daily being reformed, and return God thanks that they
are reformed, and delivered from their ruinous madness.  And those who
used to hate are now filled with love; and now that they have recovered
their right minds, they congratulate themselves that these most
wholesome laws were brought to bear against them, with as much fervency
as in their madness they detested them; and are filled with the same
spirit of ardent love towards those who yet remain as ourselves,
desiring that we should strive in like manner that those with whom they
had been like to perish might be saved.  For both the physician is
irksome to the raging madman, and a father to his undisciplined son,—the
former because of the restraint, the latter because of the chastisement
which he inflicts; yet both are acting in love.  But if they were to
neglect their charge, and allow them to perish, this mistaken kindness
would more truly be accounted cruelty.  For if the horse and mule, which
have no understanding, resist with all the force of bites and kicks the
efforts of the men who treat their wounds in order to cure them; and yet
the men, though they are often exposed to danger from their teeth and
heels, and sometimes meet with actual hurt, nevertheless do not desert
them till they restore them to health through the pain and annoyance
which the healing process gives,—how much more should man refuse to
desert his fellow-man, or brother to desert his brother, lest he should
perish everlastingly, being himself now able to comprehend the vastness
of the boon accorded to himself in his reformation, at the very time
that he complained of suffering persecution?

<span id="v.vi.iv-p6"></span>8.  As then the apostle says, "As we have
therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all <span id="page_636">p.
636</span> <span id="v.vi.iv-Page_636"></span>men, not being weary in
well-doing," <span id="fr_2482"></span>[2483](#fn_2482) so let all be
called to salvation, let all be recalled from the path of
destruction,—those who may, by the sermons of Catholic preachers; those
who may, by the edicts of Catholic princes; some through those who obey
the warnings of God, some through those who obey the emperor’s
commands.  For, moreover, when emperors enact bad laws on the side of
falsehood, as against the truth, those who hold a right faith are
approved, and, if they persevere, are crowned; but when the emperors
enact good laws on behalf of the truth against falsehood, then those who
rage against them are put in fear, and those who understand are
reformed.  Whosoever, therefore, refuses to obey the laws of the
emperors which are enacted against the truth of God, wins for himself a
great reward; but whosoever refuses to obey the laws of the emperors
which are enacted in behalf of truth, wins for himself great
condemnation.  For in the times, too, of the prophets, the kings who, in
dealing with the people of God, did not prohibit nor annul the
ordinances which were issued contrary to God’s commands, are all of them
censured; and those who did prohibit and annul them are praised as
deserving more than other men.  And king Nebuchadnezzar, when he was a
servant of idols, enacted an impious law that a certain idol should be
worshipped; but those who refused to obey his impious command acted
piously and faithfully.  And the very same king, when converted by a
miracle from God, enacted a pious and praiseworthy law on behalf of the
truth, that every one who should speak anything amiss against the true
God, the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, should perish utterly,
with all his house. <span id="fr_2483"></span>[2484](#fn_2483)   If any
persons disobeyed this law, and justly suffered the penalty imposed,
they might have said what these men say, that they were righteous
because they suffered persecution through the law enacted by the king: 
and this they certainly would have said, had they been as mad as these
who make divisions between the members of Christ, and spurn the
sacraments of Christ, and take credit for being persecuted, because they
are prevented from doing such things by the laws which the emperors have
passed to preserve the unity of Christ and boast falsely of their
innocence, and seek from men the glory of martyrdom, which they cannot
receive from our Lord.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p9"></span>9.  But true martyrs are such as those of
whom the Lord says, "Blessed are they which are persecuted for
righteousness’ sake." <span id="fr_2484"></span>[2485](#fn_2484)   It is
not, therefore, those who suffer persecution for their unrighteousness,
and for the divisions which they impiously introduce into Christian
unity, but those who suffer for righteousness’ sake, that are truly
martyrs.  For Hagar also suffered persecution at the hands of
Sarah; <span id="fr_2485"></span>[2486](#fn_2485) and in that case she
who persecuted was righteous, and she unrighteous who suffered
persecution.  Are we to compare with this persecution which Hagar
suffered the case of holy David, who was persecuted by unrighteous
Saul? <span id="fr_2486"></span>[2487](#fn_2486)   Surely there is in
essential difference, not in respect of his suffering, but because he
suffered for righteousness’ sake.  And the Lord Himself was crucified
with two thieves; <span id="fr_2487"></span>[2488](#fn_2487) but those
who were joined in their suffering were separated by the difference of
its cause.  Accordingly, in the psalm, we must interpret of the true
martyrs, who wish to be distinguished from false martyrs, the verse in
which it is said, "Judge me, O Lord, and distinguish <span
id="fr_2488"></span>[2489](#fn_2488) my cause from an ungodly
nation." <span id="fr_2489"></span>[2490](#fn_2489)   He does not say,
Distinguish my punishment, but "Distinguish my cause."  For the
punishment of the impious may be the same; but the cause of the martyrs
is always different.  To whose mouth also the words are suitable, "They
persecute me wrongfully; help Thou me;" <span
id="fr_2490"></span>[2491](#fn_2490) in which the Psalmist claimed to
have a right to be helped in righteousness, because his adversaries
persecuted him wrongfully; for if they had been right in persecuting
him, he would have deserved not help, but correction.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p17"></span>10.  But if they think that no one can be
justified in using violence,—as they said in the course of the
conference that the true Church must necessarily be the one which
suffers persecution, not the one inflicting it,—in that case I no longer
urge what I observed above; because, if the matter stand as they
maintain that it does, then Cæcilianus must have belonged to the true
Church, seeing that their fathers persecuted him, by pressing his
accusation even to the tribunal of the emperor himself.  For we maintain
that he belonged to the true Church, not merely because he suffered
persecution, but because he suffered it for righteousness’ sake; but
that they were alienated from the Church, not merely because they
persecuted, but because they did so in unrighteousness.  This, then, is
our position.  But if they make no inquiry into the causes for which
each person inflicts persecution, or for which he suffers it, but think
that it is a sufficient sign of a true Christian that he does not <span
id="page_637">p. 637</span> <span id="v.vi.iv-Page_637"></span>inflict
persecution, but suffers it, then beyond all question they include
Cæcilianus in that definition, who did not inflict, but suffered
persecution; and they equally exclude their own fathers from the
definition, for they inflicted, but did not suffer it.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p18"></span>11.  But this, I say, I forbear to urge. 
Yet one point I must press:  If the true Church is the one which
actually suffers persecution, not the one which inflicts it, let them
ask the apostle of what Church Sarah was a type, when she inflicted
persecution on her hand-maid.  For he declares that the free mother of
us all, the heavenly Jerusalem, that is to say, the true Church of God,
was prefigured in that woman who cruelly entreated her hand-maid.  <span
id="fr_2491"></span>[2492](#fn_2491)   But if we investigate the story
further, we shall find that the handmaid rather persecuted Sarah by her
haughtiness, than Sarah the handmaid by her severity:  for the handmaid
was doing wrong to her mistress; the mistress only imposed on her a
proper discipline in her haughtiness.  Again I ask, if good and holy men
never inflict persecution upon any one, but only suffer it, whose words
they think that those are in the psalm where we read, "I have pursued
mine enemies, and overtaken them; neither did I turn again till they
were consumed?" <span id="fr_2492"></span>[2493](#fn_2492)   If,
therefore, we wish either to declare or to recognize the truth, there is
a persecution of unrighteousness, which the impious inflict upon the
Church of Christ; and there is a righteous persecution, which the Church
of Christ inflicts upon the impious.  She therefore is blessed in
suffering persecution for righteousness’ sake; but they are miserable,
suffering persecution for unrighteousness.  Moreover, she persecutes in
the spirit of love, they in the spirit of wrath; she that she may
correct, they that they may overthrow:  she that she may recall from
error, they that they may drive headlong into error.  Finally, she
persecutes her enemies and arrests them, until they become weary in
their vain opinions, so that they should make advance in the truth; but
they, returning evil for good, because we take measures for their good,
to secure their eternal salvation, endeavor even to strip us of our
temporal safety, being so in love with murder, that they commit it on
their own persons, when they cannot find victims in any others.  For in
proportion as the Christian charity of the Church endeavors to deliver
them from that destruction, so that none of them should die, so their
madness endeavors either to slay us, that they may feed the lust of
their own cruelty, or even to kill themselves, that they may not seem to
have lost the power of putting men to death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2479"></span>[635:2480](1040661.htm#fr_2479) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p2"></span> In the Councils at Rome and Arles.

<span id="fn_2480"></span>[635:2481](1040661.htm#fr_2480) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p3"></span> This digest will be found in the 9th
volume of Benedictine edition of Augustin’s Works.  *Breviculus
collationis cum Donatistis*, p. 371 sqq., reproduced in Migne 613, sqq.

<span id="fn_2481"></span>[635:2482](1040661.htm#fr_2481) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p5"></span> [Dan. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#024)<span id="v.vi.iv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2482"></span>[636:2483](1040661.htm#fr_2482) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p7"></span> [Gal.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010)<span id="v.vi.iv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2483"></span>[636:2484](1040661.htm#fr_2483) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p8"></span> [Dan.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#005),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#029)<span id="v.vi.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2484"></span>[636:2485](1040661.htm#fr_2484) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p10"></span> [Matt v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001)<span id="v.vi.iv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2485"></span>[636:2486](1040661.htm#fr_2485) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p11"></span> [Gen. xvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#006)<span id="v.vi.iv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2486"></span>[636:2487](1040661.htm#fr_2486) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p12"></span> [1 Sam.
18:0](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#000), [1 Sam.
19:0](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#000)<span id="v.vi.iv-p12.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2487"></span>[636:2488](1040661.htm#fr_2487) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p13"></span> [Luke xxiii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#033)<span id="v.vi.iv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2488"></span>[636:2489](1040661.htm#fr_2488) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p14"></span> *Discerne causam meam*.  The Eng. Vers.
has, "plead my cause against an ungodly nation."

<span id="fn_2489"></span>[636:2490](1040661.htm#fr_2489) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p15"></span> [Ps. xliii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001)<span id="v.vi.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2490"></span>[636:2491](1040661.htm#fr_2490) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p16"></span> [Ps. cxix.
86](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#086)<span id="v.vi.iv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2491"></span>[637:2492](1040661.htm#fr_2491) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p19"></span> [Gal. iv.
22-31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#022)<span id="v.vi.iv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2492"></span>[637:2493](1040661.htm#fr_2492) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p20"></span> [Ps. xviii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#037)<span id="v.vi.iv-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1040662)
