[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr67)  [Next](corr69) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER LXVIII.B.

#### SPINOZA TO SCHALLER.

\[*Spinoza answers all the points in Schaller's letter, and hesitates to
entrust his writings to Leibnitz.*\]

<span class="smallcaps">Most experienced Sir, and valued
Friend</span>,—I was much pleased to learn from your letter, received
to-day, that you are well, and that our friend von Tschirnhausen

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

has happily accomplished his journey to France. In the conversation
which he had about me with Mr. Huygens, he behaved, at least in my
opinion, very judiciously; and besides, I am very glad that he has found
so convenient an opportunity for the purpose which he intended. But what
it is he has found in the fourth axiom of Part I. that seems to
contradict Proposition v. of Part II. I do not see. For in that
proposition it is affirmed, that the essence of every idea has for its
cause God, in so far as He is considered as a thinking thing; but in
that axiom, that the knowledge or idea of a cause depends on the
knowledge or idea of an effect. But, to tell the truth, I do not quite
follow, in this matter, the meaning of your letter, and suspect that
either in it, or in his copy of the book, there is a slip of the pen.
For you write, that it is affirmed in Proposition v. that the objects of
ideas are the efficient causes of the ideas, whereas this is exactly
what is expressly denied in that proposition, and mow think that this is
the cause of the whole confusion. <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76)
Accordingly it would be useless for me at present to try to write at
greater length on this subject, but I must wait, till you explain to me
his mind more clearly, and till I know whether he has a correct copy. I
believe that I have an epistolary acquaintance with the Leibnitz he
mentions. But why he, who was a counsellor at Frankfort, has gone to
France, I do not know. As far as I could conjecture from his letters, he
seemed to me a man of liberal mind, and versed in every science. But yet
I think it imprudent so soon to entrust my writings to him. I should
like first to know what is his business in France, and the judgment of
our friend von Tschirnhausen, when he has been longer in his company,
and knows his character more intimately. However, greet that friend of
ours in my name, and let him command me what he pleases, if in anything
I can be of service to him, and he will find me most ready to obey him
in everything.

I congratulate my most worthy friend Mr. Bresser on his arrival or
return, and also thank him heartily for the

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

promised beer, and will requite him, too, in any way that I can. Lastly,
I have not yet tried to find out your relation's method, nor do I think
that I shall be able to apply my mind to trying it. For the more I think
over the thing in itself, the more I am persuaded that you have not made
gold, but had not sufficiently eliminated that which was hidden in the
antimony. But more of this another time: at present I am prevented by
want of leisure. In the meanwhile, if in anything I can assist you, you
will always find me, most excellent Sir, your friend and devoted
servant,

<span class="smallcaps">B. de Spinoza</span>.

The Hague, 18 Nov., 1675.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[405:1](corr68.htm#fr_77) It appears to me, that
Schaller correctly states the difficulty of Tschirnhausen, but that by
leaving out a negative in the sentence in question, he has attributed
the doctrine of Prop. v. to Prop. vii., and *vice versâ*.—\[<span
class="smallcaps">Tr</span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXIX. From Anon \[Tschirnhausen\]](corr69)
