[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr57)  [Next](corr59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER LX. (LVI.),

#### SPINOZA TO HUGO BOXEL.

\[*Spinoza again answers the argument in favour of ghosts*. (*The
Hague*, 1674).\]

<span class="smallcaps">Dear Sir</span>,—I hasten to answer your letter,
received yesterday, for if I delay my reply, I may have to put it off
longer than I should like. The state of your health would have made me
anxious, if I did not understand that you are better. I hope you are by
this time quite well again.

The difficulties experienced by two people following different
principles, and trying to agree on a matter, which depends on many other
questions, might be shown from this discussion alone, if there were no
reason to prove it by. Pray tell me, whether you have seen or read any
philosophers, who hold that the world has been made by chance, taking
chance in your sense, namely, that God had some design in making the
world, and yet has not kept to the plan he had formed. I do not know,
that such an idea has ever entered anyone's mind. I am likewise at a
loss for the reasons, with which you want to make me believe, that
chance and necessity are not contraries. As soon as I affirm that the
three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles necessarily, I
deny that they are thus equal by chance. As soon as I affirm that heat
is a necessary effect of fire, I deny that it is a chance effect. To
say, that necessary and free are two contrary terms, seems to me no less
absurd and repugnant to reason. For no one can deny, that God freely
knows Himself and all else, yet all with one voice grant that God knows
Himself necessarily. Hence, as it seems to me, you draw no distinction
between constraint or force and necessity. Man's wishes to live, to
love, &c., are not under constraint, but nevertheless are

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

necessary; much more is it necessary, that God wishes to be, to know,
and to act. If you will also reflect, that indifference is only another
name for ignorance or doubt, and that a will always constant and
determined in all things is a necessary property of the understanding,
you will see that my words are in complete harmony with truth. If we
affirm, that God might have been able not to wish a given event, or not
to understand it, we attribute to God two different freedoms, one
necessary, the other indifferent; consequently we shall conceive God's
will as different from His essence and understanding, and shall thus
fall from one absurdity into another.

The attention, which I asked for in my former letter, has not seemed to
you necessary. This has been the reason why you have not directed your
thoughts to the main issue, and have neglected a point which is very
important.

Further, when you say that if I deny, that the operations of seeing,
hearing, attending, wishing, &c., can be ascribed to God, or that they
exist in Him in any eminent fashion, you do not know what sort of God
mine is; I suspect that you believe there is no greater perfection than
such as can be explained by the aforesaid attributes. I am not
astonished; for I believe that, if a triangle could speak, it would say,
in like manner, that God is eminently triangular, while a circle would
say that the divine nature is eminently circular. Thus each would
ascribe to God its own attributes, would assume itself to be like God,
and look on everything else as ill-shaped.

The briefness of a letter and want of time do not allow me to enter into
my opinion on the divine nature, or the questions you have propounded.
Besides, suggesting difficulties is not the same as producing reasons.
That we do many things in the world from conjecture is true, but that
our reflections are based on conjecture is false. In practical life we
are compelled to follow what is most probable; in speculative thought we
are compelled to follow truth. A man would perish of hunger and thirst,
if he refused to eat or drink, till he had obtained positive proof that
food and drink would be good for him. But in philosophic reflection this
is not so. On the contrary, we must take care not to admit as true
anything, which is

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

only probable. For when one falsity has been let in, infinite others
follow.

Again, we cannot infer that because sciences of things divine and human
are full of controversies and quarrels, therefore their whole
subject-matter is uncertain; for there have been many persons so
enamoured of contradiction, as to turn into ridicule geometrical axioms.
Sextus Empiricus and other sceptics, whom you quote, declare, that it is
false to say that a whole is greater than its part, and pass similar
judgments on other axioms.

However, as I pass over and grant that in default of proof we must be
content with probabilities, I say that a probable proof ought to be such
that, though we may doubt about it, we cannot maintain its contrary; for
that which can be contradicted resembles not truth but falsehood. For
instance, if I say that Peter is alive, because I saw him yesterday in
good health, this is a probability, in so far as no one can maintain the
contrary; but if anyone says that lie saw Peter yesterday in a swoon,
and that he believed Peter to have departed this life to-day, he will
make my statement seem false. That your conjecture about ghosts and
spectres seems false, and not even probable, I have shown so clearly,
that I can find nothing worthy of answer in your reply.

To your question, whether I have of God as clear an idea as I have of a
triangle, I reply in the affirmative. But if you ask me, whether I have
as clear a mental image of God as I have of a triangle, I reply in the
negative. For we are not able to imagine God, though we can understand
Him. You must also here observe, that I do not assert that I thoroughly
know God, but that I understand some of His attributes, not all nor the
greater part, and it is evident that my ignorance of very many does not
hinder the knowledge I have of some. When I learned Euclid's Elements, I
understood that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right
angles, and this property of a triangle I perceived clearly, though I
might be ignorant of many others.

As regards spectres or ghosts, I have hitherto heard attributed to them
no intelligible property: they seem like phantoms, which no one can
understand. When you say

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

that spectres, or ghosts, in these lower regions (I adopt your
phraseology, though I know not why matter below should be inferior to
matter above) consist in a very thin rarefied and subtle substance, you
seem to me to be speaking of spiders' webs, air, or vapours. To say,
that they are. invisible, seems to me to be equivalent to saying that
they do not exist, not to stating their nature; unless, perhaps, you
wish to indicate, that they render themselves visible or invisible at
will, and that the imagination, in these as in other impossibilities,
will find a difficulty.

The authority of Plato, Aristotle, and Socrates, does not carry much
weight with me. I should have been astonished, if you had brought
forward Epicurus, Democritus, Lucretius, or any of the atomists, or
upholders of the atomic theory. It is no wonder that persons, who have
invented occult qualities, intentional species, substantial forms, and a
thousand other trifles, should have also devised spectres and ghosts,
and given credence to old wives' tales, in order to take away the
reputation of Democritus, whom they were so jealous of, that they burnt
all the books which he-had published amid so much eulogy. If you are
inclined to believe such witnesses, what reason have you for denying the
miracles of the Blessed Virgin, and all the Saints? These have been
described by so many famous philosophers, theologians, and historians,
that I could produce at least a hundred such authorities for every one
of the former. But

I have gone further, my dear Sir, than I intended: I do not desire to
cause any further annoyance by doctrines which I know you will not
grant. For the principles which you follow are far different from my
own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXII. From Anon. \[Van Vlouten\] (Abstract)](corr59)
