[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](corr62)  [Next](corr64.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER LXV. (LXIII.)

#### G. H. SCHALLER TO SPINOZA. <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_68.md)

\[*Schaller asks for answers to four questions of his friend
Tschirnhausen on the attributes of God, and mentions that Tschirnhausen
has removed the unfavourable opinion of Spinoza lately conceived by
Boyle and Oldenburg*.\]

<span class="smallcaps">Most distinguished and excellent Sir</span>,—I
should blush for my silence, which has lasted so long, and has laid me
open to the charge of ingratitude for your kindness extended to me
beyond my merits, if I did not reflect that your generous courtesy
inclines rather to excuse than to accuse, and also know that you devote
your leisure, for the common good of your friends, to serious studies,
which it would be harmful and injurious to disturb without due cause.
For this reason I have been silent, and have meanwhile been content to
hear from friends of your good health: I send you this letter to inform
you, that our noble friend von Tschirnhausen is enjoying the same in
England, and has three times in the letters he has sent me bidden

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

me convey his kindest regards to the master, again bidding me request
from you the solution of the following questions, and forward to him
your hoped-for answer: would the master be pleased to convince him by
positive proof, not by a reduction to the impossible, that we cannot
know any attributes of God, save thought and extension? Further, whether
it follows that creatures constituted under other attributes can form no
idea of extension? If so, it would follow that there must be as many
worlds as there are attributes of God. For instance, there would be as
much room for extension in worlds affected by other attributes, as there
actually exists of extension in our world. But as we perceive nothing
save thought besides extension, so creatures in the other world would
perceive nothing besides the attributes of that world and thought.

Secondly, as the understanding of God differs from our understanding as
much in essence as in existence, it has, therefore, nothing in common
with it; therefore (by Ethics, I. iii.) God's understanding cannot be
the cause of our own.

Thirdly (in Ethics, I. x. note) you say, that *nothing in nature is
clearer than that every entity must be conceived under some attribute*
(this I thoroughly understand), and *that the more it has of reality or
being, the more attributes appertain to it*. It seems to follow from
this, that there are entities possessing three, four, or more attributes
(though we gather from what has been demonstrated that every being
consists only of two attributes, namely, a certain attribute of God and
the idea of that attribute).

Fourthly, I should like to have examples of those things which are
immediately produced by God, and those which are produced through the
means of some infinite modification. Thought and extension seem to be of
the former kind; understanding in thought and motion in extension seem
to be of the latter.

And these are the points which our said friend von Tschirnhausen joins
with [me in](errata.htm#6.md) wishing to have explained by your excellence,
if perchance your spare time allows it. He further relates, that Mr.
Boyle and Oldenburg had formed a strange idea of your personal
character, but that he has not only removed it, but also given reasons,
which have not only led them back to a most worthy and

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

favourable opinion thereof, but also made them value most highly the
Theologico-Political Treatise. Of this I have not ventured to inform
you, because of your health. Be assured that I am, and live,

Most noble sir,                       
for every good office your most devoted servant,    
G. H. SCHALLER.

Amsterdam, 25 July, 1675.

Mr. à Gent and J. Rieuwerts dutifully greet you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[396:1](corr63.htm#fr_69.md) In the Opera Posthuma
this letter is arranged, so as to seem to be from the person who puts
the questions himself, and the names of Schaller and Tschirnhausen are
suppressed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXVI. To Anon \[Tschirnhausen\]](corr64.md)
