[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr40)  [Next](corr42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER XLI.A.

#### SPINOZA TO \* \* \* \* \* <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_51) (May or June, 1665).

\[*Spinoza urges his correspondent to be diligent in studying
philosophy, promises to send part of the Ethics, and adds some personal
details*.\]

<span class="smallcaps">Dear Friend</span>,—I do not know whether you
have quite forgotten me; but there are many circumstances which lead me
to suspect it. First, when I was setting out on. my journey, <span
id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_52) I wished to bid you good-bye; and, after
your own invitation, thinking I should certainly find you at home, heard
that you had gone to the Hague. I return to Voorburg, nothing doubting
but that you would at least have visited me in passing; but you,
forsooth, without greeting your friend, went back home. Three weeks have
I waited, without getting sight of a letter from you. If you wish this
opinion of mine to be changed, you may easily change it by writing; and
you can, at the same

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

time, point out a means of entering into a correspondence, as we once
talked of doing at your house.

Meanwhile, I should like to ask you, nay I do beg and entreat you, by
our friendship, to apply yourself to some serious work with real study,
and to devote the chief part of your life to the cultivation of your
understanding and your soul. Now, while there is time, and before you
complain of having let time and, indeed, your own self slip by. Further,
in order to set our correspondence on foot, and to give you courage to
write to me more freely, I would have you know that I have long thought,
and, indeed, been almost certain, that you are somewhat too diffident of
your own abilities, and that you are afraid of advancing some question
or proposal unworthy of a man of learning. It does not become me to
praise you, and expatiate on your talents to your face; but, if you are
afraid that I shall show your letters to others, who will laugh at you,
I give you my word of honour, that I will religiously keep them, and
will show them to no mortal without your leave. On these conditions, you
may enter on a correspondence, unless you doubt of my good faith, which
I do not in the least believe. I want to hear your opinion on this in
your first letter; and you may, at the same time, send me the conserve
of red roses, though I am now much better.

After my journey, I was once bled; but the fever did not cease, though I
was somewhat more active than before the bleeding, owing, I think, to
the change of air; but I was two or three times laid up with a tertian.
This, however, by good diet, I have at length driven away, and sent
about its business. Where it has gone, I know not; but I am taking care
it does not return here.

As regards the third part of my philosophy, I will shortly send it you,
if you wish to be its transmitter, or to our friend De Vries; and,
although I had settled not to send any of it, till it was finished, yet,
as it takes longer than I thought, I am unwilling to keep you waiting. I
will send up to the eightieth proposition, or thereabouts. <span
id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_53)

Of English affairs I hear a good deal, but nothing for certain. The
people continue to be apprehensive, and can

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

see no reason, why the fleet should not be despatched; but the matter
does not yet seem to be set on foot. I am afraid our rulers want to be
overwise and prudent; but the event will show what they intend, and what
they will attempt. May the gods turn it all to good. I want to know,
what our people think, where you are, and what they know for certain;
but, above all things, I want you to believe me, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[358:1](corr41.htm#fr_52) Probably J. Bresser, a
member of the Spinozistic Society formed at Amsterdam. See note to
Letter XLII.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[358:2](corr41.htm#fr_53) See Letter XXXVIII.,
which fixes approximately the date of this.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[359:1](corr41.htm#fr_54) The third and fourth
part of the Ethics were probably originally united

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XLII. To I. B.](corr42)
