[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](corr27)  [Next](corr29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER XXIX.A. <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_45.md)

#### SPINOZA TO LEWIS MEYER.

<span class="smallcaps">Dear Friend</span>,—The preface you sent me by
our friend De Vries, I now send back to you by the same hand. Some few
things, as you will see, I have marked in the margin; but yet a few
remain, which I have judged it better to mention to you by letter.
First, where on page 4 you give the reader to know on what occasion I
composed the first part; I would have you likewise explain there, or
where you please, that I composed it within a fortnight. For when this
is explained none will suppose the exposition to be so clear as that it
cannot be bettered, and so they will not stick at obscurities in this
and that phrase on which they may chance to stumble. Secondly, I would
have you explain, that when I prove many points otherwise than they 'be
proved by Descartes, 'tis not to amend Descartes, but the better to
preserve my order, and not to multiply

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

axioms overmuch: and that for this same reason I prove many things which
by Descartes are barely alleged without any proof, and must needs add
other matters which Descartes let alone. Lastly, I will earnestly
beseech you, as my especial friend, to let be everything you have
written, towards the end against that creature, and wholly strike it
out. And though many reasons determine me to this request, I will give
but one. I would fain have all men readily believe that these matters
are published for the common profit of the world, and that your sole
motive in bringing out the book is the love of spreading the truth; and
that it is accordingly all your study to make the work acceptable to
all, to bid men, with all courtesy to the pursuit of genuine philosophy,
and to consult their common advantage. Which every man will be ready to
think when he sees that no one is attacked, nor anything advanced where
any man can find the least offence. Notwithstanding, if afterwards the
person you know of, or any other, be minded to display his ill will,
then you may portray his life and character, and gain applause by it. So
I ask that you will not refuse to be patient thus far, and suffer
yourself to be entreated, and believe me wholly bounden to you, and

Yours with all affection,  
B. DE SPINOZA.

Voorburg, Aug. 3, 1663.

Our friend De Vries had promised to take this with him; but seeing he
knows not when he will return to you, I send it by another hand.

Along with this I send you part of the scholium to Prop. xxvii. Part II.
where page 75 begins, that you may hand it to the printer to be
reprinted. The matter I send you must of necessity be reprinted, and
fourteen or fifteen lines added, which may easily be inserted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[323:1](corr28.htm#fr_46.md) This letter is not
given in the *Opera Posthuma*, but was preserved in M. Cousin's library
at the Sorbonne. This version is reprinted, by kind permission, from Mr.
Pollock's "Spinoza, his Life and Philosophy," Appendix C.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXX. To Peter Balling](corr29.md)
