[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](corr01)  [Next](corr03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER II. (II.)

#### SPINOZA TO OLDENBURG.

\[*Answer to Letter I. Spinoza defines "God," and "attribute," and sends
definitions, axioms, and first four propositions of Book I. of Ethics.
Some errors of Bacon and Descartes discussed*.\]

<span class="smallcaps">Illustrious Sir</span>,—How pleasant your
friendship is to me, you may yourself judge, if your modesty will allow
you to reflect on the abundance of your own excellences. Indeed

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

the thought of these makes me seem not a little bold in entering into
such a compact, the more so when I consider that between friends all
things, and especially things spiritual, ought to be in common. However,
this must lie at the charge of your modesty and kindness rather than of
myself. You have been willing to lower yourself through the former and
to fill me with the abundance of the latter, till I am no longer afraid
to accept the close friendship, which you hold out to me, and which you
deign to ask of me in return; no effort on my part shall be spared to
render it lasting.

As for my mental endowments, such as they are, I would willingly allow
you to share them, even though I knew it would be to my own great
hindrance. But this is not meant as an excuse for denying to you what
you ask by the rights of friendship. I will therefore endeavour to
explain my opinions on the topics you touched on; though I scarcely
hope, unless your kindness intervene, that 1 shall thus draw the bonds
of our friendship closer.

I will then begin by speaking briefly of God, Whom I define as a Being
consisting in infinite attributes, whereof each is infinite or supremely
perfect after its kind. You must observe that by attribute I mean eves y
thing,

which is conceived through itself and in itself, so that the conception
of it does not involve the conception of anything else. For instance,
extension is conceived through itself and in itself, but motion is not.
The latter is conceived through something else, for the conception of it
implies extension.

That the definition above given of God is true appears from the fact,
that by God we mean a Being supremely perfect and absolutely infinite.
That such a Being exists may easily be proved from the definition; but
as this is not the place for such proof, I will pass it over. What I am
bound here to prove, in order to satisfy the first inquiry of my
distinguished questioner, are the following consequences; *first*, that
in the universe there cannot exist two substances without their
differing utterly in essence; *secondly*, that substance cannot be
produced or created—existence pertains to its actual essence; *thirdly*,
that all substance must be infinite or supremely perfect after its kind.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

When these points have been demonstrated, my distinguished questioner
will readily perceive my drift, if he reflects at the same time on the
definition of God. In order to prove them clearly and briefly, I can
think of nothing better than to submit them to the bar of your judgment
proved in the geometrical method. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) I
therefore enclose them separately and await your verdict upon them.

Again, you ask me what errors I detect in the Cartesian and Baconian
philosophies. It is not my custom to expose the errors of others,
nevertheless I will yield to your request. The first and the greatest
error is, that these philosophers have strayed so far from the knowledge
of the first cause and origin of all things; the second is, that they
did not know the true nature of the human mind; the third, that they
never grasped the true cause of error. The necessity for correct
knowledge on these three points can only be ignored by persons
completely devoid of learning and training.

That they have wandered astray from the knowledge of the first cause,
and of the human mind, may easily be gathered from the truth of the
three propositions given above; I therefore devote myself entirely to
the demonstration of the third error. Of Bacon I shall say very little,
for he speaks very confusedly on the point, and works out scarcely any
proofs: he simply narrates. In the first place he assumes, that the
human intellect is liable to err, not only through the fallibility of
the senses, but also solely through its own nature, and that it frames
its conceptions in accordance with the analogy of its own nature, not
with the analogy of the universe, so that it is like a mirror receiving
rays from external objects unequally, and mingling its own nature with
the nature of things, &c.

Secondly, that the human intellect is, by reason of its own nature,
prone to abstractions; such things as are in flux it feigns to be
constant, &c.

Thirdly, that the human intellect continually augments, and is unable to
come to a stand or to rest content. The other causes which he assigns
may all be reduced to the

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

one Cartesian principle, that the human will is free and more extensive
than the intellect, or, as Verulam himself more confusedly puts it, that
"the understanding is not a dry light, but receives infusion from the
will." <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) (We may here observe that
Verulam often employs "intellect" as synonymous with mind, differing in
this respect from Descartes). This cause, then, leaving aside the others
as unimportant, I shall show to be false; indeed its falsity would be
evident to its supporters, if they would consider, that will in general
differs from this or that particular volition in the same way as
whiteness differs from this or that white object, or humanity from this
or that man. It is, therefore, as impossible to conceive, that will is
the cause of a given volition, as to conceive that humanity is the cause
of Peter and Paul.

Hence, as will is merely an entity of the reason, and cannot be called
the cause of particular volitions, and as some cause is needed for the
existence of such volitions, these latter cannot be called free, but are
necessarily such as they are determined by their causes; lastly,
according to Descartes, errors are themselves particular volitions;
hence it necessarily follows that errors, or, in other words, particular
volitions, are not free, but are determined by external causes, and in
nowise by the will. This is what I undertook to prove.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[278:1](corr02.htm#fr_3.md) The allusion is to Eth.
I., Beginning—Prop. iv.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[279:1](corr02.htm#fr_4.md) Bacon, Nov. Org. I. Aph.
49.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter III. From Oldenburg](corr03.md)
