[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](corr30)  [Next](corr32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

### LETTER XXXII. (XIX.)

#### SPINOZA TO BLYENBERGH.

(*Spinoza answers with his usual courtesy the question propounded by
Blyenbergh*.)

<span class="smallcaps">Unknown Friend</span>,—I received, at Schiedam,
on the 26th of December, your letter dated the 12th of December,
enclosed in another written on the 24th of the same month. I gather from
it your fervent love of truth, and your making it the aim of all your
studies. This compelled me, though by no means otherwise unwilling, not
only to grant your petition by answering all the questions you have
sent, or may in future send, to the best of my ability, but also to
impart to you everything in my power, which can conduce to further
knowledge and sincere friendship. So far as in me lies, I value, above
all other things out of my own control, the joining hands of friendship
with men who are sincere lovers of truth. I believe that nothing in the
world, of things outside our own control, brings more peace than the
possibility of affectionate intercourse with such men; it is just as
impossible that the love we bear them can be disturbed (inasmuch as it
is founded on the desire each feels for the knowledge of truth), as that
truth once perceived should not be assented to. It is, moreover, the
highest and most pleasing source of happiness derivable from things not
under our own control. Nothing save truth has power closely to unite
different feelings and dispositions. I say nothing of the very great
advantages which it brings, lest I should detain you too long on a
subject which, doubtless, you know already. I have said thus much, in
order to show you better how gladly I shall embrace this and any future
opportunity of serving you.

In order to make the best of the present opportunity, I will at once
proceed to answer your question. This seems to turn on the point "that
it seems to be clear, not only from God's providence, which is identical
with His will, but also from God's co-operation and continuous creation

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

of things, either that there are no such things as sin or evil, or that
God directly brings sin and evil to pass." You do not, however, explain
what you mean by evil. As far as one may judge from the example you give
in the predetermined act of volition of Adam, you seem to mean by evil
the actual exercise of volition, in so far as it is conceived as
predetermined in a particular way, or in so far as it is repugnant to
the command of God. Hence you conclude (and I agree with you if this be
what you mean) that it is absurd to adopt either alternative, either
that God brings to pass anything contrary to His own will, or that what
is contrary to God's will can be good.

For my own part, I cannot admit that sin and evil have any positive
existence, far less that anything can exist, or come to pass, contrary
to the will of God. On the contrary, not only do I assert that sin has
no positive existence, I also maintain that only in speaking improperly,
or humanly, can we say that we sin against God, as in the expression
that men offend God.

As to the first point, we know that whatsoever is, when considered in
itself without regard to anything else, possesses perfection, extending
in each thing as far as the limits of that thing's essence: for essence
is nothing else. I take for an illustration the design or determined
will of Adam to eat the forbidden fruit. This design or determined will,
considered in itself alone, includes perfection in so far as it
expresses reality; hence it may be inferred that we can only conceive
imperfection in things, when they are viewed in relation to other things
possessing more reality: thus in Adam's decision, so long as we view it
by itself -and do not compare it with other things more perfect or
exhibiting a more perfect state, we can find no imperfection: nay it may
be compared with an infinity of other things far less perfect in this
respect than itself, such as stones, stocks, &c. This, as a matter of
fact, everyone grants. For we all admire in animals qualities which we
regard with dislike and aversion in men, such as the pugnacity of bees,
the jealousy of doves, &c.; these in human beings are despised, but are
nevertheless considered to enhance the value of animals. This being so,
it follows that sin, which indicates nothing save imperfection, cannot
consist

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

in anything that expresses reality, as we see in the case of Adam's
decision and its execution.

Again, we cannot say that Adam's will is at variance with the law of
God, and that it is evil because it is displeasing to God; for besides
the fact that grave imperfection would be imputed to God, if we say that
anything happens contrary to His will, or that He desires anything which
He does not obtain, or that His nature resembled that of His creatures
in having sympathy with some things more than others; such an occurrence
would be at complete variance with the nature of the divine will.

The will of God is identical with His intellect, hence the former can no
more be contravened than the latter; in other words, anything which
should come to pass against His will must be of a nature to be contrary
to His intellect, such, for instance, as a round square. Hence the will
or decision of Adam regarded in itself was neither evil nor, properly
speaking, against the will of God: it follows that God may—or rather,
for the reason you call attention to, must—be its cause; not in so far
as it was evil, for the evil in it consisted in the loss of the previous
state of being which it entailed on Adam, and it is certain that loss
has no positive existence, and is only so spoken of in respect to our
and not God's understanding. The difficulty arises from the fact, that
we give one and the same definition to all the individuals of a genus,
as for instance all who have the outward appearance of men: we
accordingly assume all things which are expressed by the same definition
to be equally capable of attaining the highest perfection possible for
the genus; when we find an individual whose actions are at variance with
such perfection, we suppose him to be deprived of it, and to fall short
of his nature. We should hardly act in this way, if we did not hark back
to the definition and ascribe to the individual a nature in accordance
with it. But as God does not know things through abstraction, or form
general definitions of the kind above mentioned, and as things have no
more reality than the divine understanding and power have put into them
and actually endowed them with, it clearly follows that a state of
privation can only be spoken of in relation to our intellect, not in
relation to God.

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

Thus, as it seems to me, the difficulty is completely solved. However,
in order to make the way still plainer, and remove every doubt, I deem
it necessary to answer the two following difficulties:—First, why Holy
Scripture says that God wishes for the conversion of the wicked, and
also why God forbade Adam to eat of the fruit when He had ordained the
contrary? Secondly, that it seems to follow from what I have said, that
the wicked by their pride, avarice, and deeds of desperation, worship
God in no less degree than the good do by their nobleness, patience,
love, &c., inasmuch as both execute God's will.

In answer to the first question, I observe that Scripture, being chiefly
fitted for and beneficial to the multitude, speaks popularly after the
fashion of men. For the multitude are incapable of grasping sublime
conceptions. Hence I am persuaded that all matters, which God revealed
to the prophets as necessary to salvation, are set down in the form of
laws. With this understanding, the prophets invented whole parables, and
represented God as a king and a law-giver, because He had revealed the
means of salvation and perdition, and was their cause; the means which
were simply causes they styled laws and wrote them down as such;
salvation and perdition, which are simply effects necessarily resulting
from the aforesaid means, they described as reward and punishment;
framing their doctrines more in accordance with such parables than with
actual truth. They constantly speak of God as resembling a man, as
sometimes angry, sometimes merciful, now desiring what is future, now
jealous and suspicious, even as deceived by the devil; so that
philosophers and all who are above the law, that is, who follow after
virtue, not in obedience to law, but through love, because it is the
most excellent of all things, must not be hindered by such expressions.

Thus the command given to Adam consisted solely in this, that God
revealed to Adam, that eating of the fruit brought about death; as He
reveals to us, through our natural faculties, that poison is deadly. If
you ask, for what object did He make this revelation, I answer, in order
to render Adam to that extent more perfect in knowledge. Hence, to ask
God why He had not bestowed on Adam a

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

more perfect will, is just as absurd as to ask, why the circle has not
been endowed with all the properties of a sphere. This follows clearly
from what has been said, and I have also proved it in my Principles of
Cartesian Philosophy, I. 15.

As to the second difficulty, it is true that the wicked execute after
their manner the will of God: but they cannot, therefore, be in any
respect compared with the good. The more perfection a thing has, the
more does it participate in the deity, and the more does it express
perfection. Thus, as the good have incomparably more perfection than the
bad, their virtue cannot be likened to the virtue of the wicked,
inasmuch as the wicked lack the love of God, which proceeds from the
knowledge of God, and by which alone we are, according to our human
understanding, called the servants of God. The wicked, knowing not God,
are but as instruments in the hand of the workman, serving
unconsciously, and perishing in the using; the good, on the other hand,
serve consciously, and in serving become more perfect.

 <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_49.md)This, Sir, is all I can now
contribute to answering your question, and I have no higher wish than
that it may satisfy you. But in case you still find any difficulty, I
beg you to let me know of that also, to see if I may be able to remove
it. You have nothing to fear on your side, but so long as you are not
satisfied, I like nothing better than to be informed of your reasons, so
that finally the truth may appear. I could have wished to write in the
tongue in which I have been brought up. I should, perhaps, have been
able to express my thoughts better. But be pleased to take it as it is,
amend the mistakes yourself, and believe me,

Your sincere friend and servant.

Long Orchard, near Amsterdam,  
Jan. 5, 1665.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[335:1](corr31.htm#fr_50.md) The last paragraph
(not found in the Latin version) is reprinted by kind permission from
Mr. Pollock's translation from the Dutch original, Pollock's "Spinoza,"
Appendix C. On page 332 a misprint of "perfectioribus" for
"imperfectioribus" is corrected from the original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXXII. From Blyenbergh](corr32.md)
