[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr06)  [Next](corr08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER VII. (VII.)

#### OLDENBURG TO SPINOZA.

\[*After thanking Spinoza, in the name of himself and Boyle, Oldenburg
mentions the foundation of the Royal Society, and begs his correspondent
to publish his theological and philosophical works*.\]

\*     \*     \*     \*     \*     \*

The body of philosophers which I formerly mentioned to you has now, by
the king's grace, been constituted as a Royal Society, and furnished
with a public charter, whereby distinguished privileges are conferred
upon it, and an excellent prospect afforded of endowing it with the
necessary revenues.

I would by all means advise you not to begrudge to the learned those
works in philosophy and theology, which you have composed with the
talent that distinguishes you. Publish them, I beg, whatever be the
verdict of petty theologians. Your country is free; the course of
philosophy should there be free also. Your own prudence will, doubtless,
suggest to you, that your ideas and opinions should be put forth as
quietly as possible. For the rest, commit the issue to fortune. Come,
then, good sir, cast away all fear of exciting against you the pigmies
of our time. Long enough have we sacrificed to ignorance and pedantry.
Let us spread the sails of true knowledge, and explore the recesses of
nature more thoroughly than hereto

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

fore. Your meditations can, I take it, be printed in your country with
impunity; nor need any scandal among the learned be dreaded because of
them. If these be your patrons and supporters (and I warrant me you will
find them so), why should you dread the carpings of ignorance? I will
not let you go, my honoured friend, till I have gained my request; nor
will I ever, so far as in me lies, allow thoughts of such importance as
yours to rest in eternal silence. I earnestly beg you to communicate to
me, as soon as you conveniently can, your decision in the matter.
Perhaps events will occur here not unworthy of your knowledge. The
Society I have mentioned will now proceed more strenuously on its
course, and, if peace continues on our shores, will possibly illustrate
the republic of letters with some extraordinary achievement. Farewell,
excellent sir, and believe me,

Your most zealous and friendly,  
HENRY OLDENBURG.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter VIII. From Oldenburg](corr08)
