[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](corr20)  [Next](corr22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER XXIV. (LXXVII.)

#### OLDENBURG TO SPINOZA.

\[*Oldenburg returns to the questions of universal necessity, of
miracles, and of the literal and allegorical interpretation of
Scripture*.\]

εὖ πράττειν.

You hit the point exactly, in perceiving the cause why I did not wish
the doctrine of the fatalistic necessity of all things to be
promulgated, lest the practice of virtue should thereby be aspersed, and
rewards and punishments become ineffectual. The suggestions in your last
letter hardly seem sufficient to settle the matter, or to quiet the
human mind. For if we men are, in all our actions, moral as well as
natural, under the power of God, like clay in the hands of the potter,
with what face can any of us be accused of doing this or that,
[seeing](errata.htm#0.md) that it was impossible for him to do otherwise?
Should we not be able to cast all responsibility on God? Your inflexible
fate, and your irresistible power, compel us to act in a given manner,
nor can we possibly act otherwise. Why, then, and by what right do you
deliver us up to terrible punishments, which we can in no way avoid,
since you direct and carry on all things through supreme necessity,
according to your good will and pleasure? When you say that men are only
inexcusable before God, because they are in the power of God, I should
reverse the argument, and say, with more show of reason, that men are
evidently excusable, since they are in the power of God. Everyone may
plead, "Thy power cannot be escaped from, O God; therefore, since I
could not act otherwise, I may justly be excused."

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

Again, in taking miracles and ignorance as equivalent terms, you seem to
bring within the same limits the power of God and the knowledge of the
ablest men; for God is, according to you, unable to do or produce
anything, for which men cannot assign a reason, if they employ all the
strength of their faculties.

Again, the history of Christ's passion, death, burial, and resurrection
seems to be depicted in such lively and genuine colours, that I venture
to appeal to your conscience, whether you can believe them to be
allegorical, rather than literal, while preserving your faith in the
narrative? The circumstances so clearly stated by the Evangelists seem
to urge strongly on our minds, that the history should be understood
literally. I have ventured to touch briefly on these points, and I
earnestly beg you to pardon me, and answer me as a friend with your
usual candour. Mr. Boyle sends you his kind regards. I will, another
time, tell you what the Royal Society is doing. Farewell, and preserve
me in your affection.

London, 14 Jan., 1676.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXV. To Oldenburg](corr22.md)
