[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr24)  [Next](corr26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER XXVII. (IX.)

#### SPINOZA TO SIMON DE VRIES.

\[*Spinoza deprecates his correspondent's jealousy of Albert Burgh; and
answers that distinction must be made between different kinds of
definitions. He explains his opinions more precisely*.\]

<span class="smallcaps">Respected Friend</span>,—I have received <span
id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39) your long wished-for letter, for which,
and for your affection towards me, I heartily thank you. Your long
absence has been no less grievous to me than to you; yet in the meantime
I rejoice that my trifling studies are of profit to you and our friends.
For thus while you <span id="fr_40"></span>[3](#fn_40) are away, I in my
absence speak to you. <span id="fr_41"></span>[3](#fn_40) You need not
envy my fellow-lodger. There is no one who is more displeasing to me,
nor against whom I have been more anxiously on my guard; and therefore I
would have you and all my acquaintance warned not to

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

communicate my opinions to him,—except when he has come to maturer
years. So far he is too childish and inconstant, and is fonder of
novelty than of truth. But I hope, that in a few years he will amend
these childish faults. Indeed I am almost sure of it, as far as I can
judge from his nature. And so his temperament bids me like him.

As for the questions propounded in your club, which is wisely enough
ordered, I see that your <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_41)
difficulties arise from not distinguishing between kinds of definition:
that is, between a definition serving to explain a thing, of which the
essence only is sought and in question, and a definition which is put
forward only for purposes of inquiry. The former having a definite
object ought to be true, the latter need not. For instance, if someone
asks me for a description of Solomon's temple, I am bound to give him a
true description, unless I want to talk nonsense with him. But if I have
constructed, in my mind, a temple which I desire to build, and infer
from the description of it that I must buy such and such a site and so
many thousand stones and other materials, will any sane person tell me
that I have drawn a wrong conclusion because my definition is possibly
untrue? or will anyone ask me to prove my definition? Such a person
would simply be telling me, that I had not conceived that which I had
conceived, or be requiring me to prove, that I had conceived that which
I had conceived; in fact, evidently trifling. Hence a definition either
explains a thing, in so far as it is external to the intellect, in which
case it ought to be true and only to differ from a proposition or an
axiom in being concerned merely with the essences of things, or the
modifications of things, whereas the latter has a wider scope and
extends also to eternal truths. Or else it explains a thing, as it is
conceived or can be conceived by us; and then it differs from an axiom
or proposition, inasmuch as it only requires to be conceived absolutely,
and not like an axiom as true. Hence a bad definition is one which is
not conceived. To explain my meaning, I will take Borel's example—a man
saying that two straight lines enclosing a space shall be called
"figurals." If the man means by a straight line the same as the rest of
the world means by

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

a curved line, his definition is good (for by the definition would be
meant some such figure as (), or the like); so long as he does not
afterwards mean a square or other kind of figure. But, if he attaches
the ordinary meaning to the words straight line, the thing is evidently
inconceivable, and therefore there is no definition. These
considerations are plainly confused by Borel, to whose opinion you
incline. I give another example, the one you cite at the end of your
letter. If I say that each substance has only one attribute, this is an
unsupported statement and needs proof. But, if I say that I mean by
substance that which consists in only one attribute, the definition will
be good, so long as entities consisting of several attributes are
afterwards styled by some name other than substance. When you say that I
do not prove, that substance (or being) may have several attributes, you
do not perhaps pay attention to the proofs given. I adduced two:—First,
"that nothing is plainer to us, than that every being may be conceived
by us under some attribute, and that the more reality or essence a given
being has, the more attributes may be attributed to it. Hence a being
absolutely infinite must be defined, &c." Secondly, and I think this is
the stronger proof of the two, "the more attributes I assign to any
being, the more am I compelled to assign to it existence;" in other
words, the more I conceive it as true. The contrary would evidently
result, if I were feigning a chimera or some such being.

Your remark, that you cannot conceive thought except as consisting in
ideas, because, when ideas are removed, thought is annihilated, springs,
I think, from the fact that while you, a thinking thing, do as you say,
you abstract all your thoughts and conceptions. It is no marvel that,
when you have abstracted all your thoughts and conceptions, you have
nothing left for thinking with. On the general subject I think I have
shown sufficiently clearly and plainly, that the intellect, although
infinite, belongs to nature regarded as passive rather than nature
regarded as active (ad naturam naturatam, non vero ad naturam
naturantem).

However, I do not see how this helps towards understanding the third
definition, nor what difficulty the latter presents. It runs, if I
mistake not, as follows: "By substance I mean that, which is in itself
and is conceived

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

through itself; that is, of which the conception does not involve the
conception of anything else. By attribute I mean the same thing, except
that it is called attribute with respect to the understanding, which
attributes to substance the particular nature aforesaid." This
definition, I repeat, explains with sufficient clearness what I wish to
signify by substance or attribute. You desire, though there is no need,
that I should illustrate by an example, how one and the same thing can
be stamped with two names. In order not to seem miserly, I will give you
two. First, I say that by Israel is meant the third patriarch; I mean
the same by Jacob, the name Jacob being given, because the patriarch in
question had caught hold of the heel of his brother. Secondly, by a
colourless surface I mean a surface, which reflects all rays of light
without altering them. I mean the same by a white surface, with this
difference, that a surface is called white in reference to a man looking
at it, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_39"></span>[313:2](corr25.htm#fr_39) The whole beginning of
this letter, till after the mention of the club, is omitted in the
editions before Van Vloten's Supplementum, to make the letter agree with
the altered version of Letter XXVI., to which it is an answer.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[313:3](corr25.htm#fr_41) "You" in these two
places is plural, and refers to the club; so also the second "your" on
the next page; elsewhere "you" and "your" refer to De Vries only.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[314:1](corr25.htm#fr_42) See Note 3 on previous
page.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXVIII. To de Vries](corr26)
