[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr11)  [Next](corr13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

### LETTER XV. (XXXII.)

#### SPINOZA TO OLDENBURG.

\[*Spinoza writes to his friend concerning the reasons which lead us to
believe, that "every part of nature agrees with the whole, and is
associated with all other parts." He also makes a few remarks about
Huyghens*.\]

<span class="smallcaps">Distinguished Sir</span>,—For the encouragement
to pursue my speculations given me by yourself and the distinguished R.
Boyle, I return you my best thanks. I proceed as far as my slender
abilities will allow me, with full confidence in your aid and kindness.
When you ask me my opinion on the question raised concerning our
knowledge of the means, whereby each part of nature agrees with its
whole, and the manner in which it is associated with the remaining
parts, I presume you are asking for the reasons which induce us to
believe, that each part of nature agrees with its whole, and is
associated with the remaining parts. For as to the means whereby the
parts are really associated, and each part agrees with its whole, I told
you in my former letter that I am in ignorance. To answer such a
question, we should have to know the whole of nature and its several
parts. I will therefore endeavour to show the reason, which led me to
make the statement; but I will premise that I do not attribute to nature
either beauty or deformity, order or confusion. Only in relation to our
imagination can things be called beautiful or deformed, ordered or
confused.

By the association of parts, then, I merely mean that the laws or nature
of one part adapt themselves to the laws or nature of another part, so
as to cause the least possible inconsistency. As to the whole and the
parts, I mean that a given number of things are parts of a whole, in so
far as the nature of each of them is adapted to the nature of the rest,
so that they all, as far as possible, agree together. On the other hand,
in so far as they do not agree, each of them forms, in our mind, a
separate idea, and is to that

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

extent considered as a whole, not as a part. For instance, when the
parts of lymph, chyle, &c., combine, according to the proportion of the
figure and size of each, so as to evidently unite, and form one fluid,
the chyle, lymph, &c., considered under this aspect, are part of the
blood; but, in so far as we consider the particles of lymph as differing
in figure and size from the particles of chyle, we shall consider each
of the two as a whole, not as a part.

Let us imagine, with your permission, a little worm, living in the
blood, able to distinguish by sight the particles of blood, lymph, &c.,
and to reflect on the manner in which each particle, on meeting with
another particle, either is repulsed, or communicates a portion of its
own motion. This little worm would live in the blood, in the same way as
we live in a part of the universe, and would consider each particle of
blood, not as a part, but as a whole. He would be unable to determine,
how all the parts are modified by the general nature of blood, and are
compelled by it to adapt themselves, so as to stand in a fixed relation
to one another. For, if we imagine that there are no causes external to
the blood, which could communicate fresh movements to it, nor any space
beyond the blood, nor any bodies whereto the particles of blood could
communicate their motion, it is certain that the blood would always
remain in the same state, and its particles would undergo no
modifications, save those which may be conceived as arising from the
relations of motion existing between the lymph, the chyle, &c. The blood
would then always have to be considered as a whole, not as a part. But,
as there exist, as a matter of fact, very many causes which modify, in a
given manner, the nature of the blood, and are, in turn, modified
thereby, it follows that other motions and other relations arise in the
blood, springing not from the mutual relations of its parts only, but
from the mutual relations between the blood as a whole and external
causes. Thus the blood comes to be regarded as a part, not as a whole.
So much for the whole and the part.

All natural bodies can and ought to be considered in the same way as we
have here considered the blood, for all bodies are surrounded by others,
and are mutually determined to exist and operate in a fixed and definite
proportion,

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

while the relations between motion and rest in the sum total of them,
that is, in the whole universe, remain unchanged. Hence it follows that
each body, in so far as it exists as modified in a particular manner,
must be considered as a part of the whole universe, as agreeing with the
whole, and associated with the remaining parts. As the nature of the
universe is not limited, like the nature of blood, but is absolutely
infinite, its parts are by this nature of infinite power infinitely
modified, and compelled to undergo infinite variations. But, in respect
to substance, I conceive that each part has a more close union with its
whole. For, as I said in my first letter <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) (addressed to you while I was still at
Rhijnsburg), substance being infinite in its nature, <span
id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12) it follows, as I endeavoured to show, that
each part belongs to the nature of substance, and, without it, can
neither be nor be conceived.

You see, therefore, how and why I think that the human body is a part of
nature. As regards the human mind, I believe that it also is a part of
nature; for I maintain that there exists in nature an infinite power of
thinking, which, in so far as it is infinite, contains subjectively the
whole of nature, and its thoughts proceed in the same manner as
nature—that is, in the sphere of ideas. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[3](#fn_13) Further, I take the human mind to be
identical with this said power, not in so far as it is infinite, and
perceives the whole of nature, but in so far as it is finite, and
perceives only the human body; in this manner, I maintain that the human
mind is a part of an infinite understanding.

But to explain, and accurately prove, all these and kindred questions,
would take too long; and I do not think you expect as much of me at
present. I am afraid that I may have mistaken your meaning, and given an
answer to a different question from that which you asked. Please inform
me on this point.

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

You write in your last letter, that I hinted that nearly all the
Cartesian laws of motion are false. What I said was, if I remember
rightly, that Huyghens thinks so; I myself do not impeach any of the
laws except the sixth, concerning which I think Huyghens is also in
error. I asked you at the same time to communicate to me the experiment
made according to that hypothesis in your Royal Society; as you have not
replied, I infer that you are not at liberty to do so. The
above-mentioned Huyghens is entirely occupied in polishing lenses. He
has fitted up for the purpose a handsome workshop, in which he can also
construct moulds. What will be the result I know not, nor, to speak the
truth, do I greatly care. Experience has sufficiently taught me, that
the free hand is better and more sure than any machine for polishing
spherical moulds. I can tell you nothing certain as yet about the
success of the clocks or the date of Huyghens' journey to France.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[292:1](corr12.htm#fr_11) Letter II.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[292:2](corr12.htm#fr_12) Ethics, I. viii.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[292:3](corr12.htm#fr_13) I have given what
seems to be the meaning of this passage. The text is very obscure:
"Nempe quia statuo dare etiam in natura potentiam infinitam cogitandi,
quæ, quatenus infinita, in se continet totam naturam objective et cujus
cogitationes procedunt ac natura ejus, nimirum idearum." M. Saisset in
his French translation says here, "In this place I rather interpret than
translate Spinoza, as his thought does not seem to me completely
expressed."—\[<span class="smallcaps">Tr</span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XVI. From Oldenburg](corr13)
