[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr29)  [Next](corr31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER XXXI. (XVIII.)

#### WILLIAM DE BLYENBERGH <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_47) TO SPINOZA.

<span class="smallcaps">Unknown Friend and Sir</span>,—I have already
read several times with attention your treatise and its appendix
recently published. I should narrate to others more becomingly than to
yourself the extreme solidity I found in it, and the pleasure with which
I perused it. But I am unable to conceal my [feelings](errata.htm#3)
from you, because the more frequently I study the work with attention,
the more it pleases me, and I am constantly observing something which I
had not before remarked. However, I will not too loudly extol its
author, lest I should seem in this letter to be a flatterer. I am aware
that the gods grant all things to labour. Not to detain you too long
with wondering who I ay be, and how it comes to pass that one unknown to
you

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

takes the great liberty of writing to you, I will tell you that he is a
man who is impelled by his longing for pure and unadulterated truth, and
desires during this brief and frail life to fix his feet in the ways of
science, so far as our human faculties will allow; one who in the
pursuit of truth has no goal before his eyes save truth herself; one who
by his science seeks to obtain as the result of truth neither honour nor
riches, but simple truth and tranquillity; one who, out of the whole
circle of truths and sciences, takes delight in none more than in
metaphysics, if not in all branches at any rate in some; one who places
the whole delight of his life in the fact, that he can pass in the study
of them his hours of ease and leisure. But no one, I rest assured, is so
blessed as yourself, no one has carried his studies so far, and
therefore no one has arrived at the pitch of perfection which, as I see
from your work, you have attained. To add a last word, the present
writer is one with whom you may gain a closer acquaintance, if you
choose to attach him to you by enlightening and interpenetrating, as it
were, his halting meditations.

But I return to your treatise. While I found in it many things which
tickled my palate vastly, some of them proved difficult to digest.
Perhaps a stranger ought not to report to you his objections, the more
so as I know not whether they will meet with your approval. This is the
reason for my making these prefatory remarks, and asking you, if you can
find leisure in the winter evenings, and, at the same time, will be
willing to answer the difficulties which I still find in your book, and
to forward me the result, always under the condition that it does not
interrupt any occupation of greater importance or pleasure; for I desire
nothing more earnestly than to see the promise made in your book
fulfilled by a more detailed exposition of your opinions. I should have
communicated to you by word of mouth what I now commit to paper; but my
ignorance of your address, the infectious disease, <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_48) and my duties here, prevented me. I must
defer the pleasure for the present.

However, in order that this letter may not be quite

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

empty, and in the hope that it will not be displeasing to you, I will
ask you one question. You say in various passages in the "Principia,"
and in the "Metaphysical Reflections," either as your own opinion, or as
explaining the philosophy of Descartes, that creation and preservation
are identical (which is, indeed, so evident to those who have considered
the question as to be a primary notion); secondly, that God has not only
created substances, but also motions in substances—in other words, that
God, by a continuous act of creation preserves, not only substances in
their normal state, but also the motion and the endeavours of
substances. God, for instance, not only brings about by His immediate
will and working (whatever be the term employed), that the soul should
last and continue in its normal state; but He is also the cause of His
will determining, in some way, the movement of the soul—in other words,
as God, by a continuous act of creation, brings about that things should
remain in existence, so is He also the cause of the movements and
endeavours existing in things. In fact, save God, there is no cause of
motion. It therefore follows that God is not only the cause of the
substance of mind, but also of every endeavour or motion of mind, which
we call volition, as you frequently say. From this statement it seems to
follow necessarily, either that there is no evil in the motion or
volition of the mind, or else that God directly brings about that evil.
For that which we call evil comes to pass through the soul, and,
consequently, through the immediate influence and concurrence of God.
For instance, the soul of Adam wishes to eat of the forbidden fruit. It
follows from what has been said above, not only that Adam forms his wish
through the influence of God, but also, as will presently be shown, that
through that influence he forms it in that particular manner. Hence,
either the act forbidden to Adam is not evil, inasmuch as God Himself
not only caused the wish, but also the manner of it, or else God
directly brought about at which we call evil. Neither you nor Descartes
seem have solved this difficulty by saying that evil is a negative
conception, and that, as such, God cannot bring it about. Whence, we may
ask, came the wish to eat the forbidden fruit, or the wish of devils to
be equal with God?

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For since (as you
justly observe) the will is not something different from the mind, but
is only an endeavour or movement of the mind, the concurrence of God is
as necessary to it as to the mind itself. Now the concurrence of God, as
I gather from your writings, is merely the determining of a thing in a
particular manner through the will of God. It follows that God concurs
no less in an evil wish, in so far as it is evil, than in a good wish in
so far as it is good, in other words, He determines it. For the will of
God being the absolute cause of all that exists, either in substance or
in effort, seems to be also the primary cause of an evil wish, in so far
as it is evil. Again, no exercise of volition takes place in us, that
God has not known from all eternity. If we say that God does not know of
a particular exercise of volition, we attribute to Him imperfection. But
how could God gain knowledge of it except from His decrees? Therefore
His decrees are the cause of our volitions, and hence it seems also to
follow that either an evil wish is not evil, or else that God is the
direct cause of the evil, and brings it about. There is no room here for
the theological distinction between an act and the evil inherent in that
act. For God decrees the mode of the act, no less than the act, that is,
God not only decreed that Adam should eat, but also that he should
necessarily eat contrary to the command given. Thus it seems on all
sides to follow, either that Adam's eating contrary to the command was
not an evil, or else that God Himself brought it to pass.

These, illustrious Sir, are the questions in your treatise, which I am
unable, at present, to elucidate. Either alternative seems to me
difficult of acceptance. However, I await a satisfactory answer from
your keen judgment and learning, hoping to show you hereafter how deeply
indebted I shall be to you. Be assured, illustrious Sir, that I put
these questions from no other motive than the desire for truth. I am a
man of leisure, not tied to any profession, gaining my living by honest
trade, and devoting my spare time to questions of this sort. I humbly
hope that my difficulties will not be displeasing to you. If you are
minded to send an answer, as I most ardently hope, write to, &c.

WILLIAM DE BLYENBERGH.

Dordrecht, 12 Dec., 1664.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[327:1](corr30.htm#fr_48) See Introduction, p.
xvi. The correspondence with Blyenbergh as originally conducted in
Dutch.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[328:1](corr30.htm#fr_49) The plague, which had
prevailed on the Continent during 1664, was introduced into London in
the very month in which this letter was written, perhaps from Holland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXXII. To Blyenburgh](corr31)
