[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](corr03)  [Next](corr05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER IV. (IV.)

#### SPINOZA TO OLDENBURG.

\[*Spinoza answers some of Oldenburg's questions and doubts, but has not
time to reply to all, as he is just setting out for Amsterdam*.\]

<span class="smallcaps">Illustrious Sir</span>,—As I was starting for
Amsterdam, where I intend staying for a week or two, I received your
most welcome letter, and noted the objections you raise to the three
propositions I sent you. Not having time to reply fully, I will confine
myself to these three.

To the first I answer, that not from every definition does the existence
of the thing defined follow, but only (as I showed in a note appended to
the three propositions) from the definition or idea of an attribute,
that is (as I explained fully in the definition given of God) of a thing
conceived through and in itself. The reason for this distinction was
pointed out, if I mistake not, in the above-mentioned note sufficiently
clearly at any rate for a philosopher, who is assumed to be aware of the
difference between a fiction and a clear and distinct idea, and also of
the truth of the axiom that every definition or clear and distinct idea
is true. When this has been duly noted, I do not see what more is
required for the solution of your first question.

I therefore proceed to the solution of the second, wherein you seem to
admit that, if thought does not belong to the nature of extension, then
extension will not be limited by

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

thought; your doubt only involves the example given. But observe, I beg,
if we say that extension is not limited by extension but by thought, is
not this the same as saying that extension is not infinite absolutely,
but only as far as extension is concerned, in other words, infinite
after its kind? But you say: perhaps thought is a corporeal action be it
so, though I by no means grant it: you, at any rate, will not deny that
extension, in so far as it is extension, is not thought, and this is all
that is required for explaining my definition and proving the third
proposition.

Thirdly. You proceed to object, that my axioms ought not to be ranked as
universal notions. I will not dispute this point with you; but you
further hesitate as to their truth, seeming to desire to show that their
contrary is more probable. Consider, I beg, the definition which I gave
of substance and attribute, for on that they all depend.. When I say
that I mean by substance that which is conceived through and in itself;
and that I mean by modification or accident that, which is in something
else, and is conceived through that wherein it is, evidently it follows
that substance is by nature prior to its accidents. For without the
former the latter can neither be nor be conceived. Secondly, it follows
that, besides substances and accidents, nothing exists really or
externally to the intellect. For everything is conceived either through
itself or through something else, and the conception of it either
involves or does not involve the conception of something else. Thirdly,
it follows that things which possess different attributes have nothing
in common. For by attribute I have explained that I mean something, of
which the conception does not involve the conception of anything else.
Fourthly and lastly, it follows that, if two things have nothing in
common, one cannot be the cause of the other. For, as there would be
nothing in common between the effect and the cause, the whole effect
would spring from nothing. As for your contention that God has nothing
actually in common with created things, I have maintained the exact
opposite in my definition. I said that God is a Being consisting of
infinite attributes, whereof each one is infinite or supremely perfect
after its kind. With regard to what you say concerning my first
proposition, I beg you, my

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

friend, to bear in mind, that men are not created but born, and that
their bodies already exist before birth, though under different forms.
You draw the conclusion, wherein I fully concur, that, if one particle
of matter be annihilated, the whole of extension would forthwith vanish.
My second proposition does not make many gods but only one, to wit, a
Being consisting of infinite attributes, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter V. From Oldenburg](corr05.md)
