[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](corr38)  [Next](corr40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER XL. (XXXV.)

#### SPINOZA TO CHRISTIAN HUYGHENS.

*Further arguments for the unity of God*.

<span class="smallcaps">Distinguished Sir</span>,—In your last letter,
written on March 30th, you have excellently elucidated the point, which
was somewhat obscure to me in your letter of February 10th. As I now
know your opinion, I will set forth the state of the question as you
conceive it; whether there be only a single Being who subsists by his
own sufficiency or force? I not only affirm this to be so, but also
undertake to prove it from the fact, that the nature of such a Being
necessarily involves existence; perhaps it may also be readily proved
from the understanding of God (as I set forth, "Principles of Cartesian
Philosophy," I. Prop. i.), or from others of His attributes. Before
treating of the subject I will briefly show, as preliminaries, what
properties must be possessed by a Being including necessary existence.
To wit:—

I. It must be eternal. For if a definite duration be assigned to it, it
would beyond that definite duration be conceived as non-existent, or as
not involving necessary existence, which would be contrary to its
definition.

II\. It must be simple, not made up of parts. For parts must in nature
and knowledge be prior to the whole they compose: this could not be the
case with regard to that which is eternal.

III\. It cannot be conceived as determinate, but only as infinite. For,
if the nature of the said Being were determinate,

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

and conceived as determinate, that nature would beyond the said limits
be conceived as non-existent, which again is contrary to its definition.

IV\. It is indivisible. For if it were divisible, it could be divided
into parts, either of the same or of different nature. If the latter, it
could be destroyed and so not exist, which is contrary to its
definition; if the former, each part would in itself include necessary
existence, and thus one part could exist without others, and
consequently be conceived as so existing. Hence the nature of the Being
would be comprehended as finite, which, by what has been said, is
contrary to its definition. Thus we see that, in attempting to ascribe
to such a Being any imperfection, we straightway fall into
contradictions. For, whether the imperfection which we wish to assign to
the said Being be situate in any defect, or in limitations possessed by
its nature, or in any change which it might, through deficiency of
power, undergo from external causes, we are always brought back to the
contradiction, that a nature which involves necessary existence, does
not exist, or does not necessarily exist. I conclude, therefore—

V. That everything, which includes necessary existence, cannot have in
itself any imperfection, but must express pure perfection.

VI\. Further, since only from perfection can it come about, that any
Being should exist by its own sufficiency and force, it follows that, if
we assume a Being to exist by its own nature, but not to express all
perfections, we must further suppose that another Being exists, which
does comprehend in itself all perfections. For, if the less powerful
Being exists by its own sufficiency, how much more must the more
powerful so exist?

Lastly, to deal with the question, I affirm that there can only be a
single Being, of which the existence belongs to its nature; such a Being
which possesses in itself all perfections I will call God. If there be
any Being to whose nature existence belongs, such a Being can contain in
itself no imperfection, but must (by my fifth premiss) express every
perfection; therefore, the nature of such a Being seems to belong to God
(whose existence we are bound to affirm by Premiss VI.), inasmuch as He
has in Himself all

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

perfections and no imperfections. Nor can it exist externally to God.
For if, externally to God, there existed one and the same nature
involving necessary existence, such nature would be twofold; but this,
by what we have just shown, is absurd. Therefore there is nothing save
God, but there is a single God, that involves necessary existence, which
was to be proved.

Such, distinguished Sir, are the arguments I can now produce for
demonstrating this question. I hope I may also demonstrate to you, that
I am, &c.

Voorburg, 10 April, 1666.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XLI. To Huyghens](corr40.md)
