[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr22)  [Next](corr24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER XXV.A.

#### OLDENBURG TO SPINOZA.

\[*Oldenburg adduces certain further objections against Spinoza's
doctrine of necessity and miracles, and exposes the inconsistency of a
partial allegorization of Scripture*.\]

To the most illustrious Master Benedict de Spinoza Henry Oldenburg sends
greetings.

In your last letter, <span id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23) written to me
on the 7th of February, there are some points which seem to deserve
criticism. You say that a man cannot complain, because God has denied
him the true knowledge of Himself, and strength sufficient to avoid
sins; forasmuch as to the nature of everything nothing is competent,
except that which follows necessarily from its cause. But I say, that
inasmuch as God, the creator of men, formed them after His own image,
which seems to imply in its concept wisdom, goodness, and power, it
appears quite to follow, that it is more within the sphere of man's
power <span id="fr_24"></span>[3](#fn_24) to have a sound mind than to
have a sound body. For physical soundness of body follows from
mechanical causes, but soundness of mind depends on purpose

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

and design. You add, that men may be inexcusable, <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) and yet suffer pain in many ways. This
seems hard at first sight, and what you add by way of proof, namely,
that a dog <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26) mad from having been
bitten is indeed to be excused, but yet is rightly killed, does not seem
to settle the question. For the killing of such a dog would argue
cruelty, were it not necessary in order to preserve other dogs and
animals, and indeed men, from a maddening bite of the same kind.

But if God implanted in man a sound mind, as He is able to do, there
would be no contagion of vices to be feared. And, surely, it seems very
cruel, that God should de. vote men to eternal, or at least terrible
temporary, torments, for sins which by them could be no wise avoided.
Moreover, the tenour of all Holy Scripture seems to suppose and imply,
that men can abstain from sins. For it abounds in denunciations and
promises, in declarations of rewards and punishments, all of which seem
to militate against the necessity of sinning, and infer the possibility
of avoiding punishment. And if this were denied, it would have to be
said, that the human mind acts no less mechanically than the human body.

Next, when you proceed to take miracles and ignorance to be equivalent,
you seem to rely on this foundation, that the creature can and should
have perfect insight into the power and wisdom of the Creator: and that
the fact is quite otherwise, I have hitherto been firmly persuaded.

Lastly, where you affirm that Christ's passion, death, and burial are to
be taken literally, but His resurrection allegorically, you rely, as far
as I can see, on no proof at all. Christ's resurrection seems to be
delivered in the Gospel as literally as the rest. And on this article of
the resurrection the whole Christian religion and its truth rest, and
with its removal Christ's mission and heavenly doctrine collapse. It
cannot escape you, how Christ, after He was raised from the dead,
laboured to convince His disciples

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

of the truth of the Resurrection properly so called. To want to turn all
these things into allegories is the same thing, as if one were to busy
one's self in plucking up the whole truth of the Gospel history.

These few points I wished again to submit in the interest of my liberty
of philosophizing, which I earnestly beg you not to take amiss.

Written in London, 11 Feb., 1676.

I will communicate with you shortly on the present studies and
experiments of the Royal Society, if God grant me life and health.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[307:2](corr23.htm#fr_23) Letter XXV.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[307:3](corr23.htm#fr_24) *Potestas*, as
distinguished from *potentia*—the word just above translated power—means
power delegated by a rightful superior, as here by God. So it is
rendered here "sphere of power," and in Tract. Pol. generally
"authority." It would not be proper to say that the "image of God"
implied *potestas*.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[308:1](corr23.htm#fr_25) Surely this is a
mistake for "excusable."—\[<span class="smallcaps">Tr</span>.\]

<span id="fn_26"></span>[308:2](corr23.htm#fr_26) See Letter XXV.
Oldenburg misunderstands Spinoza's illustration, because he takes
"canis" in the phrase, "qui ex morsu canis furit," to be nominative
instead of genitive; "a dog which goes mad from a bite," instead of "he
who goes mad from the bite of a dog."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXVI. From Simon de Vries](corr24)
