[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr23)  [Next](corr25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER XXVI. (VIII.)

#### SIMON DE VRIES <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) TO SPINOZA.

\[*Simon de Vries, a diligent student of Spinoza's writings and
philosophy, describes a club formed for the study of Spinoza's MS.
containing some of the matter afterwards worked into the Ethics, and
asks questions about the difficulties felt by members of the
club*. <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28)\]

<span class="smallcaps">Most Honourable Friend</span>,—I have for a long
time wished to be present with you; but the weather and the hard winter
have not been propitious to me. I sometimes complain of my lot, in that
we are separated from each other by so long a distance. Happy, yes most
happy is the fellow-lodger, abiding under the same roof with you, who
can talk with you on the best of subjects, at dinner,

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

at supper, and during your walks. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29)
However, though I am far apart from you in body, you have been very
frequently present to my mind, especially in your writings, while I read
and turn them over. But as they are not all clear to the members of our
club, for which reason we have begun a fresh series of meetings, and as
I would not have you think me unmindful of you, I have applied my mind
to writing this letter.

As regards our club, the following is its order. One of us (that is
everyone by turn) reads through and, as far as he understands it,
expounds and also demonstrates the whole of your work, according to the
sequence and order of your propositions. Then, if it happens that on any
point we cannot satisfy one another, we have resolved to make a note of
it and write to you, so that, if possible, it may be made clearer to us,
and that we may be able under your guidance to defend the truth against
those who are superstitiously religious, and against the
Christians, <span id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30) and to withstand the
attack of the whole world. Well then, since, when we first read through
and expounded them, the definitions did not all seem clear to us, we
differed about the nature of definition. Next in your absence we
consulted as our authority a celebrated mathematician, named
Borel: <span id="fr_31"></span>[3](#fn_31) for he makes mention of the
nature of definition, axiom, and postulate, and adduces the opinions of
others on the subject. But his opinion is as follows: "Definitions are
cited in a demonstration as premisses. Wherefore it is necessary, that
they should be accurately known; otherwise scientific or accurate
knowledge cannot be attained by their means." And elsewhere he says:
"The primary and most known construction or passive quality of a given
subject should not be chosen rashly, but with the greatest care; if the
construction or passive quality be an impossibility, no scientific
definition can be obtained. For instance,

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

if anyone were to say, let [two](errata.htm#1) straight lines enclosing
a space be called figurals, the definition would be of non-existences
and impossible: hence ignorance rather than knowledge would be deduced
therefrom. Again, if the construction or passive quality be possible and
true, but unknown or doubtful to us, the definition will not be good.
For conclusions arising from what is unknown or doubtful are themselves
uncertain or doubtful; they therefore bring about conjecture or opinion,
but not certain knowledge.

Jacquet <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) seems to dissent from this
opinion, for he thinks that one may proceed from a false premiss
directly to true conclusion, as you are aware. Clavius, <span
id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33) however, whose opinion he quotes, thinks
as follows: "Definitions," he says, "are artificial phrases, nor is
there any need in reasoning that a thing should be defined in a
particular way; but it is sufficient that a thing defined should never
be said to agree with another thing, until it has been shown that its
definition also agrees therewith."

Thus, according to Borel, the definition of a given thing should consist
as regards its construction or passive quality in something thoroughly
known to us and true. Clavius, on the other hand, holds that it is a
matter of indifference, whether the construction or passive quality be
well known and true, or the reverse; so long as we do not assert, that
our definition agrees with anything, before it has been proved.

I should prefer Borers opinion to that of Clavius. I know not which you
would assent to, if to either. As these difficulties have occurred to me
with regard to the nature of definition, which is reckoned among the
cardinal points of demonstration, and as I cannot free my mind from
them, I greatly desire, and earnestly beg you, when you have leisure and
opportunity, to be kind enough to send me your opinion on the matter,
and at the same time to tell me the distinction between axioms and
definitions. Borel says that the difference is merely nominal, but I
believe you decide otherwise.

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

Further, we cannot make up our minds about the third definition. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) I adduced to illustrate it, what my master
said to me at the Hague, <span id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35) to wit,
that a thing may be regarded in two ways, either as it is in itself, or
as it is in relation to something else; as in the case of the intellect,
for that can be regarded either under the head of thought, or as
consisting in ideas. But we do not see the point of the distinction thus
drawn. For it seems to us, that, if we rightly conceive thought, we must
range it under the head of ideas; as, if all ideas were removed from it,
we should destroy thought. As we find the illustration of the matter not
sufficiently clear, the matter itself remains somewhat obscure, and we
need further explanation.

Lastly, in the third note to the eighth proposition, <span
id="fr_36"></span>[3](#fn_36) the beginning runs thus:—"Hence it is
plain that, although two attributes really distinct be conceived, that
is, one without the aid of the other, we cannot therefore infer, that
they constitute two entities or two different substances. For it belongs
to the nature of substance, that each of its attributes should be
conceived through itself, though all the attributes it possesses exist
simultaneously in it." Here our master seems to assume, that the nature
of substance is so constituted, that it may have several attributes. But
this doctrine has not yet been proved, unless you refer to the sixth
definition, of absolutely infinite substance or God. Otherwise, if it be
asserted that each substance has only one attribute, and I have two
ideas of two attributes, Î may rightly infer that, where there are two
different attributes, there are also different substances. On this point
also we beg you to give a further explanation. Besides I thank you very
much for your writings communicated to me by P. Balling, <span
id="fr_37"></span>[4](#fn_37) which have greatly delighted me,
especially

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

your note on Proposition XIX. <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) If I
can do you any service here in anything that is within my power, I am at
your [disposal](errata.htm#2). You have but to let me know. I have begun
a course of anatomy, and am nearly half through with it; when it is
finished, I shall begin a course of chemistry, and thus under your
guidance I shall go through the whole of medicine. I leave off, and
await your answer. Accept the greeting of

Your most devoted  
S. J. DE VRIES.

Amsterdam, 24 Feb., 1663.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[309:1](corr24.htm#fr_27) For an account of
Simon de Vries see Introduction, p. xiv. His letters are written in very
indifferent Latin, which is, perhaps, one reason, why the present letter
at least has been altered freely by the first editors.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[309:2](corr24.htm#fr_28) The version of this
letter in Bruder's and former editions is much altered by the omission
of all mention of the club, and of the reference to Albert Burgh, and by
the change throughout of the plural referring to the members of the club
into the singular referring to the writer only. The genuine form here
followed is to be found in Van Vloten's Supplementum.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[310:1](corr24.htm#fr_29) This "fellow-lodger,"
again mentioned in the next letter, is pretty certainly Albert Burgh,
concerning whom see Introduction, p. xv, and Letters LXXIII. and LXXIV

<span id="fn_30"></span>[310:2](corr24.htm#fr_30) Van Vloten infers that
the members of the club were chiefly Jews.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[310:3](corr24.htm#fr_31) Peter Borel, born
1620, physician to the king of France, died 1689. He wrote several
medical and philosophical works, and became in 1674 a member of the
French Academy of Sciences.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[311:1](corr24.htm#fr_32) Andrew Jacquet. born
at Antwerp 1611, was mathematical professor in that town, died 1660.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[311:2](corr24.htm#fr_33) Christopher Clavius,
born at Bamberg 1537, was mathematical professor at Rome, died 1612.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[312:1](corr24.htm#fr_34) The third definition
of the Ethics, as they now exist. See p. 45.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[312:2](corr24.htm#fr_35) Spinoza must,
therefore, have visited the Hague before he lived there.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[312:3](corr24.htm#fr_36) In the Ethics as they
now exist, "in I. x. note, towards the beginning," to which reading the
editors consequently altered the text, till the true reading was
restored by Van Vloten.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[312:4](corr24.htm#fr_37) Peter Balling is the
correspondent, to whom Spinoza wrote Letter XXX., which see. He
translated into Dutch Spinoza's Principia, as to which see Introduction,
p. xv.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[313:1](corr24.htm#fr_38) There is no note to
Ethics, I. xix. As there is nothing to show what proposition is
intended, the old version suppressed the whole passage from "Besides I
thank you" to "medicine."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXVII. To de Vries](corr25)
