[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr61)  [Next](corr63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

### LETTER LXIV. (LX.)

#### SPINOZA TO \* \* \* \* \*. <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_67)

\[*The difference between a true and an adequate idea is merely
extrinsic, &c*. *The Hague*, *Jan*., 1675.\]

<span class="smallcaps">Honoured Sir</span>.—Between a true and an
adequate idea, I recognize no difference, except that the epithet true
only has regard to the agreement between the idea and its object,
whereas the epithet adequate has regard to the nature of the idea in
itself; so that in reality there is no difference between a true and an
adequate idea beyond this extrinsic relation. However, in order that I
may know, from which idea out of many all the properties of its object
may be deduced, I pay attention to one point only, namely, that the idea
or definition should express the efficient cause of its object. For
instance, in inquiring into the properties of a circle, I ask, whether
from the idea of a circle, that it consists of infinite right angles, I
can deduce all its properties. I ask, I repeat, whether this idea
involves the efficient cause of a circle. If it does not, I look for
another, namely, that a circle is the space described by a line, of
which one point is fixed, and the other movable. As this definition
explains the efficient cause, I know that I can deduce from it all the
properties of a circle. So, also, when I define God as a supremely
perfect Being, then, since that definition does not express the
efficient cause (I mean the efficient cause internal as well as
external) I shall not be able to infer therefrom all the properties of
God; as I can, when I define God as a Being, &c. (see Ethics, I. Def.
vi.). As for your other inquiries, namely, that concerning motion, and
those pertaining to method, my observations on them are not yet written
out in due order, so I will reserve them for another occasion.

As regards your remark, that he "who considers lines applied to curves
makes many deductions with regard to the measurement of curves, but does
so with greater

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

facility from the consideration of tangents," &c., I think that from the
consideration of tangents many deductions will be made with more
difficulty, than from the consideration of lines applied in succession;
and I assert absolutely, that from certain properties of any particular
thing (whatever idea be given) some things may be discovered more
readily, others with more difficulty, though all are concerned with the
nature of the thing. I think it need only be observed, that an idea
should be sought for of such a kind, that all properties may be
inferred, as has been said above. He, who is about to deduce all the
properties of a particular thing, knows that the ultimate properties
will necessarily be the most difficult to discover, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[395:1](corr62.htm#fr_68) Tschirnhausen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXV. From G. H. Schaller](corr63)
