[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](corr54)  [Next](corr56.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

### LETTER LVII. (LIII.)

#### HUGO BOXEL TO SPINOZA.

<span class="smallcaps">Most sagacious Sir</span>,—You have sent me just
the answer I expected to receive, from a friend holding an opinion
adverse to my own. But no matter. Friends may always disagree on
indifferent subjects without injury to their friendship.

You ask me, before you gave an opinion as to what these spectres or
spirits are, to tell you whether they are children, fools, or madmen,
and you add that everything you have heard of them seems to have
proceeded rather from the insane than the sane. It is a true proverb,
which says that a preconceived opinion hinders the pursuit of truth.

I, then, believe that ghosts exist for the following reasons: first,
because it appertains to the beauty and perfection of the universe, that
they should; secondly, because it is probable that the Creator created
them, as being more like Himself than are embodied creatures; thirdly,
because as body exists without soul, soul exists without body; fourthly
and lastly, because in the upper air, region, or space, I believe there
is no obscure body without inhabitants of its own; consequently, that
the measureless space between us and the stars is not empty, but
thronged with spiritual inhabitants. Perhaps the highest and most remote
are true spirits, whereas the lowest in the lowest region of the air are
creatures of very thin and subtle substance, and also invisible. Thus I
think there are spirits of all sorts, but, perhaps, none of the female
sex.

This reasoning will in no wise convince those, who rashly believe that
the world has been created by chance. Daily experience, if these reasons
be dismissed, shows that there are spectres, and many stories, both new
and old, are current about them. Such may be found in Plutarch's book
"De viris illustribus," and in his other works; in Suetonius's "Lives of
the Cæsars," also in Wierus's and Lavater's books about ghosts, where
the subject is fully treated and illustrated from writers of all kinds.
Cardano, celebrated for his learning, also speaks of them in his books
"De

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Subtilitate," "De
Varietate," and in his "Life;" showing, by experience, that they have
appeared to himself, his relations and friends. Melancthon, a wise man
and a lover of truth, testifies to his experience of them, as also do
many others. A certain burgomaster, learned and wise, who is still
living, once told me that he heard by night the noise of working in his
mother's brew-house, going on just as it does while beer is being brewed
in the day; this he attested as having occurred frequently. The same
sort of thing has happened to me, and will never fade from my memory;
hence I am convinced by the above-mentioned experiences and reasons,
that there are ghosts.

As for evil spirits, who torture wretched men in this life and the next,
and who work spells, I believe the stories of them to be fables. In
treatises about spirits you will find a host of details. Besides those I
have cited, you may refer to Pliny the younger, bk. vii., the letter to
Sura; Suetonius, "Life of Julius Cæsar," ch. xxxii.; Valerius Maximus,
I. viii. §§ 7, 8; and Alexander ab Alexandro, "Dies Geniales." I am sure
these books are accessible to you. I say nothing of monks and priests,
for they relate so many tales of souls and evil spirits, or as I should
rather say of spectres, that the reader becomes wearied with their
abundance. Thymus, a Jesuit, in the book about the apparition of
spirits, also treats of the question. But these last-named discourse on
such subjects merely for the sake of gain, and to prove that purgatory
is not so bad as is supposed, thus treating the question as a mine, from
which they dig up plenteous store of gold and silver. But the same
cannot be said of the writers mentioned previously, and other moderns,
who merit greater credit from their absence of bias.

As an answer to the passage in your letter, where you speak of fools and
madmen, I subjoin this sentence from the learned Lavater, who ends with
it his first book on ghosts or spectres. "He who is bold enough to
gainsay so many witnesses, both ancient and modern, seems to me unworthy
of credit. For as it is a mark of frivolity to lend incontinent credence
to everyone who says he has seen a ghost; so, on the other hand, rashly
and flatly to contradict so many trustworthy historians, Fathers, and
other persons

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

placed in authority would argue a remarkable shamelessness."

21 Sept., 1674

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LVIII. To Boxel](corr56.md)
