[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](corr17)  [Next](corr19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

### LETTER XXI. (LXXIII.)

#### SPINOZA TO OLDENBURG.

<span class="smallcaps">Distinguished Sir</span>,—I received on Saturday
last your very short letter dated 15th Nov. In it you merely indicate
the points in the theological treatise, which have given pain to
readers, whereas I had hoped to learn from it, what were the opinions
which militated against the practice of religious virtue, and which you
formerly mentioned. However, I will speak on the three subjects on which
you desire me to disclose my sentiments, and tell you, first, that my
opinion concerning God differs widely from that which is ordinarily
defended by modern Christians. For I hold that God is of all things the
cause immanent, as the phrase is, not transient. I say that all things
are in God and move in God, thus agreeing with Paul, <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md) and, perhaps, with all the ancient
philosophers, though the phraseology may be different; I will even
venture to affirm that I agree with all the ancient Hebrews, in so far
as one may judge from their traditions, though these are in many ways
corrupted. The supposition of some, that I endeavour to prove in the
Tractatus Theologico-Politicos the unity of God and Nature (meaning by
the latter a certain mass or corporeal matter), is wholly erroneous.

As regards miracles, I am of opinion that the revelation of God can only
be established by the wisdom of the doctrine, not by miracles, or in
other words by ignorance. This I have shown at sufficient length in
Chapter VI. concerning miracles. I will here only add, that I make this
chief distinction between religion and superstition, that the latter is
founded on ignorance, the former on knowledge; this, I take it, is the
reason why Christians are distinguished from the rest of the world, not
by faith, nor by charity, nor by the other fruits of the Holy Spirit,
but solely by their opinions, inasmuch as they defend their cause, like
everyone else, by miracles, that is by ignorance, which is the source of
all malice; thus they turn a faith,

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

which may be true, into superstition. Lastly, in order to disclose my
opinions on the third point, I will tell you that I do not think it
necessary for salvation to know Christ according to the flesh: but with
regard to the Eternal Son of God, that is the Eternal Wisdom of God,
which has manifested itself in all things and especially in the human
mind, and above all in Christ Jesus, the case is far otherwise. For
without this no one can come to a state of blessedness, inasmuch as it
alone teaches, what is true or false, good or evil. And, inasmuch as
this wisdom was made especially manifest through Jesus Christ, as I have
said, His disciples preached it, in so far as it was revealed to them
through Him, and thus showed that they could rejoice in that spirit of
Christ more than the rest of mankind. The doctrines added by certain
churches, such as that God took upon Himself human nature, I have
expressly said that I do not understand; in fact, to speak the truth,
they seem to me no less absurd than would a statement, that a circle had
taken upon itself the nature of a square. This I think will be
sufficient explanation of my opinions concerning the three points
mentioned. Whether it will be satisfactory to Christians you will know
better than I. Farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[298:1](corr18.htm#fr_15.md) See Acts xvii. 28. Cf.
1 Cor. iii. 16, xii. 6; Eph. i. 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXII. From Oldenburg](corr19.md)
