[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](corr60)  [Next](corr62.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

### LETTER LXIII. (LIX.)

#### \* \* \* \* \* TO SPINOZA. <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_66.md)

\[*The writer exhorts Spinoza to publish the treatises on Ethics and on
the Improvement of the Understanding.—Remarks on the definition of
motion. On the difference between a true and an adequate idea*.\]

<span class="smallcaps">Most excellent Sir</span>,—When shall we have
your method of rightly directing the reason in the acquisition of
unknown truths, and your general treatise on physics? I know you have
already proceeded far with them. The first has already come to my
knowledge, and the second I have become aware of from the Lemmas added
to the second part of the Ethics; whereby many difficulties in physics
are readily solved. If time and opportunity permit, I humbly beg from
you a true *definition of motion* and its explanation; also to know how,
seeing that extension in so far as it is conceived in itself is
indivisible, immutable, &c., we can infer *à priori*, that there can
arise so many varieties of it, and consequently the existence of figure
in the particles of any given body, which are, nevertheless, in every
body various, and distinct from the figures of the parts, which compose
the reality of any other body. You have already, by word of mouth,
pointed out to me a method, which you employ in the search for truths as
yet unknown. I find this method to be very excellent, and at the same
time very easy, in so far as I have formed an opinion on it, and I can
assert that from this single discovery I have made great progress in
mathematics. I wish therefore, that you would give me a true definition
of an adequate, a true, a false, a fictitious, and a doubtful idea. I
have been in search of the difference between a true and an adequate
idea. Hitherto, however, I can ascertain nothing except after inquiring
into a thing, and forming a certain concept or idea of it. I then (in
order to elicit whether this true idea is also an adequate idea of its
object) inquire,

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

what is the cause of this idea or concept; when this is ascertained, I
again ask, What is the cause of this prior concept? and so I go on
always inquiring for the causes of the causes of ideas, until I find a
cause of such a kind, that I can not find any cause for it, except that
among all the ideas which I can command this alone exists. If, for
instance, we inquire the true origin of our errors, Descartes will
answer, that it consists in our giving assent to things not yet clearly
perceived. But supposing this to be the true idea of the thing, I
nevertheless shall not yet be able to determine all things necessary to
be known concerning it, unless I have also an adequate idea of the thing
in question; in order to obtain such, therefore, I inquire into the
cause of this concept, how it happens that we give assent to things not
clearly understood—and I answer, that it arises from defective
knowledge. But here I cannot inquire further, and ask what is the cause,
that we are ignorant of certain things; hence I see that I have detected
an adequate idea of the origin of our errors. Here meanwhile I ask you,
whether, seeing that many things expressed in infinite modes have an
adequate idea of themselves, and that from every adequate idea all that
can be known of its object can be inferred, though more readily from
some ideas than others, whether, I say, this may be the means of knowing
which idea is to be preferred? For instance, one adequate idea of a
circle consists in the equality of its radii; another adequate idea
consists in the infinite right angles equal to one another, made by the
intersection of two lines, &c., and thus we have infinite expressions,
each giving the adequate nature of a circle, Now, though all the
properties of a circle may be inferred from every one of them, they may
be deduced much more easily from some than from others. So also he, who
considers lines applied to curves, will be able to draw many conclusions
as to the measurement of curves, but will do so more readily from the
consideration of tangents, &c. Thus I have wished to indicate how far I
have progressed in this study; I await perfection in it, or, if I am
wrong on any point, correction; also the definition I asked for.
Farewell.

5 Jan., 1675.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[393:1](corr61.htm#fr_67.md) This letter is from
Tschirnhausen, who had in the meantime, as appears from its contents,
had an interview with Spinoza.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXIV. To Anon. \[Tschirnhausen\]](corr62.md)
