[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](corr26)  [Next](corr28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER XXIX. (XII.)

#### SPINOZA TO L. M. <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_42) (LEWIS MEYER.md).

<span class="smallcaps">Dearest Friend</span>,—I have received two
letters from you, one dated Jan. 11, delivered to me by our friend, N.
N., the other dated March 26, sent by some unknown friend to Leyden.
They were both most welcome to me, especially as I gathered from them,
that all goes well with you, and that you are often mindful of me. I
also owe and repay you the warmest thanks for the courtesy and
consideration, with which you have always been kind enough to treat me:
I hope you will believe, that I am in no less degree devoted to you, as,
when occasion offers, I will always endeavour to prove, as far as my
poor powers will admit. As a first proof, I will do my best to answer
the questions you ask in your letters. You request me to tell you, what
I think about the infinite; I will most readily do so.

Everyone regards the question of the infinite as most difficult, if not
insoluble, through not making a distinction between that which must be
infinite from its very nature,. or in virtue of its definition, and that
which has no limits, not in virtue of its essence, but in virtue of its
cause; and also through not distinguishing between that which is called

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

infinite, because it has no limits, and that, of which the parts cannot
be equalled or expressed by any number, though the greatest and least
magnitude of the whole may be known; and, lastly, through not
distinguishing between that, which can be understood but not imagined,
and that which can also be imagined. If these distinctions, I repeat,
had been attended to, inquirers would not have been overwhelmed with
such a vast crowd of difficulties. They would then clearly have
understood, what kind of infinite is indivisible and possesses no parts;
and what kind, on the other hand, may be divided without involving a
contradiction in terms. They would further have understood, what kind of
infinite may, without solecism, be conceived greater than another
infinite, and what kind cannot be so conceived. All this will plainly
appear from what I am about to say.

However, I will first briefly explain the terms *substance*, *mode*,
*eternity*, and *duration*.

The points to be noted concerning substance are these: First, that
existence appertains to its essence; in other words, that solely from
its essence and definition its existence follows. This, if I remember
rightly, I have already proved to you by word of mouth, without the aid
of any other propositions. Secondly, as a consequence of the above, that
substance is not manifold, but single: there cannot be two of the same
nature. Thirdly, every substance must be conceived as infinite.

The modifications of substance I call *modes*. Their definition, in so
far as it is not identical with that of substance, cannot involve any
existence. Hence, though they exist, we can conceive them as
non-existent. From this it follows, that, when we are regarding only the
essence of modes, and not the order of the whole of nature, we cannot
conclude from their present existence, that they will exist or not exist
in the future, or that they have existed or not existed in the past;
whence it is abundantly clear, that we conceive the existence of
substance as entirely different from the existence of modes. From this
difference arises the distinction between *eternity* and *duration*.
*Duration* is only applicable to the existence of modes; *eternity* is
applicable to the existence of substance. that is, the infinite

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

faculty of existence or being (*infinitum existendi sive* (*invitâ
Latinitate* <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_43)) *essendi fruitionem*.md).
From what has been said it is quite clear that, when, as is most often
the case, we are regarding only the essence of modes and not the order
of nature, we may freely limit the existence and duration of modes
without destroying the conception we have formed of them; we may
conceive them as greater or less, or may divide them into parts.
Eternity and substance, being only conceivable as infinite, cannot be
thus treated without our conception of them being destroyed. Wherefore
it is mere foolishness, or even insanity, to say that extended substance
is made up of parts or bodies really distinct from one another. It is as
though one should attempt by the aggregation and addition of many
circles to make up a square, or a triangle, or something of totally
different essence. Wherefore the whole heap of arguments, by which
philosophers commonly en' to show that extended substance is finite,
falls to the ground by its own weight. For all such persons suppose,
that corporeal substance is made up of parts. In the same way, others,
who have persuaded themselves that a line is made up of points, have
been able to discover many arguments to show that a line is not
infinitely divisible. If you ask, why we are by nature so prone to
attempt to divide extended substance, I answer, that quantity is
conceived by us in two ways, namely, by abstraction or superficially, as
we imagine it by the aid of the senses, or as substance, which can only
be accomplished through the understanding. So that, if we regard
quantity as it exists in the imagination (and this is the more frequent
and easy method), it will be found to be divisible, finite, composed of
parts, and manifold. But, if we regard it as it is in the understanding,
and the thing be conceived as it is in itself (which is very difficult),
it will then, as I have sufficiently shown you before, be found to be
infinite, indivisible, and single.

Again, from the fact that we can limit duration and quantity at our
pleasure, when we conceive the latter abstractedly

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

as apart from substance, and separate the former from the manner whereby
it flows from things eternal, there arise *time* and *measure;* *time*
for the purpose of limiting duration, measure for the purpose of
limiting quantity, so that we may, as far as is possible, the more
readily imagine them. Further, inasmuch as we separate the modifications
of substance from substance itself, and reduce them to classes, so that
we may, as far as is possible, the more readily imagine them, there
arises *number*, whereby we limit them. Whence it is clearly to be seen,
that measure, time, and number, are merely modes of thinking, or,
rather, of imagining. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that all,
who have endeavoured to understand the course of nature by means of such
notions, and without fully understanding even them, have entangled
themselves so wondrously, that they have at last only been able to
extricate themselves by breaking through every rule and admitting
absurdities even of the grossest kind. For there are many things which
cannot be conceived through the imagination but only through the
understanding, for instance, substance, eternity, and the like; thus, if
anyone tries to explain such things by means of conceptions which are
mere aids to the imagination, he is simply assisting his imagination to
run away with him. <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_44.md) Nor can even the
modes of substance ever be rightly understood, if we confuse them with
entities of the kind mentioned, mere aids of the reason or imagination.
In so doing we separate them from substance, and the mode of their
derivation from eternity, without which they can never be rightly
understood. To make the matter yet more clear, take the following
example: when a man conceives of duration abstractedly, and, confusing
it with time, begins to divide it into parts, he will never be able to
understand how an hour, for instance, can elapse. For in order that an
hour should elapse, it is necessary that its half should elapse first,
and afterwards half of the remainder, and again half of the half of the
remainder, and if you go on thus to infinity, subtracting the half of
the residue, you will never be able

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

to arrive at the end of the hour. Wherefore many, who are not accustomed
to distinguish abstractions from realities, have ventured to assert that
duration is made up of instants, and so in wishing to avoid Charybdis
have fallen into Scylla. It is the same thing to make up duration out of
instants, as it is to make number simply by adding up noughts.

Further, as it is evident from what has been said, that neither number,
nor measure, nor time, being mere aids to the imagination, can be
infinite (for, otherwise, number would not be number, nor
measure measure, nor time time); it is hence abundantly evident, why
many who confuse these three abstractions with realities, through being
ignorant of the true nature of things, have actually denied the
infinite.

The wretchedness of their reasoning may be judged by mathematicians, who
have never allowed themselves to be delayed a moment by arguments of
this sort, in the case of things which they clearly and distinctly
perceive. For not only have they come across many things, which cannot
be expressed by number (thus showing the inadequacy of number for
determining all things); but also they have found many things, which
cannot be equalled by any number, but surpass every possible number. But
they infer hence, that such things surpass enumeration, not because of
the multitude of their component parts, but because their nature cannot,
without manifest contradiction, be expressed in terms of number. As, for
instance, in the case of two circles, non-concentric, whereof one
encloses the other, no number can express the inequalities of distance
which exist between the two circles, nor all the variations which matter
in motion in the intervening space may undergo. This conclusion is not
based on the excessive size of the intervening space. However small a
portion of it we take, the inequalities of this small portion will
surpass all numerical expression. Nor, again, is the conclusion based on
the fact, as in other cases, that we do not know the maximum and the
minimum of the said space. It springs simply from the fact, that the
nature of the space between two non-concentric circles cannot be
expressed in number. Therefore, he who would assign a numerical
equivalent

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

for the inequalities in question, would be bound, at the same time, to
bring about that a circle should not be a circle.

The same result would take place—to return to my subject—if one were to
wish to determine all the motions undergone by matter up to the present,
by reducing them and their duration to a certain number and time. This
would be the same as an attempt to deprive corporeal substance, which we
cannot conceive except as existent, of its modifications, and to bring
about that it should not possess the nature which it does possess. All
this I could clearly demonstrate here, together with many other points
touched on in this letter, but I deem it superfluous.

From all that has been said, it is abundantly evident that certain
things are in their nature infinite, and can by no means be conceived as
finite; whereas there are other things, infinite in virtue of the cause
from which they are derived, which can, when conceived abstractedly, be
divided into parts, and regarded as finite. Lastly, there are some which
are called infinite or, if you prefer, indefinite, because they cannot
be expressed in number, which may yet be conceived as greater or less.
It does not follow that such are equal, because they are alike incapable
of numerical expression. This is plain enough, from the example given,
and many others.

Lastly, I have put briefly before you the causes of error and confusion,
which have arisen concerning the question of the infinite. I have, if I
mistake not, so explained them that no question concerning the infinite
remains untreated, or cannot readily be solved from what I have said;
wherefore, I do not think it worth while to detain you longer on the
matter.

But I should like it first to be observed here, that the later
Peripatetics have, I think, misunderstood the proof given by the
ancients who sought to demonstrate the existence of God. This, as I find
it in a certain Jew named Rabbi Ghasdai, runs as follows:—"If there be
an infinite series of causes, all things which are, are caused. But
nothing which is caused can exist necessarily in virtue of its own
nature. Therefore there is nothing in nature, to whose essence existence
necessarily belongs. But this is

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

absurd. Therefore the premise is absurd also." Hence the force of the
argument lies not in the impossibility of an actual infinite or an
infinite series of causes; but only in the absurdity of the assumption
that things, which do not necessarily exist by nature, are not
conditioned for existence by a thing, which does by its own nature
necessarily exist.

I would now pass on, for time presses, to your second letter: but I
shall be able more conveniently to reply to its contents, when you are
kind enough to pay me a visit. I therefore beg that you will come as
soon as possible; the time for travelling is at hand. Enough. Farewell,
and keep in remembrance Yours, &c.

Rhijnsburg, 20 April, 1663.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[317:1](corr27.htm#fr_43.md) See Introduction, pp.
xv, xx.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[319:1](corr27.htm#fr_44.md) Spinoza apologizes
here in the original for the use of the unclassical form "essendi,"
being. The classical Latin verb of being is, as the ancients themselves
admitted, defective in a most inconvenient degree.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[320:1](corr27.htm#fr_45.md) "Nihilo plus agit,
quam si det operam ut sua imaginatione insafiat." Mr. Pollock
paraphrases, "It is like applying the intellectual tests of sanity and
insanity to acts of pure imagination."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXIX.A. To Lewis Meyer](corr28.md)
