[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr00)  [Next](corr02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

### LETTER I. (I. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0))

#### HENRY OLDENBURG <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) TO B. DE SPINOZA.

\[*Oldenburg, after complimenting Spinoza, asks him to enter into a
philosophical correspondence*.\]

<span class="smallcaps">ILLUSTRIOUS Sir, and most worthy
friend</span>,—SO painful to me was the separation from you the other
day after our meeting in your retreat at Rhijnsburg, that it is my first
endeavour, now that I am returned to England, to renew, as far as is
possible by correspondence, my intercourse with you. Solid learning,
conjoined with courtesy and refinement of manners (wherewith both nature
and art have most amply endowed you), carries with it such charms as to
command the love of every honourable and liberally-educated man. Let us
then, most excellent sir, join hands in sincere friendship, and let us
foster the feeling with every zealous endeavour and kind office in our
power. Whatever my poor means can furnish I beg you to look on as your
own. Allow me in return to claim a share in the riches of your talents,
as I may do without inflicting any loss on yourself.

We conversed at Rhijnsburg of God, of extension, of infinite thought, of
the differences and agreements between these, of the nature of the
connection between the human soul and body, and further, of the
principles of the Cartesian and Baconian philosophies.

But, as we then spoke of these great questions merely cursorily and by
the way, and as my mind has been not a

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

little tormented with them since, I will appeal to the rights of our
newly cemented friendship, and most affectionately beg you to give me at
somewhat greater length your opinion on the subjects I have mentioned.
On two points especially I ask for enlightenment, if I may presume so
far; *first:* In what do you place the true distinction between thought
and matter? *secondly:* What do you consider to be the chief defects in
the Cartesian and Baconian philosophies, and how do you think they might
best be removed, and something more sound substituted? The more freely
you write to me on these and similar subjects, the more closely will you
tie the bonds of our friendship, and the stricter will be the obligation
laid on me to repay you, as far as possible, with similar services.

There is at present in the press a collection of physiological
discourses written by an Englishman of noble family and distinguished
learning. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) They treat of the nature and
elasticity of the air, as proved by forty-three experiments; also of its
fluidity, solidity, and other analogous matters. As soon as the work is
published, I shall make a point of sending it to you by any friend who
may be crossing the sea. Meanwhile, farewell, and remember your friend,
who is

Yours, in all affection and zeal,  
HENRY OLDENBURG.

London, 12/26 Aug., 1661.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[275:1](corr01.htm#fr_0) The number of each
letter as arranged in Van Vluten's edition is given in brackets.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[275:2](corr01.htm#fr_1) See Introduction, p.
xvi.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[276:1](corr01.htm#fr_2) Robert Boyle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter II. To Oldenburg](corr02)
