[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr19)  [Next](corr21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER XXIII. (LXXV.)

#### SPINOZA TO OLDENBURG.

\[*Spinoza expounds to Oldenburg his views on fate and necessity,
discriminates between miracles and ignorance, takes the resurrection of
Christ as spiritual, and deprecates attributing to the sacred writers
Western modes of speech*.\]

<span class="smallcaps">Distinguished Sir</span>,—At last I see, what it
was that you begged me not to publish. However, as it forms the chief
foundation of everything in the treatise which I intended to bring out,
I should like briefly to explain here, in what sense I assert that a
fatal necessity presides over all things and actions. God I in no wise
subject to fate: I conceive that all things follow with inevitable
necessity from the nature of God, in the same way as everyone conceives
that it follows from God's nature that God understands Himself. This
latter consequence all admit to follow necessarily from the divine
nature, yet no one conceives that God is under the compulsion of any
fate, but that He understands Himself quite freely, though necessarily.

Further, this inevitable necessity in things does away neither with
divine nor human laws. The principles of morality, whether they receive
from God Himself the form of laws or institutions, or whether they do
not, are still

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

divine and salutary; whether we receive the good, which flows from
virtue and the divine love, as from God in the capacity of a judge, or
as from the necessity of the divine nature, it will in either case be
equally desirable; on the other hand, the evils following from wicked
actions and passions are not less to be feared because they are
necessary consequences. Lastly, in our actions, whether they be
necessary or contingent, we are led by hope and fear.

Men are only without excuse before God, because they are in God's power,
as clay is in the hands of the potter, who from the same lump makes
vessels, some to honour, some to dishonour. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) If you will reflect a little on this, you
will, I doubt not, easily be able to reply to any objections which may
be urged against my opinion, as many of my friends have already done.

I have taken miracles and ignorance as equivalent terms, because those,
who endeavour to establish God's existence and the truth of religion by
means of miracles, seek to prove the obscure by what is more obscure and
completely unknown, thus introducing a new sort of argument, the
reduction, not to the impossible, as the phrase is, but to ignorance.
But, if I mistake not, I have sufficiently explained my opinion on
miracles in the Theologico-Political treatise. I will only add here,
that if you will reflect on the facts that Christ did not appear to the
council, nor to Pilate, nor to any unbeliever, but only to the
faithful,; also that God has neither right hand nor left, but is by His
essence not in a particular spot, but everywhere that matter is every
where the same; that God does not manifest himself in the imaginary
space supposed to be outside the world; and lastly, that the frame of
the human body is kept within due limits solely by the weight of the
air; you will readily see that this apparition of Christ is not unlike
that wherewith God appeared to Abraham, when the latter saw men whom he
invited to dine with him. But, you will say, all the Apostles thoroughly
believed, that Christ rose from the dead and really ascended to heaven:
I do not deny it. Abraham, too, believed that God had dined with him,
and all the Israelites believed that God descended, surrounded

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

with fire, from heaven to Mount Sinai, and there spoke directly with
them; whereas, these apparitions or revelations, and many others like
them, were adapted to the understanding and opinions of those men, to
whom God wished thereby to reveal His will. I therefore conclude, that
the resurrection of Christ from the dead was in reality spiritual, and
that to the faithful alone, according to their understanding, it was
revealed that Christ was endowed with eternity, and had risen from the
dead (using *dead* in the sense in which Christ said, "let the dead bury
their dead" <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20)), giving by His life and
death a matchless example of holiness. Moreover, He to this extent
raises his disciples from the dead, in so far as they follow the example
of His own life and death. It would not be difficult to explain the
whole Gospel doctrine on this hypothesis. Nay, 1 Cor. ch. xv. cannot be
explained on any other, nor can Paul's arguments be understood: if we
follow the common interpretation, they appear weak and can easily be
refuted: not to mention the fact, that Christians interpret spiritually
all those doctrines which the Jews accepted literally. I join with you
in acknowledging human weakness. But on the other hand, I venture to ask
you whether we "human pigmies" possess sufficient knowledge of nature to
be able to lay down the limits of its force and power, or to say that a
given thing surpasses that power? No one could go so far without
arrogance. We may, therefore, without presumption explain miracles as
far as possible by natural causes. When we cannot explain them, nor even
prove their impossibility, we may well suspend our judgment about them,
and establish religion, as I have said, solely by the wisdom of its
doctrines. You think that the texts in John's Gospel and in Hebrews are
inconsistent with what I advance, because you measure oriental phrases
by the standards of European speech; though John wrote his gospel in
Greek, he wrote it as a Hebrew. However this may be, do you believe,
when Scripture says that God manifested Himself in a cloud, or that He
dwelt in the tabernacle or the temple, that God actually assumed the
nature of a cloud, a tabernacle, or a temple? Yet the utmost that Christ
says of Himself is, that He is the Temple

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

of God, <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) because, as I said before,
God had specially manifested Himself in Christ. John, wishing to express
the same truth more forcibly, said that "the Word was made flesh." But I
have said enough on the subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[302:1](corr20.htm#fr_19) Romans ix. 21.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[303:1](corr20.htm#fr_20) Matt. viii. 22; Luke
ix. 60.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[304:1](corr20.htm#fr_21) John ii. 19. Cf. Matt.
xxvi. 60; Mark xiv. 58.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXIV. From Oldenburg](corr21)
