[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native American](../../index) [South
American](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](aflg001) [Next](aflg003)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

## PREFACE

   When, some seven years ago, I took up the duties of stipendiary
magistrate, medical officer, and protector of Indians in this
mosquito-cursed district of the Pomeroon, I determined upon devoting all
my spare time—and there has been plenty of it—to an ethnographical
survey of the native tribes of British Guiana, somewhat on the lines I
had already followed in the case of North Queensland. As the work
progressed, I recognized that, for the proper comprehension of my
subject, it was necessary to make inquiry concerning the Indians of
Venezuela, Surinam, and Cayenne, with the result that the area to be
reviewed comprised practically that portion of the South American
continent bounded, roughly speaking, by the Atlantic seaboard, the
Orinoco, and the northern limits of the watershed of the Rio Negro, and
the lower Amazon; and it was not long before I realized that for the
proper study of the Arawaks and the Caribs I had to include that of the
now almost extinct Antilleans.

   In the course of my ethnographical work, I collected sufficient
material in the way of myth, legend, and fable to warrant the
publication of a separate volume on Animism and Folk-lore, and so the
following pages have come to be written. The legends collected have been
drawn mainly from Arawak, Carib, and Warrau sources, and are initialed
(A), (C), and (W), respectively.

WALTER E. ROTH.   

   *Pomeroon River, British Guiana*, June, 1913.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](aflg003)
