[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native American](../../index.md) [South
American](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](aflg21.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

## GLOSSARY

A<span class="small">COURI</span> *or* A<span
class="small">GOUTI</span>, A<span class="small">DOURI</span>. Species
of *Dasyprocta*; small game animals of great food value.

B<span class="small">ABOON</span>. The almost invariable Creole term
applied to the Howling Monkey (*Mycetes seniculus*).

B<span class="small">ABRACOTE</span> (a corrupted form of *Barbecue*). A
small three-legged or four-legged wooden staging upon which meat is laid
to be smoke-dried.

B<span class="small">ANAB</span> *or* B<span class="small">ENAB</span>.
A temporary shed built of sticks and leaves for shelter from sun, rain,
or dew.

B<span class="small">ARBECUE</span>. To smoke-dry.

B<span class="small">ELTIRI</span>. A fermented drink, made from
cassava, essentially for home consumption.

B<span class="small">UCK</span> (feminine, B<span
class="small">UCKEEN</span>). A term originally applied by the Dutch to
any aboriginal Indian.

B<span class="small">ULLET</span> T<span class="small">REE</span>. The
*Mimusops globosa*, a timber tree with excellent fruit and valuable
"milk."

B<span class="small">UNIA</span>. The "stinking-bird" (*Ostinops* spp.).

B<span class="small">USH-COW</span>. Another name for the tapir.

B<span class="small">USH-HOG</span>. *Dicotyles* sp.

B<span class="small">USH-MASTER</span> snake. *Lachesis mutus*.

B<span class="small">USH-RAT</span>. The name applied in the Pomeroon
District to the opossum. There are, however, several bush-rats proper
(*Muridæ*).

C<span class="small">AMUDI,</span> C<span class="small">AMOODIE</span>.
The land (*Boa constrictor*) or water (*Eunectes murinus*) boas.

C<span class="small">ASSAVA</span> bread. The Indian's "staff of life,"
made from the *Manihot*.

C<span class="small">ASSIRI,</span> C<span class="small">AXIRI</span>. A
fermented drink, similar to beer, made from cassava; drunk in large
quantities to intoxicate.

C<span class="small">HIGOE</span>. A species of flea which, penetrating
the flesh, may cause great irritation.

C<span class="small">ORIAL</span>. A dug-out canoe.

C<span class="small">REOLE</span>. A British Guiana term applied to any
person born in the colony, of parents other than aboriginal Indians.

C<span class="small">URARE</span> (known also as U<span
class="small">RALI,</span> W<span class="small">URALI</span>). The
well-known deadly poison of which the chief ingredient is derived from
*Strychnos toxifera*.

G<span class="small">ILBACKER</span>. A food-fish (*Sciadeicthys
parkeri*).

H<span class="small">AIAMARA</span>. A food-fish (*Hoplias
macrophthalmus*).

H<span class="small">AIAWA,</span> H<span class="small">AIOWA</span>.
The Incense tree, from which a very fragrant resin is derived.

H<span class="small">ARRI-HARRI</span>. *See* Y<span
class="small">ARRI-YARRI</span>.

H<span class="small">OBU</span>. The Hog-plum (*Spondias lutea*).

H<span class="small">OWLING MONKEY</span>. See B<span
class="small">ABOON</span>.

H<span class="small">URI</span>. A food-fish (*Hoplias malabaricus*).

I<span class="small">GARIPE</span>. A water-channel.

I<span class="small">TABO.</span> A water-channel.

I<span class="small">TE</span> (written also I<span
class="small">TA</span> *and* E<span class="small">TA</span>). The
*Mauritia* palm; of immense economic value to the Indians.

I<span class="small">TIRITI</span>. A plant (*Ischnosiphon*) with a
reedlike stem, which is split down to form strands for plaiting.

J<span class="small">IGGER</span>. *See* C<span
class="small">HIGOE</span>.

K<span class="small">ESKEDEE</span>. The onomatopœic term for a certain
bird (a species of *Lanius*).

K<span class="small">OKERITE</span>. The *Maximiliana regia* palm.

K<span class="small">URAUA</span> (written also C<span
class="small">ROWA</span>). A species of Agave from the fibers of which
very strong cords are made.

K<span class="small">USHI</span>. A leaf-cutting ant; very destructive
on the plantations.

L<span class="small">ABARIA</span>. An exceedingly poisonous snake
(*Lachesis lanceolatus*).

L<span class="small">ABBA</span>. One of the most savory of the rodents
(*Cœlogenys paca*).

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

L<span class="small">UKUNANNI</span>. A food fish (*Cichla ocellaris*).
The Pomeroon Indians sometimes speak of it as "sunfish," owing to its
brilliant coloration.

M<span class="small">AAM</span>. *See* S<span
class="small">CRUB-TURKEY</span>.

M<span class="small">AIPURI</span>. The Indian name for the tapir.

M<span class="small">ALOKA,</span> M<span class="small">ALOCCA</span>. A
large house in which several families live a more or less communal life.

M<span class="small">ANICOLE</span>. The *Euterpe edulis* palm.

M<span class="small">ARABUNTA</span>. The Creole term for several
species of wasp.

M<span class="small">ARAKA</span>. The Calabash-gourd rattle.

M<span class="small">ARUDI</span>. A black fowl (*Penelope* sp.) with a
scarlet neck.

M<span class="small">ATAPI</span>. The plaited snakelike press for
squeezing the poisonous juice out of the cassava.

M<span class="small">ORA</span>. One of the giants of the forest trees
the wood of which is very hard.

M<span class="small">OROKOT</span>. A food fish, something like the pacu
(*Myletes*).

"N<span class="small">ANCY</span>"-<span class="small">STORY</span>. One
of the many African stories having the mythical spider, or *anansi*, as
hero; hence applied by the Creoles to any legend, myth, or fairy tale

N<span class="small">EGROCOP</span>. "Crane" or "stork" (*Mycteria
americana*).

O<span class="small">POSSUM</span>. See B<span
class="small">USH-RAT</span>; Y<span class="small">AWARRI</span>.

O<span class="small">ÜICOU</span>. A fermented drink, or paste, made
from cassava and potatoes.

P<span class="small">AIWARRI</span>. A blackish fermented drink made
from cassava used on occasions of feasting and sport.

P<span class="small">ARIPI</span> *or* P<span
class="small">EACH-PALM</span>. *Guilielma* sp.

P<span class="small">ECCARY</span>. The kairuni or abuya, two of the
bush-hogs.

P<span class="small">EGALL</span>. A basket having a plaited body and
cover, much like a European woman's traveling dress basket.

P<span class="small">EPPER-POT</span>. A meat stew containing capsicums
and cassareep, kept good by daily sterilizing (boiling).

P<span class="small">IMPLER</span> P<span class="small">ALM</span>. From
"pimple," meaning a thorn; species of *Bactris*.

P<span class="small">IRAI</span>. A very voracious carnivorous fish
(*Pygocentris* sp.) with exceedingly strong and sharp incisors.

P<span class="small">OWIS</span>. An excellent bird (*Crax* sp.) for the
table.

P<span class="small">URPLE-HEART</span>. A strong timber (*Copaifera*
sp.) used in making dug-out canoes house posts, etc.

Q<span class="small">UAKE</span>. A term applied indiscriminately to all
open-work Indian baskets.

Q<span class="small">UATTA</span>. A monkey (*Ateles paniscus*).

Q<span class="small">UERRIMAN</span>. A food fish (*Mugil brasilianus*).

S<span class="small">ALAPENTA</span>. The Creole term for the larger
lizards.

S<span class="small">AWYER</span> B<span class="small">EETLE</span>. A
beetle (*Macrodontia dejani*) which "rings" branches of trees.

S<span class="small">CRUB-TURKEY</span> *or* M<span
class="small">AAM</span>. *Tinamus subcristatus*.

S<span class="small">EA-COW</span>. A Creole term for the *Manatus*.

S<span class="small">ILK-COTTON</span> T<span class="small">REE</span>.
A large deciduous tree (*Eriodendron, Bombax*).

T<span class="small">IGER</span>. The Creole term applied to practically
all the members of the feline tribe—jaguar, puma, wildcat, and others.

T<span class="small">RULI</span> *or* T<span
class="small">ROOLIE</span>. The *Manicaria* palm, the leaves of which
are used for thatch.

T<span class="small">RUMPETER</span>. The Warracabba bird (*Psophia*
sp.).

U<span class="small">RALI</span>. *See* C<span
class="small">URARE</span>.

V<span class="small">ULTURE</span>. The carrion-crow "governor," or
"Boss" (*Sarcoramphus papa*).

W<span class="small">ATER-DOG</span>. The Creole term for otter.

W<span class="small">OODSKIN</span>. A canoe made of a single sheet of
bark.

W<span class="small">URALI,</span> U<span class="small">RALI</span>.
Other forms of the word C<span class="small">URARE</span>.

Y<span class="small">ACKMAN</span>. The Jagd-man's, or Huntsman's, Ant,
which comes at regular intervals and clears out all the other ants.

Y<span class="small">ARRI-YARRI</span>. The Indian flute.

Y<span class="small">AWARRI</span>. Species of opossum (*Didelphys*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native American](../../index.md) [South
American](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](aflg21.md)
