[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native American](../../index) [South
American](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](aflg17) [Next](aflg19)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

## C<span class="small">HAPTER</span> XVIII KANAIMA; THE INVISIBLE OR BROKEN ARROW

   <span class="small">Expression of the Law of Retaliation: Kanaima may
appear as a human being or Spirit (*[320](#pp_320)*), and perhaps can be
satisfactorily explained (*[320A](#pp_320A)*), or as an animal
(*[321](#pp_321)*). Kanaima's handiwork, when fatal, can be recognized
as such only by the piai (*[322](#pp_322)*). Discovery of the individual
under whose influence Kanaima has acted (*[323](#pp_323)*); search for
this individual by one of deceased's relatives, or by a hireling
(*[324](#pp_324)*); avenger proceeds to get into touch with his victim
(*[325](#pp_325)*); mutilates him with poison, club, or arrow
(*[326](#pp_326)*), but only to such extent that death will not ensue
until third day after (*[327](#pp_327)-328*), when he will complete the
mutilation of the corpse, and so obtain his own purification
(*[329](#pp_329)*).  
   The Invisible or Broken Arrow (*[330](#pp_330)-331*); the Misson of
the Arrow (*[331A](#pp_331A)*).</span>

   <span id="pp_320"></span>**320.**[\*](#pp_320) An individual becomes
exceedingly ill. All the ordinary everyday remedies have been resorted
to, the piai has invoked his Familiar Spirit, yet the patient dies; or
he may sometimes expire without warning. The very fact of the
medicine-man's inability to effect a cure serves only to confirm the
belief held in certain tribes—Akawaios, Makusis, Arekunas, for
example—that the victim's condition is the work of some human agency
more or less disguised, modified, or influenced by a peculiarly terrible
Spirit known as Kanaima ([Sect. *307*](aflg17.htm#pp_307)). The word
itself is said to be Akawaio; the Arawak term is Mahui, which thus comes
to be applied by this people to all Akawaios in general. According to
inquiry made of the Arawaks, who, like the Caribs and Warraus, do not
appear to know very much about the subject, and that only at
second-hand, Kanaima is said to be the name of a certain tree growing in
the savannahs, of which the sap has remarkable properties. After rubbing
himself with it a man will go mad and become changed into some animal,
as a tiger or a snake, and do people harm. The sap can also be thrown
over other folk with similar results. But the word mentioned has really
a very extended meaning; it is the expression of the law of retaliation,
which is sacredly observed among the Indians of Guiana (Da, 16), at
least, certainly among the Makusis, Akawais, Wapisianas, and Arekunas.
Though applied to the man who has devoted himself to perform a deed of
blood, it seems more properly to belong to the murderous Spirit under
the influence of which he acts, and which is supposed to possess him
(Br, 373); it indicates also the person whose rights have been injured
(ScR, <span class="small">I</span>, 322-3) as well as the whole mode of
procedure, including the means, poison, etc., employed. Thus, the
audacity of the Akawais "in these predatory excursions is astonishing.
If a party can muster eight or ten stand <span id="page_355">p.
355</span> of fire-arms it will fight its way through all the mountain
tribes, though at open war with them; and by the rapidity of their
marches and nightly enterprises, which they call Kanaima, they conceal
the weakness of their numbers, and carry terror before them" (HiC, 234).
Schomburgk says it was impossible to learn clearly how Kanaima is
regarded, because he appears not only as an evil invisible Being
(*dämonisches Wesen*) and, in many cases, as a particular personality
(*individuelle persönlichkeit*), but always as the avenger of a known or
an unknown injury. Who and what Kanaima was, they could not tell us, but
they reckoned that every casualty (*Todesfall*) was due to him. I had
already observed the thirst for vengeance among the Warraus which often
overcomes and tortures an Indian to the point of madness, as soon as he
considers himself injured in his reputation or in his wife; a thirst
which is but quenched with the death of the offender, or in the
annihilation of his whole family (SCR, <span class="small">I</span>,
322).

   The same author gives an account of a certain waterfall on the upper
Cotinga which his terrified Indians tried to get past as quickly and as
quietly as possible. Kanaima, the hereditary enemy of the human race,
was being followed by a powerful Spirit: the pursuer was close at hand,
escape seemed impossible, the steep bank preventing further flight over
level ground, but in this opening it was possible: he burrowed in here,
and came out again on the opposite shore of the river bank about ten or
twelve miles farther on, whence he emerged to continue afresh his
torments upon mankind (ScR, <span class="small">II</span>, 182).

   <span id="pp_320A"></span>**320A.**[\*](#pp_320A) And yet again it is
quite possible that the term Kanaima may have an easily intelligible
origin based on the bloody exploits of certain of the Rio Branco tribes,
whose reputation, through the avenues of exchange and barter, could
easily have reached the Indians of British Guiana. As a matter of fact,
I can not recall at present a single instance of Kanaima culled from the
literature dealing with Cayenne, Surinam, or the Orinoco region. At the
head of the River Jauapiry and River Taruman-Assu (streams flowing into
the Rio Negro to the eastward of the Rio Branco) are a series of wild
tribes. These tribes are not wild in the sense of making war on
civilized and quiet peoples (*mansos*), but are Kanaima tribes (*tribus
canaémés*), as the Indians of the upper Rio Branco call them, that is,
they are tribes of cut-throats by profession, educated from generation
to generation in murder and theft, killing for the pleasure of killing,
not even eating their victims but utilizing their tibias for flutes and
their teeth for necklaces. Indians of a dozen tribes have assured me,
says Coudreau, that there exists among the *canaémés* an association of
piais who exert great influence. What makes the thing appear very
probable is that it is known that these various Kanaima tribes are
allied and more or less united (*solidaires*). \[Cou, <span
class="small">II</span>, 235-6.\]

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

   <span id="pp_321"></span>**321.**[\*](#pp_321) As already hinted, the
Kanaima may just as often be in the form of an animal. "Many of the
Indians believe that these 'Kanaima' animals are possessed by the
spirits of men who have devoted themselves to deeds of blood and
cannibalism. To enjoy the savage delight of killing and devouring human
beings, such a person will assume the form, or his soul animate the
body, of a jaguar \[[Sects. *146*](aflg09.htm#pp_146),
[*147*](aflg09.htm#pp_147), [*148*](aflg09.htm#pp_148)\], approach the
sleeping-places of men, or waylay the solitary Indian in his path" (Br,
373). One can tell, by the effects, the particular animal whose
characteristics Kanaima have assumed. Does he give a blow that stretches
his victim on the ground? Then he is a "tiger." Does he in wrestling
find his arms encircling the neck of him devoted to destruction? Then he
imbibes the spirit of the camudi, and like the constrictor, strangles
(Da, 277). He may appear also in the form of a bird, and may even enter
a person's body in the form of an insect, a worm, or even an inanimate
object.

   <span id="pp_322"></span>**322.**[\*](#pp_322) When a person dies it
is only the piai who knows whether the death is due to an evil Spirit,
or to the "poison" \[blood-revenge\] of another Indian. If to the
former, he is buried with the usual ceremonial, but if the verdict is
that he was sacrificed for some offence the corpse is carefully
examined, and should only a blue spot or something unusual be found on
it, the piai will show that here the victim was wounded with the
invisible poisoned arrow (ScR, <span class="small">II</span>, 496).<span
id="page_356_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_356_note_1)

   <span id="pp_323"></span>**323.**[\*](#pp_323) Once the handiwork of
Kanaima has been recognized, the piai's powers, as such, are not brought
into further requisition, in the way of retaliation or revenge on the
particular individual with whose connivance this terrible Spirit has
wrought the mischief. It is not the Kanaima but his human agent who is
sought for punishment. The retaliation and revenge are matters for the
victim's relatives and friends to deal with, and various measures are
adopted by them to discover the particular individual specially
concerned. \[Among the Arawaks\] in order to ascertain this a pot is
filled with certain leaves \[and water\] and placed over a fire: when it
begins to boil over they consider that on whichever side the scum first
falls, it points out the quarter from whence the murderer came (Be, 57).
Among the Makusis, above the Waraputa Falls, Essequibo River, Schomburgk
relates the following striking instance: "A Makusi boy had died of
dropsy, and his relatives endeavored to discover the quarter to which
the Kanaima, who was supposed to have slain him, belonged . . . the
father, cutting from the corpse both the thumbs and little fingers, both
the great and the little toes, and a piece of each heel, threw these
pieces into a new pot which had been <span id="page_357">p. 357</span>
filled with water. A fire was kindled, and on this the pot was placed.
When the water began to boil, according to the side on which one of the
pieces was first thrown out from the pot by the bubbling of the water,
in that direction would the Kanaima be" (ScR, <span
class="small">I</span>, 325). A consultation is thereupon held, the
place is pointed out, and the individual whose death is to atone for
that of the deceased (Be, 57). If any one—man, woman, or child—has
incurred the hatred of the all-powerful piai, or should the latter be
desirous of the wife of some Indian, this or the other would be the
cause of the death (ScR, <span class="small">II</span>, 496).

   <span id="pp_324"></span>**324.**[\*](#pp_324) A near relative is
charged with the work of vengeance: he becomes a Kanaima, is supposed to
be possessed by the destroying Spirit so-called, and has to live apart
according to strict rule, and submit to many privations until the deed
of blood be accomplished (Br, 357). If the individual can not be found,
or rather if the favorable opportunity for committing the deed does not
present itself, although it will be sought for years, any other member
of his family will suffice. Sometimes the near relative will charge
himself with the duty: a little Warrau boy of about 12 years of age
avenges his father's and mother's death by smashing in the piai's skull
with a club when the latter lies drunk in his hammock (ScR, <span
class="small">I</span>, 158). Formerly, the Indians at the Great Falls
of the Demerara were employed by the Arawaks of the lower district to
work their vengeance as Kanaima mercenaries (Da, 277). The Indians of
Itéuni, Berbice River, sent a deputation to the Arekuna tribe with
presents, to induce them to come and exterminate Mekro and his
settlement. These Arekunas, chosen for the deed of blood on account of
the remoteness of their habitation as likely to baffle all trace of the
originators (Da, 16), came over from a great distance. Some Indians, who
are adepts in the art of making subtle poisons, hire themselves out to
rid their employers of any obnoxious individuals, and these are called
Kanaimas (Bro, 141). These examples serve to show how the work of
vengeance could be deputed to strangers and mercenaries.

   <span id="pp_325"></span>**325.**[\*](#pp_325) But whoever it may be
that is charged with the duty of avenging the death, he suddenly
disappears from the settlement: no one knows where he is. He wanders now
as Kanaima through the forests, valleys, and heights, and does not
return until he has slain his victim or shot him with the poisoned
arrow. Half a year or more \[even years\] may thus be spent, during
which time he avoids all contact with other Indians. From the moment he
leaves the settlement, he is outlawed—he has cut all the ties which bind
him to his family and his tribe—and it is the business of any Indians
who may meet him in the bush, to kill him (ScR, <span
class="small">I</span>, 322-3). Nor is he allowed to speak with any he
may meet in his way, says Bernau (57), but Hilhouse makes the statement
for the Arawaks, that an Indian who is deputed to revenge a murder will
follow his enemy <span id="page_358">p. 358</span> for years, publicly
avowing his purpose, which he will relinquish only with life (HiC, 231).
He has to abstain from meat and live on what the forest supplies, a fact
which will account for his usually emaciated appearance. As for
ornament, he is credited with wearing a curiously wrought cap (Be, 57),
but it is the bodily decoration which gives him his distinctive
features. He paints bright red spots on his skin, to show that, changing
into a jaguar at night, he can thus slay his victims. A set of jaguar's
claws hung up in a sorcerer's hut have the same threatening
signification ([BrB, 154](../lmbg/lmbg4b.htm#page_154)). In describing
two such Kanaimas, Dance says that their emaciated bodies were painted
in lines: they were tigers or \[boa\]-constrictors (Da, 276). Schomburgk
talks of the avenger being painted in a peculiar manner, and clothed
with an animal skin (ScR, <span class="small">I</span>, 324).

   <span id="pp_326"></span>**326.**[\*](#pp_326) The longed-for
opportunity arrives at last; the Kanaima finds his victim alone, and
slays him by poison, the arrow, or the club. Among the Akawaios
especially, but also among the Makusis, Wapisianas, and Arekunas, a
frightful poison known as *wassi* is brought into requisition. This is
extracted from the bulb or tuber of a plant which the Indians refused to
show him, says Schomburgk, in spite of entreaty and rich reward, on the
score that if the Paranaghieris \[Europeans\] knew it, they would
immediately discover its antidote. They cut the bulb into thin shavings,
dry in the sun, and then crush to the finest powder, which has quite the
appearance of arsenic. Should the alleged delinquent be caught asleep,
some of this powder is strewn upon his lips or under his nose, so that
it is inhaled. A sharp burning sensation in the bowels, a raging fever,
and a tantalizing thirst, with no means of obtaining relief, are the
symptoms of the poison, and convince the victim that his days, even his
hours, are numbered. Within four weeks he becomes reduced to a skeleton
and dies in fearful torment. (ScR, <span class="small">I</span>, 323.)
Thus, among the Makusis at Mora on the Rupununi River, was met an
unfortunate woman whose attenuated body was a most shocking sight: she
was a living skeleton, being nothing but skin and bones, with the
exception of the face, which was not reduced in proportion with that of
the rest of the body: they told me, says Brown, that this woman had come
to them from the Ireng River district, where she had been poisoned by
Kanaimas, and that this accounted for her wasted condition (Bro, 258).
Another account I am able to quote, from the Mazaruni River, where a
white powder is employed by inunction. It appeared that the murdered man
had been induced to join a fishing party, and then had been set upon by
a number of men, who had forced his limbs out of joint, rubbed his body
over with a white powder made from a species of wild tannier, and then
pulled them into their sockets again: he managed to reach home with
great difficulty and take to his hammock, where he was seized with
vomiting and died in a few hours (Bro, 55). <span id="page_359">p.
359</span> Further reference to this poison was obtained from the upper
Pomeroon Caribs, who speak of it as *massi*, and tell me of its being
put to use by the Akawaios as follows: Massi is a weed which is rubbed
on a thin stick and the latter is pointed at the individual it is wished
to injure. The person so pointed at *must* come to the one holding the
stick, and as he walks along, he falls down in a sort of fainting fit:
While thus unconscious, Kanaima covers him with trisel (*Pentaclethra
filamentosa*) and thus makes him wake, but by this time Kanaima changes
himself into an acouri or a deer. As the victim limps along, he startles
either one of these animals, and by this sign or token recognizes that
Kanaima has been giving him "medicine."<span
id="page_359_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_359_note_1)

   <span id="pp_327"></span>**327.**[\*](#pp_327) Now, whichever
means—as, poison, arrow, club, visible or invisible—the Kanaima agent
may employ to carry out his design, he especially refrains from causing
the immediate death of his victim for the reason that at least a three
days' respite or interregnum has to be observed before he can complete,
on his victim's body, those particular rites ([Sect.
*329*](aflg18.htm#pp_329)) without the due observance of which he can
not obtain his own purification. If circumstances should prevent him
thus being purified, he must become demented and die raving mad. Hence,
after assuring himself that the actual death will not take place before
three days shall have passed, he makes equally certain of the sufferer
in the meantime holding his tongue in more senses than one, thus
preventing him giving any definite clue to his assailant's identity or
existence in the immediate neighborhood. To effect this, the Kanaima
devotee accordingly slits his victim's tongue with the fangs of a most
poisonous snake. Schomburgk tells us from his own experience (ScR, <span
class="small">I</span>, 324) how the Indians collect the fangs of such
snakes. Of course accidents will often happen, and even after taking the
precaution of shooting an arrow into his back, the victim may be killed
on the spot: in such a case the Kanaima agent will bury the corpse at
once superficially in the spot where the man fell, taking care to
remember the place, that he may find it when he returns, after the third
day, to complete the final ceremony. Even should the wound fail to prove
immediately fatal, before the poor creature can reach home the tongue
has become inflamed and swollen, so that he (or she) is unable to tell
who did the deed. Dance speaks of another method of impairing speech, by
twisting the tongue, and inserting poisoned pills into the mouth. These
pills are composed of the parings of a macaw's bill, parings of cowhorn,
dog's hair, scrapings from the bulb-root of the *dhu turu*, and another
poison, the name of which was not ascertained (Da, 278). <span
id="page_360">p. 360</span> Brett thus talks of an Akawai murdered on
the banks of the Manawarin, a branch of the Moruca: "The deed was
perpetrated by a 'Kanaima' devotee in the usual manner, and close to the
Indian settlement: A loud shout was heard in the forest, and when the
friends of the victim ran to the spot, they found him on the ground with
his back and neck bruised, but not bleeding. He had been deprived of
speech by the murderer according to the cruel system followed in those
crimes" (Br, 269).

   <span id="pp_328"></span>**328.**[\*](#pp_328) If the sufferer is
found by his friends and carried home, the perpetrator of the deed, the
Kanaima, is obliged to hover near, to discover the place of burial (Br,
357-60), for reasons already stated ([Sect. *327*](aflg18.htm#pp_327)).
But the victim's friends are equally shrewd in burying the corpse so
secretly that its whereabouts shall not be known to him, hence every
precaution is taken to insure this object. Should the site of burial be
ultimately discovered by the Kanaima, however—and the friends of the
victim will take no chances—they will either poison the corpse or stick
"pimplers" (palm-spines) into it. Thus, a man having been killed by
Quio, the corpse was laid out naked, with a basin of water under it,
into which the pimplers of the parepi palm were placed. The body was
then washed with the water, and a portion of the spines were broken, and
forced into the body. When laid in the grave, the remaining spines were
strewn over his body: this, they said, would kill the man who tasted of
the juice of the dead body (Da, 278). Or again, so as to make certain of
revenge on Kanaima, if the grave is molested by him, some of the
deceased's friends will open the body, take out the liver, and put a
red-hot ax-head in its place. If after that is done, the Kanaima should
disturb the corpse, the intense heat which was in the ax-head, when
placed there, will pass into the Kanaima devotee's body, consuming his
vitals and causing him to perish miserably. An Akawai told Brett of
another plan that is sometimes followed, namely, wurali poison is placed
on the dead body (Br, 359-60).

   <span id="pp_329"></span>**329.**[\*](#pp_329) On the third night the
Kanaima visits the grave and sticks a pointed staff into the body: upon
drawing this out, if there is blood on it, he will lick it off, and all
the dangerous consequences of his act are paralyzed for him, with the
result that he returns contented to his settlement (ScR, <span
class="small">II</span>, 497). He has undergone purification, so to
speak.<span id="page_360_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_360_note_1) He cannot be
released from the power of the evil Spirit which possesses him until he
has performed this act. If this, which is an offering to the Kanaima
Spirit within him, be accomplished, he becomes like other men, and can
return to his family, but if not, he wanders on till madness or some
other dire consequences, through the agency of the disappointed Spirit,
are believed to come upon him <span id="page_361">p. 361</span> (Br,
359). The Arawak is firmly convinced that if the Kanaima, on the third
day, cannot taste any of his victim's blood, he will become mad and die
mad (ScR, <span class="small">II</span>, 497); he can be freed only if
he succeed in leaving behind his two distinctive death-marks—the swollen
tongue and the damaged entrails. The original doctrine of Kanaima would
almost seem to have constituted a special cult, the inner working of
which it is now hard to unravel. Brett says that, among the Akawais, the
whole system of Kanaima is taught by father to son in many families (Br,
358).

   <span id="pp_330"></span>**330.**[\*](#pp_330) It has been already
stated ([Sect. *322*](aflg18.htm#pp_322)) that Kanaima's handiwork may
be recognized in the blue spot due to the invisible poisoned arrow
employed by him. On the Napo River (Amazon), the Indians will "attribute
many of their ills to the puffing of invisible darts into their bodies
by evil, designing persons—an idea no doubt suggested by the mysterious
and silent operation of their own instruments of offence" (AS, 155). A
similar belief is current in the Guianas. Caribs ascribe children's
sicknesses ([Sect. *110*](aflg08.htm#pp_110)) and Arawaks otherwise
unaccountable illness in general, and any sharp sudden agonizing pains
in particular, to an invisible arrow. The latter tribe will often
describe it as the Bush Spirit's arrow (Yawahu-shímara). Interesting in
this connection is the fact that a miniature bow and arrow may be
extracted by the piai from the patient's body by means of massage and
suction ([Sect. *316*](aflg17.htm#pp_316)). There are further beliefs
about certain mysterious arrows which it is worth noting. Where the
arrow sank into the water, there lurked the danger in the shape of
submerged rocks, but where it floated, there the passage was clear for
the corial to pass ([Sect. *151*](aflg09.htm#pp_151)). Owing to an
invisible fungus growing upon the arrow in the one case ([Sect.
*145*](aflg09.htm#pp_145)) and upon the bowman's arm in the other
([Sect. *144*](aflg09.htm#pp_144)), the missile does not hit its mark.
When either is properly cleaned, however, the arrow is made to split a
fishing-line and a distant hanging-vine rope, respectively. It has been
claimed for the Spirits, and medicine-man—and after all, the powers of
these agents were identical—as almost one of their perquisites, so to
speak ([Sect. *30*](aflg02.htm#pp_30)), that they alone can hit an
animal by shooting the arrow up into the air and letting it fall from
above on the quarry. As a matter of fact this was once a more or less
common practice among the turtle-hunters of the Amazon and Orinoco.<span
id="page_361_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_361_note_1)

   <span id="pp_331"></span>**331.**[\*](#pp_331) A few words on certain
ideas concerning broken bows and broken arrows must be given place here.
The term "broken" would seem to represent almost the normal condition in
which certain of the Bush Spirits employed bows, for which reason some
of these denizens of the forest were known as Shimarabu-akaradáni
([Sect. *95*](aflg08.htm#pp_95)). The same <span id="page_362">p.
362</span> Beings were also evidently not averse to using broken arrows,
subsquently spliced ([Sect. *144*](aflg09.htm#pp_144)), but it is
certainly difficult to trace the raison-d'être of the self-castigation
with the two halves of a broken arrow to insure strength and courage
([Sects. *139*](aflg09.htm#pp_139), [*221B*](aflg14.htm#pp_221B)).

   <span id="pp_331A"></span>**331A.**[\*](#pp_331A) The idea of
invisible poisoned or broken arrows noted in the two next sections
preceding may possibly bear relation to one of the procedures adopted in
the declaration of hostilities on the outbreak of war. Thus, the call to
arms may be noiseless, the emissaries silently announcing the fact that
the tribe is at war without even saying a word, for it suffices to leave
in passing a barbed arrow in a public place for all to take up arms.
This notice is called the Mission of the Arrow (*correr la flecha*) and
is tantamount to a declaration of a state of war (G, <span
class="small">I</span>, 134). Martius recorded a similar procedure among
the Caribs, Yuri, Miranya, and others (*Beiträge*, <span
class="small">I</span>, 97); the practice is also observed with the
Guariua of the Yapura at the present day (KG, <span
class="small">II</span>, 316).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](aflg19)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_356">p. 356</span>

<span id="page_356_note_1"></span>[1](#page_356_fr_1) For further
information concerning this particular arrow, see Sects.
[*330*](aflg18.htm#pp_330), [*331*](aflg18.htm#pp_331).

<span id="footnotes_page_359">p. 359</span>

<span id="page_359_note_1"></span>[1](#page_359_fr_1) On the Rio Içana
(upper Rio Negro); maraka-imbára is the secret magic poison to which
every death is ascribed (KG, <span class="small">I</span>, 45, 207,
214).

<span id="footnotes_page_360">p. 360</span>

<span id="page_360_note_1"></span>[1](#page_360_fr_1) Compare the
licking of the switch by the girl at puberty ([Sect.
*171*](aflg11.htm#pp_171)).

<span id="footnotes_page_361">p. 361</span>

<span id="page_361_note_1"></span>[1](#page_361_fr_1) I have observed
and since recorded the same method among the natives of North
Queensland.—W. E. R.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
