[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe068) 
[Next](fbe070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LXIV.

Adam and Eve partake of the first earthly food.

THEN God looked upon Adam and upon his strength of mind, upon his
endurance of hunger and thirst, and of the heat. And he changed the two
fig-trees into two figs, as they were at first, and then said to Adam
and to Eve, "Each of you may take one fig." And they took them, as the
Lord commanded them.

2 And he said to them, "Go ye into the cave, and eat the figs, and
satisfy your hunger, lest ye die."

3 So, as God commanded them, they went into the cave, about the time
when the sun was setting. And Adam and Eve stood up and prayed at the
time of the setting sun.

4 Then they sat down to eat the figs; but they knew not how to eat them;
for they were not accustomed to eat earthly food. They feared also lest,
if they ate, their stomach should be burdened and their flesh thickened,
and their hearts take to liking earthly food.

5 But while they were thus seated, God, out of pity for them, sent them
His angel, lest they should perish of hunger and thirst.

6 And the angel said unto Adam and Eve, "God says to you that ye have
not strength to fast until death; eat, therefore, and strengthen your
bodies; for ye are now animal flesh, that cannot subsist without food
and drink."

7 Then Adam and Eve took the figs and began to eat of them. But God had
put into them a mixture as of savoury bread and blood.

8 Then the angel went from Adam and Eve, who ate of the figs until they
had satisfied their hunger. Then they put by what remained; but by the
power of God, the figs became full as before, because God blessed them.

9 After this Adam and Eve arose, and prayed with a joyful heart and
renewed strength, and praised and rejoiced abundantly the whole of that
night. And this was the end of the eighty-third day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXV.](fbe070)
