[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe007) 
[Next](fbe009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. III.

Concerning the promise of the great five days and a half.

GOD said to Adam, "I have ordained on this earth days and years, and
thou and thy seed shall dwell and walk in it, until the days and years
are fulfilled; when I shall send the

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Word that created
thee, and against which thou hast transgressed, the Word that made thee
come out of the garden and that raised thee when thou wast fallen.

2 Yea, the Word that will again save thee when the five days and a half
are fulfilled."

3 But when Adam heard these words from God, and of the great five days
and a half, he did not understand the meaning of them.

4 For Adam was thinking that there would be but five days and a half for
him, to the end of the world.

5 And Adam wept, and prayed God to explain it to him.

6 Then God in His mercy for Adam who was made after His own image and
similitude, explained to him, that these were 5,000 and 500 years; and
how One would then come and save him and his seed.

7 But God had before that made this covenant with our father, Adam, in
the same terms, ere he came out of the garden, when he was by the tree
whereof Eve took the fruit and gave it him to eat.

8 Inasmuch as when our father Adam came out of the garden, he passed by
that tree, and saw how God had then changed the appearance of it into
another form, and how it withered.

9 And as Adam went to it he feared, trembled and fell down; but God in
His mercy lifted him up, and then made this covenant with him.

10 And, again, when Adam was by the gate of the garden, and saw the
cherub with a sword of flashing fire in his hand, and the cherub grew
angry and frowned at him, both Adam and Eve became afraid of him, and
thought he meant to put them to death. So they fell on their faces, and
trembled with fear.

11 But he had pity on them, and showed them mercy; and turning from them
went up to heaven, and prayed unto the Lord, and said:--

12 "Lord, Thou didst send me to watch at the gate of the garden, with a
sword of fire.

13 "But when Thy servants, Adam and Eve, saw me, they fell on their
faces, and were as dead. O my Lord, what shall we do to Thy servants?"

14 Then God had pity on them, and showed them mercy, and sent His Angel
to keep the garden.

15 And the Word of the Lord came unto Adam and Eve, and raised them up.

16 And the Lord said to Adam, "I told thee that at the end of five days
and a half, I will send my Word and save thee.

17 "Strengthen thy heart, therefore, and abide in the Cave of Treasures,
of which I have before spoken to thee."

18 And when Adam heard this Word from God, he was comforted with that
which God had told him. For He had told him how He would save him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](fbe009)
