[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe009) 
[Next](fbe011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. V.

In which Eve makes a noble and emotionable intercession, taking the
blame on herself.

THEN Adam and Eve entered the cave, and stood praying, in their own
tongue, unknown to us, but which they knew well.

2 And as they prayed, Adam raised his eyes, and saw the rock and the
roof of the cave that covered him overhead, so that he could see neither
heaven, nor God's creatures. So he wept and smote heavily upon his
breast, until he dropped, and was as dead.

3 And Eve sat weeping; for she believed he was dead.

4 Then she arose, spread her hands towards God, suing Him for mercy and
pity, and said, "O God, forgive me my sin, the sin which I committed,
and remember it not against me.

5 "For I alone caused Thy servant to fall from the garden into this lost
estate; from light into this darkness; and from the abode of joy into
this prison.

6 "O God, look upon this Thy servant thus fallen, and raise him from his
death, that he may weep and repent of his transgression which he
committed through me.

7 "Take not away his soul this once; but let him live that he may stand
after the measure of his repentance, and do Thy will, as before his
death.

8 "But if Thou do not raise him up, then, O God, take away my own soul,
that I be like him; and leave me not in this dungeon, one and alone; for
I could not stand alone in this world, but with him only.

9 "For Thou, O God, didst cause a slumber to come upon him, and didst
take a bone from his side, and didst restore the flesh in the place of
it, by Thy divine power.

10 "And Thou didst take me, the bone, and make me a woman, bright like
him, with heart, reason, and speech; and in flesh, like unto his own;
and Thou didst make me after the likeness of his countenance, by Thy
mercy and power.

11 "O Lord, I and he are one and Thou, O God, art our Creator, Thou are
He who made us both in one day.

12 "Therefore, O God, give

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

him life, that he may be with me in this strange land, while we dwell in
it on account of our transgression.

13 "But if Thou wilt not give him life, then take me, even me, like him;
that we both may die the same day."

14 And Eve wept bitterly, and fell upon our father Adam; from her great
sorrow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](fbe011)
