[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe004) 
[Next](fbe006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### THE FIRST BOOK OF

# Adam and Eve

###### ALSO CALLED

##### The Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan.

PRESENT day controversy that rages around the authenticity of the
Scriptures and how human life began on this planet must pause to
consider the Adam and Eve story. Where does it come from? What does it
mean?

The familiar version in Genesis is not the source of this fundamental
legend, it is not a spontaneous, Heaven-born account that sprang into
place in the Old Testament. It is simply a version, unexcelled perhaps,
but a version of a myth or belief or account handed down by word of
mouth from generation to generation of mankind-through the incoherent,
unrecorded ages of man it came--like an inextinguishable ray of light
that ties the time when human life began, with the time when the human
mind could express itself and the human hand could write.

This is the most ancient story in the world--it has survived because it
embodies the basic fact of human life. A fact that has not changed one
iota; amid all the superficial changes of civilization's vivid array,
this fact remains: the conflict of Good and Evil; the fight between Man
and the Devil; the eternal struggle of human nature against sin,

That the Adam and Eve story pervaded the thoughts of ancient writers is
seen in the large number of versions that exist, or whose existence may
be traced, through the writings of Greeks, Syrians, Egyptians,
Abyssinians, Hebrews, and other ancient peoples. As a lawyer might say
who examines so much apparently unrelated evidence--there must be
*something* back of it.

The version which we give here is the work of unknown Egyptians (the
lack of historical allusion makes it impossible to date the writing).
Parts of this version are found in the Talmud, the Koran, and elsewhere,
showing what a vital rôle it played in the original literature of human
wisdom. The Egyptian author first wrote in Arabic (which may be taken as
the original manuscript) and that found its way farther south and was
translated into Ethiopic. For the present English translation we are
indebted to Dr. S. C. Malan, Vicar of Broadwindsor, who worked from the
Ethiopic edition edited by Dr. E. Trumpp, Professor at the University of
Munich. Dr. Trumpp had the advantage of the Arabic original, which makes
our bridge over the gap of many centuries a direct one.

The reading of these books is an adventure. You will find the mind of
man fed by the passions, hopes, fears of new and strange

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

earthly existence rioting, unrestrained, in the zest of self-expression.
You roam in the realms of mythology where swiftly the aspects of nature
assume manifold personalities, and the amorphous instinct of sin takes
on the grotesqueries of a visible devil.

From such imaginative surroundings you find yourself suddenly staring at
commonplace unvarnished events of family life--and such a family as "the
first earthly family" was! They had all the troubles, all the petty
disagreements, and the taking sides with one another, and the bother
moving, and "staying with the baby," that in the total mark family life
to-day. You will see it when you peep beneath the overlaying glamour of
tradition.

One critic has said of this writing:

"This is we believe, the greatest literary discovery that the world has
known. Its effect upon contemporary thought in molding the judgment of
the future generations is of incalculable value.

"The treasures of *Tut-ank-Amen's* Tomb were no more precious to the
Egyptologist than are these literary treasures to the world of
scholarship."

But we prefer to let the reader make his own exploration and form his
own opinion. The writing is arresting enough to inspire very original
thoughts concerning it,

In general, this account begins where the Genesis story of Adam and Eve
leaves off. Thus the two can not well be compared; here we have a new
chapter--a sort of sequel to the other. Here is the story of the twin
sisters of Cain and Abel, and it is notable that here the blame for the
first murder is placed squarely at the door of a difference over Woman.

The plan of these books is as follows:--

Book I. The careers of Adam and Eve, from the day they left Eden; their
dwelling in the Cave of Treasures; their trials and temptations; Satan's
manifold apparitions to them. The birth of Cain, of Abel, and of their
twin sisters; Cain's love for his own twin sister, Luluwa, whom Adam and
Eve wished to join to Abel; the details of Cain's murder of his brother;
and Adam's sorrow and death.

Book IL The history of the patriarchs who lived before the Flood; the
dwelling of the children of Seth on the Holy Mountain--Mount
Hermon--until they were lured by Henun and by the daughters of Cain, to
come' down from the mountain. Cain's death, when slain by Lamech the
blind; and the lives of other patriarchs until the birth of Noah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](fbe006)
