[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe072) 
[Next](fbe074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LXVIII.

How destruction and trouble is of Satan when he is the master. Adam and
Eve establish the custom of worship.

THEN God looked upon Adam and Eve, and upon what had come upon them from
Satan, and how he had made them perish.

2 God, therefore, sent His Word, and raised up Adam and Eve from their
state of death.

3 Then, Adam, when he was raised, said, "O God, Thou hast burnt and
taken from us the corn Thou hadst given us, and Thou hast emptied out
the bucket of water. And Thou hast sent Thy angels, who have waylaid us
from the corn-field. Wilt Thou make us perish? If this be from Thee, O
God, then take away our souls; but punish us not."

4 Then God said to Adam, "I did not burn down the wheat, and I did not
pour the water out of the bucket, and I did not send My angels to lead
thee astray.

5 "But it is Satan, thy master who did it; he to whom thou hast
subjected thyself; My commandment being meanwhile set aside. He it is,
who burnt down the corn, and poured out the water, and who has led thee
astray; and all the promises he has made you, verily are but feint, and
deceit, and a lie.

6 "But now, O Adam, thou shalt acknowledge My good deeds done to thee."

7 And God told His angels to take Adam and Eve, and to bear them up to
the field of wheat, which they found as before, with the bucket full of
water.

8 There they saw a tree, and found on it solid manna; and wondered at
God's power. And the angels commanded them to eat of the manna when they
were hungry.

9 And God adjured Satan with a curse, not to come again, and destroy the
field of corn.

10 Then Adam and Eve took of the corn, and made of it an offering, and
took it and offered it up on the mountain, the place where they had
offered up their first offering of blood.

11 And they offered this oblation again on the altar they had built at
first. And they stood up and prayed, and besought the Lord saying,
"Thus, O God, when we were in the garden, did our praises go up to Thee,
like this offering; and our innocence went up to thee like incense. But
now, O God, accept this offering from us, and turn us not back, reft of
Thy mercy."

12 Then God said to Adam and Eve, "Since ye have made this oblation and
have offered it to Me, I shall make it My flesh, when I come down upon
earth to save you; and I shall cause it to be offered continually upon
an altar, for forgiveness and for mercy, unto those who partake of it
duly."

13 And God sent a bright fire upon the offering of Adam and Eve, and
filled it with brightness, grace, and light; and the Holy Ghost came
down upon that oblation.

14 Then God commanded an

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

angel to take fire-tongs, like a spoon, and with it to take an offering
and bring it to Adam and Eve. And the angel did so, as God had commanded
him, and offered it to them.

15 And the souls of Adam and Eve were brightened, and their hearts were
filled with joy and gladness and with the praises of God.

16 And God said to Adam, "This shall be unto you a custom, to do so,
when affliction and sorrow come upon you. But your deliverance and your
entrance into the garden, shall not be until the days are fulfilled, as
agreed between you and Me; were it not so, I would, of My mercy and pity
for you, bring you back to My garden and to My favour for the sake of
the offering you have just made to My name."

17 Adam rejoiced at these words which he heard from God; and he and Eve
worshipped before the altar, to which they bowed, and then went back to
the Cave of Treasures.

18 And this took place at the end of the twelfth day after the eightieth
day, from the time Adam and Eve came out of the garden.

19 And they stood up the whole night praying until morning; and then
went out of the cave.

20 Then Adam said to Eve, with joy of heart, because of the offering
they had made to God, and that had been accepted of Him, "Let us do this
three times every week, on the fourth day Wednesday, on the preparation
day Friday, and on the Sabbath Sunday, all the days of our life."

21 And as they agreed to these words between themselves, God was pleased
with their thoughts, and with the resolution they had each taken with
the other.

22 After this, came the Word of God to Adam, and said, "O Adam, thou
hast determined beforehand the days in which sufferings shall come upon
Me, when I am made flesh; for they are the fourth Wednesday, and the
preparation day Friday.

23 "But as to the first day, I created in it all things, and I raised
the heavens. And, again, through My rising again on this day, will I
create joy, and raise them on high, who believe in Me; O Adam, offer
this oblation, all the days of thy life."

24 Then God withdrew His Word from Adam.

25 But Adam continued to offer this oblation thus, every week three
times, until, the end of seven weeks. And on the first day, which is the
fiftieth, Adam made an offering as he was wont, and he and Eve took it
and came to the altar before God, as He had taught them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIX](fbe074)
