[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe075) 
[Next](fbe077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LXXI.

Adam is troubled by his wedding with Eve.

BUT when Adam heard these words from Satan, he sorrowed much, because of
his oath and of his promise, and said, "Shall I commit adultery with my
flesh and my bones, and shall I sin against myself, for God to destroy
me, and to blot me out from off the face of the earth?

2 "Since, when at first, I ate of the tree, He drove me out of the
garden into this strange land, and deprived me of my bright nature, and
brought death upon me. If, then, I should do this, He will cut off my
life from the earth, and He will cast me into hell, and will plague me
there a long time.

3 "But God never spoke the words thou hast told me; and ye are not God's
angels, nor yet sent from Him. But ye are devils, come to me under the
false appearance of angels . Away from me; ye cursed of God!"

4 Then those devils fled from before Adam. And he and Eve arose, and
returned to the Cave of Treasures, and went into it.

5 Then Adam said to Eve, "If thou sawest what I did, tell it not; for I
sinned against God n swearing by His great name, and I have placed my
hand another time into that of Satan." Eve, then, held her peace, as
Adam told her.

6 Then Adam arose, and spread his hands unto God, beseeching and
entreating Him with tears, to forgive him what he had done. And Adam
remained thus standing and praying forty days and forty nights.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He neither ate nor
drank until he dropped down upon the earth from hunger and thirst.

7 Then God sent His Word unto Adam, who raised him up from where he lay,
and said unto him, "O Adam, why hast thou sworn by My name, and why hast
thou made agreement with Satan another time?"

8 But Adam wept, and said, "O God, forgive me, for I did this
unwittingly; believing they were God's angels."

9 And God forgave Adam, saying, to him, "Beware of Satan."

10 And He withdrew His Word from Adam.

11 Then Adam's heart was comforted; and he took Eve, and they went out
of the cave, to make some food for their bodies.

12 But from that day Adam struggled in his mind about his wedding Eve;
afraid as he was to do it, lest God should be wroth with him.

13 Then Adam and Eve went to the river of water, and sat on the bank, as
people do when they enjoy themselves.

14 But Satan was jealous of them; and would destroy them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXII](fbe077)
