[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe005) 
[Next](fbe007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# BOOK I.

### CHAP. I.

The crystal sea. God commands Adam, expelled from Eden, to dwell in the
Cave of Treasures.

ON the third day, God planted the garden in the east of the earth, on
the border of the world eastward, beyond which, towards the sun-rising,
one finds nothing but water, that encompasses the whole world, and
reaches unto the borders of heaven.

2 And to the north of the garden there is a sea of wafer, clear and pure
to the taste, like unto nothing else; so that, through the clearness
thereof, one may

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

look into the depths of the earth.

3 And when a man washes himself in it, becomes clean of the cleanness
thereof, and white of its whiteness--even if he were dark.

4 And God created that sea of His own good pleasure, for He knew what
would come of the man He should make; so that after he had left the
garden, on account of his transgression, men should be born in the
earth, from among whom righteous ones should die, whose souls God would
raise at the last day; when they should return to their flesh; should
bathe in the water of that sea, and all of them repent of their sins.

5 But when God made Adam go out of the garden, He did not place him on
the border of it northward, lest he should draw near to the sea of
water, and he and Eve wash themselves in it, be cleansed from their
sins, forget the transgression they had committed, and he no longer
reminded of it in the thought of their punishment.

6 Then, again, as to the southern side of the garden, God was not
pleased to let Adam dwell there; because, when the wind blew from the
north, it would bring him, on that southern side, the delicious smell of
the trees of the garden.

7 Wherefore God did not put Adam there, lest he should smell the sweet
smell of those trees forget his transgression, and find consolation for
what he had done, take delight in the smell of the trees, and not be
cleansed from his transgression.

8 Again, also, because God is merciful and of great pity, and governs
all things in a way He alone knows--He made our father Adam dwell in the
western border of the garden, because on that side the earth is very
broad.

9 And God commanded him to dwell there in a cave in a rock--the Cave of
Treasures below the garden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](fbe007)
