[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe060) 
[Next](fbe062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LVI.

A chapter of divine comfort.

THEN came the Word of God to Adam, and said unto him:--

2 "O Adam, look at that garden of joy and at this earth of toil, and
behold the angels who are in the garden-that is full of them, and see
thyself alone on this earth, with Satan whom thou didst obey.

3 "Yet, if thou hadst submitted, and been obedient to Me, and hadst kept
My Word, thou wouldst be with My angels in My garden.

4 "But when thou didst transgress and hearken to Satan, thou didst
become his guest among his angels, that are full of wickedness; and thou
camest to this earth, that brings forth to thee thorns and thistles.

5 "O Adam, ask him who deceived thee, to give thee the divine nature he
promised thee, or to make thee a garden as I had made for thee; or to
fill thee with that same bright nature with which I had filled thee.

6 "Ask him to make thee a body like the one I made thee, or to give thee
a day of rest as I gave thee; or to create within thee a reasonable
soul, as I did create for thee; or to remove thee hence to some other
earth than this one which I gave thee. But, O Adam, he will not fulfil
even one of the things he told thee.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

7 "Acknowledge, then, My favour towards thee, and My mercy on thee, My
creature; that I have not requited thee for thy transgression against
Me, but in My pity for thee I have promised thee that at the end of the
great five days and a half I will come and save thee."

8 Then God said again to Adam and Eve, "Arise, go down hence, lest the
cherub with a sword of fire in his hand destroy you."

9 But Adam's heart was comforted by God's words to him, and he
worshipped before Him.

10 And God commanded His angels to escort Adam and Eve to the cave with
joy, instead of the fear that had come upon them.

11 Then the angels took up Adam and Eve, and brought them down from the
mountain by the garden, with songs and psalms, until they brought them
to the cave. There the angels began to comfort and to strengthen them,
and then departed from them towards heaven, to their Creator, who had
sent them.

12 But, after the angels were gone from Adam and Eve, came Satan, with
shamefacedness, and stood at the entrance of the cave in which were Adam
and Eve. He then called to Adam, and said, "O Adam, come, let me speak
to thee."

13 Then Adam came out of the cave, thinking he was one of God's angels
that was come to give him some good counsel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVII](fbe062)
