[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe061) 
[Next](fbe063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LVII.

"*Therefore did I fall*. . .

BUT when Adam came out and saw his hideous figure, he was afraid of him,
and said unto him, "Who art thou?"

2 Then Satan answered and said unto him, "It is I, who hid myself within
the serpent, and who talked to Eve, and beguiled her until she hearkened
to my command. I am he who sent her, through the wiles of my speech, to
deceive thee, until thou and she ate of the fruit of the tree, and ye
came away from under the command of God."

3 But when Adam heard these words from him, he said unto him, "Canst
thou make me a garden as God made for me? Or canst thou clothe me in the
same bright nature in which God had clothed me?

4 "Where is the divine nature thou didst promise to give me? Where is
that fair speech of thine, thou didst hold with us at first, when we
were in the garden?"

5 Then Satan said unto Adam, "Thinkest thou, that when I have spoken to
one about anything, I shall ever bring it to him or fulfil my word? Not
so. For I myself have never even thought of obtaining what I asked.

6 "Therefore did I fall, and did I make you fall by that for which I
myself fell; and with you also, whosoever accepts my counsel, falls
thereby.

7 "But now, O Adam, by reason of thy fall thou art under my rule, and I
am king over thee; because thou hast hearkened to me, and hast
transgressed against thy God. Neither will there be any deliverance from
my hands until the day promised thee by thy God."

8 Again he said, "Inasmuch as we do not know the day agreed upon with
thee by thy God, nor the hour in which thou shalt be delivered, for that
reason will we multiply war and murder upon thee and thy seed after
thee.

9 "This is our will and our good pleasure, that we may not

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

leave one of the sons of men to inherit our orders in heaven.

10 "For as to our abode, O Adam, it is in burning fire; and we will not
cease our evil doing no, not one day nor one hour. And I, O Adam, shall
sow fire upon thee when thou comest into the cave to dwell there."

11 When Adam heard these words he wept and mourned, and said unto Eve,
"Hear what he said; that he will not fulfil aught of what he told thee
in the garden. Did he really then become king over us?

12 "But we will ask God, who created us, to deliver us out of his
hands."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVIII](fbe063)
