[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe239) 
[Next](fbe241) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. III.

In which is described the most exquisite and beautiful table ever
produced. Also other rich gifts, Interesting in the light of recent
excavations in Egypt.

I WILL now Proceed to redeem my promise and give a description of the
works of art.

2 They were wrought with exceptional skill, for the king spared no
expense and personally superintended the workmen individually.

3 They could not therefore scamp any part of the work or finish it off
negligently.

4 First of all I will give you a description of the table.

5 The king was anxious that this piece of work should be of
exceptionally large dimensions, and he caused enquiries to be made of
the Jews in the locality with regard to the size of the table already in
the temple at Jerusalem.

6 And when they described the measurements, he proceeded to ask whether
he might make a larger structure.

7 And some of the priests and the other Jews replied that there was
nothing to prevent him.

8 And he said that he was anxious to make it five times the size, but he
hesitated lest it should prove useless for the temple services.

9 He was desirous that his gift should not merely be stationed in the
temple, for it would afford him much greater pleasure if the men whose
duty it was to offer the fitting sacrifices were able to do so
appropriately on the table which he had made.

10 He did not suppose that it was owing to lack of gold that the former
table had been made of small size, but there seems to have been, he
said, some reason why it was made of--this dimension.

11 For had the order been given, there would have been no lack of means.

12 Wherefore we must not transgress or go beyond the proper measure.

13 At the same time he ordered them to press into service all the
manifold forms of art, for he was a man of the most lofty conceptions
and nature had endowed him with a keen imagination which enabled him to
picture the appearance which would be presented *by the finished work*.

14 He gave orders too, that where there were no instructions laid down
in the *Jewish* Scriptures, everything should be made as beautiful as
possible.--

15 When such instructions were laid down, they were to be carried out to
the letter.

16 They made the table two cubits <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)
long, one cubit broad, one and a half cubits high fashioning it of pure
solid gold.

17 What I am describing was not thin gold laid over another foundation,
but the whole structure was of massive gold welded together.

18 And they made a border of a hand's breadth round about it.

19 And there was a wreath of wave-work, engraved in relief in

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

the form of ropes marvellously wrought on its three sides.

20 For it was triangular in shape and the style of the work was exactly
the same on each of the sides, so that whichever side they were turned,
they presented the same appearance.

21 Of the two sides under the border, the one which sloped down to the
table was a very beautiful piece of work, but it was the outer side
which attracted the gaze of the spectator.

22 Now the upper edge of the two sides, being elevated, was sharp since,
as we have said, *the rim* was three-sided, from whatever point of view
one approached it.

23 And there were layers of precious stones on it in the midst of the
embossed cord-work, and they were interwoven with one another by an
inimitable artistic device.

24 For the sake of security they were all fixed by golden needles which
were inserted in perforations *in the stones*.

25 At the sides they were clamped together by fastenings to hold them
firm.

26 On the part of the border round the table which slanted upwards and
met the eyes, there was wrought a pattern of eggs in precious stones,
elaborately engraved by a continuous piece of fluted relief-work,
closely connected together round the whole table.

27 And under the stones which had been arranged to represent eggs the
artists made a crown containing all kinds of fruits, having at its top
clusters of grapes and ears of corn, dates also and apples, and
pomegranates and the like, conspicuously arranged.

28 These fruits were wrought out of precious stones, of the same colour
as the fruits themselves and they fastened them edgeways round all the
sides of the table with a band of gold.

29 And after the crown *of fruit* had been put on, *underneath* there
was inserted another pattern of eggs *in precious stones*, and other
fluting and embossed work, that both sides of the table might be used,
according to the wishes of the owners and for this reason the wave-work
and the border were extended down to the feet of the table.

30 They made and fastened under the whole width of the table a massive
plate four fingers thick, that the feet might be inserted into it, and
clamped fast with linch-pins which fitted into sockets under the border,
so that which ever side of the table people preferred, might be used.

31 Thus it became manifestly clear that the work was intended to be used
either way.

32 On the table itself they engraved a 'maeander,' having precious
stones standing out in the middle of it, rubies and emeralds and an onyx
too and many other kinds of stones which excel in beauty.

33 And next to the 'maeander' there was placed a wonderful piece of
network, which made the centre of the table appear like a rhomboid in
shape, and on it a crystal and amber, as it is called, had been wrought,
which produced an incomparable impression on the beholders.

34 They made the feet *of the table* with heads like lilies, so that
they seemed to be like lilies bending down beneath the table, and the
parts which were visible represented leaves which stood upright.

35 The basis of the foot on the ground consisted of a ruby and measured
a hand's breadth *high* all round.

36 It had the appearance of a shoe and was eight fingers broad.

37 Upon it the whole expanse of the foot rested.

38 And they made *the foot* 

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

appear like ivy growing out of the stone, interwoven with akanthus and
surrounded with a vine which encircled it with clusters of grapes, which
were worked in stones, up to the top *of the foot*.

39 All the four feet were made in the same style, and everything was
wrought and fitted so skilfully, and such remarkable skill and knowledge
were expended upon making it true to nature, that when the air was
stirred by a breath of wind, movement was imparted to the leaves, and
everything was fashioned to correspond with the actual reality *which it
represented*.

40 And they made the top of the table in three parts like a triptychon,
and they were so fitted and dovetailed together with spigots along the
whole breadth of the work, that the meeting of the joints could not be
seen or even discovered.

41 The thickness of the table was not less than half a cubit, so that
the whole work must have cost many talents.

42 For since the king did not wish to add to its size he expended on the
details the same sum of money which would have been required if the
table could have been of larger dimensions.

43 And everything was completed in accordance with his plan, in a most
wonderful and remarkable way, with inimitable art and incomparable
beauty.

44 Of the mixing bowls, two were wrought in gold, and from the base to
the middle were engraved with relief work in the pattern of scales, and
between the scales Precious stones were inserted with great artistic
skill.

45 Then there was a 'maeander' a cubit in height, with its surface.
wrought out of precious stones of many colours, displaying great
artistic effort and beauty.

46 Upon this there was a mosaic, worked in the form of a rhombus, having
a net-like appearance and reaching right up to the brim.

47 In the middle, small shields which were made of different precious
stones, placed alternately, and varying in kind, not less than four
fingers broad, enhanced the beauty of their appearance.

48 On the top of the brim there was an ornament of lilies in bloom, and
intertwining clusters of grapes were engraven all round.

49 Such then was the construction of the golden bowls, and they held
more than two firkins each.

50 The silver bowls had a smooth surface, and were wonderfully made as
if they were intended for looking-glasses, so that everything which was
brought near to them was reflected even more clearly than in mirrors.

51 But it is impossible to describe the real impression which these
works of art produced upon the mind when they were finished.

52 For, when these vessels had been completed and placed side by side,
first a silver bowl and then a golden, then another silver, and then
another golden, the appearance they presented is altogether
indescribable, and those who came to see them were not able to tear
themselves from the brilliant sight and entrancing spectacle.

53 The impressions produced by the spectacle were various in kind.

54 When men looked at the golden vessels, and their minds made a
complete survey of each detail of workmanship, their souls were thrilled
with wonder.

55 Again when a man wished

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

to direct his gaze to the silver vessels, as they stood before him,
everything seemed to flash with light round about the place where he was
standing, and afforded a still greater delight to the onlookers.

56 So that it is really impossible to describe the artistic beauty of
the works.

57 The golden vials they engraved in the centre with vine wreaths.

58 And about the rims they wove a wreath of ivy and myrtle and olive in
relief work and inserted precious stones in it.

59 The other parts of the relief work they wrought in different
patterns, since they made it a point of honour to complete everything in
a way worthy of the majesty of the king.

60 In a word it may be said that neither in the king's treasury nor in
any other, were there any works which equalled these in costliness or in
artistic skill.

61 For the king spent no little thought upon them, for he loved to gain
glory for the excellence of his *designs*.

62 For oftentimes he would neglect his official business, and spend his
time with the artists in his anxiety that they should complete
everything in a manner worthy of the place to which the gifts were to be
sent.

63 So everything was carried out on a grand scale, in a manner worthy of
the king who sent the gifts and of the high priest who was the ruler of
the land.

64 There was no stint of precious stones, for not less than five
thousand were used and they were all of large size.

65 The most exceptional artistic skill was employed, so that the cost of
the stones and the workmanship was five times as much as that of the
gold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[148:1](fbe240.htm#fr_4) A cubit is 18 inches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](fbe241)
