[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120015)  [Next](1120017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>Homily XII.</span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p2"></span><span id="iv.xiii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xiii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.xiii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p3"></span>Now these things, brethren, I have in a
figure transferred to myself and Apollos for your sakes; that in us ye
might learn not to think of men above that which is written. <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md)

<span id="iv.xiii-p5"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xiii-p5.1"></span>So</span> long as there was need of expressions
as harsh as these, he refrained from drawing up the curtain, and went on
arguing as if he were himself the person to whom they were addressed; in
order that the dignity of the persons censured tending to counteract the
censurers, no room might be left for flying out in wrath at the charges.
But when the time came for a gentler process, then he strips it off, and
removes the mask, and shows the persons concealed by the appellation of
Paul and Apollos. And on this account he said, “These things, brethren,
I have transferred in a figure unto myself and Apollos.”

<span id="iv.xiii-p6"></span>And as in the case of the sick, when the
child being out of health kicks and turns away from the food offered by
the physicians, the attendants call the father or the tutor, and bid
them take the food from the physician’s hands and bring it, so that out
of fear towards them he may take it and be quiet: so also Paul,
intending to censure them about certain other persons, of whom some, he
thought, were injured, others honored above measure, did not set down
the persons themselves, but conducted the argument in his own name and
that of Apollos, in order that reverencing these they might receive his
mode of cure. But that once received, he presently makes known in whose
behalf he was so expressing himself.

<span id="iv.xiii-p7"></span>Now this was not hypocrisy, but
condescension (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p7.1"></span>συγκατάβασις</span>) and tact (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p7.2"></span>οἰκονομία</span>). For if
he had said openly, “As for you, the men whom ye are judging are saints,
and worthy of all admiration;” they might have taken it ill and (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p7.3"></span>κἂν ἀπεπήδησαν</span>)
started back. But now in saying, “But to me it is a very small thing
that I should be judged of you:” and again, “Who is Paul, and who is
Apollos?” he rendered his speech easy of reception.

<span id="iv.xiii-p8"></span>This, if you mark it, is the reason why he
says here, “These things have I transferred in a figure unto myself for
your sakes, that in us ye may learn not to be wise above what is
written,” signifying that if he had applied his argument in their
persons, they would not have learnt all that they needed to learn, nor
would have admitted the correction, being vexed at what was said. But as
it was, revering Paul, they bore the rebuke well.

<span id="iv.xiii-p9"></span>\[2.\] But what is the meaning of, “not to
be wise above what is written?” It is written, (St. [Matt. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)<span id="iv.xiii-p9.1"></span>..md)
“Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers’s eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?” and “Judge not, that
ye be not judged.” For if we are one and are mutually bound together, it
behooveth us not to rise up against one another. For “he that humbleth
himself shall be exalted,” saith he. And (St. [Matt.
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027.md), [Mark
10:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#043.md)<span id="iv.xiii-p9.2"></span>;
not *verbatim*.) “He that will be first of all, let him be the servant
of all.” These are the things which “are written.”

<span id="iv.xiii-p10"></span>“That no one of you be puffed up for one
against another.” Again, having dismissed the teachers, he rebukes the
disciples. For it was they who caused the former to be elated.

<span id="iv.xiii-p11"></span>And besides, the leaders would not quietly
receive that kind of speech because of their desire of outward glory:
for they were even blinded with that passion. Whereas the disciples, as
not reaping themselves the fruits of the <span id="page_65">p. 65</span>
<span id="iv.xiii-Page_65"></span>glory, but procuring it for others,
would both endure the chiding with more temper, and had it more in their
power than the leading men to destroy the disease.

<span id="iv.xiii-p12"></span>It seems then, that this also is a symptom
of being “puffed up,” to be elated on another’s account, even though a
man have no such feeling in regard of what is his own. For as he who is
proud of another’s wealth, is so out of arrogance; so also in the case
of another’s glory.

<span id="iv.xiii-p13"></span>And he hath well called it “being puffed
up.” For when one particular member rises up over the rest, it is
nothing else but inflammation and disease; since in no other way doth
one member become higher than another, except when a swelling takes
place. (So in English “proud flesh.”)  And so in the body of the Church
also; whoever is inflamed and puffed up, he must be the diseased one;
for he is swollen above the proportion of the rest. For this
\[disproportion\] is what we mean by “swelling.” And so comes it to pass
in the body, when some spurious and evil humor gathers, instead of the
wonted nourishment. So also arrogance is born; notions to which we have
no right coming over us. And mark with what literal propriety he saith,
be not “puffed up:” for that which is puffed up hath a certain tumor of
spirit, from being filled with corrupt humor.

<span id="iv.xiii-p14"></span>These things, however, he saith, not to
preclude all soothing, but such soothing as leads to harm. “Wouldest
thou wait upon this or that person? I forbid thee not: but do it not to
the injury of another.” For not that we might array ourselves one
against another were teachers given us, but that we might all be
mutually united. For so the general to this end is set over the host,
that of those who are separate he may make one body. But if he is to
break up the army, he stands in the place of an enemy rather than of a
general.

<span id="iv.xiii-p15"></span>\[3.\] [1 Cor.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.xiii-p15.1"></span>.
“For who maketh thee to differ? For what hast thou which thou didst not
receive?”

<span id="iv.xiii-p16"></span>From this point, dismissing the governed,
he turns to the governors.  What he saith comes to this: From whence is
evident that thou art worthy of being praised? Why, hath any judgment
taken place? any inquiry proceeded? any essay? any severe testing? Nay,
thou canst not say it: and if men give their votes, their judgment is
not upright. But let us suppose that thou really art worthy of praise
and hast indeed the gracious gift, and that the judgment of men is not
corrupt: yet not even in this case were it right to be high-minded; for
thou hast nothing of thyself but from God didst receive it. Why then
dost thou pretend to have that which thou hast not? Thou wilt say, “thou
hast it:” and others have it with thee: well then, thou hast it upon
receiving it: not merely this thing or that, but all things whatsoever
thou hast.

<span id="iv.xiii-p17"></span>For not to thee belong these excellencies,
but to the grace of God. Whether you name faith, it came of His calling;
or whether it be the forgiveness of sins which you speak of, or
spiritual gifts, or the word of teaching, or the miracles; thou didst
receive all from thence. Now what hast thou, tell me, which thou hast
not received, but hast rather achieved of thine own self? Thou hast
nothing to say. Well: thou hast received; and does that make thee
high-minded? Nay, it ought to make thee shrink back into thyself. For it
is not thine, what hath been given, but the giver’s. What if thou didst
receive it? thou receivedst it of him. And if thou receivedst of him, it
was not thine which thou receivedst: and if thou didst but receive what
was not thine own, why art thou exalted as if thou hadst something of
thine own? Wherefore he added also, “Now if thou didst receive it, why
dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it?

<span id="iv.xiii-p18"></span>\[4.\] Thus having, you see, made good his
argument by concession, <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p19.1"></span>κατὰ συνδρομὴν</span>.) he
indicates that they have their deficiencies; and those not a few: and
saith, “In the first place, though ye had received all things, it were
not meet to glory, for nothing is your own; but as the case really
stands there are many things of which ye are destitute.” And in the
beginning he did but hint at this, saying, “I could not speak unto you
as unto spiritual:” and, “I determined to know nothing among you, save
Jesus Christ and Him crucified.” But here he doth it in a way to abash
them, saying,

<span id="iv.xiii-p20"></span>[1 Cor.
4.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.xiii-p20.1"></span>.
“Already ye are filled, already ye are rich:” that is, ye want nothing
henceforth; ye are become perfect; ye have attained the very summit; ye
stand, as ye think, in need of no one, either among Apostles or
teachers.

<span id="iv.xiii-p21"></span>“Already ye are filled.” And well saith he
“already;” pointing out, from the time, the incredibility of their
statements and their unreasonable notion of themselves. It was therefore
in mockery that he said to them, “So quickly have ye come to the end;”
which thing was impossible in the time:  for all the more perfect things
wait long in futurity: but to be “full” with a little betokens a feeble
soul; and from a little to imagine one’s self “rich,” a sick and
miserable one. For piety is an insatiable thing; and it argues a
childish mind to imagine from just the beginnings that you have obtained
the whole: and for men who are not yet even in the prelude of a matter,
to be high-minded as if they had laid hold of the end.

<span id="iv.xiii-p22"></span>Then also by means of what followeth he
puts <span id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span
id="iv.xiii-Page_66"></span>them yet more out of countenance; for having
said, “Already ye are full,” he added, “ye are become rich, ye have
reigned without us: yea and I would to God ye did reign, that we also
might reign with you.” Full of great austerity is the speech: which is
why it comes last, being introduced by him after that abundance of
reproof. For then is our admonition respected and easily received, when
after our accusations we introduce our humiliating expressions, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p22.1"></span>τὰ ἐυτρεπτικὰ
ῤήματα</span>.) For this were enough to repress even the shameless soul
and strike it more sharply than direct accusation, and correct the
bitterness and hardened feeling likely to arise from the charge brought.
It being certain that this more than anything else is the admirable
quality of those arguments which appeal to our sense of shame, that they
possess two contrary advantages. On the one hand, one cuts deeper than
by open invective: on the other hand, it causes the person reprimanded
to bear that severer stab with more entire patience.

<span id="iv.xiii-p23"></span>\[5.\] “Ye have reigned without us.”
Herein there is great force, as concerns both the teachers and the
disciples: and their ignorance, too, of themselves (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p23.1"></span>τὸ ἀσυνείδητον</span>.) is
pointed out, and their great inconsideration. For what he saith is this:
“In labors indeed,” saith he, “all things are common both to us and to
you, but in the rewards and the crowns ye are first. Not that I say this
in vexation:” wherefore he added also, “I would indeed that ye did
reign:” then, lest there should seem to be some irony, he added, “that
we also might reign with you;” for, saith he, we also should be in
possession (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p23.2"></span>ἐπιτύχοιμεν</span>, <span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xiii-p23.3"></span>ms.</span> Reg., <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p23.4"></span>ἐπιτύχωμεν</span> Edd.) of these blessings.
Dost thou see how he shews in himself all at once his severity and his
care over them and his self-denying mind? Dost thou see how he takes
down their pride?

<span id="iv.xiii-p24"></span>[1 Cor.
4.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.xiii-p24.1"></span>.
“For I think that God hath set forth us the Apostles last of all, as men
doomed to death.”

<span id="iv.xiii-p25"></span>There is great depth of meaning and
severity implied again in his saying, “us:” and not even with this was
he satisfied, but added also his dignity, hitting them vehemently:  “us
the Apostles;” who are enduring such innumerable ills; who are sowing
the word of Godliness; who are leading you unto this severe rule of
life. These “He hath set forth last, as doomed to death,” that is, as
condemned. For since he had said, “That we also might reign with you,”
and by that expression had relaxed his vehemency in order not to
dispirit them; he takes it up again with greater gravity, and saith,
“For I think that God hath set forth us the Apostles last, as men doomed
to death.” “For according to what I see,” saith he, “and from what ye
say, the most abject of all men and emphatically the condemned, are we
who are put forward for continual suffering. But ye have already a
kingdom and honors and great rewards in your fancy.” And wishing to
carry out their reasoning to still greater absurdity, and to exhibit it
as incredible in the highest degree, he said not merely, “We are
‘last,’” but, “God made us last;” nor was he satisfied with saying,
“last,” but he added also, “doomed to death:” to the end that even one
quite void of understanding might feel the statement to be quite
incredible, and his words to be the words of one vexed and vehemently
abashing them.

<span id="iv.xiii-p26"></span>Observe too the good sense of Paul. The
topics by which, when it is the proper time, he exalts and shews himself
honorable and makes himself great; by these he now puts them to shame,
calling himself “condemned.” Of so great consequence is it to do all
things at the befitting season. By “doomed to death,” in this place he
means “condemned,” and deserving of ten thousand deaths.

<span id="iv.xiii-p27"></span>\[6.\] “For we are made a spectacle unto
the world, and to angels, and to men.”

<span id="iv.xiii-p28"></span>What means, “We are become a spectacle
unto the world?” “Not in a single corner nor yet in a small part of the
world suffer we these things,” saith he; “but every where and before
all.” But what means, “unto angels?” It is possible to “become a
spectacle unto men,” but not so unto angels, when the things done are
ordinary. But our wrestlings are such as to be worthy even of angelic
contemplation. Behold from the things by which he vilifies himself, how
again he shows himself great; and from the things about which they are
proud, how he displays their meanness. For since to be fools was
accounted a meaner thing than to appear wise; to be weak, than to be
made strong; and unhonored, than glorious and distinguished; and that he
is about to cast on them the one set of epithets, while he himself
accepted the other; he signifies that the latter are better than the
former; if at least because of them he turned the throng I say not of
men only, but also of the very angels unto the contemplation of
themselves. For not with men only is our wrestling but also with
incorporeal powers. Therefore also a mighty theatre is set (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p28.1"></span>μέγα θέατρον</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p28.2"></span>κάθηται</span>.)

<span id="iv.xiii-p29"></span>[1 Cor.
4.10](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.xiii-p29.1"></span>.
“We are fools for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ.”

<span id="iv.xiii-p30"></span>Again, this also he spake in a way to
abash them; implying that it is impossible for these contraries to
agree, neither can things so distant from one another concur. “For how
can it be,” saith he, “that you should be wise, but we fools in the
things relating to Christ?” That is: the one sort beaten and despised
and <span id="page_67">p. 67</span> <span
id="iv.xiii-Page_67"></span>dishonored and esteemed as nothing; the
others enjoying honor and looked up to by many as a wise and prudent
kind of people; it gives him occasion to speak thus: as if he had said,
“How can it be that they who preach such things should be looked upon as
practically engaged in their contraries?”

<span id="iv.xiii-p31"></span>“We are weak, but ye are strong.” That is,
we are driven about and persecuted; but ye enjoy security and are much
waited upon; howbeit the nature of the Gospel endureth it not.

<span id="iv.xiii-p32"></span>“We are despised, but ye are honorable.”
Here he setteth himself against the noble and those who plumed
themselves upon external advantages.

<span id="iv.xiii-p33"></span>“Even unto this present hour we both
hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain
dwelling place; and we toil, working with our own hands.” That is, “It
is not an old story that I am telling but just what the very time
present bears me witness of: that of human things we take no account nor
yet of any outward pomp; but we look unto God only.” Which thing we too
have need to practice in every place. For not only are angels looking
on, but even more than they He that presides over the spectacle.

<span id="iv.xiii-p34"></span>\[7.\] Let us not then desire any others
to applaud us. For this is to insult Him; hastening by Him, as if
insufficient to admire us, we make the best of our way to our fellow
servants. For just as they who contend in a small theatre seek a large
one, as if this were insufficient for their display; so also do they,
who contending in the sight of God afterwards seek the applause of men;
giving up the greater praise and eager for the less, they draw upon
themselves severe punishment. What but this hath turned every thing
upside down? this puts the whole world into confusion, that we do all
things with an eye to men, and even for our good things, we esteem it
nothing to have God as an admirer, but seek the approbation which cometh
from our fellow-servants:  and for the contrary things again, despising
Him we fear men. And yet surely they shall stand with us before that
tribunal, doing us no good. But God whom we despise now shall Himself
pass the sentence upon us.

<span id="iv.xiii-p35"></span>But yet, though we know these things, we
still gape after men, which is the first of sins. Thus were a man
looking on no one would choose to commit fornication; but even though he
be ten thousand times on fire with that plague, the tyranny of the
passion is conquered by his reverence for men. But in God’s sight men
not only commit adultery and fornication; but other things also much
more dreadful many have dared and still dare to do. This then alone, is
it not enough to bring down from above ten thousand thunderbolts?
Adulteries, did I say, and fornications? Nay, things even far less than
these we fear to do before men: but in God’s sight we fear no longer.
From hence, in fact, all the world’s evils have originated; because in
things really bad we reverence not God but men.

<span id="iv.xiii-p36"></span>On this account, you see, both things
which are truly good, not accounted such by the generality, become
objects of our aversion, we not investigating the nature of the things,
but having respect unto the opinion of the many: and again, in the case
of evil things, acting on this same principle. Certain things therefore
not really good, but seeming fair unto the many, we pursue, as goods,
through the same habit. So that on either side we go to destruction.

<span id="iv.xiii-p37"></span>\[8.\] Perhaps many may find this remark
somewhat obscure. Wherefore we must express it more clearly. When we
commit uncleanness, (for we must begin from the instances alleged,) we
fear men more than God. When therefore we have thus subjected ourselves
unto them and made them lords over us; there are many other things also
which seem unto these our lords to be evil, not being such; these also
we flee for our part in like manner. For instance; To live in poverty,
many account disgraceful: and we flee poverty, not because it is
disgraceful nor because we are so persuaded, but because our masters
count it disgraceful; and we fear them. Again, to be unhonored and
contemptible, and void of all authority seems likewise unto the most
part a matter of great shame and vileness. This again we flee; not
condemning the thing itself, but because of the sentence of our masters.

<span id="iv.xiii-p38"></span>Again on the contrary side also we undergo
the same mischief. As wealth is counted a good thing, and pride, and
pomp, and to be conspicuous. Accordingly this again we pursue, not
either in this case from considering the nature of the things as good,
but persuaded by the opinion of our masters. For the people is our
master and the great mob (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p38.1"></span>ὅ πολὺς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p38.2"></span>όχλος</span>); a savage master and a severe
tyrant: not so much as a command being needed in order to make us listen
to him; it is enough that we just know what he wills, and without a
command we submit: so great good will do we bear towards him. Again, God
threatening and admonishing day by day is not heard; but the common
people, full of disorder, made up of all manner of dregs, has no
occasion for one word of command; enough for it only to signify with
what it is well pleased, and in all things we obey immediately.

<span id="iv.xiii-p39"></span>\[9.\] “But how,” says some one, “is a man
to flee from these masters?” By getting a mind greater than their’s; by
looking into the nature of things; by condemning the voice of the
multitude; before all, by training himself in <span id="page_68">p.
68</span> <span id="iv.xiii-Page_68"></span>things really disgraceful to
fear not men, but the unsleeping Eye; and again, in all good things, to
seek the crowns which come from Him. For thus neither in other sort of
things shall we be able to tolerate them. For whoso when he doeth right
judges them unworthy to know his good deeds, and contents himself with
the suffrage of God; neither will he take account of them in matters of
the contrary sort.

<span id="iv.xiii-p40"></span>“And how can this be?” you will say.
Consider what man is, what God; whom thou desertest, and unto whom thou
fliest for refuge; and thou wilt soon be right altogether. Man lieth
under the same sin as thyself, and the same condemnation, and the same
punishment. “Man is like to vanity,” ([Ps. cxliv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.xiii-p40.1"></span>.
LXX,) and hath not correct judgment, and needs the correction from
above. “Man is dust and ashes,” and if he bestow praise, he will often
bestow it at random, or out of favor, or ill will. And if he calumniate
and accuse, this again will he do out of the same kind of purpose. But
God doeth not so: rather irreprovable in His sentence, and pure His
judgment. Wherefore we must always flee to Him for refuge; and not for
these reasons alone, but because He both made, and more than all spares
thee, and loves thee better than thou dost thyself.

<span id="iv.xiii-p41"></span>Why then, neglecting to have so admirable
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p41.1"></span>θαυμαστόν</span>)
an approver, betake we ourselves unto man, who is nothing, all rashness,
all at random?  Doth he call thee wicked and polluted when thou art not
so? So much the more do thou pity him, and weep because he is corrupt;
and despise his opinion, because the eyes of his understanding are
darkened. For even the Apostles were thus evil reported of; and they
laughed to scorn their calumniators. But doth he call thee good and
kind? If such indeed thou art, yet be not at all puffed up by the
opinion: but if thou art not such, despise it the more, and esteem the
thing to be mockery.

<span id="iv.xiii-p42"></span>Wouldest thou know the judgments of the
greater part of men, how corrupt they are, how useless, and worthy of
ridicule; some of them coming only from raving and distracted persons,
others from children at the breast? Hear what hath been from the
beginning. I will tell thee of judgments, not of the people only, but
also of those who passed for the wisest, of those who were legislators
from the earliest period. For who would be counted wiser among the
multitude than the person considered worthy of legislating for cities
and peoples? But yet to these wise men fornication seems to be nothing
evil nor worthy of punishment. At least, no one of the heathen laws
makes its penal or brings men to trial on account of it. And should any
one bring another into court for things of that kind, the multitude
laughs it to scorn, and the judge will not suffer it. Dice-playing,
again, is exempt from all their punishments: nor did any one among them
ever incur penalty for it. Drunkenness and gluttony, so far from being a
crime, are considered by many even as a fine thing. And in military
carousals it is a point of great emulation; and they who most of all
need a sober mind and a strong body, these are most of all given over to
the tyranny of drunkenness; both utterly weakening the body and
darkening the soul. Yet of the lawgivers not one hath punished this
fault. What can be worse than this madness?

<span id="iv.xiii-p43"></span>Is then the good word of men so disposed
an object of desire to thee, and dost thou not hide thyself in the
earth?  For even though all such admired thee, oughtest thou not to feel
ashamed and cover thy face, at being applauded by men of such corrupt
judgment?

<span id="iv.xiii-p44"></span>Again, blasphemy by legislators in general
is accounted nothing terrible. At any rate, no one for having blasphemed
God was ever brought to trial and punishment. But if a man steal
another’s garment, or cut his purse, his sides are flayed, and he is
often given over unto death: while he that blasphemeth God hath nothing
laid to his charge by the heathen legislators. And if a man seduce a
female servant when he hath a wife, it seems nothing to the heathen laws
nor to men in general.

<span id="iv.xiii-p45"></span>\[10.\] Wilt thou hear besides of some
things of another class which shew their folly? For as they punish not
these things, so there are others which they enforce by law. What then
are these? They collect crowds to fill theatres, and there they
introduce choirs of harlots and prostituted children, yea such as
trample on nature herself; and they make the whole people sit on high,
and so they captivate their city; so they crown these mighty kings whom
they are perpetually admiring for their trophies and victories. And yet,
what can be more insipid than this honor? what more undelightful than
this delight? From among these then seekest thou judges to applaud thy
deeds? And is it in company with dancers, and effeminate, and buffoons,
and harlots, that thou art fain to enjoy the sound of compliment? answer
me.

<span id="iv.xiii-p46"></span>How can these things be other than proofs
of extreme infatuation? For I should like to ask them, is it or is it
not, a dreadful thing to subvert the laws of nature, and introduce
unlawful intercourse? They will surely <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) say, it is dreadful: at any rate, they
make a show of inflicting a penalty on that crime. Why then dost thou
bring on the stage those abused wretches; and not only bring them in,
but honor them also with honors <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> <span
id="iv.xiii-Page_69"></span>innumerable, and gifts not to be told? In
other places thou punishest those who dare such things; but here even as
on common benefactors of the city, thou spendest money upon them and
supportest them at the public expense.

<span id="iv.xiii-p48"></span>“However,” thou wilt say, “they are (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p48.1"></span>ἄτιμοι</span>)
infamous <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) .” Why then train them up?
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p49.2"></span>παιδοτριβεῖς</span>)  Why choose the infamous
to pay honor to kings withal? And why ruin our (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p49.3"></span>ἐκτραχηλίζεις</span>,
Plutarch, <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p49.4"></span>περὶ
παίδων</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p49.5"></span>ἀγωγῆς</span>, c. 17.) cities <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) ? Or why spend so much upon these
persons? Since if they be infamous expulsion is properest for the
infamous. For why didst thou render them infamous? in praise or in
condemnation? Of course in condemnation. Is the next thing to be, that
although as after condemnation you make them infamous, yet as if they
were honorable you run to see them, and admire and praise and applaud?
Why need I speak of the sort of charm <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) which is found in the horse races? or in
the contests of the wild beasts? For those places too being full of all
senseless excitement train the populace to acquire a merciless and
savage and inhuman kind of temper, and practise them in seeing men torn
in pieces, and blood flowing, and the ferocity of wild beasts
confounding all things. Now all these our wise lawgivers from the
beginning introduced, being so many plagues! and our cities applaud and
admire.

<span id="iv.xiii-p52"></span>\[11.\] But, if thou wilt, dismissing
these things which clearly and confessedly are abominable, but seemed
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p52.1"></span>οὐκ ἐδοξεν</span>.
perhaps “were not decreed.”) not \[so\] to the heathen legislators, let
us proceed to their grave precepts; and thou shalt see these too
corrupted through the opinion of the multitude. Thus marriage is
accounted an honorable thing ([Heb. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span id="iv.xiii-p52.2"></span>.md)
both by us and by those without: and it is honorable. But when marriages
are solemnized, such ridiculous things <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) take place as ye shall hear of
immediately: because the most part, possessed and beguiled by custom,
are not even aware of their absurdity, but need others to teach them.
For dancing, and cymbals, and flutes, and shameful words, and songs, and
drunkenness, and revellings, and all the Devil’s great heap (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p53.1"></span>πολὺς ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p53.2"></span>τοῦ διαβόλου</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p53.3"></span>φορυτός</span>) of garbage
is then introduced.

<span id="iv.xiii-p54"></span>I know indeed that I shall appear
ridiculous in finding fault with these things; and shall incur the
charge of great folly with the generality, as disturbing the ancient
laws:  for, as I said before, great is the deceptive power of custom.
But nevertheless, I will not cease repeating these things: for there is,
there is surely a chance, that although not all, yet some few will
receive our saying and will choose to be laughed to scorn with us,
rather than we laugh with them such a laughter as deserves tears and
overflowing punishment and vengeance.

<span id="iv.xiii-p55"></span>For how can it be other than worthy of the
utmost condemnation that a damsel who hath spent her life entirely at
home and been schooled in modesty from earliest childhood, should be
compelled on a sudden to cast off all shame, and from the very
commencement of her marriage be instructed in imprudence; and find
herself put forward in the midst of wanton and rude men, and unchaste,
and effeminate? What evil will not be implanted in the bride from that
day forth? Immodesty, petulance, insolence, the love of vain glory:
since they will naturally go on and desire to have all their days such
as these. Hence our women become expensive and profuse; hence are they
void of modesty, hence proceed their unnumbered evils.

<span id="iv.xiii-p56"></span>And tell me not of the custom: for if it
be an evil thing, let it not be done even once: but if good, let it be
done constantly. For tell me, is not committing fornication evil? Shall
we then allow just once this to be done? By no means. Why? Because
though it be done only once, it is evil all the same. So also that the
bride be entertained in this way, if it be evil, let it not be done even
once; but if it be not evil, let it even be done always.

<span id="iv.xiii-p57"></span>“What then,” saith one, “dost thou find
fault with marriage? tell me.” That be far from me. I am not so
senseless: but the things which are so unworthily appended to marriage,
the painting the face, the coloring the eyebrows, and all the other
niceness of that kind. For indeed from that day she will receive many
lovers even before her destined consort.

<span id="iv.xiii-p58"></span><span id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span
id="iv.xiii-Page_70"></span>“But many will admire the woman for her
beauty.” And what of that? Even if discreet, she will hardly avoid evil
suspicion; but if careless, she will be quickly overtaken, having got
that very day a starting point in dissolute behavior.

<span id="iv.xiii-p59"></span>Yet though the evils are so great, the
omission of these proceedings is called an insult, by certain who are no
better than brute beasts, and they are indignant that the woman is not
exhibited to a multitude, that she is not set forth as a stage
spectacle, common to all beholders: whereas most assuredly they should
rather count it insult when these things do take place; and a laughing
stock, and a farce. For even now I know that men will condemn me of much
folly and make me a laughing stock: but the derision I can bear when any
gain accrues from it. For I should indeed be worthy of derision, if
while I was exhorting to contempt of the opinion of the many, I myself,
of all men, were subdued by that feeling.

<span id="iv.xiii-p60"></span>Behold then what follows from all this.
Not in the day only but also in the evening, they provide on purpose men
that have well drunk, besotted, and inflamed with luxurious fare, to
look upon the beauty of the damsel’s countenance; nor yet in the house
only but even through the market-place do they lead her in pomp to make
an exhibition; conducting her with torches late in the evening so as
that she may be seen of all: by their doings recommending nothing else
than that henceforth she put off all modesty. And they do not even stop
here; but with shameful words do they conduct her. And this with the
multitude is a law. And runaway slaves and convicts, thousands of them
and of desperate character, go on with impunity uttering whatever they
please, both against her and against him who is going to take her to his
home. Nor is there any thing solemn, but all base and full of indecency.
Will it not be a fine lesson in chastity for the bride to see and hear
such things? \[Savile reads this sentence with a question.\] And there
is a sort of diabolical rivalry among these profligates to outdo one
another in their zealous use of reproaches and foul words, whereby they
put the whole company out of countenance, and those go away victorious
who have found the largest store of railings and the greatest
indecencies to throw at their neighbors.

<span id="iv.xiii-p61"></span>Now I know that I am a troublesome, sort
of person and disagreeable, and morose, as though I were curtailing life
of some of its pleasure. Why, this is the very cause of my mourning that
things so displeasing are esteemed a sort of pleasure. For how, I ask,
can it be other than displeasing to be insulted and reviled? to be
reproached by all, together with your bride? If any one in the market
place speak ill of thy wife, thou makest ado without end and countest
life not worth living: and can it be that disgracing thyself with thy
future consort in the presence of the whole city, thou art pleased and
lookest gay on the matter?  Why, what strange madness is this!

<span id="iv.xiii-p62"></span>“But,” saith one, “the thing is
customary.” Nay, for this very reason we ought most to bewail it,
because the devil hath hedged in the thing with custom. In fact, since
marriage is a solemn thing and that which recruits our race and the
cause of numerous blessings; that evil one, inwardly pining and knowing
that it was ordained as a barrier against uncleanness, by a new device
introduces into it all kinds of uncleanness. At any rate, in such
assemblages many virgins have been even corrupted. And if not so in
every case, it is because for the time the devil is content with those
words and those songs, so flagitious; with making a show of the bride
openly, and leading the bridegroom in triumph through the market-place.

<span id="iv.xiii-p63"></span>Moreover, because all this takes place in
the evening, that not even the darkness may be a veil to these evils,
many torches are brought in, suffering not the disgraceful scene to be
concealed. For what means the vast throng, and what the wassail, and
what the pipes? Most clearly to prevent even those who are in their
houses and plunged \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p63.1"></span>βαπτιζόμενοι</span>\] in deep sleep from
remaining ignorant of these proceedings; that being wakened by the pipe
and leaning to look out of the lattices, they may be witnesses of the
comedy such as it is.

<span id="iv.xiii-p64"></span>What can one say of the songs themselves,
crammed as they are with all uncleanness, introducing monstrous amours,
and unlawful connections, and subversions of houses, and tragic scenes
without end; and making continual mention of the titles of “friend and
lover,” “mistress and beloved?” And, what is still more grievous, that
young women are present at these things, having divested themselves of
all modesty; in honor of the bride, rather I should say to insult her,
exposing even their own salvation <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) ,
and in the midst of wanton young men acting a shameless part with their
disorderly songs, with their foul words, with their devilish harmony.
Tell me then: dost thou still enquire, “Whence come adulteries? Whence
fornications? Whence violations of marriage?”

<span id="iv.xiii-p66"></span>\[12.\] “But they are not noble nor decent
women,” you will say, “who do these things.” Why then laugh me to scorn
for this remonstrance, having been thyself aware of this law, before I
said any thing. I say, if the proceed<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>
<span id="iv.xiii-Page_71"></span>ings are right, allow those well-born
women also to enact them. For what if these others live in poverty? Are
not they also virgins? ought not they also to be careful of chastity?
But now here is a virgin dancing in a public theatre of licentious
youths; and, I ask, seems she not unto thee more dishonored than a
harlot?

<span id="iv.xiii-p67"></span>But if you say, “Female servants do these
things;” neither so do I acquit thee of my charge: for neither to these
ought such things to have been permitted. For hence all these evils have
their origin, that of our household we make no account. But it is enough
in the way of contempt to say, “He is a slave,” and, “They are
handmaids.” And yet, day after day we hear, ([Gal. iii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028)<span id="iv.xiii-p67.1"></span>..md)
“In Christ Jesus there is neither bond nor free.” Again, were it a horse
or an ass, thou dost not overlook it but takest all pains not to have it
of an inferior kind; and thy slaves who have souls like thine own dost
thou neglect? And why do I say slaves, when I might say sons and
daughters? What then must follow? It cannot be but grief (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p67.2"></span>λύπην</span>, qu. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p67.3"></span>λύμην</span>, “mischief.”)
must immediately enter in, when all these are going to ruin. And often
also very great losses must ensue, valuable golden ornaments being lost
in the crowd and the confusion.

<span id="iv.xiii-p68"></span>\[13.\] Then after the marriage if
perchance a child is born, in this case again we shall see the same
folly and many practices \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p68.1"></span>σύμβολα</span>\] full of absurdity. For when
the time is come for giving the infant a name, caring not to call it
after the saints as the ancients at first did, they light lamps and give
them names, and name the child after that one which continues burning
the longest; from thence conjecturing that he will live a long time.
After all, should there be many instances of the child’s untimely death,
(and there are many,) great laughter on the devil’s part will ensue, at
his having made sport of them as if they were silly children. What shall
we say about the amulets and the bells which are hung upon the hand, and
the scarlet woof, and the other things full of such extreme folly; when
they ought to invest the child with nothing else save the protection of
the Cross <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) . But now that is
despised which hath converted the whole world and given the sore wound
to the devil and overthrown all his power: while the thread, and the
woof, and the other amulets of that kind are entrusted with the child’s
safety.

<span id="iv.xiii-p70"></span>May I mention another thing yet more
ridiculous than this? Only let no one tax us with speaking out of
season, should our argument proceed with that instance also. For he that
would cleanse an ulcer will not hesitate first to pollute his own hands.
What then is this so very ridiculous custom? It is counted indeed as
nothing; (and this is why I grieve;) but it is the beginning of folly
and madness in the extreme. The women in the bath, nurses and
waiting-maids, take up mud and smearing it with the finger make a mark
on the child’s forehead; and if one ask, What means the mud, and the
clay? the answer is, “It turneth away an evil eye, witchcraft and
envy <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) .” Astonishing! what power in
the mud! what might in the clay! what mighty force is this which it has?
It averts all the host of the devil. Tell me, can ye help hiding
yourselves for shame? Will ye never come to understand the snares of the
devil, how from earliest life he gradually brings in the several evils
which he hath devised? For if the mud hath this effect, why dost thou
not thyself also do the same to thine own forehead, when thou art a man
and thy character is formed; and thou art likelier than the child to
have such as envy thee? Why dost thou not as well bemire the whole body?
I say, if on the forehead its virtue be so great, why not anoint thyself
all over with mud?  All this is mirth and stage-play to Satan, not
mockery only but hell-fire being the consummation to which these
deceived ones are tending.

<span id="iv.xiii-p72"></span>\[14.\] Now that among Greeks such things
should be done is no wonder: but among the worshippers of the Cross,
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p72.1"></span>τὸν σταυρὸν</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p72.2"></span>προσκυνοῦσι</span>)
and partakers in unspeakable mysteries, and professors of such high
morality, (<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p72.3"></span>τοσαῦτα
φιλοσοφοῦσιν</span>) that such unseemliness should prevail, this is
especially to be deplored again and again. God hath honored thee with
spiritual anointing; and dost thou defile thy child with mud? God hath
honored thee, and dost thou dishonor thyself? And when thou shouldest
inscribe on his forehead the Cross which affords invincible security;
dost thou forego this, and cast thyself into the madness of Satan?

<span id="iv.xiii-p73"></span>If any look on these things as trifles,
let them know that they are the source of great evils; and that not even
unto Paul did it seem right to overlook the lesser things. For, tell me,
what can be less than a man’s covering his head? Yet observe how great a
matter he makes of this and with how great earnestness he forbids it;
saying, among many things, “He dishonoreth his head.” ([1 Cor. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004)<span id="iv.xiii-p73.1"></span>..md)
Now if he that covers himself “dishonoreth his head”; he that besmears
his child with mud, how can it be less than making it abominable? For
how, I want to know, can he bring it to the hands of the priest?  How
canst thou require that on that forehead the seal <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) should be placed by the hand <span
id="page_72">p. 72</span> <span id="iv.xiii-Page_72"></span>of the
presbyter, where thou hast been smearing the mud? Nay, my brethren, do
not these things, but from earliest life encompass them with spiritual
armor and instruct them to seal the forehead with the hand (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p74.2"></span>τῇ χειρὶ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p74.3"></span>παιδεύτε σφραγίζειν</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p74.4"></span>τὸ μέτωπον</span>):
and before they are able to do this with their own hand <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) , do you imprint upon them the Cross.

<span id="iv.xiii-p76"></span>Why should one speak of the other
satanical observances in the case of travail-pangs and childbirths,
which the midwives introduce with a mischief on their own heads? Of the
outcries which take place at each person’s death, and when he is carried
to his burial; the irrational wailings, the folly enacted at the
funerals; the zeal about men’s monuments; the importunate and ridiculous
swarm of the mourning women <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) ; the
observances of days; the days, I mean, of entrance into the world and of
departure?

<span id="iv.xiii-p78"></span>\[15.\] Are these then, I beseech you, the
persons whose good opinion thou followest after? And what can it be but
the extreme of folly to seek earnestly the praise of men, so corrupt in
their ideas, men whose conduct is all at random? when we ought always to
resort to the unsleeping Eye, and look to His sentence in all that we do
and speak? For these, even if they approve, will have no power to profit
us. But He, should He accept our doings, will both here make us
glorious, and in the future day will impart to us of the unspeakable
good things:  which may it be the lot of us all to obtain, through the
grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ; with Whom to the
Father and the Holy Spirit be glory, power, honor, now and always, and
unto everlasting ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[64:58](1120016.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p4"></span> \[The true text of this clause is well
given in the Revised Version, “not to go beyond the things which are
written.”\]

<span id="fn_58"></span>[65:59](1120016.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p19"></span> \[That is, conceding that they had the
gifts which they claimed. C.\]

<span id="fn_59"></span>[68:60](1120016.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p47"></span> (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p47.1"></span>πάντες</span> Savile; <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p47.2"></span> πὰντως</span> Bened.)
\[Dr. Field adopts the former reading. C.\]

<span id="fn_60"></span>[69:61](1120016.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p49"></span> Bingham (b. xvi. c. 4. §. 10.) proves
that actors and the like were debarred from the Sacraments, except they
renounced their calling, from very early times: from S. Cyprian, Ep.
61<span id="iv.xiii-p49.1"></span>, who says, “I think it inconsistent
with the majesty of God and the discipline of the Gospel, to allow the
chastity and glory of the Church to be defiled with so base contagion:”
from Tertullian; *de Spectac*. 4; *de Cor. Mil*. 13; and from the
Apostolical Constitutions, viii. 32.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[69:62](1120016.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p49.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p50"></span> Gibbon, c. 31. from Ammianus, relates,
that on occasion of a scarcity, when all strangers were expelled from
Rome, an exception was made in favor of the actors, singers, dancers,
&c.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[69:63](1120016.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p51.1"></span>μαγγανείας</span>. Compare S. Augustin’s
account in the Confessions of the way in which some persons were
bewitched by the gladiatorial shows; of which his friend Alypius in his
youth was a remarkable instance. b. vi. §. 13.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[69:64](1120016.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p53"></span> S. Chrys. on Gen. Hom. 48. near the end,
speaking of Rebekah’s veiling herself at sight of Isaac; “See the noble
breeding of the maiden.……and observe here, I pray you, how there is no
place here for these superfluous and useless things; for a diabolical
procession, for cymbals and flutes and dances, and those revels, the
device of Satan, and invectives full of all indecency; but all wisdom,
all gravity, all thoughtfulness.……Let Rebekah be the pattern of our
wives, let our husbands emulate Isaac; be it their endeavor thus to
bring home their brides.” Then complaining, nearly as in the text, of
the Fescennine verses, as they were called, and other bad customs,
relics of heathenism, “Rather,” says he, “should the maiden be trained
in all modesty from the beginning, and priests called, and prayers and
blessings be used to rivet fast the concord of their common habitation,
that so both the bridegroom’s love may increase, and the damsel’s purity
of soul be heightened. So by all ways shall the deeds of virtue enter
into that house, and all the acts of the devil be far off and they shall
pass their life with joy, God’s Providence bringing them together.” So
again Hom. 56. of the marriage of Jacob and Leah: in which place he
complains especially of the introduction of people from the stage and
orchestra at wedding feasts. See both places in Bingham, xxii. iv. 8: as
also the 53d Canon of Laodicea: “It is wrong for Christians attending
marriages to practice theatrical gestures or dances, but to take their
part soberly in the morning or evening meal, as becometh Christians.”

<span id="fn_64"></span>[70:65](1120016.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p65.1"></span>τῆς ἑαυτῶν προτείνουσαι σωτηρίας</span>. The
Benedictine translates as if it were <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p65.2"></span>τὰς ἑαυτῶν</span>: which is here followed.
\[The true reading as given by Field is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiii-p65.3"></span>τὴν ἑαυτῶν προπίνουςαι σωτηρίαν</span>. C.\]

<span id="fn_65"></span>[71:66](1120016.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p69"></span> Compare St. Chrys. on Coloss. Hom. viii.
near the end.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[71:67](1120016.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p71"></span> So on Col. ubi supra. “What is all this
folly? Here we have ashes, and soot, and salt, and the silly old woman
again brought into play. Truly it is a mockery and a shame. ‘Nay,’ says
she, ‘an evil eye has caught hold of the child!’ How long will you go on
with these diabolical fancies?” &c.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[71:68](1120016.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p74"></span> i.e. the sign of the cross in baptism,
made with consecrated balm or ointment, and called <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiii-p74.1"></span>σφρᾶγις</span> in the
Apostolical Constitutions, iii. 17; vid. Bingham xi. 9. 6. St.
Chrysostom, it may be remarked, takes for granted, 1. that infants would
be brought to baptism; 2. that they would be brought to the priest.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[72:69](1120016.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p74.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p75"></span> Compare the well-known passages in
Tertullian and St. Cyprian: the first, “At all our goings out and
comings in, &c. we trace upon the forehead the sign of the cross;” *de
Cor. Mil*. 3.: the other, “Arm your foreheads with all boldness, that
the sign of the cross may be safe.” Ep. 50<span
id="iv.xiii-p75.1"></span>:  both in Bingham *ubi supra*.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[72:70](1120016.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="iv.xiii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p77"></span> About this custom, of hiring heathen
women as mourners, he speaks very strongly elsewhere; Hom. 32. in Matt.,
Hom. 4. in Heb., both which are quoted in Bingham, xxxiii. 18.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIII](1120017.md)
