[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120076)  [Next](1120078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxviii"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="v.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXVIII.</span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p2"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.xxviii-p2.2"></span>[2 Cor. xii.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#016)<span
id="v.xxviii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p3"></span>But be it so, I myself did not burden you:
but being crafty, I caught you with guile. Did I take advantage of you
by any one of them whom I have sent unto you? I exhorted Titus, and with
him I sent the brother. Did Titus take any advantage of you? Walked we
not by the same spirit? walked we not in the same steps?

<span id="v.xxviii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.xxviii-p4.1"></span>Paul</span> has spoken these words very
obscurely, but not without a meaning or purpose. For seeing he was
speaking about money, and his defence on that score, it is reasonable
that what he says must be wrapt in obscureness. What then is the meaning
of what he says? He had said, ‘I received not, nay I am ready even to
give besides, and to spend;’ and much discourse is made on this subject
both in the former Epistle and in this. Now he says something else,
introducing the subject in the form of an objection and meeting it by
anticipation. <span id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014)   What he says
is something like this; ‘I indeed have not made a gain of you: but
perhaps some one has it to say that I did not receive \[of you\] indeed
myself, but, being crafty, I procured those who were sent by me to ask
for something of you as for themselves <span
id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015) , and through them I myself
received, yet keeping myself clear of seeming to receive, by receiving
through others. But none can have this to say either; and you are
witnesses.’ Wherefore also he proceeds by question, saying, “I exhorted
Titus, and with him I sent the brother. Did Titus make a gain of you?”
‘walked he not just as I walked.’ That is to say, neither did he
receive. Seest thou how intense a strictness \[is here\], in that he
<span id="page_408">p. 408</span> <span
id="v.xxviii-Page_408"></span>not only keeps himself clear of that
receiving, but so modulates those also who are sent by him that he may
not give so much as a slight pretence to those who were desirous of
attacking him. For this is far greater than that which the Patriarch
did. ([Gen. xiv. 24](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#024)<span
id="v.xxviii-p6.2"></span>.) For he indeed, when he had returned from
his victory, and the king would have given him the spoil, refused to
accept aught save what the men had eaten; but this man neither himself
enjoyed \[from them\] his necessary food, nor allowed his partners to
partake of such: thus abundantly stopping the mouths of the shameless.
Wherefore he makes no assertion, nor does he say that they did not
receive either; but what was far more than this, he cites the
Corinthians themselves as witnesses that they had received nothing, that
he may not seem to be witnessing in his own person, but by their
verdict; which course we are accustomed to take in matters fully
admitted and about which we are confident. ‘For tell me,’ he says, ‘Did
any one of those who were sent by us make unfair gain <span
id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016) of you?’ He did not say, ‘Did any
one receive aught from you?’ but he calls the things ‘unfair gain;’
attacking them and shaming them exceedingly, and showing that to receive
of an unwilling \[giver\] is ‘unfair gain.’ And he said not ‘did Titus?’
but, “did any?” ‘For ye cannot say this either,’ he says, ‘that such an
one certainly did not receive, but another did. No single one of those
who came did so.’ “I exhorted Titus.” This too is severely <span
id="fr_1017"></span>[1018](#fn_1017) said. For he did not say, ‘I sent
Titus,’ but, ‘I exhorted’ him; showing that if he had received even, he
would have done so justly; but, nevertheless, even so he remained pure.
Wherefore he asks them again, saying, “Did Titus take any advantage of
you?  Walked we not by the same spirit?” What means, “by the same
spirit?” He ascribes the whole to grace and shows that the whole of this
praise is the good result not of our labors, but of the gift of the
Spirit and of Grace. For it was a very great instance of grace that
although both in want and hunger they would receive nothing for the
edification of the disciples. “Walked we not in the same steps?” That is
to say, they did not depart the least from this strictness, but
preserved the same rule entire.

<span id="v.xxviii-p9"></span>\[2.\] [2 Cor.
12.19](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#019)<span id="v.xxviii-p9.1"></span>.
“Again, think ye that we are excusing ourselves unto you?” <span
id="fr_1018"></span>[1019](#fn_1018)

<span id="v.xxviii-p11"></span>Seest thou how he is continually in fear,
lest he should incur the suspicion of flattery? Seest thou an Apostle’s
prudence, how constantly he mentions this? For he said before, “We
commend not ourselves again, but give you occasion to glory;” ([2 Cor.
v. 12](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#012)<span
id="v.xxviii-p11.1"></span>.) and in the commencement of the Epistle,
“Do we need letters of commendation?” ([2 Cor.
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001)<span id="v.xxviii-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.xxviii-p12"></span>“But all things are for your edifying.”
Again he is soothing them. And he does not here either say clearly, ‘on
this account we receive not, because of your weakness;’ but, ‘in order
that we may edify you;’ speaking out indeed more clearly than he did
before, and revealing that wherewith he travailed; but yet without
severity. For he did not say, ‘because of your weakness;’ but, ‘that ye
may be edified.’

<span id="v.xxviii-p13"></span>[2 Cor.
12.20](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#020)<span
id="v.xxviii-p13.1"></span>. “For I fear, lest by any means when I come,
I should not find you such as I would, and should myself be found of you
such as ye would not.”

<span id="v.xxviii-p14"></span>He is going to say something great and
offensive. And therefore he also inserts this excuse \[for it\], both by
saying, “All things are for your edifying,” and by adding, “I fear,”
softening the harshness of what was presently going to be said. For it
was not here out of arrogance nor the authority of a teacher, but out of
a father’s tender concern, when he is more fearful and trembling than
the sinners themselves at that which is likely to reform them. And not
even so does he run them down or make an absolute assertion; but says
doubtingly, “lest by any means when I come, I should not find you such
as I would.” He did not say, ‘not virtuous,’ but “not such as I would,”
everywhere employing the terms of affection. And the words, “I should
find,” are of one who would express what is out of natural expectation,
as are also those, “I shall be found by you.” For the thing is not of
deliberate choice, but of a necessity originating with you. Wherefore he
says, “I should be found such as ye would not.” He said not here, “such
as I would not,” but, with more severity, “such as ye wish not.” For it
would in that case become his own will, not indeed what he would first
have willed, but his will nevertheless. For he might indeed have said
again, ‘such as I would not,’ and so have showed his love: but he wishes
not to relax <span id="fr_1019"></span>[1020](#fn_1019) his hearer. Yea
rather, his words would in that case have been even harsher; but now he
has at once dealt them a smarter blow and showed himself more gentle.
For this is the characteristic of his wisdom; cutting more deeply, to
strike more gently. Then, because he had spoken obscurely, he unveils
his meaning, saying,

<span id="v.xxviii-p16"></span>“Lest there be strife, jealousy, wraths,
backbitings, whisperings, swellings.” <span
id="fr_1020"></span>[1021](#fn_1020)

<span id="v.xxviii-p18"></span>And what he might well put first, that he
<span id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span
id="v.xxviii-Page_409"></span>puts last: for they were very proud <span
id="fr_1021"></span>[1022](#fn_1021) against him. Therefore, that he may
not seem principally to be seeking his own, he first mentions what was
common. For all these things were gendered of envy, their slanderings,
accusations, dissensions. For just like some evil root, envy produced
wrath, accusation, pride, and all those other evils, and by them was
increased further,

<span id="v.xxviii-p20"></span>[2 Cor.
12.21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021)<span
id="v.xxviii-p20.1"></span>. And “lest when I come again, my God should
humble me among you.”

<span id="v.xxviii-p21"></span>And the word “again,” too, is as smiting
them. For he means, ‘What happened before is enough;’ as he said also in
the beginning \[of the Epistle\], “to spare you, I came not as yet to
Corinth.” ([2 Cor. 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#018),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023)<span id="v.xxviii-p21.1"></span>.)
Seest thou how he shows both indignation and tender affection? But what
means, “will humble me?” And yet this is glorious rather, to accuse, to
take vengeance, to call to account, to be seated in the place of judge;
howbeit he calls it a humbling. So far was he from being ashamed of that
\[cause of\] humbling, because, “his bodily presence was weak, and his
speech of no account,” that he wished to be even for ever in that case,
and deprecated the contrary. And he says this more clearly as he
proceeds; and he counts this to be especially humbling, to be involved
in such a necessity as the present, of punishing and taking vengeance.
And wherefore did he not say, ‘lest when I come I shall be humbled,’
but, “lest when I come my God will humble me.” ‘Because had it not been
for His sake, I should have paid no attention nor been anxious. For it
is not as possessing authority and for my own pleasure, that I demand
satisfaction, <span id="fr_1022"></span>[1023](#fn_1022) but because of
His commandment.’ Now above, indeed, he expressed himself thus, “I shall
be found;” here, however, he relaxes and adopts milder and gentler
language, saying,

<span id="v.xxviii-p23"></span>“I shall mourn for many of them who have
sinned.” Not simply, “who have sinned,” but,

<span id="v.xxviii-p24"></span>“Who have not repented.” And he said not,
‘all,’ but “many;” nor made it clear who these were either, thereby
making the return unto repentance easy to them; and to make it plain
that a repentance is able to right transgressions, he bewails those that
repent not, those who are incurably diseased, those who continue in
their wounds. Observe then Apostolic virtue, in that, conscious of no
evil in himself, he laments over the evils of others and is humbled for
other men’s transgressions. For this is the especial mark of a teacher,
so to sympathize with the calamities of his disciples, and to mourn over
the wounds of those who are under him. Then he mentions also the
specific sin.

<span id="v.xxviii-p25"></span>“Of the lasciviousness and uncleanness
which they committed.” Now in these words he alludes indeed to
fornication; but if one carefully examine the subject, every kind of sin
can be called by this name. For although the fornicator and adulterer is
preeminently styled unclean, yet still the other sins also produce
uncleanness in the soul. And therefore it is that Christ also calls the
Jews unclean, not charging them with fornication only, but with
wickedness of other kinds as well. Wherefore also He says that they made
the outside clean, and that “not the things which enter in defile the
man, but those which come out from him;” ([Matt. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011)<span id="v.xxviii-p25.1"></span>.)
and it is said in another place, “Every one that is proud in heart is
unclean before the Lord.” ([Prov. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#005)<span id="v.xxviii-p25.2"></span>.
LXX.)

<span id="v.xxviii-p26"></span>\[3.\] For nothing is purer than virtue,
nothing uncleaner than vice; for the one is brighter than the sun, the
other more stinking than mire. And to this they will themselves bear
witness, who are wallowing in that mire and living in that darkness; at
any rate, when one prepares them a little to see clearly. For as long as
they are by themselves, and inebriate with the passion, just as if
living in darkness they lie in unseemly wise to their much infamy,
conscious even then where they are, although not fully; but after they
have seen any of those who live in virtue reproving them or even showing
himself, then they understand their own wretchedness more clearly; and
as if a sunbeam had darted upon them, they cover up their own
unseemliness and blush before those who know of their doings, yea,
though the one be a slave and the other free, though the one be a king
and the other a subject. Thus when Ahab saw Elijah, he was ashamed, even
when he <span id="fr_1023"></span>[1024](#fn_1023) had as yet said
nothing; standing convicted by the mere sight of him; and when his
accuser was silent, he pronounced a judgment condemnatory of himself;
uttering the language of such as are caught, and saying, “Thou hast
found me, O mine enemy!” ([1 Kings xxi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#020)<span id="v.xxviii-p27.1"></span>.)
Thus Elijah himself conversed with that tyrant then with great boldness.
Thus Herod, unable to bear the shame of those reproofs, (which \[shame\]
the sound of the prophet’s tongue with mighty and transparent clearness
exposed more evidently,) cast John into the prison:  like one who was
naked and attempting to put out the light, that he might be in the dark
again; or rather he himself dared not put it out, but, as it were,
placed it in the house under a bushel; and that wretched and miserable
woman compelled it to be done. But not even so could they cover the
reproof, nay, they lit it up the more. For both <span id="page_410">p.
410</span> <span id="v.xxviii-Page_410"></span>they that asked,
Wherefore doth John dwell in prison? learnt the reason, and all they
that since have dwelt on land or sea, who then lived, or now live, and
who shall be hereafter, both have known and shall know clearly these
wicked tragedies, both that of their lewdness and that of their
bloodguiltiness, and no time shall be able to wipe out the remembrance
of them.

<span id="v.xxviii-p28"></span>So great a thing is virtue: so immortal
is its memory, so completely even by words only doth it strike down its
adversaries. For wherefore did he cast him into the prison?  Wherefore
did he not despise him? Was he going to drag him before the
judgment-seat? Did he demand vengeance upon him for his adultery? Was
not what he said then simply a reproof? Why then doth he fear and
tremble? Was it not words and talk merely? But they stung him more than
deeds. He led him not to any judgment-seat, but he dragged him before
that other tribunal of conscience; and he sets as judges upon him all
who freely gave their verdicts in their thought. Therefore the tyrant
trembled, unable to endure the lustre of virtue. Seest thou how great a
thing is philosophy? It made a prisoner more lustrous than a king, and
the latter is afraid and trembles before him. He indeed only put him in
bonds; but that polluted woman rushed on to his slaughter also, although
the rebuke was leveled rather against him, \[than herself.\] For he did
not then meet “her” and say, Why cohabitest thou with the king? not that
she was guiltless, (how should she be so?) but he wished by that other
means to put all to rights. Wherefore he blamed the king, and yet not
him with violence of manner. For he did not say, O polluted and
all-polluted and lawless and profane one, thou hast trodden under foot
the law of God, thou hast despised the commandments, thou hast made thy
might law. None of these things; but even in his rebukings great was the
gentleness of the man, great his meekness. For, “It is not lawful for
thee,” he says, “to have thy brother Philip’s wife.” The words are those
of one who teacheth rather than reproveth, instructeth rather than
chasteneth, who composeth to order rather than exposeth, who amendeth
rather than trampleth on him. But, as I said, the light is hateful to
the thief, and the mere sight of the just man is odious to sinners; “for
he is grievous unto us even to behold.” ([Wisdom of Solomon ii.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#015)<span id="v.xxviii-p28.1"></span>.)
For they cannot bear his radiance, even as diseased eyes cannot bear the
sun’s. But to many of the wicked he is grievous not to behold only, but
even to hear of. And therefore that polluted and all-polluted woman, the
procuress of her girl, yea rather her murderess, although she had never
seen him nor heard his voice, rushed on to his slaughter; and prepareth
her whom she brought up in lasciviousnss to proceed also to murder, so
extravagantly did she fear him.

<span id="v.xxviii-p29"></span>\[4.\] And what says she? “Give me here
in a charger the head of John the Baptist.” ([Matt. xiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#008)<span id="v.xxviii-p29.1"></span>.)
Whither rushest thou over precipices, wretched and miserable one? What?
is the accuser before thee? is he in sight and troubleth thee? Others
said, “He is grievous unto us even to behold;” but to her, as I said, he
was grievous to even hear of. Wherefore she saith, “Give me here in a
charger the head of John.” And yet because of thee he inhabits a prison,
and is laden with chains, and thou art free to wanton over thy love and
to say, ‘So completely have I subdued the king, that though publicly
reproached he yielded not, nor desisted from his passion, nor tore
asunder his adulterous connection with me, but even put him that
reproached him in bonds.’ Why art thou mad and rabid, when even after
that reproof of his sin thou retainest thy paramour? Why seekest thou a
table of furies, and preparest a banquet of avenging demons?  Seest thou
how nothing-worth, <span id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024) how
cowardly, how unmanly, is vice; how when it shall most succeed, it then
becomes more feeble? For this woman was not so much disturbed before she
had cast John into prison, as she is troubled after he is bound, and she
is urgent, saying, “Give me here in a charger the head of John.” And
wherefore so? ‘I fear,’ she says, ‘lest there be any <span
id="fr_1025"></span>[1026](#fn_1025) hushing up of his murder, lest any
should rescue him from his peril.’ And wherefore requirest thou not the
whole corpse, but the head?  ‘The tongue,’ she says, ‘that pained me,
that I long to see silent.’ But the contrary will happen, as indeed it
also hath done, thou wretched and miserable one! it will cry louder
afterwards, when it is cut out. For then indeed it cried in Judæa only,
but now it will reach to the ends of the world; and wheresoever thou
enterest into a church, whether it be among the Moors, or among the
Persians, or even unto the British isles themselves, thou hearest John
crying, “It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother Phillip’s wife.”
But she, unknowing to reason in any such way, urges and presses, <span
id="fr_1026"></span>[1027](#fn_1026) and thrusts on the senseless tyrant
to the murder, fearing lest he change his mind. But from this too learn
thou again the power of virtue. Not even when he was shut up and bound
and silent, does she bear the righteous man. Seest thou how weak a thing
vice is? how unclean? For in the place of meats it bringeth in a human
head upon a charger. What is more polluted, what more accursed, <span
id="page_411">p. 411</span> <span id="v.xxviii-Page_411"></span>what
more immodest, than that damsel? what a voice she uttered in that
theatre of the devil, in that banquet of demons!  Seest thou this tongue
and that; the one bringing healthful medicines, the other one with
poison on it, and made the purveyor to a devilish banquet. But wherefore
did she not command him to be murdered within there, at the feast, when
her pleasure would have been greater? She feared lest if he should come
thither and be seen, he should change them all by his look, by his
boldness. Therefore surely it is that she demandeth his head, wishing to
set up a bright trophy of fornication; and give it to her mother. Seest
thou the wages of dancing, seest thou the spoils of that devilish plot?
I mean not the head of John, but her paramour himself. For if one
examine it carefully, against the king that trophy was set up, and the
victress was vanquished, and the beheaded was crowned, and proclaimed
victor, even after his death shaking more vehemently the hearts of the
offenders. And that what I have said is no \[mere\] boast, ask of Herod
himself; who, when he heard of the miracles of Christ, said, “This is
John, he is risen from the dead: and therefore do these powers work in
him.” ([Matt. xiv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#002)<span
id="v.xxviii-p32.3"></span>.) So lively <span
id="fr_1027"></span>[1028](#fn_1027) was the fear, so abiding the agony
he retained; and none had power to cast down the terror of his
conscience, but that incorruptible Judge continued to take him by the
throat, and day by day to demand of him satisfaction for the murder.
Knowing, then, these things, let us not fear to suffer evil, but to do
evil; for that indeed is victory, but this defeat.

<span id="v.xxviii-p34"></span>Wherefore also Paul said, “Why not rather
take wrong, why not rather be defrauded. Nay, ye yourselves do wrong,
and defraud, and that your brethren.” For by the suffering evil \[come\]
those crowns, those prizes, that proclamation \[of victory\]. And this
may be seen in all the saints. Since then they all were thus crowned,
thus proclaimed, let us too travel this road, and let us pray indeed
that we enter not into temptation; but if it should come, let us make
stand with much manliness and display the proper readiness of mind, that
we may obtain the good things to come, through the grace and love
towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, together
with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, honor, now and for ever, and world
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[407:1015](1120077.htm#fr_1014) <span
id="v.xxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p5.1"></span>προηγουμενως</span>.

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[407:1016](1120077.htm#fr_1015) <span
id="v.xxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p6.1"></span>εἰς οἰκεῖον πρόσωπον</span>.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[408:1017](1120077.htm#fr_1016) <span
id="v.xxviii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p7.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p7.2"></span>πλεονέκτησεν</span>.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[408:1018](1120077.htm#fr_1017) <span
id="v.xxviii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p8.1"></span>πληκτικῶς</span>.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[408:1019](1120077.htm#fr_1018) <span
id="v.xxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p10"></span> The words in the Rec. Text here omitted,
‘We speak before God in Christ,’ are found above, where this text is
quoted. Hom. vi. p. 311. \[They are undoubtedly genuine. C.\]

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[408:1020](1120077.htm#fr_1019) <span
id="v.xxviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p15.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p15.2"></span>κλῦσαι</span>.

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[408:1021](1120077.htm#fr_1020) <span
id="v.xxviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p17"></span> The Received Text has ‘factions’ after
‘wraths,’ and ‘tumults’ after ‘swellings,’ which Chrysostom omits.

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[409:1022](1120077.htm#fr_1021) <span
id="v.xxviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p19.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p19.2"></span>πενοοῦντο</span>.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[409:1023](1120077.htm#fr_1022) <span
id="v.xxviii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p22.1"></span>αὐθαδιζόμενος</span>.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[409:1024](1120077.htm#fr_1023) <span
id="v.xxviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p27"></span> Elijah.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[410:1025](1120077.htm#fr_1024) <span
id="v.xxviii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p30.1"></span>οὐδαμινὸν</span>.

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[410:1026](1120077.htm#fr_1025) <span
id="v.xxviii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p31.1"></span>συσκιασθῇ ὁ φόνος</span>.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[410:1027](1120077.htm#fr_1026) <span
id="v.xxviii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p32.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p32.2"></span>γχεί</span>.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[411:1028](1120077.htm#fr_1027) <span
id="v.xxviii-p32.4"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p33.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p33.2"></span>γχεί</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXIX](1120078)
