[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120030)  [Next](1120032.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXVII.</span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p2"></span><span id="iv.xxviii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxviii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p3"></span>But in giving you this charge, I praise
you not, that ye come together not for the better, but for the worse.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p4.1"></span>It</span> is necessary in considering the
present charge to state also first the occasion of it. For thus again
will our discourse be more intelligible. What then is this occasion?

<span id="iv.xxviii-p5"></span>As in the case of the three thousand who
believed in the beginning, all had eaten their meals in common and had
all things common; such also was the practice at the time when the
Apostle wrote this: not such indeed exactly; but as it were a certain
outflowing of that communion which abode among them descended also to
them that came after. And because of course some were poor, but others
rich, they laid not down all their goods in the midst, but made the
tables open on stated days, as it should seem; and when the solemn
service <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) was completed, after the
communion of the Mysteries, they all went to a common entertainment, the
rich bringing their provisions with them, and the poor and destitute
being invited by them, and all feasting in common. But afterward this
custom also became corrupt. And the reason was, their being divided and
addicting themselves, some to this party, and others to that, and
saying, “I am of such a one,” and “I of such a one;” which thing also to
correct he said in the beginning of the Epistle, “For it hath been
signified unto me concerning you, my brethren, by them which are of the
household of Chloe, that there are contentions among you. Now this I
mean, that each one of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I
of Cephas.” Not that Paul was the person to whom they were attaching
themselves; for he would not have borne it: but wishing by concession to
tear up this custom from the root, he introduced himself, indicating
that if any one had inscribed upon himself even his name when breaking
off from the common body, even so the thing done was profane and extreme
wickedness. And if in his case it were wickedness, much more in the case
of those who were inferior to him.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p7"></span>\[2.\] Since therefore this custom was
broken through, a custom most excellent and most useful; (for it was a
foundation of love, and a comfort to poverty, and a corrective of
riches, and an occasion of the highest philosophy, and an instruction of
humility:)  since however he saw so great advantages in a way to be
destroyed, he naturally addresses them with severity, thus saying: “But
in giving you this charge, I praise you not.” For in the former charge,
as there were many who kept (the ordinances), he began otherwise, saying
thus:  “Now I praise you that ye remember me in all things:” but here
contrariwise, “But in giving you this charge, I praise you not.” And
here is the reason why <span id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span
id="iv.xxviii-Page_158"></span>he placed it not after the rebuke of them
that eat the idol-sacrifices. But because that was unusually harsh he
interposes the discourse about wearing of long hair, that he might not
have to pass from one set of vehement reproofs to others again of an
invidious kind and so appear too harsh: and then he returns to the more
vehement tone, and says, “But in giving you this charge, I praise you
not.”  What is this? That which I am about to tell you of. What is,
“giving you this charge, I praise you not?” “I do not approve you,”
saith he, “because ye have reduced me to the necessity of giving
advice:  I do not praise you, because ye have required instruction in
regard to this, because ye have need of an admonition from me.” Dost
thou perceive how from his beginning he signifieth that what was done
was very profane? For when he that errs ought not to require so much as
a hint to prevent his erring, the error would seem to be unpardonable.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p8"></span>And why dost thou not praise? Because “ye
come together,” saith he, “not for the better but for the worse;” i.e.,
because ye do not go forward unto virtue. For it were meet that your
liberality <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) should increase and
become manifold, but ye have taken rather from the custom which already
prevailed, and have so taken from it as even to need warning from me, in
order that ye may return to the former order.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p10"></span>Further, that he might not seem to say
these things on account of the poor only, he doth not at once strike in
to the discourse concerning the tables, lest he render his rebuke such
as they might easily come to think slightly of, but he searches for an
expression most confounding and very fearful. For what saith he?

<span id="iv.xxviii-p11"></span>[1 Cor.
11.18](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p11.1"></span>. “For first of all, when ye come together
in the Church, I hear that divisions <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md) exist among you.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p13"></span>And he saith not, “For fear that you do
not sup together in common;” “for I hear that you feast in private, and
not with the poor:” but what was most calculated thoroughly to shake
their minds, that he set down, the name of division, which was the cause
of this mischief also: and so he reminded them again of that which was
said in the beginning of the Epistle, and was “signified by them of the
house of Chloe.” (c. [1 Cor. 1.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p13.1"></span>.) “And I partly believe it.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p14"></span>Thus, lest they should say, “But what if
the accusers speak falsely?” he neither saith, “I believe it,” lest he
should rather make them reckless; nor again, on the other hand, “I
disbelieve it,” lest he should seem to reprove without cause, but, “I
partly believe it,” saith he, i.e., “I believe it in a small part;”
making them anxious and inviting them to return to correction.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p15"></span>\[3.\] [1 Cor.
11.19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p15.1"></span>. “For there must be also factions among
you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p16"></span>By “factions,” here he means those which
concern not the doctrines, but these present divisions. But even if he
had spoken of the doctrinal heresies, not even thus did he give them any
handle. For Christ Himself said, “it must needs be that occasions of
stumbling come,” ([Matt. xviii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p16.1"></span>.) not destroying the liberty of the will
nor appointing any necessity and compulsion over man’s life, but
foretelling what would certainly ensue from the evil mind of men; which
would take place, not because of his prediction, but because the
incurably disposed are so minded. For not because he foretold them did
these things happen: but because they were certainly about to happen,
therefore he foretold them. Since, if the occasions of stumbling were of
necessity and not of the mind of them that bring them in, it was
superfluous His saying, “Woe to that man by whom the occasion cometh.”
But these things we discussed more at length when we were upon the
passage itself <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md) ; now we must
proceed to what is before us.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p18"></span>Now that he said these things of these
factions relating to the tables, and that contention and division, he
made manifest also from what follows. For having said, “I hear that
there are divisions among you,” he stopped not here, but signifying what
divisions he means he goes on to say, “each one taketh before other his
own supper;” and again, “What? have ye not houses to eat and to drink
in? or despise ye the Church of God?” However, that of these he was
speaking is evident. And if he call them divisions, marvel not. For, as
I said, he wishes to touch them by the expression: whereas had they been
divisions of doctrine, he would not have discoursed with them thus
mildly. Hear him, for instance, when he speaks of any such thing, how
vehement he is both in assertion and in reproof: in assertion, as when
he says, “If even an angel preach any other gospel unto you than that ye
have received, let him be accursed;” ([Gal. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxviii-p18.1"></span>..md)
but in reproof, as when he says, “Whosoever of you would be justified by
the law, ye are fallen away from grace.” ([Gal. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004)<span id="iv.xxviii-p18.2"></span>..md)
And at one time he calls the corrupters “dogs,” saying, “Beware of
dogs:” ([Philip. iii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p18.3"></span>.) at another, “having their consciences
seared with a hot iron.” ([1 Tim. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002)<span id="iv.xxviii-p18.4"></span>..md)
And again, “angels of Satan:” ([2 Cor. xi.
14-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p18.5"></span>.) but here he said no such thing, but spoke
in a gentle and subdued tone.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p19"></span><span id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span
id="iv.xxviii-Page_159"></span>But what is, “that they which are
approved may be made manifest among you?” That they may shine the more.
And what he intends to say is this, that those who are unchangeable and
firm are so far from being at all injured hereby, but even shows them
the more, and that it makes them more glorious. For the word,
“that <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md) ,” is not every where
indicative of cause, but frequently also of the event of things. Thus
Christ Himself uses it, when He saith, “For judgement I am come into
this world; that they which see not may see, and that they which see may
be made blind.” ([John ix. 39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p20.3"></span>.) So likewise Paul in another place, when
discoursing of the law, he writes, “And the Law came in beside, that the
trespass might abound.” ([Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="iv.xxviii-p20.4"></span>..md)
But neither was the law given to this end that the trespasses of the
Jews might be increased: (though this did ensue:)  nor did Christ come
for this end that they which see might be made blind, but for the
contrary; but the result was such. Thus then also here must one
understand the expression, “that they which are approved may be made
manifest.” For not at all with this view came heresies into being, that
“they which are approved may be made manifest,” but on these heresies
taking place such was the result. Now these things he said to console
the poor, those of them who nobly bore that sort of contempt. Wherefore
he said not, “that they may become approved,” but, “that they which are
approved may be made manifest; showing that before this also they were
such, but they were mixed up with the multitude, and while enjoying such
relief as was afforded them by the rich, they were not very conspicuous:
but now this strife and contentiousness made them manifest, even as the
storm shows the pilot. And he said not, “that ye may appear approved,”
but, “that they which are approved may be made manifest, those among you
who are such.” For neither when he is accusing doth he lay them open,
that he may not render them more reckless; nor when praising, that he
may not make them more boastful; but he leaves both this expression and
that in suspense <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md) , allowing each
man’s own conscience to make the application of what he saith.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p22"></span>Nor doth he here seem to me to be
comforting the poor only, but those also who were not violating the
custom. For it was likely that there were among them also those that
observed it.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p23"></span>And this is why he said, “I partly
believe it.” Justly then doth he call these “approved,” who not only
with the rest observed the custom, but even without them kept this good
law undisturbed. And he doth this, studying by such praises to render
both others and these persons themselves more forward.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p24"></span>\[4.\] Then at last he adds the very
form of offence. And what is it?

<span id="iv.xxviii-p25"></span>[1 Cor.
11.20](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p25.1"></span>. “When ye assemble yourselves together,”
saith he, “it is not possible to eat the Lord’s Supper.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p26"></span>Seest thou how effectually appealing to
their shame, even already by way of narrative he contrives to give them
his counsel? “For the appearance of your assembly,” saith he, “is
different. It is one of love and brotherly affection. At least one place
receives you all, and ye are together in one flock. But the Banquet,
when you come to that, bears no resemblance to the Assembly of
worshippers.” And he said not, “When ye come together, this is not to
eat in common; “this is not to feast with one another;” but otherwise
again and much more fearfully he reprimands them, saying, “it is not
possible to eat the Lord’s Supper,” sending them away now from this
point to that evening on which Christ delivered the awful Mysteries.
Therefore also he called the early meal “a supper.” For that supper too
had them all reclining at meat together: yet surely not so great was the
distance between the rich and the poor as between the Teacher and the
disciples. For that is infinite. And why say I the Teacher and the
disciples? Think of the interval between the Teacher and the traitor:
nevertheless, the Lord Himself both sat at meat with them and did not
even cast him out, but both gave him his portion of salt and made him
partaker of the Mysteries.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p27"></span>Next he explains how “it is not possible
to eat the Lord’s Supper.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p28"></span>[1 Cor.
11.21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p28.1"></span>. “For in your eating, <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) each one taketh before other his own
supper,” saith he, “and one is hungry, and another is drunken.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p30"></span>Perceivest thou how he intimates that
they were disgracing themselves rather? For that which is the Lord’s,
they make a private matter: so that themselves are the first to suffer
indignity, depriving their own table of its greatest prerogative. How
and in what manner? Because the Lord’s Supper, i.e. the Master’s, ought
to be common. For the property of the master belongs not to this servant
without belonging to that, but in common to all. So that by “the Lord’s”
Supper he expresses this, the “community” of the feast. As if he had
said, “If it be thy master’s, as assuredly it is, thou oughtest not to
withdraw it as private, but as belonging to thy Lord and Master to set
it in common before all. For this is the meaning of, ‘the Lord’s.’ But
now thou dost not suffer it to be the Lord’s, not suffering it to be
<span id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span
id="iv.xxviii-Page_160"></span>common but feasting by thyself.”
Wherefore also he goes on to say,

<span id="iv.xxviii-p31"></span>“For each one taketh before other his
own supper.” And he said not, “cutteth off,” but “taketh before,”
tacitly censuring them both for greediness and for precipitancy. This at
least the sequel also shows. For having said this, he added again, “and
one is hungry, and another is drunken,” each of which showed a want of
moderation, both the craving and the excess. See also a second fault
again whereby those same persons are injured: the first, that they
dishonor their supper: the second, that they are greedy and drunken; and
what is yet worse, even when the poor are hungry. For what was intended
to be set before all in common, that these men fed on alone, and
proceeded both to surfeiting and to drunkenness. Wherefore neither did
he say, “one is hungry, and another is filled:” but, “is drunken.” Now
each of these, even by itself, is worthy of censure: for it is a fault
to be drunken even without despising the poor; and to despise the poor
without being drunken, is an accusation. When both then are joined
together at the same time, consider how exceeding great is the
transgression.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p32"></span>Next, having pointed out their
profaneness, he adds his reprimand in what follows, with much anger,
saying,

<span id="iv.xxviii-p33"></span>[1 Cor.
11.22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p33.1"></span>. “What? have ye not houses to eat and to
drink in? Or despise ye the Church of God, and put them to shame that
have not?”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p34"></span>Seest thou how he transferred the charge
from the indignity offered to the poor to the Church, that his words
might make a deeper impression of disgust? Here now you see is yet a
fourth accusation, when not the poor only, but the Church likewise is
insulted. For even as thou makest the Lord’s Supper a private meal, so
also the place again, using the Church as a house. For it was made a
Church, not that we who come together might be divided, but that they
who are divided might be joined:  and this act of assembling shows.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p35"></span>“And put them to shame that have not.”
He said not, “and kill with hunger them that have not,” but so as much
more to put them to the blush, “shame them;” to point out that it is not
food which he cares for so much as the wrong done unto them. Behold
again a fifth accusation, not only to overlook the poor but even to
shame them. Now this he said, partly as treating with reverence the
concerns of the poor, and intimating that they grieve not so for the
belly as for the shame; and partly also drawing the hearer to
compassion.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p36"></span>Having therefore pointed out so great
impieties, indignity to the Supper, indignity to the Church, the
contempt practised towards the poor; he relaxes again the tones of his
reproof, saying, all of a sudden <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md)
, “Shall I praise you? In this I praise you not.” Wherein one might
especially marvel at him that when there was need to strike and chide
more vehemently after the proof of so great offences, he doeth the
contrary rather, gives way, and permits them to recover breath. What
then may the cause be? He had touched more painfully than usual in
aggravating the charge, and being a most excellent physician, he adapts
the incision to the wounds, neither cutting superficially those parts
which require a deep stroke; (for thou hast heard him how he cut off
among those very persons him that had committed fornication;) nor
delivering over to the knife those things which require the milder sort
of remedies. For this cause then here also he conducts his address more
mildly, and in another point of view likewise, he sought especially to
render them gentle to the poor:  and this is why he discourses with them
rather in a subdued tone.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p38"></span>\[5.\] Next, wishing also from another
topic to shame them yet more, he takes again the points which were most
essential and of them weaves his discourse.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p39"></span>[1 Cor.
11.23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p39.1"></span>. “For I received of the Lord,” saith he,
“that which also I delivered unto you: how that the Lord Jesus in the
night in which He was betrayed, took bread:”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p40"></span>[1 Cor.
11.24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p40.1"></span>. “And when He had given thanks, He brake
it, and said, Take, eat: this is My Body, which is broken for you: this
do in remembrance of me.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p41"></span>Wherefore doth he here make mention of
the Mysteries? Because that argument was very necessary to his present
purpose. As thus: “Thy Master,” saith he, “counted all worthy of the
same Table, though it be very awful and far exceeding the dignity of
all: but thou considerest them to be unworthy even of thine own, small
and mean as we see it is; and while they have no advantage over thee in
spiritual things, thou robbest them in the temporal things. For neither
are these thine own.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p42"></span>However, he doth not express himself
thus, to prevent his discourse becoming harsh:  but he frames it in a
gentler form, saying, that “the Lord Jesus in the night in which He was
betrayed, took bread.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p43"></span>And wherefore doth he remind us of the
time, and of that evening, and of the betrayal? Not indifferently nor
without some reason, but that he might exceedingly fill them with
compunction, were it but from consideration of the time. For even if one
be a very stone, yet when he considers that night, how He was with His
disciples, “very heavy,” how He was betrayed, how He was bound, how He
was led away, how He was judged, how He suffered all <span
id="page_161">p. 161</span> <span id="iv.xxviii-Page_161"></span>the
rest in order, he becometh softer than wax, and is withdrawn from earth
and all the pomp of this world. Therefore he leads us to the remembrance
of all those things, by His time, and His table, and His betrayal,
putting us to shame and saying, “Thy Master gave up even Himself for
thee: and thou dost not even share a little meat with thy brother for
thine own sake.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p44"></span>But how saith he, that “he received it
from the Lord?” since certainly he was not present then but was one of
the persecutors. That thou mayest know that the first table had no
advantage above that which cometh after it. For even to-day also it is
He who doeth all, and delivereth it even as then.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p45"></span>And not on this account only doth he
remind us of that night, but that he may also in another way bring us to
compunction. For as we particularly remember those words which we hear
last from those who are departing; and to their heirs if they should
venture to transgress their commands, when we would put them to shame we
say, “Consider that this was the last word that your father uttered to
you, and until the evening when he was just about to breathe his last he
kept repeating these injunctions:” just so Paul, purposing hence also to
make his argument full of awfulness; “Remember,” saith he, “that this
was the last mysterious rite <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) He
gave unto you, and in that night on which He was about to be slain for
us, He commanded these things, and having delivered to us that Supper
after that He added nothing further.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p47"></span>Next also he proceeds to recount the
very things that were done, saying, “He took bread, and, when He had
given thanks, He brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is My Body, which
is broken for you.” If therefore thou comest for a sacrifice of
thanksgiving, <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md) do thou on thy
part nothing unworthy of that sacrifice: by no means either dishonor thy
brother, or neglect him in his hunger; be not drunken, insult not the
Church. As thou comest giving thanks for what thou hast enjoyed: so do
thou thyself accordingly make return, and not cut thyself off from thy
neighbor. Since Christ for His part gave equally to all, saying, “Take,
eat.” He gave His Body equally, but dost not thou give so much as the
common bread equally? Yea, it was indeed broken for all alike, and
became the Body equally for all.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p49"></span>[1 Cor.
11.25](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p49.1"></span>. “In like manner also the cup after supper,
saying, This cup is the New Covenant in My Blood: this do, as oft as ye
drink of it, in remembrance of Me.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p50"></span>What sayest thou? Art thou making a
remembrance of Christ, and despisest thou the poor and tremblest not?
Why, if a son or brother had died and thou wert making a remembrance of
him, thou wouldst have been smitten by thy conscience, hadst thou not
fulfilled the custom and invited the poor: and when thou art making
remembrance of thy Master, dost thou not so much as simply give a
portion of the Table?

<span id="iv.xxviii-p51"></span>But what is it which He saith, “This cup
is the New Covenant?” Because there was also a cup of the Old Covenant;
the libations and the blood of the brute creatures. For after
sacrificing, they used to receive the blood in a chalice and bowl and so
pour it out. Since then instead of the blood of beasts He brought in His
own Blood; lest any should be troubled on hearing this, He reminds them
of that ancient sacrifice.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p52"></span>\[6.\] Next, having spoken concerning
that Supper, he connects the things present with the things of that
time, that even as on that very evening and reclining on that very couch
and receiving from Christ himself this sacrifice, so also now might men
be affected; and he saith,

<span id="iv.xxviii-p53"></span>[1 Cor.
11.26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p53.1"></span>. “For as often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye proclaim the Lord’s death till He come.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p54"></span>For as Christ in regard to the bread and
the cup said, “Do this in remembrance of Me,” revealing to us the cause
of the giving of the Mystery, and besides what else He said, declaring
this to be a sufficient cause to ground our religious fear upon:—(for
when thou considerest what thy Master hath suffered for thee, thou wilt
the better deny thyself:)—so also Paul saith here: “as often as ye eat
ye do proclaim His death.” And this is that Supper. Then intimating that
it abides unto the end, he saith, “till He come.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p55"></span>[1 Cor.
11.27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p55.1"></span>. “Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread
and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body
and the Blood of the Lord.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p56"></span>Why so? Because he poured it out, and
makes the thing appear a slaughter and no longer a sacrifice. Much
therefore as they who then pierced Him, pierced Him not that they might
drink but that they might shed His blood: so likewise doth he that
cometh for it unworthily and reaps no profit thereby. Seest thou how
fearful he makes his discourse, and inveighs against them very
exceedingly, signifying that if they are thus to drink, they partake
unworthily of the elements <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md) ? For
how can it be other than unworthily when it is he who neglects the
hungry? who besides overlooking him puts him to shame? Since if not
giving to the poor casteth one out of the kingdom, even though one
should be a virgin; or rather, not giving <span id="page_162">p.
162</span> <span id="iv.xxviii-Page_162"></span>liberally: (for even
those virgins too had oil, only they had it not abundantly:)  consider
how great the evil will prove, to have wrought so many impieties?

<span id="iv.xxviii-p58"></span>“What impieties?” say you. Why sayest
thou, what impieties? Thou hast partaken of such a Table and when thou
oughtest to be more gentle than any and like the angels, none so cruel
as thou art become. Thou hast tasted the Blood of the Lord, and not even
thereupon dost thou acknowledge thy brother. Of what indulgence then art
thou worthy? Whereas if even before this thou hadst not known him, thou
oughtest to have come to the knowledge of him from the Table; but now
thou dishonorest the Table itself; he having been deemed worthy to
partake of it and thou not judging him worthy of thy meat. Hast thou not
heard how much he suffered who demanded the hundred pence? how he made
void the gift vouchsafed to him <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153.md)
? Doth it not come into thy mind what thou wert and what thou hast
become?  Dost thou not put thyself in remembrance that if this man be
poor in possessions, thou wast much more beggarly in good works, being
full of ten thousand sins? Notwithstanding, God delivered thee from all
those and counted thee worthy of such a Table: but thou art not even
thus become more merciful: therefore of course nothing else remaineth
but that thou shouldest be “delivered to the tormentors.”

<span id="iv.xxviii-p60"></span>\[7.\] These words let us also listen
to, all of us, as many as in this place approach with the poor to this
holy Table, but when we go out, do not seem even to have seen them, but
are both drunken and pass heedlessly by the hungry; the very things
whereof the Corinthians were accused. And when is this done? say you. At
all times indeed, but especially at the festivals, where above all times
it ought not so to be. Is it not so, that at such times, immediately
after Communion, drunkenness succeeds and contempt of the poor? And
having partaken of the Blood, when it were a time for thee to fast and
watch, thou givest thyself up to wine and revelling. And yet if thou
hast by chance made thy morning meal on any thing good, thou keepest
thyself lest by any other unsavory viand thou spoil the taste of the
former: and now that thou hast been feasting on the Spirit thou bringest
in a satanical luxury. Consider, when the Apostles partook of that holy
Supper, what they did: did they not betake themselves to prayers and
singing of hymns? to sacred vigils? to that long work of teaching, so
full of all self-denial? For then He related and delivered to them those
great and wonderful things, when Judas had gone out to call them who
were about to crucify Him. Hast thou not heard how the three thousand
also who partook of the Communion continued even in prayer and teaching,
not in drunken feasts and revellings? But thou before thou hast partaken
fastest, that in a certain way thou mayest appear worthy of the
Communion: but when thou hast partaken, and thou oughtest to increase
thy temperance, thou undoest all. And yet surely it is not the same to
fast before this and after it. Since although it is our duty to be
temperate at both times, yet most particularly after we have received
the Bridegroom.  Before, that thou mayest become worthy of receiving:
after, that thou mayest not be found unworthy of what thou hast
received.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p61"></span>“What then? ought we to fast after
receiving?” I say not this, neither do I use any compulsion. This indeed
were well: however, I do not enforce this, but I exhort you not to feast
to excess. For if one never ought to live luxuriously, and Paul showed
this when he said, “she that giveth herself to pleasure is dead while
she liveth” ([1 Tim. v. 6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.xxviii-p61.1"></span>.); much more will she then be dead. And if
luxury be death to a woman, much more to a man:  and if this done at
another time is fatal, much more after the communion of the Mysteries.
And dost thou having taken the bread of life, do an action of death and
not shudder? Knowest thou not how great evils are brought in by luxury?
Unseasonable laughter, disorderly expressions, buffoonery fraught with
perdition, unprofitable trifling, all the other things, which it is not
seemly even to name. And these things thou doest when thou hast enjoyed
the Table of Christ, on that day on which thou hast been counted worthy
to touch His flesh with thy tongue. What then is to be done to prevent
these things? Purify thy right hand, thy tongue, thy lips, which have
become a threshold for Christ to tread upon. Consider the time in which
thou didst draw near and set forth a material table, raise thy mind to
that Table, to the Supper of the Lord, to the vigil of the disciples, in
that night, that holy night. Nay, rather should one accurately examine,
this very present state is night. Let us watch then with the Lord, let
us be pricked in our hearts with the disciples. It is the season of
prayers, not of drunkenness; ever indeed, but especially during a
festival. For a festival is therefore appointed, not that we may behave
ourselves unseemly, not that we may accumulate sins, but rather that we
may blot out those which exist.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p62"></span>I know, indeed, that I say these things
in vain, yet will I not cease to say them. For if ye do not all obey,
yet surely ye will not all disobey; or rather, even though ye should all
be disobedient, my reward will be greater, though <span id="page_163">p.
163</span> <span id="iv.xxviii-Page_163"></span>yours will be more
condemnation. However, that it may not be more, to this end I will not
cease to speak. For perchance, perchance, by my perseverance I shall be
able to reach you.

<span id="iv.xxviii-p63"></span>Wherefore I beseech you that we do not
this to condemnation; let us nourish Christ, let us give Him drink, let
us clothe Him. These things are worthy of that Table. Hast thou heard
holy hymns? Hast thou seen a spiritual marriage? Hast thou enjoyed a
royal Table? Hast thou been filled with the Holy Ghost? Hast thou joined
in the choir of the Seraphim? Hast thou become partaker of the powers
above? Cast not away so great a joy, waste not the treasure, bring not
in drunkenness, the mother of dejection, the joy of the devil, the
parent of ten thousand evils. For hence is a sleep like unto death, and
heaviness of head, and disease, and obliviousness, and an image of dead
men’s condition. Further, if thou wouldst not choose to meet with a
friend when intoxicated, when thou hast Christ within, durst thou, tell
me, to thrust in upon Him so great an excess?

<span id="iv.xxviii-p64"></span>But dost thou love enjoyment? Then, on
this very account cease being drunken. For I, too, would have thee enjoy
thyself, but with the real enjoyment, that which never fadeth. What then
is the real enjoyment, ever blooming? Invite Christ to sup <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154.md) ([Rev. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020)<span id="iv.xxviii-p65.2"></span>..md)
with thee; give Him to partake of thine, or rather of His own. This
bringeth pleasure without limit, and in its prime everlastingly. But the
things of sense are not such; rather as soon as they appear they vanish
away; and he that hath enjoyed them will be in no better condition than
he who hath not, or rather in a worse. For the one is settled as it were
in a harbor, but the other exposes himself to a kind of torrent, a
besieging army of distempers, and hath not even any power to endure the
first swell of the sea. <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155.md)

<span id="iv.xxviii-p67"></span>That these things be therefore not so,
let us follow after moderation. For thus we shall both be in a good
state of body, and we shall possess our souls in security, and shall be
delivered from evils both present and future: from which may we all be
delivered, and attain unto the kingdom, through the grace and mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, together with the Holy
Spirit, be glory, power, and honor, now and ever, and world without end.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_142"></span>[157:143](1120031.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p6.1"></span>τῆς συνάξεως</span>.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[158:144](1120031.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p9.1"></span>φιλοτιμίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[158:145](1120031.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p12.1"></span>σχίσματα</span>.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[158:146](1120031.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p17"></span> vid. S. Chrys. on S. Matth. Hom. 59.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[159:147](1120031.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p20.1"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p20.2"></span>να</span>.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[159:148](1120031.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p20.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p21.1"></span>εἰς μετέωρον ἀφίησι</span>, “sends it out
into the air.”

<span id="fn_148"></span>[159:149](1120031.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p29.1"></span>ἐν τῷ φαγεῖν</span>.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[160:150](1120031.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p37.1"></span>χαλᾶ τὸν τόνον, ἀθρόον λέγων</span>.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[161:151](1120031.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p46.1"></span>μυσταγωγίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[161:152](1120031.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p48.1"></span>εὐχαριστία</span>.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[161:153](1120031.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p57.1"></span>τῶν προκέιμενων</span>.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[162:154](1120031.htm#fr_153.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p59.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p59.2"></span>ξενεχθεῖσαν</span>, perhaps “officially
declared.”

<span id="fn_154"></span>[163:155](1120031.htm#fr_154.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p65.1"></span>ἐπ ἂριστον</span>.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[163:156](1120031.htm#fr_155.md) <span
id="iv.xxviii-p65.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxviii-p66.1"></span>τήν ζάλην ταύτην</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXVIII](1120032.md)
