[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120040)  [Next](1120042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXVII.</span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p2"></span><span id="iv.xxxviii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. xiv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p3"></span>Let your women keep silence in the
churches: for it is not permitted unto them to speak; but let them be in
subjection, as also saith the law.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>Having</span> abated the disturbance both
from the tongues and from the prophesyings; and having made a law to
prevent confusion, that they who speak with tongues should do this in
turn, and that they who prophesy should be silent when another begins;
he next in course proceeds to the disorder which arose from the women,
cutting off their unseasonable boldness of speech: and that very
opportunely. For if to them that have the gifts it is not permitted to
speak inconsiderately, nor when they will, and this, though they be
moved by the Spirit; much less to those women who prate idly and to no
purpose. Therefore he represses their babbling with much authority, and
taking the law along with him, thus he sews up their mouths; not simply
exhorting here or giving counsel, but even laying his commands on them
vehemently, by the recitation of an ancient law on that subject. For
having said, “Let your women keep silence in the churches;” and “it is
not permitted unto them to speak, but let them be in subjection;” he
added, “as also saith the law.” And where doth the law say this? “Thy
desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.” ([Gen.
iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p4.2"></span>.) Seest thou the wisdom of Paul, what kind
of testimony he adduced, one that not only enjoins on them silence, but
silence too with fear; and with as great fear as that wherewith a maid
servant ought to keep herself quiet. Wherefore also having himself said,
“it is not permitted unto them to speak,” he added not, “but to be
silent,” but instead of “to be silent,” he set down what is more, to
wit, “the being in subjection.” And if this be so in respect of
husbands, much more in respect of teachers, and fathers, and the general
assembly of the Church. “But if they are not even to speak,” saith one,
“nor ask a question, to what end are they to be present?” That they may
hear what they ought; but the points which are questioned let them learn
at home from their husbands. Wherefore also he added,

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p5"></span>[1 Cor.
14.35](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#035)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>. “And if they would learn any thing, let
them ask their own husbands at home.”

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p6"></span>Thus, “not only, as it seems, are they
not allowed to speak,” saith he, “at random, but not even to ask any
question in the church.” Now if they ought not to ask questions, much
more is their speaking at pleasure contrary to law. And what may be the
cause of his setting them under so great subjection? Because the woman
is in some sort a weaker being and easily carried away and light minded.
Here you see why he set over them their husbands as teachers, for the
benefit of both. For so he both rendered the women orderly, and the
husbands he made anxious, as having to deliver to their wives very
exactly what they heard.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p7"></span>Further, because they supposed this to
be an ornament to them, I mean their speaking in public; again he brings
round the discourse to the opposite point, saying, “For it is shameful
for a woman to speak in the church.” That is, first he made this out
from the law of God, then from common reason and our received custom;
even when he was discoursing with the women about long hair, he said,
“Doth not even nature herself teach you?” (c. [1 Cor.
11.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>.) And everywhere thou mayest find this to
be his manner, not only from the divine Scriptures, but also from the
common custom, to put them to shame.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p8"></span>\[2.\] But besides these things, he also
shames them by consideration of what all agreed on, <span
id="page_223">p. 223</span> <span id="iv.xxxviii-Page_223"></span>and
what was every where prescribed; which topic also here he hath set down,
saying,

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p9"></span>[1 Cor.
14.36](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#036)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p9.1"></span>. “What? was it from you that the word of
God went forth? or came it unto you alone?”

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p10"></span>Thus he brings in the other Churches
also as holding this law, both abating the disturbance by consideration
of the novelty of the thing, and by the general voice making his saying
acceptable. Wherefore also elsewhere he said, “Who shall put you in
remembrance of my ways which be in Christ, even as I teach everywhere in
all the Churches.” ([1 Cor. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#017)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p10.1"></span>.) And again, “God is not a God of
confusion, but of peace, as in all the Churches of the saints.” (c. [1
Cor. 14.33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p10.2"></span>.) And here, “What? was it from you that
the word of God went forth? or came it unto you alone?” i.e., “neither
first, nor alone are ye believers, but the whole world <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) .” Which also writing to the
Colossians he said, “even as it is bearing fruit and increasing in all
the world,” ([Col. i. 6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p11.3"></span>.) speaking of the Gospel.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p12"></span>But he turns it also at another time to
the encouragement of his hearers; as when he saith that theirs were the
first fruits, and were manifest unto all. Thus, writing to the
Thessalonians he said, “For from you hath sounded forth the word of
God,” and, “in every place your faith to God-ward is gone forth.” ([1
Thess. i. 8](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#008)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p12.1"></span>.) And again to the Romans, “Your faith is
proclaimed throughout the whole world.” For both are apt to shame and
stir up, as well the being commended of others, as that they have others
partakers in their judgment. Wherefore also here he saith; “What? was it
from you that the word of God went forth? or came it unto you only?”
“For neither can ye say this,” saith he; “we were made teachers to the
rest, and it cannot be right for us to learn of others;” nor, “the faith
remained in this place only, and no precedents from other quarters ought
to be received.” Seest thou by how many arguments he put them to shame?
He introduced the law, he signified the shamefulness of the thing, he
brought forward the other Churches. <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252)

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p14"></span>\[3.\] Next, what is strongest of all
he puts last, saying, “God ordains these things even at this time by
me.”

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p15"></span>[1 Cor.
14.37](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#037)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p15.1"></span>. Thus: “if any man thinketh himself to be
a prophet, or spiritual, let him take knowledge of the things which I
write unto you that they are the commandments of the Lord.”

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p16"></span>[1 Cor.
14.38](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#038)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p16.1"></span>. “But if any man is ignorant, let him be
ignorant.”

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p17"></span>And wherefore did he add this?
Intimating that he is not using violence nor contention, which is a sign
of them who wish not to set up their own things, but aim at what is
profitable to others. Wherefore also in another place he saith, “But if
any man seemeth to be contentious, we have no such custom.” ([1 Cor. xi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p17.1"></span>.) But he doth not this everywhere, but
only where the offences are not very great, and then rather as putting
them to shame. Since when he discourses of other sins, he speaks not
thus. But how? “Be not deceived:  neither fornicators, nor effeminate,
shall inherit the kingdom of God.” ([1 Cor.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p17.2"></span>.) And again, “Behold, I Paul say unto you,
that if ye receive circumcision, Christ will profit you nothing.” ([Gal.
v. 2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p17.3"></span>.) But here, since his discourse was of
silence, he doth not very keenly inveigh against them, by this very
thing attracting them the more. Then, as he is ever wont to do, unto the
former subject whence he digressed to say these things, he brings back
his discourse as follows:

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p18"></span>[1 Cor.
14.39](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#039)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p18.1"></span>. “Wherefore, brethren, desire earnestly to
prophesy, and forbid not to speak with tongues.”

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p19"></span>For this too is his wont, not only to
work out what is before him, but also starting from that to set right
whatever seems to him in any way akin to it, and again to return to the
former, so as not to appear to wander from the subject. For so when he
was discoursing of their concord in their banquets, he digressed to
their Communion in the Mysteries, and having thence put them to shame,
he returns again to the former, saying, “Wherefore, when ye come
together to eat, wait one for another.” ([1 Cor. xi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#033)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p20"></span>And here, accordingly, having
discoursed of good order in their gifts, and of its being a duty neither
to faint in the lesser, nor to be puffed up on account of the greater;
then having made an excursion from thence to the sobriety becoming women
and having established it, he returns again to his subject, saying,
“Wherefore, brethren, desire earnestly to prophesy, and forbid not to
speak with tongues.” Seest thou how to the end he preserved the
difference of these? And how he signifies that the one is very
necessary, the other not so? Wherefore of the one he saith, “desire
earnestly <span id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) ,” but of the other,
“forbid not.”

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p22"></span>\[4.\] Then, as in brief summary,
setting all things right, he adds the words,

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p23"></span>[1 Cor.
14.40](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#040)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p23.1"></span>. “Let all things be done decently and in
order.”

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p24"></span><span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span
id="iv.xxxviii-Page_224"></span>Again giving a blow to them who chose to
behave themselves unseemly without cause, and to incur the imputation of
madness; and who keep not their proper rank. For nothing doth so build
up as good order, as peace, as love; even as their contraries tend to
pull down. And not only in things spiritual, but also in all others one
may observe this. Thus whether it be in a dance, or a ship, or in a
chariot, or a camp, if thou shouldest confound the order, and casting
the greater out of their proper place, shouldest bring in the lesser
into their rank, thou destroyest all, and thus things are turned upside
down. Neither let us then destroy our order, nor place the head below
and the feet above:  now this is done when we cast down right reason,
and set our lusts, passions, and pleasure, over the rational part:
whence violent are the billows, and great the confusion, and intolerable
the tempest, all things being wrapt in darkness.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p25"></span>And, if thou wilt, let us first examine
the unseemliness which arises herefrom, and then the loss. How then may
this be clear to us, and thoroughly known? Let us bring forward a man in
that frame of mind; enamoured of a harlot and overcome by a dishonorable
passion; and then we shall see the mockery which this comes to. For what
can be baser than a man watching the doors before the harlots’ chambers,
and beaten by a whorish woman, and weeping, and lamenting, and turning
his glory into shame? And if thou wilt also see the loss, call to mind,
I pray, the expenditure of money, the extreme risks, the contests with
rival lovers, the wounds, the stripes received in such affrays.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p26"></span>Such also are they who are holden by
the lust of wealth; or rather they behave themselves more unseemly. For
whereas these are wholly occupied about one person; the covetous busy
themselves about all men’s substance alike, both poor and rich, and long
for things that are not; a thing which above all denotes the wildness of
their passion. For they say not, “I would fain have the substance of
such a person or of such another,” only, but they want the very
mountains to be gold, and the houses and all that they see; and they go
forth into another world, and this passion they feel to a boundless
degree, and at no point cease from their lusting. What discourse can set
before us the tempest of those thoughts, the waves, the darkness? And
where the waves and tempest are so great, what pleasure can there be? 
There is not any; but tumult, and anguish, and black clouds which
instead of rain bring great sorrow of heart: the kind of thing which is
wont to happen in the case of those who are enamoured of beauty not
their own. Wherefore they who have no passionate love at all are in more
pleasure than any lovers.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p27"></span>\[5.\] This however no man would
gainsay. But to me even he who loves, but restrains his passion, seems
to live more pleasurably than he who continually enjoys his mistress.
For though the proof be rather difficult, nevertheless even at that
disadvantage the argument must be ventured on: the cause of the
increased difficulty not being the nature of the thing, but because of
the want of meet hearers for this high morality. Thus:  whether is it
pleasanter, tell me, to the lover, to be despised by his beloved, or to
be honored, and to look down upon her?  Evidently the latter. Whom then,
tell me, will the harlot value more? Him that is a slave to her and is
already led captive at her will, or him that is above her nets and
soareth higher than her arrows?  Every one must see, the latter. And
about whom will she take more thought, the fallen, or him that is not
yet so? Him that is not yet so, of course. And which will be more an
object of desire, he who is subdued, or he who is not yet taken? He who
up to this time is not yet taken. And if ye disbelieve it, I will
produce my proof from what takes place within yourselves. As thus: of
which woman would a man be more enamored; one that easily submits and
gives herself up to him, or one that denies, and gives him trouble?
Evidently of this last; since hereby the longing is more vehemently
kindled. Of course then in the woman’s case also exactly the same thing
will happen. And him will they honor and admire more who looks down upon
them. But if this be true, so likewise is the other, that he enjoys
greater pleasure who is more honored and beloved. Since the general too
lets alone the city that hath been once taken, but that which stands out
and maintains the struggle he besets with all diligence: and the hunter,
when the animal is caught, keeps it shut up in darkness as the harlot
doth her lover, but pursues that which flies from him.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p28"></span>But I shall be told, “the one enjoys
his desire, the other not so.” But freedom from disgrace, and from being
a slave under her tyrannical commands, the not being led and dragged
about by her as a drudge, beaten, spit upon, pitched head foremost; dost
thou consider this to be a small pleasure, tell me? Nay, if one would
accurately examine these things, and were able to gather into one their
insults, complaints, everlasting quarrels, some arising from their
tempers, others from their wantonness, their enmities, and all the rest,
such as they only that feel them know;—he will find that there is no war
but hath more truces than this wretched life of theirs. What pleasure
then meanest thou, tell me? The temporary and brief enjoyment of
intercourse? But this speedily doth strife overtake, and storms, and
rage, and the same madness again.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p29"></span><span id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span
id="iv.xxxviii-Page_225"></span>\[6.\] And these things have been said
by us, as one would speak discoursing with licentious youths, who do not
very patiently submit to hear our discourses of the kingdom and of hell.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p30"></span>And now that we are bringing forward
these topics also, it is not even possible to say how great is the
pleasure of the continent; if one frame in one’s own mind his crowns,
his rewards, his converse with the angels, the proclaiming of him before
the world, his boldness, those blessed and immortal hopes of his.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p31"></span>“But intercourse hath a certain
pleasure:” for this they are continually repeating: “while the continent
continually suffers pain contending with the tyranny of nature.” Nay,
but one shall find just the contrary result. For this violence and
tumult is present with the unchaste rather:  there being in his body a
violent tempest, and no sea in a storm so grievously vexed as he; never
withstanding his passion, but ever receiving blows from it; as the
possessed and they that are continually rent in the midst by evil
spirits. Whereas the temperate like a noble champion continually giving
blows to it, reaps the best of pleasures, and sweeter than ten thousand
of that kind; and this victory and his good conscience, and those
illustrous trophies, are ornaments for him continually to deck himself
withal.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p32"></span>As to the other, if after his
intercourse he hath a little respite, it must be counted nothing. For
again the storm comes on, and again there are waves. But he that
commands himself doth not suffer this tumult to lay hold of him at all,
nor the sea to arise, nor the wild beast to roar. And even if he endure
some violence in restraining such an impulse, yet so doth the other
also, continually receiving blows and stabs, and unable to endure the
sting: and it is like as if there were a wild horse furious and
struggling, and one should check with the bridle, and hold him in with
all skill: while another giving him the rein to escape the trouble, were
dragged along by him and carried hither and thither.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p33"></span>If I have spoken these things more
plainly than is becoming, let no man blame me. For I desire not to make
a brave show by a gravity of words, but to make my hearers grave.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p34"></span>Therefore also the prophets spare no
such words, wishing to extirpate the licentiousness of the Jews, but do
even more nakedly inveigh against them than we do now in the things we
have spoken. For so a physician wishing to remove an ulcer doth not
consider how he may keep his hands clean, but how he may rid the patient
of the ulcer; and he who would raise on high the lowly, first makes
himself lowly; and he who seeks to slay the conspirator stains himself
with blood as well as the other, and this makes him the more brilliant.
Since if one were to see a soldier returning from the war, stained with
gore and blood and brains, he will not loathe him nor turn from him on
this account, but will even admire him the more. So then let us do, when
we see any one returning, covered with blood after the slaughter of his
evil desire, let us the more admire him and become partakers of his
battle and victory, and say to those who indulge this wild love, “show
us the pleasure you derive from lust; for the continent hath that which
comes of his victory, but thou none from any quarter. But if ye should
mention that which is connected with the criminal act, yet the other is
more manifest and satisfactory. For thou hast from the enjoyment
something brief and hardly apparent; but he from his conscience, hath
both a greater and an enduring and a sweeter joy. The company of a woman
hath surely no such power as self-command, to preserve the soul
undisturbed and give it wings.”

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p35"></span>Well then: the continent man, as I
said, thus evidently makes his pleasure out to us: but in thy case I see
the dejection arising from defeat, but the pleasure, desiring to see, I
find not. For what dost thou consider the moment of pleasure?  That
before the criminal action? Nay, it is not so, for it is a time of
madness and delirium and frenzy: to grind the teeth and be beside one’s
self is not any pleasure: and if it were pleasure, it would not produce
the same effects on you which they who are in pain endure. For they who
strike with their fists and are stricken grind their teeth, and women in
travail distracted with pains do the same. So that this is no pleasure,
but frenzy rather, and confusion, and tumult. Shall we say then, the
time after the action? Nay, neither is this. For neither could we say
that a woman just delivered is in pleasure, but in release from certain
pains. But this is by no means pleasure, but weakness rather and falling
away: and there is a great difference between these two. What then is
the time of pleasure, tell me? There is none. But if there be any, it is
so brief as not even to be apparent. At least, having zealously sought
in a great many ways to detect and apprehend it, we have not been able.
But the time of the chaste man’s pleasure is not such, rather it is
wider and evident to all. Or rather, all his life is in pleasure, his
conscience crowned, the waves laid, no disturbance from any quarter
arising within him.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p36"></span>Since then this man’s life is more in
pleasure, while the life spent in love of pleasure is in dejection and
disquiets; let us flee from licentiousness, let us keep hold on
continence, that we may also obtain the good things to come, through the
grace and mercy, &c., &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_251"></span>[223:252](1120041.htm#fr_251) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p11"></span> [Rom. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p11.2"></span>
καταγγέλλεται</span>.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[223:253](1120041.htm#fr_252) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p13"></span> \[The sharp rebuke contained in this
verse is restricted by Meyer to the regulation laid down respecting
women, but it rather refers, as Chrysostom views it, to all the points
touched upon in the preceding discussion. As Principal Edwards says,
“The Corinthians acted as if they had originated the Gospel or were the
only Christian Church; that is, as if the Gospel took its coloring from
local influences and were not broad as humanity itself nor destined to
survive nationalities.” He thinks too that it is a question whether they
asked the Apostle’s advice as touching the Spiritual gifts, as the way
in which that subject is introduced in the [1 Cor.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001), [1 Cor.
14:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#036)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p13.1"></span> as well as the words of this verse make it
doubtful. C.\]

<span id="fn_253"></span>[223:254](1120041.htm#fr_253) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p21.1"></span>ζηλοῦτε</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXVIII](1120042)
