[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120057)  [Next](1120059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ix"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="v.ix-p1.1"></span>Homily IX.</span>

<span id="v.ix-p2"></span><span id="v.ix-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.ix-p2.2"></span>[2 Cor.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#009)<span id="v.ix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.ix-p3"></span>We are pressed on every side, yet not
straitened; perplexed, yet not unto despair; pursued, yet not forsaken.

<span id="v.ix-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.ix-p4.1"></span>He</span> still dwells upon proving that the whole
work is to be ascribed to the power of God, repressing the
highmindedness of those that glory in themselves. ‘For not this only,’
saith he, ‘is marvelous, that we keep this treasure in earthen vessels,
but that even when enduring ten thousand hardships, and battered <span
id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619) on every side, we \[still\] preserve
and lose it not. Yet though there were a vessel of adamant, it would
neither have been strong enough to carry so vast a treasure, nor have
sufficed against so many machinations; yet, as it is, it both bears it
and suffers no harm, through God’s grace.’ For, “we are pressed on every
side,” saith he, “but not straitened.” What is, “on every side?”

<span id="v.ix-p6"></span>‘In respect of our foes, in respect of our
friends, in respect of necessaries, in respect of other needs, by them
which be hostile, by them of our own household.’ “Yet not straitened.”
And see how he speaks contrarieties, that thence also he may show the
strength of God. For, “we are pressed on every side, yet not
straitened,” saith he; “perplexed, yet not unto despair;” that is, ‘we
do not quite fall off. For we are often, indeed, wrong in our
calculations <span id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620) , and miss our aim,
yet not so as to fall away from what is set before us:  for these things
are permitted by God for our discipline, not for our defeat.’

<span id="v.ix-p8"></span>[2 Cor.
4.9](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#009)<span id="v.ix-p8.1"></span>.
“Pursued, yet not forsaken; smitten down, yet not destroyed.” For these
trials do indeed befal, but not the consequences of the trials. And this
indeed through the power and Grace of God. In other places indeed he
says that these things were permitted in order both to their own <span
id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621) humble-mindedness, and to the safety
of others: for “that I should not be exalted overmuch, there was given
to me a thorn,” ([2 Cor. 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#006)<span id="v.ix-p9.1"></span>.) he
says: and again, “Lest any man should account of me above that which he
seeth me to be, or heareth from me;” and in another place again, “that
we should not trust in ourselves:” ([2 Cor. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#009)<span id="v.ix-p9.2"></span>.) here,
however, that the power of God might be manifested. Seest thou how great
the gain of his trials? For it both showed the power of God, and more
disclosed His grace. For, saith He, “My grace is sufficient for thee.”
([2 Cor. xii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span
id="v.ix-p9.3"></span>.) It also anointed them unto lowliness of mind,
and prepared them for keeping down the rest, and made them to be more
hardy. “For patience,” saith he, “worketh probation, and probation
hope.” ([Rom. v. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004)<span
id="v.ix-p9.4"></span>.) For they who had fallen into ten thousand
dangers and through the hope they had in God had been recovered <span
id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622) , were taught to hold by it more and
more in all things.

<span id="v.ix-p11"></span>[2 Cor.
4.10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010)<span id="v.ix-p11.1"></span>.
“Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the
life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body.”

<span id="v.ix-p12"></span>And what is the “dying of the Lord Jesus,”
which they bare about? Their daily deaths by which also the resurrection
was showed. ‘For if any believe not,’ he says, ‘that Jesus died and rose
again, beholding us every day die and rise again, let him believe
henceforward in the resurrection.’ Seest thou how he has discovered yet
another reason for the trials? What then is this reason? “That his life
also may be manifested in our body.” He says, ‘by snatching us out of
the perils. So that this which seems a mark of weakness and destitution,
this, \[I say,\] proclaims His resurrection. For His power had not so
appeared in our suffering no unpleasantness, as it is now shown in our
suffering indeed, but without being overcome.’

<span id="v.ix-p13"></span>[2 Cor.
4.11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#011)<span id="v.ix-p13.1"></span>.
“For we which live are also <span id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623)
delivered unto death for Jesus’ sake, that the life also of Jesus may be
manifested in us in our mortal flesh.”

<span id="v.ix-p15"></span><span id="page_322">p. 322</span> <span
id="v.ix-Page_322"></span>For every where when he has said any thing
obscure, he interprets himself again. So he has done here also, giving a
clear interpretation of this which I have cited. ‘For therefore, “we are
delivered,”’ he says, ‘in other words, we bear about His dying that the
power of His life may be made manifest, who permitteth not mortal flesh,
though undergoing so great sufferings, to be overcome by the snowstorm
of these calamities.’ And it may be taken too in another way. How? As he
says in another place, “If we die with him, we shall also live with
Him.” ([2 Tim. ii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011)<span
id="v.ix-p15.1"></span>.) ‘For as we endure His dying now, and choose
whilst living to die for His sake: so also will he choose, when we are
dead, to beget us then unto life. For if we from life come into death,
He also will from death lead us by the hand into life.’

<span id="v.ix-p16"></span>[2 Cor.
4.12](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#012)<span id="v.ix-p16.1"></span>. “So
then death worketh in us, but life in you.”

<span id="v.ix-p17"></span>Speaking no more of death in the strict
sense <span id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624) , but of trials and of
rest. ‘For we indeed,’ he says, ‘are in perils and trials, but ye in
rest; reaping the life which is the fruit of these perils. And we indeed
endure the dangerous, but ye enjoy the good things; for ye undergo not
so great trials.’

<span id="v.ix-p19"></span>\[2.\] [2 Cor.
4.13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013)<span id="v.ix-p19.1"></span>.
“But having the same spirit of faith, according to that which is
written, I believed, and therefore did I speak; we also believe, and
therefore also we speak; that <span id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625) He
which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus.” ([Ps.
cxvi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="v.ix-p20.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.ix-p21"></span>He has reminded us of a Psalm which abounds
in heavenly wisdom <span id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626) , and is
especially fitted to encourage <span id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627)
in dangers. For this saying that just man uttered when he was in great
dangers, and from which there was no other possibility of recovery than
by the aid of God. Since then kindred circumstances are most effective
in comforting, therefore he says, “having the same Spirit;” that is, ‘by
the same succor by which he was saved, we also are saved; by the Spirit
through which he spake, we also speak.’ Whence he shows, that between
the New and Old Covenants great harmony exists, and that the same Spirit
wrought in either; and that not we alone are in dangers, but all those
of old were so too; and that we must find a remedy <span
id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628) through faith and hope, and not seek
at once to be released from what is laid upon us. For having showed by
arguments the resurrection and the life, and that the danger was not a
mark of helplessness or destitution; he thenceforward brings in faith
also, and to it commits the whole. But still of this also, he furnishes
a proof, the resurrection, namely, of Christ, saying, “we also believe,
and therefore also we speak.” What do we believe? tell me.

<span id="v.ix-p25"></span>[2 Cor.
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#015)<span id="v.ix-p25.1"></span>.
“That He which raised up Jesus, shall raise up also, <span
id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629) and shall present us with you. For all
things are for your sakes, that the grace, being multiplied through the
many, may cause the thanksgiving to abound unto the glory of God.”

<span id="v.ix-p27"></span>Again, he fills them with lofty
thoughts <span id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) , that they may not
hold themselves indebted to men, I mean to the false Apostles. For the
whole is of God Who willeth to bestow upon many, so that the grace may
appear the greater. For your sakes, therefore, was the resurrection and
all the other things. For He did not these things for the sake of one
only, but of all.

<span id="v.ix-p29"></span>[2 Cor.
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span id="v.ix-p29.1"></span>.
“Wherefore we faint not; but though our outward man is decaying, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day.”

<span id="v.ix-p30"></span>How does it decay? Being scourged, being
persecuted, suffering ten thousand extremities. “Yet the inward man is
renewed day by day.” How is it renewed? By faith, by hope, by a forward
will, finally, by braving those extremities. For in proportion as the
body suffers ten thousand things, in the like proportion hath the soul
goodlier hopes and becometh brighter, like gold refined in the fire more
and more. And see how he brings to nothing the sorrows of this present
life.

<span id="v.ix-p31"></span>[2 Cor.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018)<span id="v.ix-p31.1"></span>. “For
the <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631) light affliction,” he saith,
“which is for the moment, worketh <span
id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632) more and more exceedingly an eternal
weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but at
the things which are not seen.”

<span id="v.ix-p34"></span>Having closed the question by a reference to
hope, (and, as he said in his Epistle to the Romans, “We are saved by
hope, but hope that is seen is not hope;” ([Rom. viii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span id="v.ix-p34.1"></span>.)
establishing the same point here also,) he sets side by side the things
present with the things to come, the momentary with the eternal, the
light with the weighty, the affliction with the glory. And neither is he
content with this, but he addeth another expression, doubling it and
saying, “more and more exceedingly <span
id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) .” Next he also shows the mode how so
great afflictions are light. How then light? “While we look not at the
things that are seen, but at the things that <span id="page_323">p.
323</span> <span id="v.ix-Page_323"></span>are not seen.” So will both
this present be light and that future great, if we withdraw ourselves
from the things that are seen. “For the things that are seen are
temporal.” ([2 Cor. 4.18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018)<span
id="v.ix-p35.2"></span>.) Therefore the afflictions are so too. “But the
things that are not seen are eternal.” Therefore the crowns are so also.
And he said not the afflictions are so, but “the things that are seen;”
all of them, whether punishment or rest, so that we should be neither
puffed up by the one nor overborne <span
id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) by the other. And therefore when
speaking of the things to come, he said not the kingdom is eternal; but,
“the things which are not seen are eternal,” whether they be a kingdom,
or again punishment; so as both to alarm by the one and to encourage by
the other.

<span id="v.ix-p37"></span>\[3.\] Since then “the things that are seen
are temporal, but the things that are not seen are eternal,” let us look
to them. For what excuse even can we have, if we choose the temporal
instead of the eternal? For even if the present be pleasurable, yet it
is not abiding; whilst the woe it entails is abiding and irremissible.
For what excuse will they have who have been counted worthy of the
Spirit and have enjoyed so great a gift, if they become of grovelling
mind and fall down to the earth. For I hear many saying these words
worthy of all scorn, ‘Give me to-day and take tomorrow.’ ‘For,’ saith
one, ‘if indeed there be such things there as ye affirm, then it is one
for one; but if there be no such thing at all, then it is two for
nothing.’ What can be more lawless than these words? or what more idle
prating <span id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) ? We are discoursing
about Heaven and those unspeakable good things; and thou bringest forth
unto us the terms of the race-course <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636) , yet art not ashamed nor hidest thy
face, whilst uttering such things as befit maniacs? Blushest thou not
that art so rivetted to the present things? Wilt thou not cease from
being distraught and beside thyself, and in youth a dotard? Were Greeks
indeed to talk in this way, it were no marvel: but that believers should
vent such dotage, of what forgiveness doth it admit? For dost thou hold
those immortal hopes in utter suspicion? Dost thou think these things to
be utterly doubtful? And in what are these things deserving of pardon?
‘And who hath come,’ saith one, ‘and brought back word what is there?’
Of men indeed not any one, but God, more trustworthy than all, hath
declared these things. But thou beholdest not what is there. Neither
dost thou see God. Wilt thou then deny that there is a God, because thou
seest Him not? ‘Yes,’ he replies, ‘I firmly believe there is a God.’ If
then an infidel should ask thee, ‘And who came from Heaven and brought
back word of this?’ what wilt thou answer?  Whence dost thou know that
there is a God? ‘From the things that are seen,’ he answers, ‘from the
fair order existing through the whole creation, from its being manifest
to all.’ Therefore receive also in the same way the doctrine of the
judgment. ‘How?’ he asks. I will question thee, and do thou answer me.
Is this God just, and will He render to each according to his deserving?
or, on the contrary, doth He will the wicked should live happily and in
luxury, and the good in the contrary things? ‘By no means,’ he answers,
‘for man even would not feel thus.’ Where then shall they who have done
virtuously here, enjoy the things that be good? and where the wicked the
opposites, except there is to be a life and retribution hereafter? Seest
thou that at present it is one for one, and not two for one. But I will
show thee, as I proceed, that it is not even one against one, but it
shall be for the righteous two for nothing; and for the sinners and
these that live here riotously, quite the contrary. For they that have
lived riotously here have received not even one for one; but those who
pass their life in virtue two for nothing <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637) . For who are at in rest, they that
have abused this present life, or they that followed heavenly wisdom?
Perhaps thou wilt say the former, but I prove it of the latter,
summoning for my witnesses those very men that have enjoyed these
present things; and they will not be so shameless as to deny what I am
going to say. For oftentimes have they imprecated curses upon
matchmakers <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638) and upon the day
that their bridal chamber <span id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639) was
wreathed, and have proclaimed them happy who have not married. Many too
of the young, even when they might have married, have refused for no
other reason than the troublesomeness of the thing. And this I say, not
as accusing marriage; for it is “honorable;” ([Heb. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span id="v.ix-p42.2"></span>.) but
those who have used it amiss. Now if they who have lived a married life,
often considered their life not worth the living; what shall we say of
those who have been swept down into whores’ deep pits, and are more
slavishly and wretchedly treated than any captive? what of those who
have grown rotten in luxury and have enveloped their bodies with a
thousand diseases? ‘But it is a pleasure to be had in honor.’ Yea,
rather, nothing is bitterer than this slavery. For he that seeketh vain
honor is more servile than any slave, and desirous of pleasing any body;
but he that treads it under foot is superior to all, who careth <span
id="page_324">p. 324</span> <span id="v.ix-Page_324"></span>not for the
glory that cometh from others. ‘But the possession of wealth is
desirable.’ Yet we have often shown that they who are loose from it and
have nothing, enjoy greater riches and repose. ‘But to be drunken is
pleasant.’ But who will say this? Surely then if to be without riches is
pleasanter than to have them, and not to marry than to marry, and not to
seek vainglory than to seek it, and not to live luxuriously than to live
so; even in this world they who are not riveted to those present things
have the advantage. And as yet I say not how that the former, even
though he be racked with ten thousand tortures, hath that good hope to
carry him through:  whilst the latter, even though he is in the
enjoyment of a thousand delights, hath the fear of the future
disquieting and confounding his pleasure. For this, too, is no light
sort of punishment; nor therefore the contrary, of enjoyment and repose.
And besides these there is a third sort. And what is this? In that the
things of worldly delight do not even whilst they are present appear
such, being refuted <span id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640) both by
nature and time; but the others not only are, but also abide immovable.
Seest thou that we shall be able to put not two for nothing only, but
three even, and five, and ten, and twenty, and ten thousand for nothing?
But that thou mayest learn this same truth by an example also,—the rich
man and Lazarus,—the one enjoyed the things present, the other those to
come. ([Luke xvi. 19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019)<span
id="v.ix-p43.3"></span>. &c.) Seems it then to thee to be one and one,
to be punished throughout all time, and to be an hungered for a little
season? to be diseased in thy corruptible body, and to scorch <span
id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641) miserably in an undying one? to be
crowned and live in undying delights after that little sickness, and to
be endlessly tormented after that short enjoyment of his goods. And who
will say this? For what wilt thou we should compare? the quantity? the
quality? the rank? the decision of God <span
id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642) concerning each? How long will ye
utter the words of beetles that are for ever wallowing. in dung!  For
these are not the words of reasoning men, to throw away a soul which is
so precious for nothing, when there needeth little labor to receive
heaven. Wilt thou that I teach thee also in another way that there is an
awful tribunal there? Open the doors of thy conscience, and behold the
judge that sitteth in thine heart. Now if thou condemnest thyself,
although a lover of thyself, and canst not refrain from passing a
righteous verdict, will not God much rather make great provision for
that which is just, and pass that impartial judgment upon all; or will
He permit everything to go on loosely and at random? And who will say
this? No one; but both Greeks and barbarians, both poets and
philosophers, yea the whole race of men in this agree with us, though
differing in particulars <span id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643) , and
affirm that there are tribunals of some sort in Hades; so manifest and
uncontroverted is the thing.

<span id="v.ix-p47"></span>\[4.\] ‘And wherefore,’ saith one, ‘doth he
not punish here?’ That He may display that longsuffering of His, and may
offer to us the salvation that cometh by repentance, and not make our
race to be swept away, nor pluck away those who by an excellent change
are able to be saved, before that salvation. For if he instantly
punished upon the commission of sins, and destroyed, how should Paul
have been saved, how should Peter, the chief teachers of the world? How
should David have reaped the salvation that came by his repentance? How
the Galatians? How many others? For this reason then He neither exacts
the penalty from all here, (but only from some out of all,) nor yet
there from all, but from one here, and from another there; that He may
both rouse those who are exceedingly insensible by means of those whom
He punishes, and may cause them to expect the future things by those
whom He punishes not. Or seest thou not many punished here, as those,
for instance, who were buried under the ruins of that tower; ([Luke
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#004),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#007)<span id="v.ix-p47.1"></span>.) as
those whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices; as those who
perished by an untimely death amongst the Corinthians, because they
partook unworthily of the mysteries ([1 Cor. xi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030)<span id="v.ix-p47.2"></span>.); as
Pharaoh; as those of the Jews who were slain by the barbarians; as many
others, both then, and now, and continually? And yet others too, having
sinned in many things, departed without suffering the penalty here; as
the rich man in the story of Lazarus; as many others. ([Luke
xvi](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#000)<span id="v.ix-p47.3"></span>.) Now
these things He does, both to arouse those who quite disbelieve <span
id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644) in the things to come, and to make
those who do believe and are careless more diligent. “For God is a
righteous Judge, and strong, and longsuffering, and visits not with
wrath every day.” ([Ps. vii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#011)<span
id="v.ix-p48.2"></span>. LXX.) But if we abuse His longsuffering, there
will come a time when He will no more be longsuffering even for a
little, but will straightway inflict the penalty.

<span id="v.ix-p49"></span>Let us not then, in order that for a single
moment (for such is this present life) we may live luxuriously, draw on
ourselves punishment through endless ages: but let us toil for a moment,
that we may be crowned for ever. See ye not that even in worldly things
most men act in this manner; and choose a brief toil in order to <span
id="page_325">p. 325</span> <span id="v.ix-Page_325"></span>a long rest,
even though the opposite falls out unto them? For in this life indeed
there is an equal portion of toils and reward; yea, often, on the
contrary, the toil is endless whilst the fruit is little, or not even a
little; but in the case of the kingdom conversely, the labor is little
whilst the pleasure is great and boundless. For consider: the husbandman
wearieth himself the whole year through, and at the very end of his hope
of times misses of the fruit <span id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645) of
those many toils. The shipmaster again and the soldier, until extreme
old age, are occupied with wars and labors; and oftentimes hath each of
them departed, the one with the loss of his wealthy cargoes, the other,
along with victory, of life itself. What excuse then shall we have, tell
me, if in worldly matters indeed we prefer what is laborious in order
that we may rest for a little, or not a little even; (for the hope of
this is uncertain;) but in spiritual things do the converse of this and
draw upon ourselves unutterable punishment for a little sloth? Wherefore
I beseech you all, though late, yet still at length to recover from this
frenzy. For none shall deliver us in that day; neither brother, nor
father, nor child, nor friend, nor neighbor, nor any other:  but if our
works play us false, all will be over and we must needs <span
id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646) perish. How many lamentations did that
rich man make, and besought the Patriarch and begged that Lazarus might
be sent!  But hear what Abraham said unto him: “There is a gulf <span
id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647) betwixt us and you, so that they who
wish to go forth cannot pass thither.” ([Luke xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026)<span id="v.ix-p52.2"></span>.) How
many petitions did those virgins make to their fellows for a little
oil!  But hear what they also say; “Peradventure there will not be
enough for you and for us;” ([Matt. xxv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#009)<span id="v.ix-p52.3"></span>.) and
none was able to bring them in to the bridal chamber.

<span id="v.ix-p53"></span>Thinking then on these things let us also be
careful of that which is our life. For mention what toils soever and
bring forward besides what punishment soever; all these combined will be
nothing in comparison of the good things to come. Instance therefore, if
thou wilt, fire and steel and wild beasts, and if there be aught sorer
than these; but yet these are not even a shadow compared with those
torments. For these things when applied in excess become then especially
light, making the release speedy <span id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648)
; since the body sufficeth not unto intensity at once and long
continuance of suffering; but both meet together, both prolongation and
excess, alike in the good and the grievous. Whilst we have time then,
“let us come before His presence with confession,” ([Ps. xcv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#002)<span id="v.ix-p54.1"></span>, LXX.)
that in that day we may behold Him gentle and serene, that we may escape
altogether those threat-bearing Powers. Seest thou not how this world’s
soldiers who perform the bidding of those in authority drag men about;
how they chain, how they scourge them, how they pierce their sides, how
they apply torches to their torments, how they dismember them? Yet all
these things are but plays and joke unto those punishments. For these
punishments are temporal; but there neither the worm dieth nor is the
fire quenched: for that body of all is incorruptible, which is then to
be raised up. But God grant that we may never learn these things by
experience; but that these fearful things may never be nearer unto us
than in the mention of them <span id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649) ;
and that we be not delivered over to those tormentors, but may be hence
made wise <span id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650) . How many things
shall we then say in accusation of ourselves!  How many lamentations
shall we utter!  How many groans!  But it will thenceforth be of no
avail. For neither can sailors, when the ship hath gone to pieces and
hath sunk, thereafter be of any service; nor physicians when the patient
is departed; but they will often say indeed that so and so ought to have
been done; but all is fruitless and in vain. For as long indeed as hopes
remain from amendment, one ought both to say and do every thing: but
when we have no longer any thing in our power, all being quite ruined,
it is to no purpose that all is said and done. For even then Jews will
then say, “Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord:”  ([Matt.
xxiii. 39](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#039)<span
id="v.ix-p56.5"></span>.) but they will be able to reap none advantage
of this cry towards escaping their punishment; for when they ought to
have said it, they said it not. That then this be not the case with us
in respect to our life, let us now and from this time reform that we may
stand at the tribunal of Christ with all boldness; whereunto may all of
us attain through the grace and love toward men of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Spirit, be glory and
might for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_619"></span>[321:620](1120058.htm#fr_619) <span
id="v.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p5.1"></span>περικρουόμενοι</span>, a term especially used of
striking upon vessels, to sound them.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[321:621](1120058.htm#fr_620) <span
id="v.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p7.1"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p7.2"></span>λογούμεθα</span>. The Ben. Ed. has <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p7.3"></span>ἁλγοῦμεν</span> in defiance of
<span class="c18"><span id="v.ix-p7.4"></span>mss</span>.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[321:622](1120058.htm#fr_621) <span
id="v.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p9"></span> i.e., the Apostles’.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[321:623](1120058.htm#fr_622) <span
id="v.ix-p9.5"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p10.1"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p10.2"></span>νενεγκόντες</span>.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[321:624](1120058.htm#fr_623) <span
id="v.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p14"></span> So Chrysostom: Rec. text “always,” \[which
is correct. C.\] Just below he inserts, as will be seen, “in us,”
\[without authority. C.\]

<span id="fn_624"></span>[322:625](1120058.htm#fr_624) <span
id="v.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p18"></span> Literally, *the* death.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[322:626](1120058.htm#fr_625) <span
id="v.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p20"></span> *Knowing that* &c. Rec. Text \[which is well
sustained. C.\]

<span id="fn_626"></span>[322:627](1120058.htm#fr_626) <span
id="v.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p22.1"></span>φιλοσοφίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[322:628](1120058.htm#fr_627) <span
id="v.ix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p23.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p23.2"></span>λείφειν</span>.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[322:629](1120058.htm#fr_628) <span
id="v.ix-p23.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p24.1"></span>διορθοῦσθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[322:630](1120058.htm#fr_629) <span
id="v.ix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p26"></span> \[It is singular that the preacher in citing
this verse omitted a clause of great importance, found in all the chief
<span class="c18"><span id="v.ix-p26.1"></span>mss</span>., viz., *with
Jesus*, words which teach that believers are raised up in union with
Christ and by virtue of that union, and therefore in his fellowship and
likeness. This it is that made the resurrection the one great,
all-absorbing object of anticipation and desire to the early Christians.
They were to be with their Lord and like him. C.\]

<span id="fn_630"></span>[322:631](1120058.htm#fr_630) <span
id="v.ix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p28.1"></span>φρονἠματος</span>.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[322:632](1120058.htm#fr_631) <span
id="v.ix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p32"></span> *Our*, A.V., \[the true text.\]

<span id="fn_632"></span>[322:633](1120058.htm#fr_632) <span
id="v.ix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p33"></span> *Worketh for us*, A.V., \[the true text.\]

<span id="fn_633"></span>[322:634](1120058.htm#fr_633) <span
id="v.ix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p35.1"></span>καθ̓ ὓπερβολὴν εἰς ὑπερβοήλν</span>.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[323:635](1120058.htm#fr_634) <span
id="v.ix-p35.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p36.1"></span>βιάζεσθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[323:636](1120058.htm#fr_635) <span
id="v.ix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p38.1"></span>ληρωδέστερον</span>.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[323:637](1120058.htm#fr_636) <span
id="v.ix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p39.1"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p39.2"></span>πποδρομίων</span>. Vid. Field *Ann*.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[323:638](1120058.htm#fr_637) <span
id="v.ix-p39.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p40"></span> “For one.” Bened., against most <span
class="c18"><span id="v.ix-p40.1"></span>mss</span>.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[323:639](1120058.htm#fr_638) <span
id="v.ix-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p41.1"></span>προμνηστοίαις</span>.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[323:640](1120058.htm#fr_639) <span
id="v.ix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p42.1"></span>αἱ παστάδες</span>.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[324:641](1120058.htm#fr_640) <span
id="v.ix-p42.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p43.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p43.2"></span>λεγχὀμενα</span>.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[324:642](1120058.htm#fr_641) <span
id="v.ix-p43.4"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p44.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p44.2"></span>ποτηγανίζεσθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[324:643](1120058.htm#fr_642) <span
id="v.ix-p44.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p45.1"></span>τάξιν</span>. The Ben. translate “*ordinem Dei
aut sententiam*.”

<span id="fn_643"></span>[324:644](1120058.htm#fr_643) <span
id="v.ix-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p46.1"></span>εἰ καὶ μὴ ὁμοίως</span>.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[324:645](1120058.htm#fr_644) <span
id="v.ix-p47.4"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p48.1"></span>διαπιστοῦντας</span>.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[325:646](1120058.htm#fr_645) <span
id="v.ix-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p50"></span> Or, “at the very end ofttimes misses of his
hope, the fruit, &c.”

<span id="fn_646"></span>[325:647](1120058.htm#fr_646) <span
id="v.ix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p51"></span> Or, ‘utterly.’

<span id="fn_647"></span>[325:648](1120058.htm#fr_647) <span
id="v.ix-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p52.1"></span>χάος</span>, Chrys. who varies from the text in
other respects. \[Not, however, so as to affect the sense of the
passage. Perhaps in quoting he took only that portion which suited his
purpose. The word he uses for *gulf* or *chasm* is employed in the LXX.
in the same sense. C.\]

<span id="fn_648"></span>[325:649](1120058.htm#fr_648) <span
id="v.ix-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p54"></span> *Si gravis, brevis: si longa, levis*: Cic.
*Tusc. Disp*.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[325:650](1120058.htm#fr_649) <span
id="v.ix-p54.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p55.1"></span>μεχρὶ ῥηματος στῆναι</span>.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[325:651](1120058.htm#fr_650) <span
id="v.ix-p55.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p56.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p56.2"></span>ντεῦθεν σωφρονισθῆναι</span>. Ben. <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p56.3"></span>ἐνταῦθα</span> against the
<span class="c18"><span id="v.ix-p56.4"></span>mss</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily X](1120059)
