[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120073)  [Next](1120075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxv"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="v.xxv-p1.1"></span>Homily XXV.</span>

<span id="v.xxv-p2"></span><span id="v.xxv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.xxv-p2.2"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#021)<span id="v.xxv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p3"></span>Yet whereinsoever any is bold, (I speak in
foolishness,) I am bold also.

<span id="v.xxv-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.xxv-p4.1"></span>See</span> him again drawing back and using
depreciation and correctives beforehand, although he has already even
said many such things: “Would that ye could bear with me in a little
foolishness;” ([2 Cor. 11.1](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001)<span
id="v.xxv-p4.2"></span>.) and again, “Let no man think me foolish: if ye
do, yet as foolish receive me.” ([2 Cor.
11.16](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#016)<span id="v.xxv-p4.3"></span>.)
“That which I speak, I speak not after the Lord, but as in foolishness.”
([2 Cor. 11.17](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#017)<span
id="v.xxv-p4.4"></span>.) “Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I
will glory also;” ([2 Cor. 11.18](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#018)<span
id="v.xxv-p4.5"></span>.) and here again, “Whereinsoever any is bold, (I
speak in foolishness) I am bold also.” Boldness and folly he calls it to
speak aught great of himself, and that though there was a necessity,
teaching us even to an excess <span id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951) to
avoid any thing of the sort. For if after we have done all, we ought to
call ourselves unprofitable; of what forgiveness can he be worthy who,
when no reason presses, exalts himself and boasts? Therefore also did
the Pharisee meet the fate he did, and even in harbor suffered shipwreck
because he struck upon this rock. Therefore also doth Paul, although he
sees very ample necessity for it, draw back nevertheless, and keep on
observing that such speaking is a mark of foolishness. And then at
length he makes the venture <span id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952) ,
putting forward the plea of necessity, and says,

<span id="v.xxv-p7"></span>[2 Cor.
11.22](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#022)<span id="v.xxv-p7.1"></span>.
“Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they Israelites? so am I.”

<span id="v.xxv-p8"></span>For it was not all Hebrews that were
Israelites, since both the Ammonites and Moabites were Hebrews.
Wherefore he added somewhat to clear his nobility of descent, and says,

<span id="v.xxv-p9"></span>[2 Cor.
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023)<span id="v.xxv-p9.1"></span>. “Are
they the seed of Abraham? so am I. Are they ministers of Christ. (I
speak as one beside himself,) I more.”

<span id="v.xxv-p10"></span>He is not content with his former
deprecation, but uses it again here also. “I speak as one beside
himself, I more.” I am their superior and their better. And indeed he
possessed clear proofs of his superiority, but nevertheless even so he
terms the thing a folly <span id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953) . And
yet if they were false Apostles, he heeded not to have introduced his
own superiority by way of comparison, but to have destroyed their claim
to “be ministers” at all. Well, he did destroy it, saying, “False
Apostles, deceitful workers, fashioning themselves into Apostles of
Christ,” ([2 Cor. 11.13](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#013)<span
id="v.xxv-p11.2"></span>.) but now he doth not proceed in that way, for
his discourse was about to proceed to strict examination; and no one
when an examination is in hand simply asserts; but having first stated
the case in the way of comparison, he shows it to be negatived by the
facts, a very strong negative. But besides, it is their opinion he
gives, not his own assertion, when he says, “Are they ministers of
Christ?” And having said, “I more,” he proceeds in his comparison, and
shows that not by bare assertions, but by furnishing the proof that
facts supply, he maintains the impress of the Apostleship. And leaving
all his miracles, he begins with his trials; thus saying,

<span id="v.xxv-p12"></span>“In labors more abundantly, in stripes above
measure.” This latter is greater than the former; to be both beaten and
scourged.

<span id="v.xxv-p13"></span>“In prisons more abundantly.” Here too again
is there an increase. “In deaths oft.” ([1 Cor. xv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031)<span id="v.xxv-p13.1"></span>.)
For, “I die,” saith he, “daily.” But here, even in reality; ‘for I have
oft been delivered into mortal dangers <span
id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954) .’

<span id="v.xxv-p15"></span>[2 Cor.
11.24](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024)<span id="v.xxv-p15.1"></span>.
“Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one.”

<span id="v.xxv-p16"></span>Why, “save one?” There was an ancient law
that he who had received more than the <span id="page_395">p. 395</span>
<span id="v.xxv-Page_395"></span>forty should be held disgraced amongst
them. Lest then the vehemence and impetuosity <span
id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955) of the executioner by inflicting more
than the number should cause a man to be disgraced, they decreed that
they should be inflicted, “save one,” that even if the executioner
should exceed, he might not overpass the forty, but remaining within the
prescribed number might not bring degradation on him that was scourged.

<span id="v.xxv-p18"></span>[2 Cor.
11.25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025)<span id="v.xxv-p18.1"></span>.
“Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered
shipwreck.”

<span id="v.xxv-p19"></span>And what has this to do with the Gospel?
Because he went forth on long journeys; and those by sea.

<span id="v.xxv-p20"></span>“A night and a day I have been in the deep.”
Some say this means out on the open sea, others, swimming upon it, which
is also the truer interpretation. There is nothing wonderful, at least,
about the former, nor would he have placed it as greater than his
shipwrecks.

<span id="v.xxv-p21"></span>[2 Cor.
11.26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026)<span id="v.xxv-p21.1"></span>.
“In perils of rivers.”

<span id="v.xxv-p22"></span>For he was compelled also to cross rivers.
“In perils of robbers, in perils in the city, in perils in the
wilderness.” ‘Everywhere were contests set before me, in places, in
countries, in cities, in deserts.’

<span id="v.xxv-p23"></span>“In perils from the Gentiles, in perils
amongst false brethren.”

<span id="v.xxv-p24"></span>Behold another kind of warfare. For not only
did such as were enemies strike at him, but those also who played the
hypocrite; and he had need of much firmness, much prudence.

<span id="v.xxv-p25"></span>\[2.\] [2 Cor.
11.27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#027)<span id="v.xxv-p25.1"></span>.
“In labor and travail.”

<span id="v.xxv-p26"></span>Perils succeed to labors, labors to perils,
one upon other and unintermitted, and allowed him not to take breath
even for a little.

<span id="v.xxv-p27"></span>[2 Cor.
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#028)<span id="v.xxv-p27.1"></span>. “In
journeyings often, in hunger and thirst and nakedness, besides those
things that are without.”

<span id="v.xxv-p28"></span>What is left out is more than what is
enumerated. Yea rather, one cannot count the number of those even which
are enumerated; for he has not set them down specifically, but has
mentioned those the number of which was small and easily comprehended,
saying, “thrice” and “thrice,” ([2 Cor.
11.25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025)<span id="v.xxv-p28.1"></span>.)
and \[again\] “once;” but of the others he does not mention the number
because he had endured them often. And he recounts not their results as
that he had converted so many and so many, but only what he suffered on
behalf of the Preaching; at once out of modesty, and as showing that
even should nothing have been gained but labor, even so his title to
wages has been fulfilled.

<span id="v.xxv-p29"></span>“That which presseth upon me daily.” The
tumults, the disturbances, the assaults <span
id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956) of mobs, onsets of cities. For the
Jews waged war against this man most of all because he most of all
confounded them, and his changing sides all at once was the greatest
refutation of their madness. And there breathed a mighty war against
him, from his own people, from strangers, from false brethren; and every
where were billows and precipices, in the inhabited world, in the
uninhabited, by land, by sea, without, within. And he had not even a
full supply of necessary food, nor even of thin clothing, but the
champion of the world wrestled in nakedness and fought in hunger; so far
was he from enriching himself <span id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957) .
Yet he murmured not, but was grateful for these things to the Judge of
the combat. <span id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958)

<span id="v.xxv-p33"></span>“Anxiety for all the Churches.” This was the
chief thing of all, that his soul too was distracted, and his thoughts
divided. For even if nothing from without had assailed him; yet the war
within was enough, those waves on waves, that sleet of cares, that war
of thoughts. For if one that hath charge of but a single house, and hath
servants and superintendents and stewards, often cannot take breath for
cares, though there be none that molests him: he that hath the care not
of a single house, but of cities and peoples and nations and of the
whole world; and in respect to such great concerns, and with so many
spitefully entreating him, and single-handed, and suffering so many
things, and so tenderly concerned as not even a father is for his
children—consider what he endured. For that thou mayest not say, What if
he was anxious, yet the anxiety was slight <span
id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959) , he added further the intensity of
the care, saying,

<span id="v.xxv-p35"></span>[2 Cor.
11.29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span id="v.xxv-p35.1"></span>.
“Who is weak, and I am not weak?” He did not say, ‘and I share not in
his dejection?’ but, ‘so am I troubled and disturbed, as though I myself
were laboring under that very affection, that very infirmity.’

<span id="v.xxv-p36"></span>“Who is made to stumble, and I burn not?”
See, again, how he places before us the excess of his grief by calling
it “burning.” ‘I am on fire,’ ‘I am in a flame,’ he says, which is
surely greater than any thing he has said. For those other things,
although violent, yet both pass quickly by, and brought with them that
pleasure which is unfading; but this was what afflicted and straightened
him, and pierced his mind through and through; the suffering such things
for each one of the weak, whosoever he might be. For he did not feel
pained for the greater sort only and despise the lesser, but counted
even the abject amongst his familiar friends. Wherefore also he said,
“who is weak?” whosoever he may be; and as though he were himself the
Church throughout the world, so was he distressed for every member.

<span id="v.xxv-p37"></span>[2 Cor.
11.30](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#030)<span id="v.xxv-p37.1"></span>.
“If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern my
weakness.”

<span id="v.xxv-p38"></span><span id="page_396">p. 396</span> <span
id="v.xxv-Page_396"></span>Seest thou that he no where glorieth of
miracles, but of his persecutions and his trials? For this is meant by
“weaknesses.” And he shows that his warfare was of a diversified
character <span id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960) . For both the Jews
warred upon him, and the Gentiles stood against him, and the false
brethren fought with him, and brethren caused him sorrow, through their
weakness and by taking offense:—on every side he found trouble and
disturbance, from friends and from strangers. This is the especial mark
of an Apostle, by these things is the Gospel woven.

<span id="v.xxv-p40"></span>[2 Cor.
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#032)<span id="v.xxv-p40.1"></span>.
“The God and Father of the Lord Jesus knoweth that I lie not. The
Governor under Aretas the king guarded the city of the Damascenes,
desiring to apprehend me.”

<span id="v.xxv-p41"></span>What can be the reason that he here strongly
confirms and gives assurance of \[his truth\], seeing he did not so in
respect to any of the former things? Because, perhaps, this was of older
date and not so well known <span id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961) ;
whilst of those other facts, his care for the churches, and all the
rest, they were themselves cognisant. See then how great the war
\[against him\] was, since on his account the city was “guarded.” And
when I say this of the war, I say it of the zeal of Paul; for except
this had breathed intensely, it had not kindled the governor to so great
madness. These things are the part of an apostolic soul, to suffer so
great things and yet in nothing to veer about, but to bear nobly
whatever befalls; yet not to go out to meet dangers, nor to rush upon
them. See for instance here, how he was content to evade the siege, by
being “let down through a window in a basket.” For though he were even
desirous “to depart hence;” still nevertheless he also passionately
affected the salvation of men. And therefore he ofttimes had recourse
even to such devices as these, preserving himself for the Preaching; and
he refused not to use even human contrivances when the occasion called
for them; so sober and watchful was he. For in cases where evils were
inevitable, he needed only grace; but where the trial was of a measured
character, he devises many things of himself even, here again ascribing
the whole to God. And just as a spark of unquenchable fire, if it fell
into the sea, would be merged as many waves swept over it, yet would
again rise shining to the surface; even so surely the blessed Paul also
would now be overwhelmed by perils, and now again, having dived <span
id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962) through them, would come up more
radiant, overcoming by suffering evil.

<span id="v.xxv-p44"></span>\[3.\] For this is the brilliant victory,
this is the Church’s trophy, thus is the Devil overthrown when we suffer
injury. For when we suffer, he is taken captive; and himself suffers
harm, when he would fain inflict it on us. And this happened in Paul’s
case also; and the more he plied him with perils, the more was he
defeated. Nor did he raise up against him only one kind of trials, but
various and diverse. For some involved labor, others sorrow, others
fear, others pain, others care, others shame, others all these at once;
but yet he was victorious in all. And like as if a single soldier,
having the whole world fighting against him, should move through the mid
ranks of his enemies, and suffer no harm: even so did Paul, showing
himself singly, among barbarians, among Greeks, on every land, on every
sea, abide unconquered. And as a spark, falling upon reeds and hay,
changes into its own nature the things so kindled; so also did this man
setting upon all make things change over unto the truth; like a winter
torrent, sweeping over all things and overturning every obstacle. And
like some champion who wrestles, runs, and boxes too; or soldier engaged
by turns in storming <span id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963) , fighting
on foot, on shipboard; so did he try by turns every form of fight, and
breathed out fire, and was unapproachable by all; with his single body
taking possession of the world, with his single tongue putting all to
flight. Not with such force did those many trumpets fall upon the stones
of Jericho and throw them down, as did the sound of this man’s voice
both dash to the earth the devil’s strong-holds and bring over to
himself those that were against him. And when he had collected a
multitude of captives, having armed the same, he made them again his own
army, and by their means conquered. Wonderful was David who laid Goliah
low with a single stone; but if thou wilt examine Paul’s achievements,
that is a child’s exploit, and great <span id="page_397">p. 397</span>
<span id="v.xxv-Page_397"></span>as is the difference between a shepherd
and a general, so great the difference thou shalt see here. For this man
brought down no Goliath by the hurling of a stone, but by speaking only
he scattered the whole array of the Devil; as a lion roaring and darting
out flame from his tongue, so was he found by all irresistible; and
bounded everywhere by turns continually; he ran to these, he came to
those, he turned about to these, he bounded away to others, swifter in
his attack than the wind; governing the whole world, as though a single
house or a single ship; rescuing the sinking, steadying the dizzied,
cheering the sailors, sitting at the tiller, keeping an eye to the prow,
tightening the yards, handling an oar, pulling at the mast, watching the
sky; being all things in himself, both sailor, and pilot, and pilot’s
mate <span id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964) , and sail, and ship; and
suffering all things in order to relieve the evils of others. For
consider. He endured shipwreck that he might stay the shipwreck of the
world; “a day and a night he passed in the deep,” that he might draw it
up <span id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965) from the deep of error; he
was “in weariness” that he might refresh the weary; he endured smiting
that he might heal those that had been smitten of the devil; he passed
his time in prisons that he might lead forth to the light those that
were sitting in prison and in darkness; he was “in deaths oft” that he
might deliver from grievous deaths; “five times he received forty
stripes save one” that he might free those that inflicted them from the
scourge of the devil; he was “beaten with rods” that he might bring them
under “the rod and the staff” of Christ; ([Ps. xxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span id="v.xxv-p47.3"></span>.) he
“was stoned,” that he might deliver them from the senseless stones; he
“was in the wilderness <span id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966) ,” that
he might take them out of the wilderness; “in journeying,” to stay their
wanderings and open the way that leadeth to heaven; he “was in perils in
the cities,” that he might show the city which is above; “in hunger and
thirst,” to deliver from a more grievous hunger; “in nakedness,” to
clothe their unseemliness with the robe of Christ; set upon by the mob,
to extricate them from the besetment of fiends; he burned, that he might
quench the burning darts of the devil: “through a window was let down
from the wall,” to send up from below those that lay prostrate upon the
ground. Shall we then talk any more, seeing we do not so much as know
what Paul suffered? shall we make mention any more of goods, or even of
wife, or city, or freedom, when we have seen him ten thousand times
despising even life itself? The martyr dies once for all: but that
blessed saint in his one body and one soul endured so many perils as
were enough to disturb even a soul of adamant; and what things all the
saints together have suffered in so many bodies, those all he himself
endured in one: he entered into the world as if a race-course, and
stripped himself of all, and so made a noble stand. For he knew the
fiends that were wrestling with him. Wherefore also he shone forth
brightly at once from the beginning, from the very starting-post, and
even to the end he continued the same; yea, rather he even increased the
intensity of his pursuit as he drew nearer to the prize. And what surely
is wonderful is that though suffering and doing such great things, he
knew how to maintain an exceeding modesty. For when he was driven upon
the necessity of relating his own good deeds, he ran quickly over them
all; although he might have filled books without number, had he wished
to unfold in detail <span id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967) every thing
he mentioned; if he had specified the Churches he was in care for, if
his prisons and his achievements in them, if of the other things one by
one, the besetments <span id="fr_968"></span>[969](#fn_968) , the
assaults. But he would not. Knowing then these things, let us also learn
to be modest and not to glory at any time in wealth or other worldly
things, but in the reproaches we suffer for Christ’s sake, and in these,
only when need compels; for if there be nothing urging it, let us not
mention these even, (lest we be puffed up,) but our sins only. For so
shall we both easily be released from them and shall have God propitious
to us, and shall attain the life to come; whereunto may we all attain
through the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, honor, now and
for ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_951"></span>[394:952](1120074.htm#fr_951) <span
id="v.xxv-p4.6"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p5.1"></span>ἐκ περιουσίας</span>.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[394:953](1120074.htm#fr_952) <span
id="v.xxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p6.1"></span>κατατολμᾷ</span>.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[394:954](1120074.htm#fr_953) <span
id="v.xxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p11.1"></span>παραφροσύνην</span>.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[394:955](1120074.htm#fr_954) <span
id="v.xxv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p14"></span> Literally, ‘dangers having death.’

<span id="fn_955"></span>[395:956](1120074.htm#fr_955) <span
id="v.xxv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p17.1"></span>ῤ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p17.2"></span>ύμη καὶ ὁρμὴ</span>.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[395:957](1120074.htm#fr_956) <span
id="v.xxv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p30.1"></span>πολιορκίαι</span>.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[395:958](1120074.htm#fr_957) <span
id="v.xxv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p31.1"></span>χρηματίζεσθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[395:959](1120074.htm#fr_958) <span
id="v.xxv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p32.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p32.2"></span>γωνοθέτῃ</span>.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[395:960](1120074.htm#fr_959) <span
id="v.xxv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p34.1"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p34.2"></span>πλῶς</span>.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[396:961](1120074.htm#fr_960) <span
id="v.xxv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p39.1"></span>ποικίλον</span>.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[396:962](1120074.htm#fr_961) <span
id="v.xxv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p42"></span> \[The Apostle’s mention of this isolated
fact of his escape at Damascus, at the conclusion of the narrative of
his varied labors and trials, has been variously explained, some
considering it an afterthought, others the opening of a statement of
details intended to be complete but for some reason interrupted. But it
does not seem necessary to view it otherwise than it appears on its
face, as a reminiscence of a peculiar peril which befel him at the
commencement of his Christian career, and by which he was as it were
matriculated in the school of persecution. The furtive method of escape
(in the darkness of night, [Acts ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#025)<span id="v.xxv-p42.1"></span>.)
shows the extreme danger and helplessness of his position. He could very
well put this among the “weaknesses” in which he ventured to glory ([2
Cor. 12.5](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#005)<span
id="v.xxv-p42.2"></span>.), since his deliverance was effected not by
the pomp of a supernatural interposition as afterwards at Philippi, but
by ordinary human instrumentality, and that certainly not of a very
dignified kind. “The name of Damascus, somewhat irregularly repeated
here in that of its inhabitants, was deeply graven on the Apostle’s
memory, being inseparably associated with the great turning point of his
life, which is the reason why his experience there is mentioned.”
(Waite). If the solemn asservation of the [2 Cor.
11.31](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#031)<span id="v.xxv-p42.3"></span> is
to be considered as referring to what follows, then the explanation
given by Chrysostom in the text is satisfactory. The Apostle’s later
trials were well known to the Corinthians; this one might not have been.
Yet to Paul it was of the profoundest interest because it showed that
where his ministry began, there also began his “weakness.” Then and
there the persecutor became the persecuted. There is no greater contrast
in all human history than that of Paul on his way to Damascus to bind
and deliver to death the Nazarenes, and the same man fleeing that city
between two days to escape the plots of his former friends and
followers. C.\]

<span id="fn_962"></span>[396:963](1120074.htm#fr_962) <span
id="v.xxv-p42.4"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p43.1"></span>διαδῦς</span>.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[396:964](1120074.htm#fr_963) <span
id="v.xxv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p45.1"></span>τειχομαχῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[397:965](1120074.htm#fr_964) <span
id="v.xxv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p46.1"></span>πρωρεὺς</span>.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[397:966](1120074.htm#fr_965) <span
id="v.xxv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p47.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p47.2"></span>νιμήσηται</span>.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[397:967](1120074.htm#fr_966) <span
id="v.xxv-p47.4"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p48"></span> Or, ‘*desolateness*.’

<span id="fn_967"></span>[397:968](1120074.htm#fr_967) <span
id="v.xxv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p49.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p49.2"></span>ξαπλῶσαι</span>.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[397:969](1120074.htm#fr_968) <span
id="v.xxv-p49.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p50.1"></span>περιστάσεις</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXVI](1120075)
