[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120063)  [Next](1120065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xv"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p1"></span> <span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span
id="v.xv-Page_350"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="v.xv-p1.1"></span>Homily XV.</span>

<span id="v.xv-p2"></span><span id="v.xv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.xv-p2.2"></span>[2 Cor. vii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008)<span id="v.xv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xv-p3"></span>*So that* <span
id="fr_769"></span>[770](#fn_769) *though I made you sorry with my
letter, I do not regret it, though I did regret.*

<span id="v.xv-p5"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.xv-p5.1"></span>He</span> goes on to apologize for his Epistle,
when, (the sin having been corrected,) to treat them tenderly <span
id="fr_770"></span>[771](#fn_770) was unattended with danger; and he
shows the advantage of the thing. For he did this indeed even before,
when he said, “For out of much affliction and anguish of heart, I wrote
unto you: not that ye should be made sorry, but that ye might know the
love which I have toward you.” (c. [2 Cor.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#004)<span id="v.xv-p6.2"></span>.) And
he does it also now, establishing this same point in more words. And he
said not, ‘I regretted indeed before, but now I do not regret:’ but how?
“I regret not now, though I did regret.” ‘Even if what I wrote,’ he
says, ‘was such as to overstep the \[due\] measure of rebuke <span
id="fr_771"></span>[772](#fn_771) , and to cause me to regret; still the
great advantage which has accrued from them doth not allow me to
regret.’ And this he said, not as though he had rebuked them beyond due
measure, but to heighten his praises of them. ‘For the amendment ye
manifested was so great,’ saith he, ‘that even if I did happen to smite
you too severely insomuch that I even condemned myself, I praise myself
now from the result.’ Just as with little children, when they have
undergone a painful remedy, such as an incision, or cautery, or bitter
physic, afterwards we are not afraid to sooth them; so also doth Paul.

<span id="v.xv-p8"></span>[2 Cor. 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#009)<span id="v.xv-p8.1"></span>. “For I
see that that epistle made you sorry, though but for a season. Now I
rejoice not that ye were made sorry, but that ye were made sorry unto
repentance.”

<span id="v.xv-p9"></span>Having said, “I do not regret,” he tells the
reason also; alleging the good that resulted from his letter; and
skillfully excusing himself by saying, “though but for a season.” For
truly that which was painful was brief, but that which was profitable
was perpetual. And what indeed followed naturally was to say, ‘even
though it grieved you for a season, yet it made you glad and benefited
you forever.’ But he doth not say this: but before mentioning the gain
he passes again to his praises of them, and the proof of his own concern
for them, saying, “Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry,” (‘for
what gain came to me from you being made sorry?) “but that ye were made
sorry unto repentance,” that the sorrow brought some gain.’ For a father
also when he sees his son under the knife rejoiceth not that he is being
pained, but that he is being cured; so also doth this man. But observe
how he transfers all that was well achieved in the matter unto
themselves; and lays whatever was painful to the account of the Epistle,
saying, “It made you sorry for a season;” whilst the benefit that
resulted from it he speaks of as their own good achieving. For he said
not, ‘The Epistle corrected you,’ although this was the case; but, “ye
sorrowed unto repentance.”

<span id="v.xv-p10"></span>“For ye were made sorry after a godly sort,
that ye might suffer loss by us in nothing.”

<span id="v.xv-p11"></span>Seest thou wisdom unspeakable? ‘For had we
not done this,’ he says, ‘we had done you damage.’ And he affirms that
indeed which was well achieved to be theirs, but the damage his own, if
indeed he had been silent. For if they are likely to be corrected by a
sharp rebuke, then, if we did not sharply rebuke, we should have done
you damage; and the injury would not be with you alone, but also with
us. For just as he that gives not to the merchant what is necessary for
his voyage, he it is that causeth the damage; so also we, if we did not
offer you that occasion <span id="fr_772"></span>[773](#fn_772) of
repentance, should have wrought you damage. Seest thou that the not
rebuking those that sin is a damage both to the master and to the
disciple?

<span id="v.xv-p13"></span>\[2.\] [2 Cor.
7.10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)<span id="v.xv-p13.1"></span>.
“For godly sorrow worketh repentance unto salvation, a repentance which
bringeth no regret.”

<span id="v.xv-p14"></span>‘Therefore,’ he says, ‘though I did regret
before I saw the fruit and the gain, how great they were I do not regret
now .’ For such a thing is godly sorrow. And then he philosophizeth
about it, showing that sorrow is not in all cases a grievous thing, but
when it is worldly. And what is worldly? If thou be in sorrow for <span
id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span id="v.xv-Page_351"></span>money, for
reputation, for him that is departed, all these are worldly. Wherefore
also they work death. For he that is in sorrow for reputation’s sake
feeleth envy and is driven oftentimes to perish: such sorrow was that
which Cain sorrowed, such Esau. By this worldly sorrow then he meaneth
that which is to the harm of those that sorrow. For only in respect to
sins is sorrow a profitable thing; as is evident in this way. He that
sorroweth for loss of wealth repaireth not that damage; he that
sorroweth for one deceased raiseth not the dead to life again; he that
sorroweth for a sickness, not only is not made well but even aggravates
the disease: he that sorroweth for sins, he alone attains some advantage
from his sorrow, for he maketh his sins wane and disappear. For since
the medicine has been prepared for this thing, in this case only is it
potent and displays its profitableness; and in the other cases is even
injurious. ‘And yet Cain,’ saith one, ‘sorrowed because he was not
accepted with God.’ It was not for this, but because he saw his brother
glorious in honor <span id="fr_773"></span>[774](#fn_773) ; for had he
grieved for this, it behoved him to emulate and rejoice with him; but,
as it was, grieving, he showed that his was a worldly sorrow. But not so
did David, nor Peter, nor any of the righteous. Wherefore they were
accepted, when grieving either over their own sins or those of others.
And yet what is more oppressive than sorrow? Still when it is after a
godly sort, it is better than the joy in the world. For this indeed ends
in nothing; but that “worketh repentance unto salvation, a salvation
that bringeth no regret.” For what is admirable in it is this that one
who had thus sorrowed would never repent, whilst this is an especial
characteristic of worldly sorrow. For what is more regretted than a true
born son? And what is a heavier grief than a death of this sort? But yet
those fathers who in the height of their grief endure nobody and who
wildly beat themselves, after a time repent because they have grieved
immoderately; as having thereby nothing benefitted themselves, but even
added to their affliction. But not such as this is godly sorrow; but it
possesseth two advantages, that of not being condemned in that a man
grieves for, and that this sorrow endeth in salvation; of both which
that is deprived. For they both sorrow unto harm and after they have
sorrowed vehemently condemn themselves, bringing forth this greatest
token of having done it unto harm. But godly sorrow is the reverse \[of
this\]: wherefore also he said, “worketh repentance unto salvation, a
repentance that bringeth no regret.” For no one will condemn himself if
he have sorrowed for sin, if he have mourned and afflicted himself.
Which also when the blessed Paul hath said he needeth not to adduce from
other sources the proof of what he said, nor to bring forward those in
the old histories who sorrowed, but he adduceth the Corinthians
themselves; and furnishes his proof from what they had done; that along
with praises he might both instruct them and the rather win them to
himself.

<span id="v.xv-p16"></span>[2 Cor.
7.11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011)<span id="v.xv-p16.1"></span>.
“For behold,” he saith, “this self-same thing, that ye were made sorry
after a godly sort, what earnest care it wrought in you.” ‘For not
only,’ he saith, ‘did your sorrow not cast you into that condemning of
yourselves, as having acted idly in so doing; but it made you even more
careful.’ Then he speaks of the certain tokens of that carefulness;

<span id="v.xv-p17"></span>“Yea,” what “clearing of yourselves,” towards
me. “Yea, what indignation” against him that had sinned. “Yea, what
fear.” ([2 Cor. 7.11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011)<span
id="v.xv-p17.1"></span>.) For so great carefulness and very speedy
reformation was the part of men who feared exceedingly. And that he
might not seem to be exalting himself, see how quickly he softened it by
saying,

<span id="v.xv-p18"></span>“Yea, what longing,” that towards me. “Yea,
what zeal,” that on God’s behalf. “Yea, what avenging:” for ye also
avenged the laws of God that had been outraged.

<span id="v.xv-p19"></span>“In every thing ye approved yourselves to be
pure in the matter.” Not only by not having perpetrated, for this was
evident before, but also by not consenting <span
id="fr_774"></span>[775](#fn_774) unto it. For since he said in the
former Epistle, “and ye are puffed up;” ([1 Cor. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#002)<span id="v.xv-p20.2"></span>.) he
also says here, ‘ye have cleared yourselves of this suspicion also; not
only by not praising, but also by rebuking and being indignant.’

<span id="v.xv-p21"></span>\[3.\] [2 Cor.
7.12](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#012)<span id="v.xv-p21.1"></span>. “So
although I wrote unto you,” I wrote “not for his cause that did the
wrong, nor for his cause that suffered the wrong.” For that they might
not say, Why then dost thou rebuke us if we were “clear in the matter?”
setting himself to meet this even further above, and disposing of it
beforehand <span id="fr_775"></span>[776](#fn_775) , he said what he
said, namely, “I do not regret, though I did regret.” ‘For so far,’ says
he, ‘am I from repenting now of what I wrote then, that I repented then
more than I do now when ye have approved <span
id="fr_776"></span>[777](#fn_776) yourselves.’ Seest thou again his
vehemence and earnest contention, how he has turned around what was said
unto the very opposite. For what they thought would have made him
recant <span id="fr_777"></span>[778](#fn_777) in confusion as having
rebuked them hastily, by reason of their amendment; that he uses as a
proof that it was right in him to speak freely. For neither does he
refuse afterwards to humor them fearlessly, when <span id="page_352">p.
352</span> <span id="v.xv-Page_352"></span>he finds he can do this. For
he that said farther above such things as these, “He that is joined to
an harlot is one body,” ([1 Cor. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#016)<span id="v.xv-p24.2"></span>.) and,
“Deliver such an one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh,” ([1
Cor. v. 5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span
id="v.xv-p24.3"></span>.) and, “Every sin that a man doeth is without
the body,” ([1 Cor. vi. 18](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#018)<span
id="v.xv-p24.4"></span>.) and such like things; how saith he here, “Not
for his cause that did the wrong, nor for his cause that suffered the
wrong?” Not contradicting, but being even exceedingly consistent with
himself. How consistent with himself? Because it was a very great point
with him to show the affection he bore towards them. He does not
therefore discard concern for him <span
id="fr_778"></span>[779](#fn_778) , but shows at the same time, as I
said, the love he had for them, and that a greater fear agitated him,
\[namely\] for the whole Church. For he had feared lest the evil should
eat further, and advancing on its way should seize upon the whole
Church. Wherefore also he said, “A little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump.” ([1 Cor. v. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006)<span
id="v.xv-p25.1"></span>.) This however he said at the time; but now that
they had well done, he no longer puts it so but differently: and implies
indeed the same thing, but manages his expressions more agreeably,
saying,

<span id="v.xv-p26"></span>“That our care for you might appear unto
you. <span id="fr_779"></span>[780](#fn_779) ”

<span id="v.xv-p28"></span>That is, ‘that ye might know how I love you.’
Now this is the same thing as the former, but being differently
expressed seemed to convey another meaning. For \[to convince thyself\]
that it is the same, unfold his conception and thou wilt perceive the
difference to be nothing. ‘For because I love you exceedingly,’ saith
he, ‘I was afraid lest ye should suffer any injury from that quarter,
and yourselves succeed to that sorrow.’ As therefore when he says, “Doth
God take care for oxen?” ([1 Cor. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009)<span id="v.xv-p28.1"></span>.) he
doth not mean that He careth not, (for it is not possible for any
existing thing to consist if deserted by the Providence of God:)  but
that He did not legislate primarily for oxen, so also here he means to
say, ‘I wrote first indeed on your account, but secondly on his also.
And I had indeed that love in myself,’ he says, ‘even independently of
mine Epistle: but I was desirous of showing it both to you, and in a
word to all, by that writing.’

<span id="v.xv-p29"></span>[2 Cor.
7.13](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#013)<span id="v.xv-p29.1"></span>.
“Therefore we have been comforted.”

<span id="v.xv-p30"></span>Since we both showed our care for you and
have been wholly successful. As he said also in another place, “Now we
live, if ye stand fast in the Lord;” ([1 Thess. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#008)<span id="v.xv-p30.1"></span>.) and
again, “For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not
even ye?” ([1 Thess. 2.19](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#019)<span
id="v.xv-p30.2"></span>.) For this is life, this comfort, this
consolation to a teacher possessed of understanding; the growth <span
id="fr_780"></span>[781](#fn_780) of his disciples.

<span id="v.xv-p32"></span>\[4.\] For nothing doth so declare him that
beareth rule as paternal affection for the ruled. For begetting alone
constitutes not a father; but after begetting, also loving. But if where
nature is concerned there is so great need of love, much more where
grace is concerned. In this way were all the ancients distinguished. As
many, for instance, as obtained a good report amongst the Hebrews, by
this were made manifest. So was Samuel shown to be great, saying, “But
God forbid that I should sin against God in ceasing to pray for you:”
([1 Sam. xii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#023)<span
id="v.xv-p32.1"></span>.) so was David, so Abraham, so Elijah, and so
each one of the righteous, those in the New Testament and those in the
Old. For so Moses for the sake of those he ruled left so great riches
and treasures untold, “choosing to suffer affliction with the people of
God,” ([Heb. xi. 25](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#025)<span
id="v.xv-p32.2"></span>.) and before his appointment was leader of the
people <span id="fr_781"></span>[782](#fn_781) by his actions. Wherefore
also very foolishly did that Hebrew say to him, “Who made thee a ruler
and a judge over us?” ([Exod. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#014)<span id="v.xv-p33.2"></span>.) What
sayest thou?  Thou seest the actions and doubtest of the title? Just as
if one seeing a physician using the knife excellently well, and
succoring that limb in the body which was diseased, should say, ‘Who
made thee a physician and ordered thee to use the knife?’ ‘Art, my good
Sir <span id="fr_782"></span>[783](#fn_782) , and thine own ailment.’ So
too did his knowledge make him (i.e., Moses,) what he claimed to be. For
ruling is an art, not merely a dignity, and an art above all arts. For
if the rule of those without is an art and science superior to all
other, much more this. For this rule is as much better than that, as
that than the rest; yea, rather, even much more. And, if ye will, let us
examine this argument more accurately. There is an art of agriculture,
of weaving, of building; which are both very necessary and tend greatly
to preserve our life. For others surely are but ancillary to these; the
coppersmith’s, the carpenter’s, the shepherd’s. But further, of arts
themselves the most necessary of all is the agricultural, which was even
that which God first introduced when He had formed man. For without
shoes and clothes it is possible to live; but without agriculture it is
impossible. And such they say are the Hamaxobii, the Nomads amongst the
Scythians, and the Indian Gymnosophists. For these troubled not
themselves <span id="fr_783"></span>[784](#fn_783) with the arts of
housebuilding, and weaving, and shoemaking, but <span id="page_353">p.
353</span> <span id="v.xv-Page_353"></span>need only that of
agriculture. Blush ye that have need of those arts that be superfluous,
cooks, confectioners, embroiderers, and ten thousand other such people,
that ye may live; blush ye that introduce vain refinements <span
id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784) into life; blush ye who are
unbelievers, before those barbarians who have no need of art. For God
made nature exceedingly independent, needing only a few things <span
id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785) . However, I do not compel you nor lay
it down for law that ye should live thus; but as Jacob asked. And what
did he ask? “If the Lord will give me bread to eat and raiment to put
on.” ([Gen. xxviii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020)<span
id="v.xv-p37.2"></span>.) So also Paul commanded, saying, “And having
food and covering let us be therewith content.” ([1 Tim. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008)<span id="v.xv-p37.3"></span>.) First
then comes agriculture; second, weaving; and third after it, building;
and shoemaking last of all; for amongst us at any rate there are many
both servants and laborers who live without shoes. These, therefore, are
the useful and necessary arts. Come, then, let us compare them with that
of ruling. For I have therefore brought forward these that are of all
most important, that when it shall have been seen to be superior to
them, its victory over the rest may be unquestioned. Whereby then shall
we show that it is more necessary than all? Because without it there is
no advantage in these. And if you think good, let us leave mention of
the rest and bring on the stage <span id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786)
that one which stands higher and is more important than any, that of
agriculture. Where then will be the advantage of the many hands of your
laborers, if they are at war with one another and plunder one another’s
goods? For, as it is, the fear of the ruler restrains them and protects
that which is wrought by them; but if thou take this away, in vain is
their labor. But if one examine accurately, he will find yet another
rule which is the parent and bond of this. What then may this be? That
according to which it behoveth each man to control and rule himself,
chastising his unworthy passions, but both nourishing and promoting the
growth of all the germs of virtue with all care.

<span id="v.xv-p39"></span>For there are \[these\] species of rule; one,
that whereby men rule peoples and states, regulating this the political
life; which Paul denoting said, “Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers; for there is no power but of God.” ([Rom.
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004)<span id="v.xv-p39.1"></span>.)
Afterwards to show the advantage of this, he went on to say, that the
ruler “is a minister of God for good;” and again, “he is a minister of
God, and avenger to execute wrath on him that doeth evil.”

<span id="v.xv-p40"></span>A second there is whereby every one that hath
understanding ruleth himself; and this also the Apostle further
denoted <span id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) , saying, “Wouldest thou
have no fear of the power? do that which is good;” ([Rom. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)<span id="v.xv-p41.2"></span>.)
speaking of him that ruleth himself.

<span id="v.xv-p42"></span>\[5.\] Here, however, there is yet another
rule, higher than the political rule. And what is this? That in the
Church. And this also itself Paul mentions, saying, “Obey them that have
the rule over you and submit to them; for they watch in behalf of your
souls as they that shall give account.” ([Heb. xiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017)<span id="v.xv-p42.1"></span>.) For
this rule is as much better than the political as heaven is than earth;
yea rather, even much more. For, in the first place, it considers
principally not how it may punish sins committed, but how, they may
never be committed at all; next, when committed, not how it may remove
the deceased \[member\], but how they may be blotted out. And of the
things of this life indeed it maketh not much account, but all its
transactions are about the things in heaven. “For our citizenship <span
id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788) is in heaven.” ([Philip. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="v.xv-p43.1"></span>.) And
our life is here. “For our life,” saith he, “is hid with Christ in God.”
([Col. iii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span
id="v.xv-p43.2"></span>.) And our prizes are there, and our race is for
the crowns that be there. For this life is not dissolved after the end,
but then shineth forth the more. And therefore, in truth, they who bear
this rule have a greater honor committed to their hands, not only than
viceroys but even than those themselves who wear diadems, seeing that
they mould men in greater, and for greater, things. But neither he that
pursueth political rule nor he that pursueth spiritual, will be able
well to administer it, unless they have first ruled themselves as they
ought, and have observed with all strictness the respective laws of
their polity. For as the rule over the many is in a manner twofold, so
also is that which each one exerts over himself. And again, in this
point also the spiritual rule transcends the political, as what we have
said proved. But one may observe certain also of the arts imitating
rule; and in particular, that of agriculture. For just as the tiller of
the soil is in a sort a ruler over the plants, clipping and keeping
back <span id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789) some, making others grow
and fostering them: just so also the best rulers punish and cut off such
as are wicked and injure the many; whilst they advance the good and
orderly <span id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790) . For this cause also
the Scripture likeneth rulers to vine-dressers. For what though plants
utter no cry, as in states the injured do? nevertheless they still show
the wrong by their appearance, withering, straitened for room by the
worthless weeds. And like as <span id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span
id="v.xv-Page_354"></span>wickedness is punished by laws, so truly here
also by this art both badness of soil and degeneracy and wildness in
plants, are corrected. For all the varieties of human dispositions we
shall find here also, roughness, weakness, timidity, forwardness <span
id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791) , steadiness <span
id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792) : and some of them through
wealth <span id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793) luxuriating unseasonably,
and to the damage of their neighbors, and others impoverished and
injured; as, for instance, when hedges are raised to luxuriance at the
cost of the neighboring plants; when other barren and wild trees,
running up to a great height, hinder the growth of those beneath them.
And like as rulers and kings have those that vex their rule with outrage
and war; so also hath the tiller of the soil attacks of wild beasts,
irregularity of weather, hail, mildew, great rain, drought, and all such
things. But these things happen in order that thou mayest constantly
look unto the hope of God’s aid. For the other arts indeed hold their
way <span id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794) through the diligence of men
as well; but this getteth the better as God determines the balance, and
is throughout almost wholly dependent thereupon; and it needeth rains
from above, and the admixture of weathers, and, above all, His
Providence. “For neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that
watereth, but God that giveth the increase.” ([1 Cor. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="v.xv-p49.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.xv-p50"></span>Here also there is death and life, and throes
and procreation, just as with men. For here happen instances both of
being cut off, and of bearing fruit, and of dying, and of being born
(the same that was dead) over again, wherein the earth discourseth to us
both variously and clearly of a resurrection. For when the root beareth
fruit, when the seed shooteth, is not the thing a resurrection? And one
might perceive a large measure of God’s providence and wisdom involved
in this rule, if one go over it point by point. But what I wished to say
is that this \[rule\] is concerned with earth and plants; but ours with
care of souls. And great as is the difference between plants and a soul;
so great is the superiority of this to that. And the rulers of the
present life again are as much inferior to that \[rule\], as it is
better to have mastery over the willing than the unwilling. For this is
also a natural rule; for truly in that case every thing is done through
fear and by constraint; but here, what is done aright is of choice and
purpose. And not in this point alone doth this excel the other, but in
that it is not only a rule, but a fatherhood <span
id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795) so to speak; for it has the gentleness
of a father; and whilst enjoining greater things, \[still\] persuades.
For the temporal ruler indeed says, ‘If thou committest adultery, thou
hast forfeited thy life,’ but this, shouldst thou look with unchaste
eyes, threatens the highest punishments. For awful is this judgment
court, and for the correction of soul, not of body only. As great then
as the difference between soul and body, is that which separates this
rule again from that. And the one indeed sitteth as judge of things that
are open; yea, rather, not of all these even, but of such as can be
fully proved; and ofttimes moreover, even in these dealeth
treacherously <span id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796) , but this court
instructeth those that enter it that He that judgeth in our case, will
bring forward “all things naked and laid open,” ([Heb. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013)<span id="v.xv-p52.2"></span>.)
before the common theatre of the world, and that to be hidden will be
impossible. So that Christianity keeps together this our life far more
than temporal <span id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797) laws. For if to
tremble about secret sins makes a man safer than to fear for such as are
open; and if to call him to account even for those offences which be
less doth rather excite him unto virtue, than to punish the graver only;
then it is easily seen that this rule, more than all others, welds <span
id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798) our life together.

<span id="v.xv-p55"></span>\[6.\] But, if thou wilt, let us consider
also the mode of electing the rulers; for here too thou shalt behold the
difference to be great. For it is not possible to gain this authority by
giving money, but by having displayed a highly virtuous character; and
not as unto glory with men and ease unto himself, but as unto toils and
labors and the welfare of the many, thus, (I say,) is he that hath been
appointed inducted unto this rule. Wherefore also abundant is the
assistance he enjoys from the Spirit. And in that case indeed the rule
can go no further than to declare merely what is to be done; but in this
it addeth besides the help derived from prayers and from the Spirit. But
further; in that case indeed is not a word about philosophy, nor doth
any sit to teach what a soul is, and what the world, and what we are to
be hereafter, and unto what things we shall depart hence, and how we
shall achieve virtue. Howbeit of contracts and bonds and money, there is
much speech, but of those things not a thought; whereas in the Church
one may see that these are the subjects of every discourse. Wherefore
also with justice may one call it by all these names, a court of
justice, and a hospital, and a school of philosophy, and a nursery of
the soul, and a training course for that race that leadeth unto heaven.
Further, that this rule is also the mildest of all, even though
requiring greater strictness, is plain from hence. For the temporal
ruler if he catch an adulterer <span id="page_355">p. 355</span> <span
id="v.xv-Page_355"></span>straightway punishes him. And yet what is the
advantage of this? For this is not to destroy the passion, but to send
away the soul with its wound upon it. But this ruler, when he hath
detected, considers not how he shall avenge, but how extirpate the
passion. For thou indeed dost the same thing, as if when there was a
disease of the head, thou shouldest not stay the disease, but cut off
the head. But I do not thus: but I cut off the disease. And I exclude
him indeed from mysteries and hallowed precincts; but when I have
restored him I receive him back again, at once delivered from that
viciousness and amended by his repentance. ‘And how is it possible,’
saith one, ‘to extirpate adultery?’ It is possible, yea, very possible,
if a man comes under these laws. For the Church is a spiritual bath,
which wipeth away not filth of body, but stains of soul, by its many
methods of repentance. For thou, indeed, both if thou let a man go
unpunished hast made him worse, and if thou punish hast sent him away
uncured: but I neither let him go unpunished, nor punish him, as thou,
but both exact a satisfaction which becomes me, and set that right which
hath been done. Wilt thou learn in yet another way how that thou indeed,
though drawing swords and displaying flames to them that offend, workest
not any considerable cure; whilst I, without these things, have
conducted them to perfect health? But no need have I of arguments or
words, but I bring forth earth and sea, and human nature itself, \[for
witnesses.\] And inquire, before this court held its sittings, what was
the condition of human affairs; how, not even the names of the good
works which now are done, were ever heard of. For who braved death? who
despised money? who was indifferent to glory? who, fleeing from the
turmoils of life <span id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799) , bade welcome
to mountains and solitude, the mother of heavenly wisdom? where was at
all the name of virginity? For all these things, and more than these,
were the good work of this judgment court, the doings of this rule.
Knowing these things then, and well understanding that from this
proceedeth every benefit of our life, and the reformation of the world,
come frequently unto the hearing of the Divine words, and our assemblies
here, and the prayers. For if ye thus order yourselves, ye will be able,
having displayed a deportment worthy of heaven, to obtain the promised
good things; which may all we obtain, through the grace and love towards
men of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_769"></span>[350:770](1120064.htm#fr_769) <span
id="v.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p4"></span> ‘For,’ Rec. Text \[which is correct. C.\]

<span id="fn_770"></span>[350:771](1120064.htm#fr_770) <span
id="v.xv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p6.1"></span>θεραπεύειν</span>.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[350:772](1120064.htm#fr_771) <span
id="v.xv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p7.1"></span>τό μετρόν τῆς ἐπιτιμήσεως</span>.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[350:773](1120064.htm#fr_772) <span
id="v.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p12.1"></span>τὰς ἀφορμὰς</span>.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[351:774](1120064.htm#fr_773) <span
id="v.xv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p15.1"></span>λάμποντα</span>.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[351:775](1120064.htm#fr_774) <span
id="v.xv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p20.1"></span>συνήδεσθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[351:776](1120064.htm#fr_775) <span
id="v.xv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p22.1"></span>προδιοικούμενος</span>.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[351:777](1120064.htm#fr_776) <span
id="v.xv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p23.1"></span>συνεστήσατε</span>.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[351:778](1120064.htm#fr_777) <span
id="v.xv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p24.1"></span>διατετράφθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[352:779](1120064.htm#fr_778) <span
id="v.xv-p24.5"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p25"></span> i.e. the incestuous person.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[352:780](1120064.htm#fr_779) <span
id="v.xv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p27"></span> \[The true text of this clause is given in
the Rev. Vers. “That your earnest care for us might be made manifest.”
C.\]

<span id="fn_780"></span>[352:781](1120064.htm#fr_780) <span
id="v.xv-p30.3"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p31.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p31.2"></span>πίδοσις</span>.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[352:782](1120064.htm#fr_781) <span
id="v.xv-p32.3"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p33.1"></span>δημαγωγὸς</span>.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[352:783](1120064.htm#fr_782) <span
id="v.xv-p33.3"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p34.1"></span>ὦ βέλτιστε</span>.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[352:784](1120064.htm#fr_783) <span
id="v.xv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p35.1"></span>εἴασαν</span>.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[353:785](1120064.htm#fr_784) <span
id="v.xv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p36.1"></span>ματαιοτεχνίας</span>.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[353:786](1120064.htm#fr_785) <span
id="v.xv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p37.1"></span>ἐξ ὀλίγων</span>.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[353:787](1120064.htm#fr_786) <span
id="v.xv-p37.4"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p38.1"></span>εἰς μέσον</span>.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[353:788](1120064.htm#fr_787) <span
id="v.xv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p41.1"></span>παρεδήλωσεν</span>.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[353:789](1120064.htm#fr_788) <span
id="v.xv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p43"></span> *conversation* A.V.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[353:790](1120064.htm#fr_789) <span
id="v.xv-p43.3"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p44.1"></span>κωλύων</span>, others, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p44.2"></span>κολούων</span>.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[353:791](1120064.htm#fr_790) <span
id="v.xv-p44.3"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p45.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p45.2"></span>πιεικεῖς</span>.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[354:792](1120064.htm#fr_791) <span
id="v.xv-p45.3"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p46.1"></span>προπέτεια</span>.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[354:793](1120064.htm#fr_792) <span
id="v.xv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p47"></span> Or, healthiness.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[354:794](1120064.htm#fr_793) <span
id="v.xv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p48.1"></span>κομῶντα</span>.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[354:795](1120064.htm#fr_794) <span
id="v.xv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p49.1"></span>συνίστανται</span>.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[354:796](1120064.htm#fr_795) <span
id="v.xv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p51.1"></span>πατρότης</span>.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[354:797](1120064.htm#fr_796) <span
id="v.xv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p52.1"></span>προδότης</span>.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[354:798](1120064.htm#fr_797) <span
id="v.xv-p52.3"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p53.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p53.2"></span>ξωθεν</span>.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[354:799](1120064.htm#fr_798) <span
id="v.xv-p53.3"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p54.1"></span>συγκροτεῖ</span>.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[355:800](1120064.htm#fr_799) <span
id="v.xv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xv-p56.1"></span>ἐν μέσῳ</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XVI](1120065)
