[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120023)  [Next](1120025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>Homily XX.</span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p2"></span><span id="iv.xxi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxi-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. viii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.xxi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p3"></span>Now concerning things sacrificed to idols:
we know that we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up, but love
edifieth.

<span id="iv.xxi-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xxi-p4.1"></span>It</span> is necessary first to say what the
meaning of this passage is: for so shall we readily comprehend the
Apostle’s discourse. For he that sees a charge brought against any one,
except he first perceive the nature of the offence will not understand
what is said. What then is it of which he was then accusing the
Corinthians? A heavy charge and the cause of many evils. Well, what is
it? Many among them, having learnt that (St. [Matt. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011)<span id="iv.xxi-p4.2"></span>..md)
“not the things which enter in defile the man, but the things which
proceed out,” and that idols of wood and stone, and demons, have no
power to hurt or help, had made an immoderate use of their perfect
knowledge of this to the harm both of others and of themselves. They had
both gone in where idols were and had partaken of the tables there, and
were producing thereby great and ruinous evil. For, on the one hand,
those who still retained the fear of idols and knew not how to contemn
them, took part in those meals, because they saw the more perfect sort
doing this; and hence they got the greatest injury:  since they did not
touch what was set before them with the same mind as the others, but as
things offered in sacrifice to idols; and the thing was becoming a way
to idolatry. On the other hand, these very persons who pretended to be
more perfect were injured in no common way, partaking in the tables of
demons.

<span id="iv.xxi-p5"></span>This then was the subject of complaint. Now
this blessed man being about to correct it, did not immediately begin to
speak vehemently; for that which was done came more of folly than of
wickedness: wherefore in the first instance there was need rather of
exhortation than of severe rebuke and wrath. Now herein observe his good
sense, how he immediately begins to admonish.

<span id="iv.xxi-p6"></span> “Now concerning things sacrificed to idols,
we know that we all have knowledge.” Leaving alone the weak, which he
always doth, he discourses with the strong first. And this is what he
did also in the Epistle to the Romans, saying, ([Rom. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span id="iv.xxi-p6.1"></span>..md)
“But thou, why dost thou judge thy brother?” for this is the sort of
person that is able to receive rebuke also with readiness. Exactly the
same then he doth here also.

<span id="iv.xxi-p7"></span>And first he makes void their conceit by
declaring that this very thing which they considered as peculiar to
themselves, the having perfect knowledge, was common to all. Thus, “we
know,” saith he, “that we all have knowledge.” For if allowing them to
have high thoughts, he had first pointed out how hurtful the thing was
to others, he would not have done them so much good as harm. For the
ambitious soul when it plumes itself upon any thing, <span
id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span id="iv.xxi-Page_112"></span>even
though the same do harm to others, yet strongly adheres to it because of
the tyranny of vain-glory. Wherefore Paul first examines the matter
itself by itself: just as he had done before in the case of the wisdom
from without, demolishing it with a high hand. But in that case he did
it as we might have expected: for the whole thing was altogether
blameworthy and his task was very easy. Wherefore he signifies it to be
not only useless, but even contrary to the Gospel. But in the present
case it was not possible to do this. For what was done was of knowledge,
and perfect knowledge. Nor was it safe to overthrow it, and yet in no
other way was it possible to cast out the conceit which had resulted
from it. What then doeth he? First, by signifying that it was common, he
curbs that swelling pride of theirs. For they who possess something
great and excellent are more elated, when they alone have it; but if it
be made out that they possess it in common with others, they no longer
have so much of this feeling. First then he makes it common property,
because they considered it to belong to themselves alone.

<span id="iv.xxi-p8"></span>Next, having made it common, he does not
make himself singly a sharer in it with them; for in this way too he
would have rather set them up; for as to be the only possessor elates,
so to have one partner or two perhaps among leading persons has this
effect just as much. For this reason he does not mention himself but
all: he said not, “I too have knowledge,” but, “we know that we all have
knowledge.”

<span id="iv.xxi-p9"></span>\[2.\] This then is one way, and the first,
by which he cast down their pride; the next hath greater force. What
then is this? In that he shews that not even this thing itself was in
all points complete, but imperfect, and extremely so. And not only
imperfect, but also injurious, unless there were another thing joined
together with it. For having said that “we have knowledge,” he added,
“Knowledge puffeth up, but love edifieth:” so that when it is without
love, it lifts men up to absolute arrogance.

<span id="iv.xxi-p10"></span>“And yet not even love,” you will say,
“without knowledge hath any advantage.” Well: this he did not say; but
omitting it as a thing allowed by all, he signifies that knowledge
stands in extreme need of love. For he who loves, inasmuch as he fulfils
the commandment which is most absolute of all, even though he have some
defects, will quickly be blest with knowledge because of his love; as
Cornelius and many others. But he that hath knowledge but hath not love,
not only shall gain nothing more, but shall also be cast out of that
which he hath, in many cases falling into arrogance. It seems then that
knowledge is not productive of love, but on the contrary debars from it
him that is not on his guard, puffing him up and elating him. For
arrogance is wont to cause divisions: but love both draws together and
leads to knowledge. And to make this plain he saith, “But if any man
loveth God, the same is known of Him.” So that “I forbid not this,”
saith he, “namely, your having perfect knowledge; but your having it
with love, that I enjoin; else is it no gain, but rather loss.”

<span id="iv.xxi-p11"></span>Do you see how he already sounds the first
note of his discourse concerning love? For since all these evils were
springing from the following root, i.e., not from perfect knowledge, but
from their not greatly loving nor sparing their neighbors; whence ensued
both their variance and their self-satisfaction, and all the rest which
he had charged them with; both before this and after he is continually
providing for love; so correcting the fountain of all good things. “Now
why,” saith he, “are ye puffed up about knowledge? For if ye have not
love, ye shall even be injured thereby. For what is worse than boasting?
But if the other be added, the first also will be in safety. For
although you may know something more than your neighbor, if you love him
you will not set yourself up but lead him also to the same.” Wherefore
also having said, “Knowledge puffeth up,” he added, “but love edifieth.”
He did not say, “Behaveth itself modestly,” but what is much more, and
more gainful. For their knowledge was not only puffing them up but also
distracting them. On this account he opposes the one to the other.

<span id="iv.xxi-p12"></span>\[3.\] And then he adds a third
consideration, which was of force to set them down. What then is this?
that although charity be joined with it, yet not even in that case is
this our knowledge perfect. And therefore he adds,

<span id="iv.xxi-p13"></span>[1 Cor.
8.2](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.xxi-p13.1"></span>.
“But if any man think that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet
as he ought to know.” This is a mortal blow. “I dwell not,” saith he,
“on the knowledge being common to all. I say not that by hating your
neighbor and by arrogance, you injure yourself most. But even though you
have it by yourself alone, though you be modest, though you love your
brother, even in this case you are imperfect in regard of knowledge.
“For as yet thou knowest nothing as thou oughtest to know,” Now if we
possess as yet exact knowledge of nothing, how is it that some have
rushed on to such a pitch of frenzy as to say that they know God with
all exactness? Whereas, though we had an exact knowledge of all other
things, not even so were it possible to possess this knowledge to such
an extent. For how far He is apart from all things, it is impossible
even to say.

<span id="iv.xxi-p14"></span>And mark how he pulls down their swelling
pride:  for he said not, “of the matters before <span id="page_113">p.
113</span> <span id="iv.xxi-Page_113"></span>us ye have not the proper
knowledge,” but, “about every thing.” And he did not say, “ye,” but, “no
one whatever,” be it Peter, be it Paul, be it any one else. For by this
he both soothed them and carefully kept them under.

<span id="iv.xxi-p15"></span>[1 Cor.
8.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.xxi-p15.1"></span>.
“But if any man love God, the same,” he doth not say, “knoweth Him,”
but, “is known of Him.” For we have not known Him, but He hath known us.
And therefore did Christ say, “Ye have not chosen Me, but I have chosen
you.” And Paul elsewhere, “Then shall I know fully, <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) even as also I have been known.”

<span id="iv.xxi-p17"></span>Observe now, I pray, by what means he
brings down their high-mindedness. First, he points out that not they
alone knew the things which they knew; for “we all,” he saith,” have
knowledge.” Next, that the thing itself was hurtful so long as it was
without love; for “knowledge,” saith he, “puffeth up.” Thirdly, that
even joined with love it is not complete nor perfect. “For if any man
thinketh that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing as yet as he
ought to know,” so he speaks. In addition to this, that they have not
even this from themselves, but by gift from God. For he said not, “hath
known God,” but, “is known of Him.” Again, that this very thing comes of
love which they have not as they ought. For, “if any man,” saith he,
“love God, the same is known of Him.” Having then so much at large
allayed their irritation, he begins to speak doctrinally, saying thus.

<span id="iv.xxi-p18"></span>\[4.\] [1 Cor.
8.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.xxi-p18.1"></span>.
“Concerning therefore the eating of things sacrificed to idols, we know
that no idol is anything in the world, and that there is no God but
one.” Look what a strait he hath fallen into!  For indeed his mind is to
prove both; that one ought to abstain from this kind of banquet, and
that it hath no power to hurt those who partake of it: things which were
not greatly in agreement with each other. For when they were told that
they had no harm in them, they would naturally run to them as
indifferent things. But when forbidden to touch them, they would
suspect, on the contrary, that their having power to do hurt occasioned
the prohibition. Wherefore, you see, he puts down their opinion about
idols, and then states as a first reason for their abstaining the
scandals which they place in the way of their brethren; in these words:
“Now concerning the eating of things sacrificed to idols, we know that
no idol is anything in the world.” Again he makes it common property and
doth not allow this to be theirs alone, but extends the knowledge all
over the world. For “not among you alone,” says he, “but every where on
earth this doctrine prevails.” What then is it? “That no idol is
anything in the world; that there is no God but one.” What then? are
there no idols? no statues?  Indeed there are; but they have no power:
neither are they gods, but stones and demons. For he is now setting
himself against both parties; both the grosser sort among them, and
those who were accounted lovers of wisdom. Thus, seeing that the former
know of no more than the mere stones, the others assert that certain
powers reside in them <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92.md) , which they
also call gods; to the former accordingly he says, that “no idol is
anything in the world,” to the other, that “there is no God but one.”

<span id="iv.xxi-p20"></span>Do you mark how he writes these things, not
simply as laying down doctrine, but in opposition to those without? A
thing indeed which we must at all times narrowly observe, whether he
says anything abstractedly, or whether he is opposing any persons. For
this contributes in no ordinary way to the accuracy of our doctrinal
views, and to the exact understanding of his expressions.

<span id="iv.xxi-p21"></span>\[5.\] [1 Cor.
8.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.xxi-p21.1"></span>.
“For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or on
earth, as there are gods many and lords many; yet to us there is one
God, the Father, of Whom are all things, and we unto Him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, through Whom are all things, and we through Him.” Since he
had said, that “an idol is nothing” and that “there is no other God;”
and yet there were idols and there were those that were called gods;
that he might not seem to be contradicting plain facts, he goes on to
say, “For though there be that are called gods, as indeed there are;”
not absolutely, “there are;” but, “called,” not in reality having this
but in name: “be it in heaven or on earth:—in heaven,” meaning the sun
and the moon and the remainder of the choir of stars; for these too the
Greeks worshipped: but upon the earth demons, and all those who had been
made gods of men:—“yet to us there is One God, the Father.” In the first
instance having expressed it without the word “Father,” and said, “there
is no God but one,” he now adds this also, when he had utterly cast out
the others.

<span id="iv.xxi-p22"></span>Next, he adduces what indeed is the
greatest token of divinity; “of Whom are all things.” For this implies
also that those others are not gods. For it is said ([Jer. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011)<span id="iv.xxi-p22.1"></span>..md),
“Let the gods who made not the heaven and the earth perish.” Then he
subjoins what is not less than this, “and we unto Him.” For when he
saith, “of Whom are all things,” he means the creation and the bringing
of things out of nothing into existence. But when he saith, “and we unto
Him,” he speaks of the word of faith and mutual <span id="page_114">p.
114</span> <span id="iv.xxi-Page_114"></span>appropriation (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxi-p22.2"></span>οἰκειώσεως</span>), as also
he said before ([1 Cor. i. 30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.xxi-p22.3"></span>.), “but of Him are ye also in Christ Jesus.”
In two ways we are of Him, by being made when we were not, and by being
made believers. For this also is a creation: a thing which he also
declares elsewhere; ([Ephes. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015)<span id="iv.xxi-p22.4"></span>..md)
“that He might create in Himself of the twain one new man.”

<span id="iv.xxi-p23"></span>“And there is one Lord, Jesus Christ,
through Whom are all things, and we through Him.” And in regard to
Christ again, we must conceive of this in like manner. For through Him
the race of men was both produced out of nothing into existence, and
returned from error to truth. So that as to the phrase “of Whom,” it is
not to be understood apart from Christ. For of Him, through Christ, were
we created.

<span id="iv.xxi-p24"></span>\[6.\] Nor yet, if you observe, hath he
distributed the names as if belonging exclusively, assigning to the Son
the name Lord, and to the Father, God. For the Scripture useth also
often to interchange them; as when it saith, ([Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span id="iv.xxi-p24.1"></span>..md)
“The Lord saith unto My Lord;” and again, ([Ps. lxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxi-p24.2"></span>..md)
“Wherefore God Thy God hath appointed Thee;” and, ([Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="iv.xxi-p24.3"></span>..md) “Of
Whom is Christ according to the flesh, Who is God over all.” And in many
instances you may see these names changing their places. Besides, if
they were allotted to each nature severally, and if the Son were not
God, and God as the Father, yet continuing a Son: after saying, “but to
us there is but One God,” it would have been superfluous, his adding the
word “Father,” with a view to declare the Unbegotten. For the word of
God was sufficient to explain this, if it were such as to denote Him
only.

<span id="iv.xxi-p25"></span>And this is not all, but there is another
remark to make: that if you say, “Because it is said ‘One God,’
therefore the word God doth not apply to the Son;” observe that the same
holds of the Son also. For the Son also is called “One Lord,” yet we do
not maintain that therefore the term Lord applies to Him alone. So then,
the same force which the expression “One” has, applied to the Son, it
has also, applied to the Father. And as the Father is not thrust out
from being the Lord, in the same sense as the Son is the Lord, because
He, the Son, is spoken of as one Lord; so neither does it cast out the
Son from being God, in the same sense as the Father is God, because the
Father is styled One God.

<span id="iv.xxi-p26"></span>\[7.\] Now if any were to say, “Why did he
make no mention of the Spirit?” our answer might be this: His argument
was with idolaters, and the contention was about “gods many and lords
many.” And this is why, having called the Father, God, he calls the Son,
Lord. If now he ventured not to call the Father Lord together with the
Son, lest they might suspect him to be speaking of two Lords; nor yet
the Son, God, with the Father, lest he might be supposed to speak of two
Gods: why marvel at his not having mentioned the Spirit? His contest
was, so far, with the Gentiles: his point, to signify that with us there
is no plurality of Gods. Wherefore he keeps hold continually of this
word, “One;” saying, “There is no God but One; and, to us there is One
God, and One Lord.” From which it is plain, that to spare the weakness
of the hearers he used this mode of explanation, and for this reason
made no mention at all of the Spirit. For if it be not this, neither
ought he to make mention of the Spirit elsewhere, nor to join Him with
the Father and the Son. For if He be rejected from the Father and Son,
much more ought He not to be put in the same rank with them in the
matter of Baptism; where most especially the dignity of the Godhead
appears and gifts are bestowed which pertain to God alone to afford.
Thus then I have assigned the cause why in this place He is passed over
in silence. Now do thou if this be not the true reason, tell me, why He
is ranked with Them in Baptism? But thou canst not give any other reason
but His being of equal honor. At any rate, when he has no such
constraint upon him, he puts Him in the same rank, saying thus: ([2 Cor.
xiii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.xxi-p26.1"></span>.) “The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God and the Father, <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93.md) and the
fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with you all:” and again, (ch. [xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span id="iv.xxi-p27.2"></span>..md)
“There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit: and there are
diversities of administrations, but the same Lord; and there are
diversities of workings but the same God.” But because now his speech
was with Greeks and the weaker sort of the converts from among Greeks,
for this reason he husbands it (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxi-p27.3"></span>ταμιεύεται</span>) so far. And this is what the
prophets do in regard of the Son; no where making mention of Him plainly
because of the infirmity of the hearers.

<span id="iv.xxi-p28"></span>[1 Cor.
8.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.xxi-p28.1"></span>.
“But not in all is knowledge,” saith he. What knowledge doth he mean?
about God, or about things offered in sacrifice to idols? For either he
here glances at the Greeks who say that there are many gods and lords,
and who know not Him that is truly God; or at the converts from among
Greeks who were still rather infirm, such as did not yet know clearly
that they ought not to fear idols and that “an idol is nothing in the
world.” But in saying this, he gently soothes and encourages the latter.
For there was no need of mentioning all he had to reprove, particularly
as he intended to visit them again with more severity.

<span id="iv.xxi-p29"></span>\[8.\] “But some being used to the idol eat
as of a thing sacrificed to an idol, and their con<span id="page_115">p.
115</span> <span id="iv.xxi-Page_115"></span>science being weak is
defiled.” They still tremble at idols, he saith. For tell me not of the
present establishment, and that you have received the true religion from
your ancestors. But carry back your thoughts to those times, and
consider when the Gospel was just set on foot, and impiety was still at
its height, and altars burning, and sacrifices and libations offering
up, and the greater part of men were Gentiles; think, I say, of those
who from their ancestors had received impiety, and who were the
descendants of fathers and grandfathers and great-grandfathers like
themselves, and who had suffered great miseries from the demons. How
must they have felt after their sudden change!  How would they face and
tremble at the assaults of the demons!  For their sake also he employs
some reserve, saying, “But some with conscience of the things sacrificed
to an idol. <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md) ” Thus he neither
exposed them openly, not to strike them hard; nor doth he pass by them
altogether: but makes mention of them in a vague manner, saying, “Now
some with conscience of the idol even until now eat as of a thing
sacrificed to an idol; that is, with the same thoughts as they did in
former times: ‘and their conscience being weak is defiled;’” not yet
being able to despise and once for all laugh them to scorn, but still in
some doubt. Just as if a man were to think that by touching a dead body
he should pollute himself according to the Jewish custom, and then
seeing others touching it with a clear conscience, but not with the same
mind touching it himself, would be polluted. This was their state of
feeling at that time. “For some,” saith he, “with conscience of the idol
do it even until now.” Not without cause did he add, “even until now;”
but to signify that they gained no ground by their refusing to
condescend. For this was not the way to bring them in, but in some other
way persuading them by word and by teaching.

<span id="iv.xxi-p31"></span>“And their conscience being weak is
defiled.” No where as yet doth he state his argument about the nature of
the thing, but turns himself this way and that as concerning the
conscience of the person partaking. For he was afraid lest in his wish
to correct the weak person, he should inflict a heavy blow upon the
strong one, and make him also weak. On which account he spares the one
no less than the other. Nor doth he allow the thing itself to be thought
of any consequence, but makes his argument very full to prevent any
suspicion of the kind.

<span id="iv.xxi-p32"></span>\[9.\] [1 Cor.
8.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.xxi-p32.1"></span>.
“But meat doth not commend us to God. For neither if we eat are we the
better, nor if we eat not are we the worse.” Do you see how again he
takes down their high spirit? in that, after saying that “not only they
but all of us have knowledge,” and that “no one knoweth any thing as he
ought to know,” and that “knowledge puffeth up;” then having soothed
them, and said that “this knowledge is not in all,” and that “weakness
is the cause of these being defiled,” in order that they might not say,
“And what is it to us, if knowledge be not in all? Why then has not such
an one knowledge? Why is he weak?”—I say, in order that they might not
rejoin in these terms, he did not proceed immediately to point out
clearly that for fear of the other’s harm one ought to abstain: but
having first made but a sort of skirmish upon mention of him, he points
out what is more than this. What then is this? That although no one were
injured nor any perversion of another ensued, not even in this case were
it right so to do. For the former topic by itself is laboring in vain.
Since he that hears of another being hurt while himself has the gain, is
not very apt to abstain; but then rather he doth so, when he finds out
that he himself is no way advantaged by the thing. Wherefore he sets
this down first, saying, “But meat commendeth us not to God.” See how
cheap he holds that which was accounted to spring from perfect
knowledge!  “For neither if we eat are we the better,” (that is, stand
higher in God’s estimation, as if we had done any thing good or great:) 
“nor if we eat not are we the worse,” that is, fall in any way short of
others. So far then he hath signified that the thing itself is
superfluous, and as nothing. For that which being done profits not, and
which being left undone injures not, must be superfluous.

<span id="iv.xxi-p33"></span>\[10.\] But as he goes on, he discloses all
the harm which was likely to arise from the matter. For the present,
however, that which befel the brethren is his subject.

<span id="iv.xxi-p34"></span>[1 Cor.
8.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.xxi-p34.1"></span>.
“For take heed,” saith he, “lest by any means this liberty of yours
become a stumbling-block to the weak among the brethren.” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxi-p34.2"></span>τῶν ἀδελφῶν</span> not in
rec. text.)

<span id="iv.xxi-p35"></span>He did not say, “Your liberty is become a
stumbling-block,” nor did he positively affirm it that he might not make
them more shameless; but how? “Take heed;” frightening them, and making
them ashamed, and leading them to disavow any such conduct. And he said
not, “This your knowledge,” which would have sounded more like praise;
nor “this your perfectness;” but, “your liberty;” a thing which seemed
to savor more of rashness and obstinacy and arrogance. Neither said he,
“To the brethren,” but, “To those of the brethren who are weak;”
enhancing his accusation from their not even sparing the weak, and those
too their brethren. For let it be so that you correct them not, nor
arouse them: yet why trip them up, <span id="page_116">p. 116</span>
<span id="iv.xxi-Page_116"></span>and make them to stumble, when you
ought to stretch out the hand? but for that you have no mind: well then,
at least avoid casting them down. Since if one were wicked, he required
punishment; if weak, healing: but now he is not only weak, but also a
brother.

<span id="iv.xxi-p36"></span>[1 Cor.
8.10](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.xxi-p36.1"></span>.
“For if a man see thee who hast knowledge, sitting at meat in an idol’s
temple, will not his conscience if he is weak, be emboldened <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95.md) to eat things sacrificed to idols?”

<span id="iv.xxi-p38"></span>After having said, “Take heed lest this
your liberty become a stumbling-block,” he explains how and in what
manner it becomes so: and he continually employs the term “weakness,”
that the mischief may not be thought to arise from the nature of the
thing, nor demons appear formidable. As thus:  “At present,” saith he,
“a man is on the point of withdrawing himself entirely from all idols;
but when he sees you fond of loitering about them, he takes the
circumstance for a recommendation and abides there himself also. So that
not only his weakness, but also your ill-timed behavior, helps to
further the plot against him; for it is you who make him weaker.”

<span id="iv.xxi-p39"></span>[1 Cor.
8.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.xxi-p39.1"></span>.
“And through thy meat <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96.md) he that is
weak perisheth, the brother for whose sake Christ died.”

<span id="iv.xxi-p41"></span>For there are two things which deprive you
of excuse in this mischief; one, that he is weak, the other, that he is
thy brother: rather, I should say, there is a third also, and one more
terrible than all. What then is this? That whereas Christ refused not
even to die for him, thou canst not bear even to accommodate thyself to
him. By these means, you see, he reminds the perfect man also, what he
too was before, and that for him He died. And he said not, “For whom
even to die was thy duty;” but what is much stronger, that even Christ
died for his sake. “Did thy Lord then not refuse to die for him, and
dost thou so make him of none account as not even to abstain from a
polluted table for his sake? Yea, dost thou permit him to perish, after
the salvation so wrought, and, what is still more grievous, ‘for a
morsel of meat?’ “For he said not, “for thy perfectness,” nor “for thy
knowledge,” but “for thy meat.” So that the charges are four, and these
extremely heavy: that it was a brother, that he was weak, and one of
whom Christ made so much account as even to die for him, and that after
all this for a “morsel of meat” he is destroyed.

<span id="iv.xxi-p42"></span>[1 Cor.
8.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.xxi-p42.1"></span>.
“And thus sinning against the brethren, and wounding their weak
conscience, ye sin against Christ.”

<span id="iv.xxi-p43"></span>Do you observe how quietly and gradually he
hath brought their offence up to the very summit of iniquity? And again,
he makes mention of the infirmity of the other sort: and so, the very
thing which these considered to make for them, that he every where turns
round upon their own head. And he said not, “Putting stumbling-blocks in
their way,” but, “wounding;” so as by the force of his expression to
indicate their cruelty. For what can be more savage than a man who
wounds the sick? and yet no wound is so grievous as making a man to
stumble. Often, in fact, is this also the cause of death.

<span id="iv.xxi-p44"></span>But how do they “sin against Christ?” In
one way, because He considers the concerns of His servants as His own;
in another, because those who are wounded go to make up His Body and
that which is part of Him: in a third way, because that work of His
which He built up by His own blood, these are destroying for their
ambition’s sake.

<span id="iv.xxi-p45"></span>\[11.\] [1 Cor.
8.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.xxi-p45.1"></span>.
“Wherefore, if meat make my brother to stumble, I will eat no flesh for
ever.” This is like the best of teachers, to teach in his own person the
things which he speaks. Nor did he say whether justly or unjustly; but
in any case. “I say not,” (such is his tone,) “meat offered in sacrifice
to an idol, which is already prohibited for another reason; but if any
even of those things which are within license and are permitted causes
stumbling, from these also will I abstain: and not one or two days, but
all the time of my life.” For he saith, “I will eat no flesh for ever.”
And he said not, “Lest I destroy my brother,” but simply, “That I make
not my brother to stumble.” For indeed it comes of folly in the extreme
that what things are greatly cared for by Christ, and such as He should
have even chosen to die for them, these we should esteem so entirely
beneath our notice as not even to abstain from meats on their account.

<span id="iv.xxi-p46"></span>Now these things might be seasonably spoken
not to them only, but also to us, apt as we are to esteem lightly the
salvation of our neighbors and to utter those satanical words. I say,
satanical: for the expression, “What care I, though such an one stumble,
and such another perish?” savors of his cruelty and inhuman mind. And
yet in that instance, the infirmity also of those who were offended had
some share in the result: but in our case it is not so, sinning as we do
in such a way as to offend even the strong. For when we smite, and
raven, and overreach, and use the free as if they were slaves, whom is
not this enough to offend? Tell me not of such a man’s being a
shoemaker, another a dyer, another a brazier: but bear in mind that he
is a believer and a brother. Why these are they whose disciples we are;
the fishermen, <span id="page_117">p. 117</span> <span
id="iv.xxi-Page_117"></span>the publicans, the tent-makers, of Him who
was brought up in the house of a carpenter; and who deigned to have the
carpenter’s betrothed wife for a mother; and who was laid, after His
swaddling clothes, in a manger; and who had not where to lay His
head;—of Him whose journeys were so long that His very journeying was
enough to tire Him down; of Him who was supported by others.

<span id="iv.xxi-p47"></span>\[12.\] Think on these things, and esteem
the pride of man to be nothing. But count the tent-maker as well as thy
brother, as him that is borne upon a chariot and hath innumerable
servants and struts in the market-place: nay, rather the former than the
latter; since the term brother would more naturally be used where there
is the greater resemblance. Which then resembles the fisherman? He who
is supported by daily labor and hath neither servant nor dwelling, but
is quite beset with privations; or that other who is surrounded with
such vast pomp, and who acts contrary to the laws of God? Despise not
then him that is more of the two thy brother, for he comes nearer to the
Apostolic pattern.

<span id="iv.xxi-p48"></span>“Not however,” say you, “of his own accord,
but by compulsion; for he doeth not this of his own mind.” How comes
this? Hast thou not heard, “Judge not, that ye be not judged?” But, to
convince thyself that he doeth it not against his inclination, approach
and give him ten thousand talents of gold, and thou shalt see him
putting it away from him. And thus, even though he have received no
wealth by inheritance from his ancestors, yet when it is in his power to
take it, and he lets it not come near him neither adds to his goods, he
exhibits a mighty proof of his contempt of wealth. For so John was the
son of Zebedee that extremely poor man: yet I suppose we are not
therefore to say that his poverty was forced upon him.

<span id="iv.xxi-p49"></span>Whensoever then thou seest one driving
nails, smiting with a hammer, covered with soot, do not therefore hold
him cheap, but rather for that reason admire him. Since even Peter
girded himself, and handled the dragnet, and went a fishing after the
Resurrection of the Lord.

<span id="iv.xxi-p50"></span>And why say I Peter? For this same Paul
himself, after his incessant runnings to and fro and all those vast
miracles, standing in a tent-maker’s shop, sewed hides together: while
angels were reverencing him and demons trembling. And he was not ashamed
to say, ([Acts xx. 34](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.xxi-p50.1"></span>.) “Unto my necessities, and to those who were
with me, these hands ministered.” What say I, that he was not ashamed?
Yea, he gloried in this very thing.

<span id="iv.xxi-p51"></span>But you will say, “Who is there now to be
compared with the virtue of Paul?” I too am aware that there is no one,
yet not on this account are those who live now to be despised:  for if
for Christ’s sake thou give honor, though one be last of all, yet if he
be a believer he shall justly be honored. For suppose a general and a
common soldier both present themselves before you, being friends of the
king, and you open your house to both: in which of their persons would
you seem to pay most honor to the king? Plainly in that of a soldier.
For there were in the general, beside his loyalty to the king, many
other things apt to win such a mark of respect from you: but the soldier
had nothing else but his loyalty to the king.

<span id="iv.xxi-p52"></span>Wherefore God bade us call to our suppers
and our feasts the lame, and the maimed, and those who cannot repay us;
for these are most of all properly called good deeds which are done for
God’s sake. Whereas if thou entertain some great and distinguished man,
it is not such pure mercy, what thou doest:  but some portion many times
is assigned to thyself also, <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md) both
by vain-glory, and by the return of the favor, and by thy rising in many
men’s estimation on account of thy guest. At any rate, I think I could
point out many who with this view pay court to the more distinguished
among the saints, namely, that by their means they may enjoy a greater
intimacy with rulers, and that they may find them thenceforth more
useful in their own affairs and to their families. And many such favors
do they ask in recompense from those saints; a thing which mars the
repayment of their hospitality, they seeking it with such a mind.

<span id="iv.xxi-p54"></span>And why need I say this about the saints?
Since he who seeks, even from God, the reward of his labors in the
present life and follows after virtue for this world’s good, is sure to
diminish his recompense. But he that asks for all his crowns wholly
there, is found far more admirable; like that Lazarus, who even now is
“receiving” (St. [Luke xvi. 25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.xxi-p54.1"></span>.) there all “his good things;” like those
Three Children, who when they were on the point of being thrown into the
furnace said, (Dan. 17:17, 18<span id="iv.xxi-p54.2"></span>.) “There is
a God in heaven able to deliver us; and if not, be it known unto thee, O
king, that we serve not thy gods, nor worship the golden image which
thou hast set up:” like Abraham, who even offered <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md) his son and slew him; and this he did,
not for any reward, but esteeming this one thing the greatest
recompense, to obey the Lord.

<span id="iv.xxi-p56"></span>These let us also imitate. For so shall we
be visited with a return of all our good deeds and that abundantly,
because we do all with such a mind as this: so shall we obtain also the
<span id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span
id="iv.xxi-Page_118"></span>brighter crowns. And God grant that we may
all obtain them, through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom, to the Father and the Holy Spirit, be glory, power,
honor, now, henceforth, and for everlasting ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[113:92](1120024.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="iv.xxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxi-p16.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxi-p16.2"></span>πιγνώσομαι</span>.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[113:93](1120024.htm#fr_92.md) <span
id="iv.xxi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p19"></span> Olympius the Sophist, of Alexandria, A.D.
389, thus comforted the people when their idols were destroyed: “Shapes
and counterfeits they were, fashioned of matter subject unto corruption,
therefore to grind them to dust was easy: but those celestial powers
which dwelt and resided in them are ascended to Heaven.” Sozom. vii. 15,
quoted by Hooker, E. P. v. 65. 15.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[114:94](1120024.htm#fr_93.md) <span
id="iv.xxi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxi-p27.1"></span>καὶ Πατρος</span>, om. in rec. text.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[115:95](1120024.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="iv.xxi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxi-p30.1"></span>τοῦ εἰδωλοθύτου</span>. rec. text. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxi-p30.2"></span>εἰδώλου</span>.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[116:96](1120024.htm#fr_95.md) <span
id="iv.xxi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxi-p37.1"></span>οἰκοδομηθῆσεται</span>, “established,”
“edified.”

<span id="fn_96"></span>[116:97](1120024.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="iv.xxi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxi-p40.1"></span>βρώσει</span>, rec. text <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxi-p40.2"></span> γνώσει</span>, Comp. [Rom.
xiv. 15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.xxi-p40.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[117:98](1120024.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="iv.xxi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxi-p53.1"></span>μερίζεταί τι πρὸς σε</span>.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[117:99](1120024.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="iv.xxi-p54.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxi-p55.1"></span>ἀνήγαγε</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXI](1120025.md)
