[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120037)  [Next](1120039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxxv"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXIV.</span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p2"></span><span id="iv.xxxv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxxv-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.xxxv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p3"></span>But whether there be prophecies, they shall
be done away; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there
be knowledge, it shall be done away.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p4.1"></span>Having</span> shown the excellency of love from
its being requisite both to the spiritual gifts, and to the virtues of
life; and from rehearsal of all its good qualities, and by showing it to
be the foundation of exact self-denial; from another, a third head,
again he points out its worth. And this he doth, first from a wish to
persuade those who seemed to be accounted inferior that it is in their
power to have the chief of all signs, and that they will be no worse off
than the possessors of the gifts, if they have this, but rather much
better: secondly, with regard on the other hand to them that had the
greater gifts and were lifted up thereby, studying to bring them down
and to show that they have nothing unless they have this. For thus they
would both love one another, envy as well as pride being hereby taken
away; and reciprocally, loving one another, they would still further
banish these passions. “For love envieth not, is not puffed up.” So that
on every side he throws around them an impregnable wall, and a manifold
unanimity, which first removes all their disorders, and thereby again
waxes stronger. Therefore also he put forward innumerable reasons which
might comfort their dejection. As thus: both “the same Spirit,” saith
he, is the giver; and He “giveth to profit withal; and divideth as he
will,” and it is a gift which He divideth, not a debt. Though thou
receive but a little, thou dost equally contribute to the body, and even
thus thou enjoyest much honor. And he that hath the greater, needs thee
who hast the less. And, “Love is the greatest gift, and ‘the more
excellent way.’”

<span id="iv.xxxv-p5"></span>Now all this he said doubly to bind them to
each other, both by their not considering themselves disparaged while
they had this; and because, after pursuit and attainment of it, they
henceforth would not feel human infirmity; both as having the root of
all gifts, and as no longer capable of contentiousness even though they
had nothing. For he that is once led captive by love is freed from
contentiousness.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p6"></span>And this is why, pointing out to them how
great advantages they shall thence reap, he sketched out its fruits; by
his praises of it repressing their disorders: inasmuch as each one of
the things mentioned by him was a sufficient medicine to heal their
wounds. Wherefore also he said, “suffereth long,” to them that <span
id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span id="iv.xxxv-Page_202"></span>are at
strife one with another; “is kind,” to them that stand mutually aloof,
and bear a secret grudge; “envieth not,” to them that look grudgingly on
their superiors; “vaunteth not itself,” to them that are separated; “is
not puffed up,” to them that boast themselves against others; “doth not
behave itself unseemly,” to them that do not think it their duty to
condescend; “seeketh not her own,” to them that overlook the rest; “is
not provoked, taketh not account of evil,” to them that are insolent;
“rejoiceth not in unrighteousness, but rejoiceth with the truth,” to
them again that are envious; “beareth all things,” to them that are
treacherous; “hopeth all things,” to the despairing; “endureth all
things, never faileth,” to them that easily separate themselves.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p7"></span>\[2.\] Now then after that in every way he
had shown her to be very exceedingly great, again he doth so from
another most important head, by a fresh comparison exalting her dignity,
and saying thus; “but whether there be prophecies, they shall be done
away; whether there be tongues, they shall cease.” For if both these
were brought in in order to the faith; when that is every where sown
abroad, the use of these is henceforth superfluous. But the loving one
another shall not cease, rather it shall even advance further, both here
and hereafter, and then more than now. For here there are many things
that weaken <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215.md) our love; wealth,
business, passions of the body, disorders of the soul; but there none of
these.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p9"></span>But although it be no marvel that
prophecies and tongues should be done away, that knowledge should be
done away, this is what may cause some perplexity. For this also he
added, “Whether there be knowledge, it shall be done away.” What then?
are we then to live in ignorance? Far from it. Nay, then specially it is
probable that our knowledge is made intense. Wherefore also he said,
“Then shall I know, even as also I am known.” For this reason, if you
mark it, that you might not suppose this to be done away equally with
the prophecy and the tongues, having said, “Whether there be knowledge,
it shall be done away,” he was not silent, but added also the manner of
its vanishing away, immediately subjoining the saying,

<span id="iv.xxxv-p10"></span>[1 Cor.
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.xxxv-p10.1"></span>.
“We know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is
perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.”

<span id="iv.xxxv-p11"></span>It is not therefore knowledge that is done
away, but the circumstance that our knowledge is in part. For we shall
not only know as much but even a great deal more. But that I may also
make it plain by example; now we know that God is every where, but how,
we know not.  That He made out of things that are not the things that
are we know; but of the manner we are ignorant. That He was born of a
virgin, we know; but how, we know not yet. But then shall we know
somewhat more and clearer concerning these things. Next he points out
also how great is the distance between the two, and that our deficiency
is no small one, saying,

<span id="iv.xxxv-p12"></span>[1 Cor.
13.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.xxxv-p12.1"></span>.
“When I was a child, I spake as a child, I felt as a child, I thought as
a child; but now that I am become a man, I have put away childish
things.”

<span id="iv.xxxv-p13"></span>And by another example too he manifests
the same thing again, saying,

<span id="iv.xxxv-p14"></span>[1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.xxxv-p14.1"></span>.
“For now we see in a mirror.” Further, because the glass sets before us
the thing seen indefinitely, he added, “darkly <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216.md) ,” to show very strongly that the
present knowledge is most partial.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p16"></span>“But then face to face.”  Not as though
God hath a face, but to express the notion of greater clearness and
perspicuity. Seest thou how we learn all things by gradual addition?

<span id="iv.xxxv-p17"></span>“Now I know in part; but then shall I know
even as also I have been known.” Seest thou how in two ways he pulls
down their pride? Both because their knowledge is in part, and because
not even this have they of themselves. “For I knew Him not, but He made
Himself known <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217.md) to me,” saith he.
Wherefore, even as now He first knew me, and Himself hastened towards
me, so shall I hasten towards Him then much more than now. For so he
that sits in darkness, as long as he sees not the sun doth not of
himself hasten to meet the beauty of its beam, which indeed shows itself
as soon as it hath begun to shine: but when he perceives its brightness,
then also himself at length follows after its light: This then is the
meaning of the expression, “even as also I have been known.” Not that we
shall so know him as He is, but that even as He hastened toward us now,
so also shall we cleave unto Him then, and shall know many of the things
which are now secret, and shall enjoy that most blessed society and
wisdom. For if Paul who knew so much was a child, consider what those
things must be. If these be “a glass” and “a riddle,” do thou hence
again infer, God’s open Face, how great a thing It is.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p19"></span>\[3.\] But that I may open out to thee
some small part of this difference, and may impart some faint ray of
this thought to thy soul, I would have thee recall to mind things as
they were in the Law, now after that grace hath shone forth. For those
things too, that came before grace, had a certain great and marvellous
<span id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span
id="iv.xxxv-Page_203"></span>appearance:  nevertheless, hear what Paul
saith of them after grace came:  “That which was made glorious had no
glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that surpasseth.” ([2 Cor.
iii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.xxxv-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxxv-p20"></span>But that what I say may be made yet
clearer, let us apply the argument to some one of the rites then
performed, and then thou wilt see how great is the difference. And if
thou wilt, let us bring forward that passover and this, and then shalt
thou be aware of our superiority. For the Jews indeed celebrated it, but
they celebrated it “so as in a mirror, and darkly.” But these hidden
mysteries they never at any time did even conceive in their mind, nor
what things they prefigured. They saw a lamb slain, and the blood of a
beast, and door-posts sprinkled with it; but that the Son of God
incarnate shall be slain, and shall set free the whole world, and shall
grant both to Greeks and Barbarians to taste of this Blood, and shall
open heaven to all, and shall offer what is there to the whole human
race, and having taken His blood-stained flesh shall exalt it above the
heaven, and the heaven of heavens, and, in a word, above all the hosts
on high, of the angels and archangels and all the other powers, and
shall cause it shining in unspeakable glory,—to sit down upon the throne
itself of the King, on the right hand of the Father these things, I say,
no one, either of them or of the rest of mankind, either foreknew or was
able ever to conceive.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p21"></span>\[4.\] But what say those who shrink from
nothing? <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218.md)   That the expression,
“now I know in part,” is spoken in dispensations; for that the Apostle
had the perfect knowledge of God. And now he calls himself a child? How
sees he “in a mirror?” How “darkly,” if he hath the sum of knowledge?
And why doth he refer to it as something peculiar to the Spirit, and to
no other power in the creation, saying, “For who among men knoweth the
things of a man, save the spirit of the man which is in him? Even so the
things of God none knoweth, save the Spirit of God.” ([1 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span id="iv.xxxv-p22.5"></span>..md)
And Christ again sayeth that this belongs to Himself alone, thus saying,
“Not that any man hath seen the Father, save He which is from God, He
hath seen the Father,” ([John vi.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)<span id="iv.xxxv-p22.6"></span>..md)
giving the name, “sight,” to the most clear and perfect knowledge.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p23"></span>And how shall he who knoweth the Essence,
be ignorant of the dispensations? since that knowledge is greater than
this.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p24"></span>“Are we then,” saith he, “ignorant of
God?” Far from it. That He is, we know, but what He is, as regards His
Essence, we know not yet. And that thou mayst understand that not
concerning the dispensations did he speak the words, “now I know in
part,” hear what follows. He adds then, “but then shall I know, even as
also I have been known.” He was surely known not by the dispensations,
but by God.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p25"></span>Let none therefore consider this to be a
small or simple transgression, but twofold, and threefold, yea and
manifold. For not only is there this impiety that they boast of knowing
those things which belong to the Spirit alone; and to the only-begotten
Son of God, but also that when Paul could not acquire even this
knowledge “which is in part” without the revelation from above, these
men say that they have obtained the whole from their own reasonings. For
neither are they able to point out that the Scripture hath any where
discoursed to us of these things.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p26"></span>\[5.\] But however, leaving their madness,
let us give heed to the words which follow concerning love. For he was
not content with these things, but adds again, saying,

<span id="iv.xxxv-p27"></span>[1 Cor.
13.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.xxxv-p27.1"></span>.
“And now abideth, faith, hope, love, these three; and the greatest of
these is love.”

<span id="iv.xxxv-p28"></span>For faith indeed and hope, when the good
things believed and hoped for are come, cease. And to show this Paul
said, “For hope that is seen is not hope; for who hopeth for that which
he seeth.” Again, “Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the
proving of things not seen.” ([Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md), [Heb.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)<span id="iv.xxxv-p28.1"></span>..md)
So that these cease when those appear; but love is then most elevated,
and becomes more vehement. Another encomium of love. For neither is he
content with those before mentioned, but he strives to discover yet
another. And observe: he hath said that it is a great gift, and a still
more excellent way to these. He hath said, that without it there is no
great profit in our gifts; he hath shadowed out its image at length; he
intends again and in another manner to exalt <span id="page_204">p.
204</span> <span id="iv.xxxv-Page_204"></span>it, and to show that it is
great from its abiding. Wherefore also he said, “But now abideth faith,
hope, love, these three; but the greatest of these is love.” How then is
love the greater? In that those pass away.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p29"></span>If now so great is the virtue of love,
with good reason doth he add and say, “Follow after love.” For there is
surely need of “following,” and a kind of vehement running after her: in
such sort doth she fly from us, and so many are the things which trip us
up in that direction. Wherefore we have ever need of great earnestness
in order to overtake her. And to point out this, Paul said not, “follow
love,” but, “pursue <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219.md) ” her;
stirring us up, and inflaming us to lay hold on her.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p31"></span>For so God from the beginning contrived
ten thousand ways for implanting her in us. Thus, first, He granted one
head to all, Adam. For why do we not all spring out of the earth?  Why
not full grown, as he was? In order that both the birth and the
bringings up of children, and the being born of another, might bind us
mutually together. For this cause neither made He woman out of the
earth: and because the thing of the same substance was not equally
sufficient to shame us into unanimity, unless we had also the same
progenitor, He provided also for this: since, if now, being only
separated by place, we consider ourselves alien from one another; much
more would this have happened if our race had had two originals. For
this cause therefore, as it were from some one head, he bound together
the whole body of the human race. And because from the beginning they
seemed to be in a manner two, see how he fastens them together again,
and gathers them into one by marriage. For, “therefore,” saith He,
“shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his
wife; and they shall be for one flesh.” ([Gen. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.xxxv-p31.1"></span> <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) ..md)
And he said not, “the woman,” but, “the man,” because the desire too is
stronger in him. Yea, and for this cause He made it also stronger, that
it might bow the superior party to the absolute sway of this passion,
and might subjugate it to the weaker. And since marriage also must needs
be introduced, him from whom she sprang He made husband to the woman.
For all things in the eye of God are second to love. And if when things
had thus begun, the first man straightway became so frantic, and the
devil sowed among them so great warfare and envy; what would he not have
done, had they not sprung from one root?

<span id="iv.xxxv-p33"></span>Further, in order that the one might be
subject, and the other rule; (for equality is wont oftentimes to bring
in strife;) he suffered it not to be a democracy, but a monarchy; and as
in an army, this order one may see in every family. In the rank of
monarch, for instance, there is the husband; but in the rank of
lieutenant and general, the wife; and the children too are allotted a
third station in command. Then after these a fourth order, that of the
servant. For these also bear rule over their inferiors, and some one of
them is oftentimes set over the whole, keeping ever the post of the
master, but still as a servant. And together with this again another
command, and among the children themselves again another, according to
their age and sex; since among the children the female doth not possess
equal sway. And every where hath God made governments at small distances
and thick together, that all might abide in concord and much good order.
Therefore even before the race was increased to a multitude, when the
first two only were in being, He bade him govern, and her obey. And in
order again that He might not despise her as inferior, and separate from
her, see how He honored her, and made them one, even before her
creation. For, “Let us make for man,” saith He, “a help meet,” implying
that she was made for his need, and thereby drawing him unto her who was
made for his sake: since to all those things are we more kindly
disposed, which are done for our sakes. But that she, on the other hand,
might not be elated, as being granted him for help, nor might burst this
bond, He makes her out of his side, signifying that she is a part of the
whole body. And that neither might the man be elated therefore, He no
longer permits that to belong to him alone which before was his alone,
but effected the contrary to this, by bringing in procreation of
children, and herein too giving the chief honor unto the man, not
however allowing the whole to be his.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p34"></span>Seest thou how many bonds of love God hath
wrought? And these indeed by force of nature He hath lodged in us as
pledges of concord. For both our being of the same substance leads to
this; (for every animal loves its like;) and the woman being produced
from the man, and again the children from both. Whence also many kinds
of affection arise. For one we love as a father, another as a
grandfather; one as a mother, another as a nurse; and one as a son or
grandson or great-grandson again, and another as a daughter, or
grand-daughter; and one as a brother, another as a nephew; and one as a
sister, another as a niece. And why need one recount all the names of
consanguinity?

<span id="iv.xxxv-p35"></span>And He devised also another foundation of
affection. For having forbidden the marriage of kindred, he led us out
unto strangers and drew them again unto us. For since by this natural
kindred it was not possible that they <span id="page_205">p. 205</span>
<span id="iv.xxxv-Page_205"></span>should be connected with us, he
connected us anew by marriage, uniting together whole families by the
single person of the bride, and mingling entire races with races.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p36"></span>For, “marry not,” saith the Lord, ([Lev.
xviii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.xxxv-p36.1"></span>.) “thy sister, nor thy father’s sister, nor
any damsel which hath such consanguinity with thee,” as utterly hinders
the marriage;” naming the degrees of such relationship. It is enough for
thine affection towards them that ye were the fruit of the same
birth-pangs, and that the others are in a different relation to thee.
Why dost thou narrow the breadth of love? Why dost thou idly throw away
a ground of affection towards her, such as that thou mightest thereby
provide thyself with distinct source for affection to spring from; I
mean, by taking a wife from another family, and through her a chain of
kinsmen, both mother, and father, and brethren, and their connexions!

<span id="iv.xxxv-p37"></span>\[7.\] Seest thou by how many ways He hath
bound us together? Nevertheless, not even this sufficed Him, but He
likewise made us to stand in need of one another, that thus also He
might bring us together, because necessities above all create
friendships. For no other reason neither suffered He all things to be
produced in every place, that hence also He might compel us to mix with
one another. But having set us in need of one another, He on the other
hand made the intercourse easy. Since if this were not so, the matter
would have turned out painful and difficult in another way. For if one
that wanted a physician, or a carpenter, or any other workman, had need
to set off on a long foreign sojourn, the whole had come to nought. Here
then is why He founded cities also, and brought all into one place. And
accordingly that we might easily keep up intercourse with distant
countries, He spread the level of the sea between us, and gave us the
swiftness of winds, thereby making our voyages easy. And at the
beginning He even gathered all men together in one spot, and did not
disperse them until they who first received the gift abused their
concord unto sin. However, He hath drawn us together in every way; both
by nature, and by consanguinity, and by language, and by place; and as
he willed not that we should fall from paradise; (for had He willed it,
He would not have placed there at all “the man whom He had formed,” but
he that disobeyed was the cause;) so neither was it His will that men
should have divers tongues; since otherwise He would have made it so
from the beginning. But now “the whole earth was of one language, and
all had one speech.” ([Gen. xi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.xxxv-p37.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxxv-p38"></span>Here is the reason why, when it was
needful that the earth should be destroyed, not even then did He make us
of other matter, nor did He translate the righteous man, but leaving him
in the midst of the deluge, like a kind of spark of the world, He
rekindled our race from thence, even by the blessed Noah. And from the
beginning He made one sovereignty only, setting the man over the woman.
But after that our race ran headlong into extreme disorder, He appointed
other sovereignties also, those of Masters, and those of Governors, and
this too for love’s sake. That is, since vice was a thing apt to
dissolve and subvert our race, He set those who administer justice in
the midst of our cities as a kind of physicians, that driving away vice,
as it were a plague to love, they might gather together all in one.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p39"></span>And that not only in cities, but also in
each family there might be great unanimity, He honored the man with rule
and superiority; the woman on the other hand He armed with desire: and
the gift also of procreation of children, He committed in common to
both, and withal He furnished also other things apt to conciliate love:
neither entrusting all to the man, nor all to the woman; but “dividing
these things also severally to each;” to her entrusting the house, and
to him the market; to him the work of feeding, for he tills the ground;
to her that of clothing, for loom and distaff are the woman’s. For it is
God Himself who gave to woman-kind skill in woven work. Woe be to
covetousness, which suffers not this difference to appear!  For the
general effeminacy <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221.md) hath gone so
far as to introduce our men to the looms, and put shuttles into their
hands, and the woof, and threads. Nevertheless, even thus the
forethought of the divine economy shines out. For we still greatly need
the woman in other more necessary things, and we require the help of our
inferiors in those things which keep our life together.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p41"></span>\[8.\] And so strong is the compulsion of
this need that though one be richer than all men, not even thus is he
rid of this close conjunction, and of his want of that which is inferior
to himself. For it is not, we see, the poor only who need the rich, but
the rich also the poor; and these require those more than the others
them. And that thou mayest see it more clearly, let us suppose, if it
seem good, two cities, the one of rich only, but the other of poor; and
neither in that of the rich let there be any poor man, nor in that of
the poor any rich; but let us purge out both thoroughly, and see which
will be the more able to support itself. For if we find that of the poor
able, it is evident that the rich will more stand in need of them.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p42"></span>Now then, in that city of the affluent
there will be no manufacturer, no builder, no carpenter, no shoe-maker,
no baker, no husband<span id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span
id="iv.xxxv-Page_206"></span>man , no brazier, no rope-maker, nor any
other such trade. For who among the rich would ever choose to follow
these crafts, seeing that the very men who take them in hand, when they
become rich, endure no longer the discomfort caused by these works? How
then shall this our city stand? “The rich,” it is replied, “giving
money, will buy these things of the poor.” Well then, they will not be
sufficient for themselves, their needing the others proves that. But how
will they build houses? Will they purchase this too?  But the nature of
things cannot admit this. Therefore they must needs invite the
artificers thither, and destroy the law, which we made at first when we
were founding the city. For you remember, that we said, “let there be no
poor man within it.” But, lo, necessity, even against our will, hath
invited and brought them in. Whence it is evident that it is impossible
without poor for a city to subsist: since if the city were to continue
refusing to admit any of these, it will be no longer a city but will
perish. Plainly then it will not support itself, unless it shall collect
the poor as a kind of preservers, to be within itself.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p43"></span>But let us look also upon the city of the
poor, whether this too will be in a like needy condition, on being
deprived of the rich. And first let us in our discourse thoroughly clear
the nature of riches, and point them out plainly. What then may riches
be? Gold, and silver, and precious stones, and garments silken, purple,
and embroidered with gold. Now then that we have seen what riches are,
let us drive them away from our city of the poor: and if we are to make
it purely a city of poor persons, let not any gold appear there, no not
in a dream, nor garments of such quality; and if you will, neither
silver, nor vessels of silver. What then? Because of this will that city
and its concerns live in want, tell me? Not at all. For suppose first
there should be need to build; one does not want gold and silver and
pearls, but skill, and hands, and hands not of any kind, but such as are
become callous, and fingers hardened, and great strength, and wood, and
stones: suppose again one would weave a garment, neither here have we
need of gold and silver, but, as before, of hands and skill, and women
to work. And what if one require husbandry, and digging the ground?  Is
it rich men who are wanted, or poor? It is evident to every one, poor.
And when iron too is to be wrought, or any such thing to be done, this
is the race of men whereof we most stand in need. What respect then
remains wherein we may stand in need of the rich? except the thing
required be, to pull down this city. For should that sort of people make
an entrance, and these philosophers, for (for I call them philosophers,
who seek after nothing superfluous,) should fall to desiring gold and
jewels, giving themselves up to idleness and luxury; they will ruin
everything from that day forward.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p44"></span>\[9.\] “But unless wealth be useful,”
saith one, “wherefore hath it been given by God?” And whence is it
evident, that being rich is from God? “The Scripture saith, ‘The silver
is Mine, and the gold is Mine,’ and to whomsoever I will, I will give
it.” ([Hag. ii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.xxxv-p44.1"></span>.) Here, if I were not doing an unseemly
thing, I could at this moment laugh loudly, in derision of those who say
these things: because as little children admitted to a King’s table,
together with that food they thrust into their mouth everything that
comes to hand; so also do these together with the divine Scriptures
privily bring in their own notions. For this, “the silver is Mine, and
the gold is Mine,” I know to have been spoken by the Prophet; but that,
“to whomsoever I will, I will give it,” is not added, but is brought in
by these offscourings <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md) of the
people. And as to the former, why it was said, I will explain. The
Prophet Haggai, because he was continually promising to the Jews after
their return from Babylon, that he would show the temple in its former
appearance, and some doubted of the thing spoken, and considered it to
be well nigh impossible that after being reduced to dust and ashes, the
house should appear again such as it was;—he, to remove their unbelief,
in the person of God saith these things; as if he said, “Why are ye
afraid? and why do ye refuse to believe? ‘The silver is Mine, and the
gold is Mine,’ and I need not to borrow from others, and so to beautify
the house.” And to show that this is the meaning he adds, “and the glory
of this house, the latter glory shall be greater than the glory of the
former.” Let us not then bring in spiders’ webs upon the royal robe. For
if any person, detected in weaving a counterfeit thread in a purple
vest, is to suffer the severest punishment, much more in spiritual
things; since neither is it an ordinary sin, which is hereby committed.
And why say I, by adding and taking away? By a mere point, and by a mere
circumstance of delivery in the reading, many impious thoughts have not
seldom been brought into being.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p46"></span>“Whence then the rich,” saith one? “for it
hath been said, ‘Riches and poverty are from the Lord.’” Let us then ask
those who object these things against us, whether all riches and all
poverty are from the Lord? Nay, who would say this? For we see that both
by rapine, <span id="page_207">p. 207</span> <span
id="iv.xxxv-Page_207"></span>and by wickedly breaking open of tombs, and
by witchcraft, and by other such devices, great wealth is gathered by
many, and the possessors are not worthy even to live. What then, tell
me, do we say that this wealth is from God? Far from it. Whence then?
From sin. For so the harlot by doing indignity to her own body grows
rich, and a handsome youth oftentimes selling his bloom with disgrace
brings himself gold, and the tomb-spoiler by breaking open men’s
sepulchres gathers together unjust wealth, and the robber by digging
through walls. All wealth therefore is not from God. “What then,” saith
one, “shall we say to this expression?” Acquaint thyself first with a
kind of poverty which proceeds not from God, and then we will proceed to
the saying itself. I mean, that when any dissolute youth spends his
wealth either on harlots, or on conjurors, or on any other such evil
desires, and becomes poor, is it not very evident that this hath not
come from God, but from his own profligacy? Again, if any through
idleness become poor, if any through folly be brought down to beggary,
if any, by taking in hand perilous and unlawful practices; is it not
quite evident, that neither hath any one of these and other such persons
been brought down to this their poverty by God?

<span id="iv.xxxv-p47"></span>“Doth then the Scripture speak falsely?”
God forbid! but they do foolishly, who neglect to examine with due
exactness all things written. For if this on the one hand be
acknowledged, that the Scriptures cannot lie; and this on the other hand
proved, that not all wealth is from God; the weakness of inconsiderate
readers is the cause of the difficulty.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p48"></span>\[10.\] Now it were right for us to
dismiss you, having herein exculpated the Scripture, that ye may suffer
this punishment at our hands for your negligence concerning the
Scriptures: but because I greatly spare you and cannot any longer bear
to look on you confused and disturbed, let us also add the solution,
having first mentioned the speaker, and when it was spoken, and to whom.
For not alike to all doth God speak, as neither do we deal alike with
children and men. When then was it spoken, and by whom, and to whom? By
Solomon in the Old Testament to the Jews, who knew no other than things
of sense, and by these proved the power of God. For these are they who
say, “Can He give bread also?” and, “What sign showest Thou unto us? Our
fathers did eat manna in the desert:—whose God is their belly.” ([Ps.
78:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024.md), [Matt.
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038.md), [John
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#031.md), [Phil.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span id="iv.xxxv-p48.1"></span>..md)
Since then they were proving Him by these things, He saith to them,
“This is also possible with God to make both rich and poor;” not that it
is of course He Himself who maketh them, but that He can, when He will.
Just as when he saith, “Who rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and
drieth up all the rivers,” ([Nahum i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#004)<span id="iv.xxxv-p48.2"></span>..md)
and yet this was never done. How then doth the prophet say so? Not as
though it were a doing always, but as a thing that was possible for Him
to do.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p49"></span>What kind of poverty then doth He give,
and what kind of wealth? Remember the patriarch, and thou shalt know the
kind of wealth that is given by God. For He made both Abraham rich, and
after him Job, even as Job himself saith; “If we have received good from
the Lord, shall we not also receive evil?” ([Job ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010)<span id="iv.xxxv-p49.1"></span>..md)
And the wealth of Jacob thence had its beginning. There is also a
poverty which cometh from Him, that which is commended, such as He once
would have introduced to the knowledge of that rich man, saying, “If
thou wouldest be perfect, sell thy goods, and give to the poor, and
come, follow Me.” ([Matt. xix. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.xxxv-p49.2"></span>.) And to the disciples again, making a law
and saying, “Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor two coats.” ([Matt.
ix. 10](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.xxxv-p49.3"></span>.) Say not then that all wealth is His gift:
seeing that cases have been pointed out of its being collected both by
murderers, and by rapine, and by ten thousand other devices.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p50"></span>But again the discourse reverts to our
former question: viz. “if the rich are no way useful to us, wherefore
are they made rich?” What then must we say? That these are not useful
who so make themselves rich; whereas those surely who are made so by God
are in the highest degree useful. And do thou learn this from the very
things done by those whom we just now mentioned. Thus Abraham possessed
wealth for all strangers, and for all in need. For he who on the
approach of three men, as he supposed, sacrificed a calf and kneaded
three measures of fine flour, and that while sitting in his door in the
heat of the day; consider with what liberality and readiness he used to
spend his substance on all, together with his goods giving also the
service of his body, and this at such an advanced age; being a harbor to
strangers, to all who had come to any kind of want, and possessing
nothing as his own, not even his son: since at God’s command he actually
delivered up even him; and along with his son he gave up also himself
and all his house, when he hastened to snatch his brother’s son out of
danger; and this he did not for lucre’s sake, but of mere humanity.
When, for instance, they who were saved by him would put the spoils at
his disposal, he rejected all, even to “a thread and a shoe-latchet.”
([Gen. xiv. 23](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.xxxv-p50.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxxv-p51"></span>Such also was the blessed Job. “For my
door,” saith, “was open to every one who came: ([Job xx.
15](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#015)<span id="iv.xxxv-p51.1"></span>..md)
“I was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame: I was a father of the
helpless, the stranger lodged not without, <span id="page_208">p.
208</span> <span id="iv.xxxv-Page_208"></span>and the helpless, whatever
need they had, failed not of it, neither suffered I one helpless man to
go out of my door with a empty bosom.” And much more too than these,
that we may not now recount all, he continued to do, spending all his
wealth on the needy.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p52"></span>Wilt thou also look upon those who have
become rich but not of God, that thou mayest learn how they employed
their wealth? Behold him in the parable of Lazarus, how he imparted not
so much as a share of his crumbs. Behold Ahab, how not even the vineyard
is free from his extortion: behold Gehazi: behold all such. Thus they on
the one hand who make just acquisitions, as having received from God,
spend on the commands of God: but they who in act of acquiring offend
God, in the expending also do the same: consuming it on harlots and
parasites, or burying and shutting it up, but laying out nothing upon
the poor.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p53"></span>“And wherefore,” saith one, “doth God
suffer such men to be rich?” Because He is long-suffering: because He
would bring us to repentance; because He hath prepared hell; because “He
hath appointed a day in which He is to judge the world.” ([Acts xvii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span id="iv.xxxv-p53.1"></span>..md)
Whereas did He use at once to punish them that are rich and not
virtuously, Zacchæus would not have had an appointed time <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223.md) for repentance, so as even to restore
fourfold whatever he had unjustly taken, and to add half of his goods;
nor Matthew, to be converted and become an Apostle, taken off as he
would have been before the due season; nor yet many other such.
Therefore doth He bear with them, calling all to repentance. But if they
will not, but continue in the same, they shall hear Paul saying that
“after their hardness and impenitent heart they treasure up unto
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation, and righteous
judgment of God:  ([Rom. ii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.xxxv-p54.2"></span>.) which wrath that we may escape, let us
become rich with the riches of heaven, and follow after the laudable
sort of poverty. For thus shall we obtain also the good things to come:
the which may we all obtain through the grace and mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory,
power, and honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_215"></span>[202:216](1120038.htm#fr_215.md) <span
id="iv.xxxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p8.1"></span>χαυνοῦντα</span>.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[202:217](1120038.htm#fr_216.md) <span
id="iv.xxxv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p15.1"></span>ἐν αἰνίγματι</span>.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[202:218](1120038.htm#fr_217.md) <span
id="iv.xxxv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p18.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p18.2"></span>γνώρισε</span>, made me know Him.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[203:219](1120038.htm#fr_218.md) <span
id="iv.xxxv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p22"></span> The Heretics here referred to were the
Eunomians or Anomœans, so called from Eunomius their chief Teacher, (for
Aetius first promulgated their opinions,) and from their maintaining not
merely the inequality but the dissimilarity (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p22.1"></span>τὸ ἆνόμοιον</span>) of the Son’s nature to
that of the Father. By this he carried out Arianism, and made it more
consistent and more impious. It seems that he arbitrarily selected the
term <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p22.2"></span>ἇγεννητὸς</span>, “unbegotten,” as setting
forth not merely the attribute of the Father, but the very substance of
the Godhead, and upon this proceeded, of course, to deny the proper
divinity of the Son, because He was confessed to be <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxv-p22.3"></span> γεννητὸς</span>,
“begotten.” And he not only thus implied, but expressly maintained, that
knowing thus much of God, we know His whole Nature: whence it followed,
that St. Paul’s professions of ignorance referred not to the Substance,
but to some parts of the Providence of God, called here,
“dispensations.” Against this result of Eunomius’ impiety, St.
Chrysostom preached the series of five Homilies, “On the
Incomprehensible Nature of God:” in the first of which, (t. vi. 393. ed.
Saville,) he argues on this passage almost in the same words. The same
fallacy may be seen refuted by St. Basil also, *Ep*. 234, 235; *Epiph.
Hær*. 76. p. 989, &c.: Theodoret, ii. 418; and by others. The whole
doctrine as grounded on the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p22.4"></span>ἇγεννητὸς</span> is exposed at large by St.
Basil in his five books against Eunomius, t. i. ed. Bened. In the
Appendix to that volume, Eunomius’s own treatise is given. The whole
forms a melancholy example, how men may deceive themselves by following
after simplification and logical consistency, without due reverence for
sacred things.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[204:220](1120038.htm#fr_219.md) <span
id="iv.xxxv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p30.1"></span>ὃ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p30.2"></span>ιώκετε</span>.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[204:221](1120038.htm#fr_220.md) <span
id="iv.xxxv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p32.1"></span>εἰς σάρκα μίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[205:222](1120038.htm#fr_221.md) <span
id="iv.xxxv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p40.1"></span>βλακεία</span>.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[206:223](1120038.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="iv.xxxv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p45.1"></span>συρφετῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[208:224](1120038.htm#fr_223.md) <span
id="iv.xxxv-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxv-p54.1"></span>προθεσμίαν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXV](1120039.md)
