[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120006)  [Next](1120008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>Homily III.</span>

<span id="iv.iv-p2"></span><span id="iv.iv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iv-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p3"></span>Now I beseech you, brethren, through the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak of the same thing, and that
there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfected together in
the same mind and in the same judgment.

<span id="iv.iv-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.iv-p4.1"></span>What</span> I have continually been saying, that
we must frame our rebukes gently and gradually, this Paul doth here
also; in that, being about to enter upon a subject full of many dangers
and enough to tear up the Church from her foundations he uses very mild
language. His word is that he “beseeches” them, and beseeches them
“through Christ;” as though not even he were sufficient alone to make
this supplication, and to prevail.

<span id="iv.iv-p5"></span>But what is this, “I beseech you through
Christ?” “I take Christ to fight on my side, and to aid me, His injured
and insulted Name.” An awful way of speaking indeed! lest they should
prove hard and shameless: for sin makes men restless. Wherefore if at
once (<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv-p5.1"></span>ἄν μὲν</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv-p5.2"></span> εὐθέως
ἐπιπλήξης</span> Savil. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv-p5.3"></span> ἄν μὴ</span> Ben.) you sharply rebuke you make a
man fierce and impudent: but if you put him to shame, you bow down his
neck, you check his confidence, you make him hang down his head. Which
object being Paul’s also, he is content for a while to beseech them
through the Name of Christ. And what, of all things, is the object of
his request?

<span id="iv.iv-p6"></span>“That ye may all speak the same thing, and
that there be no divisions \[schisms\] among you.” The emphatic force of
the word “schism,” I mean the name itself, was a sufficient accusation.
For it was not that they had become many parts, each entire within
itself, but rather the One \[Body which originally existed\] had
perished.  For had they <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) been entire
Churches, there might be many of them; but if they were divisions, then
that first One was gone. For that which is entire within itself not only
does not become many by division into many parts, but even the original
One is lost. Such is the nature of divisions.

<span id="iv.iv-p8"></span><span id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span
id="iv.iv-Page_11"></span>\[2.\] In the next place, because he had
sharply dealt with them by using the word “schism,” he again softens and
soothes them, saying, “That ye may be perfectly joined together in the
same mind and in the same judgment.” That is; since he had said, “That
ye may all speak the same thing;” “do not suppose,” he adds, “that I
said concord should be only in words; I seek for that harmony which is
of the mind.” But since there is such a thing as agreement in words, and
that hearty, not however on all subjects, therefore he added this, “That
ye may be perfected together.” For he that is united in one thing, but
in another dissents, is no longer “perfected,” nor fitted in to complete
accordance. There is also such a thing as harmony of opinions, where
there is not yet harmony of sentiment; for instance, when having the
same faith we are not joined together in love: for thus, in opinions we
are one, (for we think the same things,) but in sentiment not so. And
such was the case at that time; this person choosing one \[leader\], and
that, another. For this reason he saith it is necessary to agree both in
“mind” and in “judgment.” For it was not from any difference in faith
that the schisms arose, but from the division of their judgment through
human contentiousness.

<span id="iv.iv-p9"></span>\[3.\] But seeing that whoso is blamed is
unabashed so long as he hath no witnesses, observe how, not permitting
them to deny the fact, he adduces some to bear witness.

<span id="iv.iv-p10"></span>[1 Cor.
1.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv-p10.1"></span>.
“For it hath been signified unto me concerning you, my brethren, by them
which are of the household of Chloe.” Neither did he say this at the
very beginning, but first he brought forward his charge; as one who put
confidence in his informants. Because, had it not been so, he would not
have found fault: for Paul was not a person to believe lightly. Neither
then did he immediately say, “it hath been signified,” lest he might
seem to blame on their authority:  neither does he omit all mention of
them, lest he should seem to speak only from himself. And again, he
styles them “brethren;” for although the fault be plain, there is
nothing against calling people brethren still. Consider also his
prudence in not speaking of any distinct person, but of the entire
family; so as not to make them hostile towards the informer: for in this
way he both protects him, and fearlessly opens the accusation. For he
had an eye to the benefit not of the one side only, but of the other
also. Wherefore he saith not, “It hath been declared to me by certain,”
but he indicates also the household, lest they might suppose that he was
inventing.

<span id="iv.iv-p11"></span>\[4.\]  What was “declared? “That there are
contentions among you.” Thus, when he is rebuking them, he saith, “That
there be no divisions among you;” but when he is reporting the
statements of others, he doth it more gently; saying, “For it hath been
declared unto me…that there are contentions among you; in order that he
might not bring trouble upon the informants.

<span id="iv.iv-p12"></span>Next he declares also the kind of
contention.

<span id="iv.iv-p13"></span>[1 Cor.
1.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv-p13.1"></span>.
“That each one of you saith, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of
Cephas.” “I say, contentions,” saith he, “I mean, not about private
matters, but of the more grievous sort.” “That each one of you saith;”
for the corruption pervaded not a part, but the whole of the Church. And
yet they were not speaking about himself, nor about Peter, nor about
Apollos; but he signifies that if these were not to be leaned on, much
less others. For that they had not spoken about them, he saith further
on: “And these things I have transferred in a figure unto myself and
Apollos, that ye may learn in us not to go beyond the things which are
written.” For if it were not right for them to call themselves by the
name of Paul, and of Apollos, and of Cephas, much less of any others. If
under the Teacher and the first of the Apostles, and one that had
instructed so much people, it were not right to enroll themselves, much
less under those who were nothing. By way of hyperbole then, seeking to
withdraw them from their disease, he sets down these names. Besides, he
makes his argument less severe, not mentioning by name the rude dividers
of the Church, but concealing them, as behind a sort of masks, with the
names of the Apostles.

<span id="iv.iv-p14"></span>“I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of
Cephas.” Not esteeming himself before Peter hath he set his name last,
but preferring Peter to himself, and that greatly. He arranged his
statement in the way of climax, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv-p14.1"></span>κατὰ αῦξησιν</span>) that he might not be
supposed to do this for envy; or, from jealousy, to be detracting from
the honor of others. Wherefore also he put his own name first. For he
who puts himself foremost to be rejected, doth so not for love of honor,
but for extreme contempt of this sort of reputation. He puts himself,
you see, in the way of the whole attack, and then mentions Apollos, and
then Cephas. Not therefore to magnify himself did he do this, but in
speaking of wrong things he administers the requisite correction in his
own person first.

<span id="iv.iv-p15"></span>\[5.\] But that those who addicted
themselves to this or that man were in error, is evident. And rightly he
rebukes them, saying, “Ye do not well in that ye say, ‘I am of Paul, and
I of Apollos, and I of Cephas.’” But why did he add, “And I of Christ?”
For although these who addicted themselves to men were in error, <span
id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span id="iv.iv-Page_12"></span>not surely
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv-p15.1"></span>οὔδε που</span>
Bened. <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv-p15.2"></span>οὐ δήπου</span>
Savil.) those who dedicated themselves unto Christ. But this was not his
charge, that they called themselves by the Name of Christ, but that they
did not all call themselves by that Name alone. And I think that he
added this of himself, wishing to make the accusation more grievous, and
to point out that by this rule Christ must be considered as belonging to
one party only: although they were not so using the Name themselves. For
that this was what he hinted at he declared in the sequel, saying,

<span id="iv.iv-p16"></span>[1 Cor.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv-p16.1"></span>.
“Is Christ divided.” What he saith comes to this: “Ye have cut in pieces
Christ, and distributed His body.” Here is anger! here is chiding! here
are words full of indignation!  For whenever instead of arguing he
interrogates only, his doing so implies a confessed absurdity.

<span id="iv.iv-p17"></span>But some say that he glanced at something
else, in saying, “Christ is divided:” as if he had said, “He hath
distributed to men and parted the Church, and taken one share Himself,
giving them the other.” Then in what follows, he labors to overthrow
this absurdity, saying, “Was Paul crucified for you, or were ye baptized
into the name of Paul?” Observe his Christ-loving mind; how thenceforth
he brings the whole matter to a point in his own name, shewing, and more
than shewing, that this honor belongs to no one. And that no one might
think it was envy which moved him to say these things, therefore he is
constantly putting himself forward. Observe, too, his considerate way,
in that he saith not, “Did Paul make the world? did Paul from nothing
produce you into being?” But only those things which belonged as choice
treasures to the faithful, and were regarded with great solicitude—those
he specifies, the Cross, and Baptism, and the blessings following on
these. For the loving-kindness of God towards men is shewn by the
creation of the world also: in nothing, however, so much as by the
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv-p17.1"></span>τῆς
συγκαταβάσεως</span>) condescension through the Cross. And he said not,
“did Paul die for you?” but, “was Paul crucified?” setting down also the
kind of death.

<span id="iv.iv-p18"></span>“Or were ye baptized into the name of Paul?”
Again, he saith not, “did Paul baptize you?” For he did baptize many:
but this was not the question, by whom they had been baptized, but, into
whose name they had been baptized!  For since this also was a cause of
schisms, their being called after the name of those who baptized them,
he corrects this error likewise saying, “Were ye baptized into the name
of Paul?” “Tell me not,” saith he, “who baptized, but into whose name.
For not he that baptizeth, but he who is invoked in the Baptism, is the
subject of enquiry. For this is He who forgives our sins <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) .”

<span id="iv.iv-p20"></span>And at this point he stays the discourse,
and does not pursue the subject any further. For he saith not, “Did Paul
declare to you the good things to come? Did Paul promise you the kingdom
of heaven?” Why, then, I ask, doth he not add these questions also?
Because it is not all as one, to promise a kingdom and to be crucified.
For the former neither had danger nor brought shame; but the latter, all
these. Moreover, he proves the former from the latter: for having said,
([Rom. viii. 32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iv-p20.1"></span>.) “He that spared not His own Son,” he adds,
“How shall He not with Him also freely give us all things?” And again,
([Rom. v. 10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv-p20.2"></span>.) “For if when we were enemies we were
reconciled unto God by the death of His Son, much more bring reconciled,
we shall be saved.” This was one reason for his not adding what I just
mentioned: and also because the one they had not as yet, but of the
other they had already made trial. The one were in promise; the other
had already come to pass.

<span id="iv.iv-p21"></span>\[6.\] [1 Cor.
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv-p21.1"></span>. “I
thank God that I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gaius.” “Why are
you elate at having baptized, when I for my part even give thanks that I
have not done so!” Thus saying, by a kind of divine art (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv-p21.2"></span>οἰκονομικῶς</span>) he does
away with their swelling pride upon this point; not with the efficacy of
the baptism, (God forbid,) but with the folly of those who were puffed
up at having been baptizers: first, by showing that the Gift is not
theirs; and, secondly, by thanking God therefore. For Baptism truly is a
great thing: but its greatness is not the work of the person baptizing,
but of Him who is invoked in the Baptism: since to baptize is nothing as
regards man’s labor, but is much less than preaching the Gospel. Yea,
again I say, great indeed is Baptism, and without baptism it is
impossible to obtain the kingdom. Still a man of no singular excellence
is able to baptize, but to preach the Gospel there is need of great
labor.

<span id="iv.iv-p22"></span>[1 Cor.
1.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv-p22.1"></span>. He
states also the reason, why he giveth thanks that he had baptized no
one. What then is this reason? “Lest anyone should say that ye were
baptized into my own name.” Why, did he mean that they said this in
those other cases? Not at all; but, “I fear,” saith he, “lest the
disease should proceed even to that. For if, when insignificant persons
and of little worth baptize, a heresy ariseth, had I, the first
announcer of Baptism, baptized many, it was likely that they forming a
party, would not <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span
id="iv.iv-Page_13"></span>only call themselves by my name, but also
ascribe the Baptism to me.” For if from the inferiors so great an evil
arose, from those of higher order it would perhaps have gone on to
something far more grievous.

<span id="iv.iv-p23"></span>[1 Cor.
1.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#016)<span id="iv.iv-p23.1"></span>.
Then, having abashed those who were unsound in this respect and
subjoining, “I baptized also the house of Stephanas,” he again drags
down their pride, saying besides, “I know not whether I baptized any
other.” For by this he signifies that neither did he seek much to enjoy
the honor accruing hereby from the multitude, nor did he set about this
work for glory’s sake.

<span id="iv.iv-p24"></span>[1 Cor.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv-p24.1"></span>.
And not by these only, but also by the next words, he greatly represses
their pride, saying, “Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel:” for the more laborious part, and that which needed much toil
and a soul of iron, and that on which all depended, was this. And
therefore it was that Paul had it put into his hand.

<span id="iv.iv-p25"></span>And why, not being sent to baptize, did he
baptize? Not in contention with Him that sent him, but in this instance
laboring beyond his task. For he saith not, “I was forbidden,” but, “I
was not sent for this, but for that which was of the greatest
necessity.” For preaching the Gospel is a work perhaps for one or two;
but baptizing, for everyone endowed with the priesthood. For a man being
instructed and convinced, to take and baptize him is what any one
whatever might do: for the rest, it is all effected by the will of the
person drawing near, and the grace of God. But when unbelievers are to
be instructed, there must be great labor, great wisdom. And at that time
there was danger also annexed. In the former case the whole thing is
done, and he is convinced, who is on the point of initiation: and it is
no great thing when a man is convinced, to baptize him. But in the later
case the labor is great, to change the deliberate will, to alter the
turn of mind, and to tear up error by the roots, and to plant the truth
in its place.

<span id="iv.iv-p26"></span>Not that he speaks out all this, neither
doth he argue in so many words that Baptism has no labor, but that
preaching has. For he knows how always to subdue his tone, whereas in
the comparison with heathen wisdom he is very earnest, the subject
enabling him to use more vehemency of language.

<span id="iv.iv-p27"></span>Not therefore in opposition to Him that sent
him did he baptize; but, as in the case of the widows <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) , though the apostles had said, ([Acts
vi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv-p28.2"></span>.)
“it is not fit that we should leave the Word of God and serve tables,”
he discharged the office ([Acts xii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#025)<span id="iv.iv-p28.3"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv-p28.4"></span>τὴν διακονίαν</span>)
of a deacon, not in opposition to them, but as something beyond his
task: so also here. For even now, we commit this matter to the simpler
sort of presbyters, but the word of doctrine unto the wiser: for there
is the labor and the sweat. Wherefore he saith himself, ([1 Tim. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv-p28.5"></span>.)
“Let the Elders who rule well be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the word and in teaching.” For as to teach
the wrestlers in the games is the part of a spirited and skilful
trainer, but to place the crown on the conquerors head may be that of
one who cannot even wrestle, (although it be the crown which adds
splendor to the conqueror,) so also in Baptism. It is impossible to be
saved without it, yet it is no great thing which the baptizer doth,
finding the will ready prepared.

<span id="iv.iv-p29"></span>\[7.\] “Not in wisdom of words, lest the
Cross of Christ should be made of none effect.”

<span id="iv.iv-p30"></span>Having brought down the swelling pride of
those who were arrogant because of their baptizing, he changes his
ground afterwards to meet those who boasted about heathen wisdom, and
against them he puts on his armor with more vehemency. For to those who
were puffed up with baptizing he said, “I give thanks that I baptized no
one;” and, “for Christ sent me not to baptize.” He speaks neither
vehemently nor argumentatively, but, having just hinted his meaning in a
few words, passeth on quickly. But here at the very outset he gives a
severe blow, saying, “Lest the Cross of Christ be made void.” Why then
pride thyself on a thing which ought to make thee hide thy face?  Since,
if this wisdom is at war with the Cross and fights with the Gospel, it
is not meet to boast about it, but to retire with shame. For this was
the cause why the Apostles were not wise; not through any weakness of
the Gift, but lest the Gospel preached suffer harm. The sort of people
therefore above mentioned were not those employed in advocating the
Word: rather they were among its defamers. The unlearned men were the
establishers of it. This was able to check vain glory, this to repress
arrogance, this to enforce moderation.

<span id="iv.iv-p31"></span>“But if it was ‘not by wisdom of speech,’
why did they send Apollos who was eloquent?” It was not, he replies,
through confidence in his power of speech, but because he was ([Acts
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#029)<span id="iv.iv-p31.1"></span>)
“mighty in the Scriptures,” and “confuted the Jews.” And besides the
point in question was that the leaders and first disseminators of the
word were not eloquent; since these were the very persons to require
some great power, for the expulsion of error in the first instance; and
then, namely at the very outset, was the abundant strength needed. Now
He who could do without educated persons at first, if afterwards some
being eloquent were admitted <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span
id="iv.iv-Page_14"></span>by Him, He did so not because He wanted them,
but because He would make no distinctions. For as He needed not wise men
to effect whatever He would, so neither, if any were afterwards found
such, did He reject them on that account.

<span id="iv.iv-p32"></span>\[8.\] But prove to me that Peter and Paul
were eloquent. Thou canst not: for they were “unlearned and ignorant
men!” <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)   As therefore Christ, when
He was sending out His disciples into the world, having shewn unto them
His power in Palestine first, and said, (St. [Luke xxii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#035)<span id="iv.iv-p33.3"></span>.
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv-p33.4"></span>ὑποδήμάτος</span>,
rec. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv-p33.5"></span>ὑποδηματων</span>.) “When I sent you forth
without purse and wallet and shoe, lacked ye any thing?” permitted them
from that time forward to possess both a wallet and a purse; so also He
hath done here: for the point was the manifestation of Christ’s power,
not the rejection of persons from the Faith on account of their Gentile
wisdom, if they were drawing nigh. When the Greeks then charge the
disciples with being uneducated, let us be even more forward in the
charge than they. Nor let anyone say, “Paul was wise;” but while we
exalt those among them who were great in wisdom and admired for their
excellency of speech, let us allow that all on our side were uneducated;
for it will be no slight overthrow which they will sustain from us in
that respect also: and so the victory will be brilliant indeed.

<span id="iv.iv-p34"></span>I have said these things, because I once
heard a Christian disputing in a ridiculous manner with a Greek, and
both parties in their mutual fray ruining themselves. For what things
the Christian ought to have said, these the Greek asserted; and what
things it was natural to expect the Greek would say, these the Christian
pleaded for himself. As thus: the dispute being about Paul and Plato,
the Greek endeavored to show that Paul was unlearned and ignorant; but
the Christian, from simplicity, was anxious to prove that Paul was more
eloquent than Plato. And so the victory was on the side of the Greek,
this argument being allowed to prevail. For if Paul was a more
considerable person than Plato, many probably would object that it was
not by grace, but by excellency of speech that he prevailed; so that the
Christian’s assertion made for the Greek. And what the Greek said made
for the Christian’s; for if Paul was uneducated and yet overcame Plato,
the victory, as I was saying, was brilliant; the disciples of the
latter, in a body, having been attracted by the former, unlearned as he
was, and convinced, and brought over to his side. From whence it is
plain that the Gospel was a result not of human wisdom, but of the grace
of God.

<span id="iv.iv-p35"></span>Wherefore, lest we fall into the same error,
and be laughed to scorn, arguing thus with Greeks whenever we have a
controversy with them; let us charge the Apostles with want of learning;
for this same charge is praise. And when they say that the Apostles were
rude, let us follow up the remark and say that they were also untaught,
and unlettered, and poor, and vile, and stupid, and obscure. It is not a
slander on the Apostles to say so, but it is even a glory that, being
such, they should have outshone the whole world. For these untrained,
and rude, and illiterate men, as completely vanquished the wise, and
powerful, and the tyrants, and those who flourished in wealth and glory
and all outward good things, as though they had not been men at all: 
from whence it is manifest that great is the power of the Cross; and
that these things were done by no human strength. For the results do not
keep the course of nature, rather what was done was above all nature.
Now when any thing takes place above nature, and exceedingly above it,
on the side of rectitude and utility; it is quite plain that these
things are done by some Divine power and cooperation. And observe; the
fisherman, the tentmaker, the publican, the ignorant, the unlettered,
coming from the far distant country of Palestine, and having beaten off
their own ground the philosophers, the masters of oratory, the skillful
debaters, alone prevailed against them in a short space of time; in the
midst of many perils; the opposition of peoples and kings, the striving
of nature herself, length of time, the vehement resistance of inveterate
custom, demons in arms, the devil in battle array and stirring up all,
kings, rulers, peoples, nations, cities, barbarians, Greeks,
philosophers, orators, sophists, historians, laws, tribunals, divers
kinds of punishments, deaths innumerable and of all sorts. But
nevertheless all these were confuted and gave way when the fisherman
spake; just like the light dust which cannot bear the rush of violent
winds. Now what I say is, let us learn thus to dispute with the Greeks;
that we be not like beasts and cattle, but prepared concerning “the hope
which is in us.” ([1 Pet. 3.15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv-p35.1"></span>.) And let us pause for a while to work out this
topic, no unimportant one; and let us say to them, How did the weak
overcome the strong; the twelve, the world? Not by using the same armor,
but in nakedness contending with men in arms.

<span id="iv.iv-p36"></span>For say, if twelve men, unskilled in matters
of war, were to leap into an immense and armed host of soldiers,
themselves not only unarmed but of weak frame also; and to receive no
harm from them, nor yet be wounded, though assailed with ten thousand
weapons; if while the darts were striking them, with <span
id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span id="iv.iv-Page_15"></span>bare naked
body they overthrew all their foes using no weapons but striking with
the hand, and in conclusion killed some, and others took captive and led
away, themselves receiving not so much as a wound; would anyone have
ever said that the thing was of man? And yet the trophy of the Apostles
is much more wonderful than that. For a naked man’s escaping a wound is
not so wonderful by far as that the ordinary and unlettered person—that
a fisherman—should overcome such a degree of talent: (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv-p36.1"></span>δεινότητος</span>)  and
neither for fewness, nor for poverty, nor for dangers, nor for
prepossession of habit, nor for so great austerity of the precepts
enjoined, nor for the daily deaths, nor for the multitude of those who
were deceived, nor for the great reputation of the deceivers be turned
from his purpose.

<span id="iv.iv-p37"></span>\[9.\] Let this, I say, be our way of
overpowering them, and of conducting our warfare against them; and let
us astound them by our way of life rather than by words. For this is the
main battle, this is the unanswerable argument, the argument from
conduct. For though we give ten thousand precepts of philosophy in
words, if we do not exhibit a life better than theirs, the gain is
nothing. For it is not what is said that draws their attention, but
their enquiry is, what we do; and they say, “Do thou first obey thine
own words, and then admonish others. But if while thou sayest, infinite
are the blessings in the world to come, thou seem thyself nailed down to
this world, just as if no such things existed, thy works to me are more
credible than thy words. For when I see thee seizing other men’s goods,
weeping immoderately over the departed, doing ill in many other things,
how shall I believe thee that there is a resurrection?” And what if men
utter not this in words? they think it and turn it often in their minds.
And this is what stays the unbelievers from becoming Christians.

<span id="iv.iv-p38"></span>Let us win them therefore by our life. Many,
even among the untaught, have in that way astounded the minds of
philosophers, as having exhibited in themselves also that philosophy
which lies in deeds, and uttered a voice clearer than a trumpet by their
mode of life and self-denial. For this is stronger than the tongue. But
when I say, “one ought not to bear malice,” and then do all manner of
evils to the Greek, how shall I be able by words to win him, while by my
deeds I am frightening him away? Let us catch them then by our mode of
life; and by these souls let us build up the Church, and of these let us
amass our wealth. There is nothing to weigh against a soul, not even the
whole world. So that although thou give countless treasure unto the
poor, thou wilt do no such work as he who converteth one soul. ([Jer.
xv. 19](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#019)<span id="iv.iv-p38.1"></span>.)
“For he that taketh forth the precious from the vile shall be as my
mouth:” so He speaks. A great good it is, I grant, to have pity on the
poor; but it is nothing equal to the withdrawing them from error. For he
that doth this resembles Paul and Peter: we being permitted to take up
their Gospel, not with perils such as theirs;—with endurance of famines
and pestilences, and all other evils, (for the present is a season of
peace;)—but so as to display that diligence which cometh of zeal. For
even while we sit at home we may practice this kind of fishery. Who hath
a friend or relation or inmate of his house, these things let him say,
these do; and he shall be like Peter and Paul. And why do I say Peter
and Paul?  He shall be the mouth of Christ. For He saith, “He that
taketh forth the precious from the vile shall be as My mouth.” And
though thou persuade not to-day, to-morrow thou shalt persuade. And
though thou never persuade, thou shalt have thine own reward in full.
And though thou persuade not all, a few out of many persuade all men;
but still they discoursed with all, and for all they have their reward.
For not according to the result of the things that are well done, but
according to the intention of the doers, is God wont to assign the
crowns; though thou pay down but two farthings, He receiveth them; and
what He did in the case of the widow, the same will He do also in the
case of those who teach. Do not thou then, because thou canst not save
the world, despise the few; nor through longing after great things,
withdraw thyself from the lesser. If thou canst not an hundred, take
thou charge of ten; if thou canst not ten, despise not even five; if
thou canst not five, do not overlook one; and if thou canst not one,
neither so despair, nor keep back what may be done by thee. Seest thou
not how, in matters of trade, they who are so employed make their profit
not only of gold but of silver also? For if we do not slight the little
things, we shall keep hold also of the great. But if we despise the
small, neither shall we easily lay hand upon the other. Thus individuals
become rich, gathering both small things and great. And so let us act;
that in all things enriched, we may obtain the kingdom of heaven;
through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, through
Whom and with Whom unto the Father together with the Holy Spirit be
glory, power, honor, now and henceforth and for evermore. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[10:17](1120007.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p7"></span> i.e. the bodies formed by separation.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[12:18](1120007.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iv.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p19"></span> This seems to allude to the words of the
ancient Oriental Creed, as preserved by S. Cyril of Jerusalem, “I
believe in one Baptism of Repentance, for the Remission of Sins;” (see
Bp. Bull, *Jud. Eccl. Cath*. c. vi. §. 4. &c.) into which Creed, in all
probability, the people of Antioch had been baptized.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[13:19](1120007.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iv.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p28"></span> Perhaps the allusion is to such places as
[Acts 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030), [Acts
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#017), [1 Cor.
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv-p28.1"></span>;
&c.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[14:20](1120007.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iv.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv-p33.1"></span>ἀγράμματοι καὶ ἰδιῶται</span>. [Acts iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv-p33.2"></span>:
there spoken of St. Peter and St. John, and by St. Chrysostom here
quoted from memory as of St. Peter and St. Paul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VI](1120008)
