[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120051)  [Next](1120053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_286">p. 286</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_286"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>Homily III.</span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span><span id="v.iii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iii-p2.2"></span>[2 Cor. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)<span id="v.iii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span>*For our glorying is this, the testimony of
our conscience, that in simplicity and* <span
id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476) *sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom, but
in the grace of God, we behaved ourselves in the world.*

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.iii-p5.1"></span>Here</span> again he openeth to us yet another
ground of comfort, and that not small, yea rather, exceeding great, and
well fitted to upraise a mind sinking <span
id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) under perils. For seeing he had said,
God comforted us <span id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478) , and God
delivered us, and had ascribed all to His mercies and their prayers,
lest he should thus make the hearer supine, presuming on God’s mercy
only and the prayers of others, he showeth that they themselves <span
id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) had contributed not a little of
their <span id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480) own. And indeed he showed
as much even before, when he said, “For as the sufferings of Christ
abound \[in us,\] so our consolation also aboundeth.” ([2 Cor.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#005)<span id="v.iii-p9.2"></span>.) But
here he is speaking of a certain other good work, properly their
own <span id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481) . What then is this? That,
saith he, in a conscience pure and without guile we behave ourselves
every where in the world: and this availeth not a little to our
encouragement and comfort; yea, rather, not to comfort merely, but even
unto somewhat else far greater than comfort, even to our glorying. And
this he said, teaching them too not to sink down in their afflictions,
but, if so be they have a pure conscience, even to be proud of them; and
at the same time quietly though <span id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482)
gently hitting at the false Apostles. And as in the former Epistle he
saith, “Christ sent me to preach the Gospel, not in wisdom of words,
lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect:” ([1 Cor. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017)<span id="v.iii-p11.2"></span>.)
and, “that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the
power of God;” ([1 Cor. 2.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#005)<span
id="v.iii-p11.3"></span>.) so here also, “Not in wisdom, but in the
grace of Christ.”

<span id="v.iii-p12"></span>And he hinted also something besides, by
employing the words, “not in wisdom,” that is, ‘not in deceit,’ here too
striking at the heathen discipline <span
id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483) . “For our glorying,” saith he, “is
this, the testimony of our conscience;” that is, our conscience not
having whereof to condemn us, as if for evil doings we were persecuted.
For though we suffer countless horrors, though from every quarter we be
shot at and in peril, it is enough for our comfort, yea rather not only
for comfort, but even for our crowning, that our conscience is pure and
testifieth unto us that for no evil-doing, but for that which is
well-pleasing to God, we thus suffer; for virtue’s sake, for heavenly
wisdom’s, for the salvation of the many. Now that previous consolation
was from God: but this was contributed by themselves and from the purity
of their life. Wherefore also he calls it their glorying <span
id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484) , because it was the achievement of
their own virtue. What then is this glorying and what doth our
conscience testify unto us? “That in sincerity,” that is to say, having
no deceitful thing, no hypocrisy, no dissimulation, no flattery, no
ambush or guile, nor any other such thing, but in all frankness, in
simplicity, in truth, in a pure and unmalicious spirit, in a guileless
mind, having nothing concealed, no festering sore <span
id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485) . “Not in fleshly wisdom;” that is,
not with evil artifice, nor with wickedness, nor with cleverness of
words, nor with webs of sophistries, for this he meaneth by ‘fleshly
wisdom:’ and that whereupon they <span id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486)
greatly prided themselves, he disclaims and thrusts aside: showing very
abundantly <span id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487) that this is no
worthy ground for glorying: and that not only he doth not seek it, but
he even rejecteth and is ashamed of it.

<span id="v.iii-p18"></span>“But in the grace of God we behaved
ourselves in the world.”

<span id="v.iii-p19"></span>What is, “in the grace of God?” Displaying
the wisdom that is from Him, the power from Him given unto us, by the
signs wrought, by overcoming sages, rhetoricians, philosophers, kings,
peoples, unlearned as we are and bringing with us nothing of the wisdom
that is without. No ordinary comfort and glorying, however, was this, to
be conscious to themselves that it was not men’s power they had used;
but that by Divine grace they had achieved all success.

<span id="v.iii-p20"></span><span id="page_287">p. 287</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_287"></span>\[“In the world. <span
id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488) ”\] So not in Corinth only, but also
in every part of the world.

<span id="v.iii-p22"></span>“And more abundantly to you-ward.” What more
abundantly to you-ward? “In the grace of God we behaved ourselves.” For
we showed both signs and wonders amongst you, and greater
strictness <span id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489) , and a life
unblameable; for he calls these too the grace of God, ascribing his own
good works also unto it. For in Corinth he even overleapt the goal <span
id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490) , making the Gospel without charge,
because he spared their weakness.

<span id="v.iii-p25"></span>[2 Cor.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#013)<span id="v.iii-p25.1"></span>.
“For we write none other things unto you, than what ye read or even
acknowledge.”

<span id="v.iii-p26"></span>For since he spoke great things of himself
and seemed to be bearing witness to himself, an odious thing, he again
appeals to them as witnesses of what he says.  For, he saith, let no one
think that what I say is a boastful flourish of writing; for we declare
unto you what yourselves know; and that we lie not ye more than all
others can bear us witness. For, when ye read, ye acknowledge that what
ye know that we perform in our actions, this we say also in our
writings, and your testimony doth not contradict our epistles; but the
knowledge which ye had before of us is in harmony with your reading.

<span id="v.iii-p27"></span>[2 Cor.
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#014)<span id="v.iii-p27.1"></span>.
“As also ye did acknowledge us in part.”

<span id="v.iii-p28"></span>For your knowledge of us, he saith, is not
from hearsay but from actual experience. The words “in part” he added
from humility. For this is his wont, when necessity constraineth him to
say any highsounding thing, (for he never doth so otherwise,) as
desiring quickly to repress again the elation <span
id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491) arising from what he had said.

<span id="v.iii-p30"></span>“And I hope ye will acknowledge even to the
end.”

<span id="v.iii-p31"></span>\[2.\] Seest thou again how from the past he
draws pledges for the future; and not from the past only, but also from
the power of God? For he affirmed not absolutely, but cast the whole
upon God and his hope in Him.

<span id="v.iii-p32"></span>“That we are your glorying, even as ye also
are our’s, in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ <span
id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492) .”

<span id="v.iii-p34"></span>Here he cuts at the root <span
id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493) of the envy that his speech might
occasion, by making them sharers and partners in the glory of his good
works. ‘For these stick not with us, but pass over unto you also, and
again from you to us.’ For seeing he had extolled himself, and produced
proof of the past and given security for the future <span
id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494) ; lest his hearers should reflect on
him for talking proudly, or, as I have said, be hurried to enviousness,
he makes the rejoicing a common one and declares that this crown of
praises is theirs. For if, he says, we have shown ourselves to be such,
our praise is your glory: even as when ye also are approved, we rejoice
and leap for joy and are crowned. Here also again he displays his great
humility by what he says. For he so levels his expressions, not as a
master discoursing to disciples, but as a disciple unto fellow-disciples
of his own rank. And observe how he lifts them on high and fills them
with philosophy, sending them on to That Day. For, he saith, tell me not
of the present things, that is, the reproaches, the revilings, the
scoffings of the many, for the things here are no great matter, neither
the good nor the painful; nor the scoffings nor the praises which come
from men: but remember, I pray, that day of fear and shuddering in the
which all things are revealed. For then both we shall glory in you, and
ye in us; when ye shall be seen to have such teachers, who teach no
doctrine of men nor live in wickedness nor give \[men\] any handle; and
we to have such disciples, neither affected after the manner of men nor
shaken, but taking all things with readiness of mind, and unseduced by
sophistries <span id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495) from what side
soever. For this is plain even now to those that have understanding, but
then to all. So that even if we are afflicted now, we have this, and
that no light, consolation which the conscience affordeth now, and the
manifestation itself then. For now indeed our conscience knoweth that we
do all things by the grace of God, as ye also know and shall know: but
then, all men as well will learn both our doings and yours: and shall
behold us glorified through each other. For that he may not appear
himself alone to derive lustre from this glorying, he gives to them also
a cause of boasting, and leads them away from their present distresses.
And as he did in respect to the consolation when he said, “We are
comforted for your sakes,” ([2 Cor.
1.6](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#006)<span id="v.iii-p37.2"></span>.) so
he does here also, saying, ‘we glory on your account, as ye also on
ours,’ every where making them partakers of every thing, of his comfort,
his sufferings, his preservation. For this his preservation he ascribes
to their prayers. “For God delivered us,” he saith, “ye helping together
by prayer.” In like manner also he makes the gloryings common. For as in
that place he says, “Knowing that as ye are partakers of the sufferings,
so also of the consolation:” so here too, “we are your glorying, as ye
also are ours.”

<span id="v.iii-p38"></span>[2 Cor.
1.15](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#015)<span id="v.iii-p38.1"></span>.
“And in this confidence I was minded to come before unto you.”

<span id="v.iii-p39"></span>What confidence? ‘In relying exceedingly on
<span id="page_288">p. 288</span> <span id="v.iii-Page_288"></span>you,
glorying over you, being your glorying, loving you exceedingly, being
conscious to myself of nothing evil, being confident that all is
spiritual with us, and having you as witnesses of this.’

<span id="v.iii-p40"></span>“I was minded to come unto you, and by you
to pass into Macedonia.”

<span id="v.iii-p41"></span>And yet he promised the contrary in his
former Epistle, saying thus: “Now I will come unto you when I shall have
passed through Macedonia: for I do pass through Macedonia.” ([1 Cor.
xvi. 5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005)<span id="v.iii-p41.1"></span>.)
How is it then that he here says the contrary? He doth not say the
contrary:  away with the thought. For it is contrary indeed to what he
wrote, but not contrary to what he wished.

<span id="v.iii-p42"></span>Wherefore also here he said not, ‘I wrote
that I would pass by you into Macedonia; but, ‘I was minded.’ ‘For
though I did not write on that wise,’ he says, ‘nevertheless I was
greatly desirous, and ‘was minded,’ even before, to have come unto you:
so far was I from wishing to be later than my promise that I would
gladly have come before it.’ “That ye might have a second benefit <span
id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496) .” What is, a second benefit?  ‘That
ye might have a double benefit, both that from my writings, and that
from my presence.’ By “benefit” he here means pleasure <span
id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497) .

<span id="v.iii-p45"></span>[2 Cor.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#017)<span id="v.iii-p45.1"></span>.
“And by you to pass into Macedonia, and to come again from Macedonia
unto you, and of you to be set forward on my journey unto Judæa. When I
therefore was thus <span id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498) minded, did I
show fickleness?”

<span id="v.iii-p47"></span>\[3.\] Here in what follows, he directly
does away with the charge arising out of his delay and absence. For what
he says is of this nature. “I was minded to come unto you.” ‘Wherefore
then did I not come? Is it as light-minded and changeable?’ for this is,
“did I show fickleness?” By no means. But wherefore? “Because what
things I purpose, I purpose not according to the flesh.” What is, “not
according to the flesh?” I purpose not ‘carnally.’

<span id="v.iii-p48"></span>[2 Cor.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#017)<span id="v.iii-p48.1"></span>.
“That with me there should be the yea yea and the nay nay.”

<span id="v.iii-p49"></span>But still even this is obscure. What is it
then he says? The carnal man, that is, he that is rivetted to the
present things and is continually occupied in them, and is without the
sphere of the Spirit’s influence, has power to go every where, and to
wander whithersoever he will. But he that is the servant of the Spirit,
and is led, and led about by Him, cannot everywhere be lord of his own
purpose, having made it dependent upon the authority thence given; but
it so fares with him as if a trusty servant, whose motions are always
ruled by his lord’s biddings and who has no power over himself nor is
able to rest even a little, should make some promise to his
fellow-servants, and then because his master would have it otherwise
should fail to perform his promise. This then is what he means by, “I
purpose not according to the flesh.” I am not beyond the Spirit’s
governance, nor have liberty to go where I will. For I am subject to
lordship and commands, the Comforter’s, and by His decrees I am led, and
led about. For this cause I was unable to come, for it was not the
Spirit’s will. As happened also frequently in the Acts; for when he had
purposed to come to one place, the Spirit bade him go to another.  So
that it was not from lightness, that is, fickleness in me that I came
not, but that being subject to the Spirit I obeyed Him. Didst mark again
his accustomed logic? <span id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499)   That by
which they thought to prove that “he purposed according to the flesh,”
namely, the non-fulfilment of his promise, he uses as the special proof
that he purposed according to the Spirit, and that the contrary had been
purposing according to the flesh. What then? saith one: was it not with
the Spirit that he promised what he did? By no means. For I have already
said that Paul did not foreknow every thing that was to happen or was
expedient. And it is for this reason that he says in the former Epistle,
“that ye may set me forward on my journey whithersoever I go;” ([1 Cor.
xvi. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#006)<span id="v.iii-p50.2"></span>.)
entertaining this very fear that after he had said, ‘into Judæa,’ he
might be compelled to go elsewhither; but now when his intention had
been frustrated, he says it, “And of you be set forward on my journey
unto Judæa.” So much as was of love, he states, namely, the coming to
them; but that which had no reference to them, his going, namely, from
them into Judæa, he doth not add definitely. When however he had been
proved wrong <span id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500) , he afterwards
says here boldly, “toward Judæa.” And this too befel for good, lest any
among them should conceive of them (the Apostles, [Acts xiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#013)<span id="v.iii-p51.3"></span>.)
more highly than they deserved. For if in the face of these things they
wished to sacrifice bulls to them, upon what impiety would they not have
driven, had they not given many instances of human weakness? And why
marvel if he knew not all things that were to happen, seeing that
ofttimes he even in prayers knoweth not what is expedient.

<span id="v.iii-p52"></span>“For,” saith he “we know not what we should
pray for as we ought.” And that he may not seem to be speaking modestly,
he not only saith this, but instances wherein he knew not in prayers
what was expedient. Wherein then was it? When he entreated to be
delivered from his trials, saying, “There was given to me a <span
id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span id="v.iii-Page_289"></span>thorn in
the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet me. Concerning this thing I
besought the Lord thrice. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient
for thee: for My power is made perfect in weakness.” ([2 Cor. xii.
7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span id="v.iii-p52.1"></span>.)
Seest thou how he knew not to ask what was expedient, and so although he
asked often he obtained not.

<span id="v.iii-p53"></span>[2 Cor.
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#018)<span id="v.iii-p53.1"></span>.
“But as God is faithful, our word toward you was <span
id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501) not yea and nay.”

<span id="v.iii-p55"></span>He skillfully overturns a rising objection.
For one might say, If after having promised, thou hast put off coming,
and yea is not yea, and nay nay, with thee, but what thou sayest now
thou unsayest afterwards, as thou didst in the case of this Journey: woe
is unto us, if all this were the case in the Preaching too. Now lest
they should have these thoughts and be troubled thereat, he says, “But
as God is faithful, our word toward you was not yea and nay.” This,
saith he, was not the case in the Preaching, but only in our travels and
journeyings; whereas whatever things we have said in our preaching,
these abide steadfast and unmoveable, (for he calleth his preaching
here, “word.”)  Then he bringeth proof of this that cannot be gainsaid,
by referring all to God. What he saith is this; ‘the promise of my
coming was my own and I gave that promise from myself: but the preaching
is not my own, nor of man, but of God, and what is of God it is
impossible should lie.’ Whereupon also he said, “God is faithful,” that
is, “true.” ‘Mistrust not then what is from Him, for there is nought of
man in it.’

<span id="v.iii-p56"></span>\[4.\] And seeing he had said “word,” he
adds what follows to explain what kind of word he means. Of what kind
then is it?

<span id="v.iii-p57"></span>[2 Cor.
1.19](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#019)<span id="v.iii-p57.1"></span>.
“For the Son of God,” saith he, “Who was preached among you by us, even
by me, and Silvanus, and Timothy, was not yea and nay.”

<span id="v.iii-p58"></span>For on this account he brings before them
the company of the teachers also, as thence too giving credibility to
the testimony by those who taught, and not who heard it only. And yet
they were disciples; however in his modesty he counts them as in the
rank of teachers. But what is, “was not yea and nay?” I have never, he
saith, unsaid what before I said in the Preaching. My discourse to you
was not now this, now that. For this is not of faith, but of an erring
mind.

<span id="v.iii-p59"></span>“But in Him was the yea.” That is, just as I
said, the word abideth unshaken and steadfast.”

<span id="v.iii-p60"></span>[2 Cor.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="v.iii-p60.1"></span>.
“For how many soever be the promises of God,” in Him is the yea, and in
Him the Amen, unto the glory of God by us.”

<span id="v.iii-p61"></span>What is this, “how many soever the promises
of God?” The Preaching promised many things; and these many things they
proffered and preached. For they discoursed of being raised again, and
of being taken up, and of incorruption, and of those great rewards and
unspeakable goods. As to these promises then, he saith that they abide
immoveable, and in them is no yea and nay, that is, the things spoken
were not now true, and now false, as was the case about my being with
you, but always true. And first indeed he contends for the
articles <span id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502) of the faith, and the
word concerning Christ, saying, “My word” and my preaching, “was not yea
and nay;” next, for the promises “for how many soever be the promises,
of God, in Him is the yea.” But if the things He promised are sure and
He will certainly give them, much more is He Himself and the word
concerning Him, sure, and it can not be said that He is now, and now is
not, but He “always” is, and is the same. But what is, “In Him is the
yea, and the Amen.” He signifies that which shall certainly be. For in
Him, not in man, the promises have their being and fulfilment. Fear not,
therefore; for it is not man so that thou shouldest mistrust; but it is
God Who both said and fulfilleth. “Unto the glory of God through us.”
What is, “unto \[His\] glory through us?” He fulfilleth them by us, that
is, and <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503) by His benefits towards
us unto His glory; for this is “for the glory of God.” But if they be
for the glory of God, they will certainly come to pass. For His own
glory He will not think little of, even did He think little of our
salvation. But as it is, He thinketh not little of our salvation either,
both because He loveth mankind exceedingly, and because our salvation is
bound up with His glory from these things accruing. So that if the
promises are for His glory, our salvation also will certainly follow; to
which also, in the Epistle to the Ephesians, he reverteth continually,
saying, “to the maintenance of His glory <span
id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504) ;” ([Eph. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)<span id="v.iii-p64.3"></span>.) and
every where he layeth down this, and shows the necessity of this result.
And in this regard he here saith, that His promises lie not: for they
not only save us, but also glorify Him. Dwell not on this therefore that
they were promised by us; and so doubt. For they are not fulfilled by
us, but by Him. Yea, and the promises were by Him; for we spoke not to
you our own words, but His.

<span id="v.iii-p65"></span>[2 Cor.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022)<span id="v.iii-p65.1"></span>.
“Now He which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and anointed us, is
God; Who also sealed us, and gave us the earnest of the Spirit in our
hearts.”

<span id="v.iii-p66"></span>Again, from the past He stablisheth the
<span id="page_290">p. 290</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_290"></span>future. For if it is He that establisheth us
in Christ; (i.e., who suffereth us not to be shaken from the faith which
is in Christ;) and He that anointed us and gave the Spirit in our
hearts, how shall He not give us the future things?

<span id="v.iii-p67"></span>For if He gave the principles and the
foundations, and the root and the fount, (to wit, the true knowledge of
Him, the partaking of the Spirit,) how shall He not give the things that
come of these: for if for the sake of these <span
id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) those are given, much more will
he <span id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) supply those. And if to such
as were enemies he gave these, much more when now made friends will He
“freely give” to them those. Wherefore He said not simply “the Spirit,”
but named “earnest,” that from this thou mightest have a good hope of
the whole as well. For did He not purpose to give the whole, He would
never have chosen to give “the earnest” and to waste it without object
or result. And observe Paul’s candor. For why need I say, saith he, that
the truth of the promises standeth not in us? The fact of your standing
unwavering and fixed is not in us, but this too is of God; “for” saith
he, “He who stablisheth us is God.” It is not we who strengthen you: for
even we also need Him that stablisheth. So then let none imagine that
the Preaching is hazardous in us. He hath undertaken the whole, He cared
for the whole.

<span id="v.iii-p70"></span>And what is, “anointed,” and “sealed?” Gave
the Spirit by Whom He did both these things, making at once prophets and
priests and kings, for in old times these three sorts were anointed. But
we have now not one of these dignities, but all three preeminently. For
we are both to enjoy a kingdom and are made priests by offering our
bodies for a sacrifice, (for, saith he, “present your members <span
id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507) a living sacrifice unto God;) and
withal we are constituted prophets too:  for what things “eye hath not
seen, nor ear heard,” ([1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="v.iii-p71.4"></span>.)
these have been revealed unto us.

<span id="v.iii-p72"></span>\[5.\] And in another way too we become
kings: if we have the mind to get dominion over our unruly thoughts, for
that such an one is a king and more than he who weareth the diadem, I
will now make plain to you. He hath many armies, but we again have
thoughts exceeding them in number; for it is impossible to number the
infinite multitude of the thoughts within us. Nor is their multitude all
that one is to consider, but also that in this multitude of thoughts,
there are many generals, and colonels, and captains, and archers, and
slingers. What else makes a king? His apparel? But this one too is
arrayed in a better and braver robe, which neither doth moth devour nor
age impair. A crown too he hath of curious workmanship <span
id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508) , that of glory, that of the tender
mercies of God. For saith \[the Psalmist\], “Bless the Lord, O my soul,
that crowneth thee with pity and tender mercies.” ([Ps.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004)<span id="v.iii-p73.2"></span>.)
Again, that of glory:  “For thou hast crowned him with glory and honor.”
([Ps. viii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006)<span
id="v.iii-p73.3"></span>.) And “with favor Thou hast crowned us with a
shield.” ([Ps. v. 12](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#012)<span
id="v.iii-p73.4"></span>. LXX.) Again, that of grace: “For thou shalt
receive a crown of grace upon thy head.” ([Prov. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#009)<span id="v.iii-p73.5"></span>. LXX.)
Seest thou this diadem of many wreaths, and surpassing the other in
grace. But let us institute anew and from the beginning a stricter
inquiry into the condition of these kings. That king hath dominion over
his guards, and issues orders to all, and all obey and serve him; but
here I show you greater authority. For the number here is as great or
even greater: it remains to inquire into their obedience. And bring me
not forth those that have ruled amiss <span
id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509) , since I too bring those that have
been driven from their kingdom and murdered by their very body guards.
Let us then bring forth these instances, but seek for those of either
kind who have ordered well their kingdom. And do thou put forward whom
thou wilt. I oppose unto thee the patriarch against all. For when he was
commanded to sacrifice his son, consider how many thoughts then rose up
against him. Nevertheless, he brought all under submission, and all
trembled before him more than before a king his guards; and with a look
only he stilled them all and not one of them dared so much as mutter;
but down they bowed and as unto a king gave place, one and all, though
much exasperated and exceeding relentless. For even the heads of spears
raised upright by many soldiers are not as fearful as were then those
fearful thoughts, armed not with spears, but what is harder <span
id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510) to deal with than many spears, the
sympathy of nature!  Wherefore they had power to pierce his soul more
than sharpened spear point. For never spear could be so sharp as were
the goads of those thoughts, which, sharpened and upraised from beneath,
from his affections, were piercing through and through the mind of that
righteous man. For here there needs time and purpose and a stroke and
pain, and then death follows; but there, there needed none of these, so
much were the wounds speedier and acuter. But still though so many
thoughts were then in arms against him, there was a deep calm, and they
stood all in fair array; adorning rather than daunting him. See him at
least stretching out the knife, and set forth as many as thou <span
id="page_291">p. 291</span> <span id="v.iii-Page_291"></span>wilt,
kings, emperors, Cæsars, yet shalt thou tell of nought like this, have
no like mien to point to, so noble, so worthy of the heavens. For that
righteous man erected a trophy at that movement over the most arbitrary
of tyrannies. For nothing is so tyrannical as nature; and find ten
thousand tyrannicides, one like this shalt thou never show us. For it
was the triumph in that moment of an angel, not a man. For consider.
Nature was dashed to the ground with all her weapons, with all her host:
and he stood with outstretched hand, grasping not a crown, but a knife
more glorious than any crown, and the throng of angels applauded, and
God from heaven proclaimed him conquerer.

<span id="v.iii-p76"></span>For seeing that his citizenship was in
heaven, thence also he received that proclamation. ([Philip. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="v.iii-p76.1"></span>.)
What could be more glorious than this? rather, what trophy could ever be
equal to it? For if on occasion of a wrestler’s success, not a herald
below but the king above should have risen up and himself proclaimed the
Olympic Victor, would not this have seemed to him more glorious than the
crown, and have turned the gaze of the whole theatre upon him? When then
no mortal king, but God Himself, not in this theatre but in the theatre
of the universe, in the assembly of the angels, the archangels,
proclaimeth his name with uplifted voice shouting from heaven, tell me
what place shall we assign to this holy man?

<span id="v.iii-p77"></span>\[6.\] But if you will, let us listen too to
the voice itself. What then was the voice? “Abraham, Abraham, lay not
thy hand upon Isaac, neither do thou any thing unto him. For now I know
that thou fearest God, and hast not spared thy son, thy well-beloved,
for My sake.” ([Gen. 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#012)<span id="v.iii-p77.1"></span>.)
What is this? He that knoweth all things before they are, did He now
know!  And yet even to man the Patriarch’s <span
id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) fear of God was evident: so many
proofs had he given that his heart was right toward God <span
id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512) , as when He said to him, “Get thee
out of thy country, and from thy kindred;” ([Gen. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001)<span id="v.iii-p79.2"></span>.) when
for His sake and the honor due to Him he relinquished to his sister’s
son his priority; when He delivered him out of so great perils; when He
bade him go into Egypt, and on his wife’s being taken from him, he
repined not, and more instances besides; and as I said, from these
things even man would have learned the Patriarch’s fear of God, much
more than God Who waiteth not for the acts to know the end. And how too
justified he him, if He knew not? For it is written, “Abraham believed,
and it was counted unto him for righteousness.” ([Gen.
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006), [Rom.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003)<span id="v.iii-p79.3"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii-p80"></span>What then means this, “Now I know?” The
Syriac hath, “Now thou hast made known;” that is, to men. For I knew of
old, even before all those commandments. And why, to men even, “now?”
for were not those acts enough to prove his mind was right toward God?
They were enough indeed, but this one so much greater than them all that
they appear nothing beside it. As exalting then this good work and
showing its superiority to all, He so spake. For of things which exceed
and surpass all that went before, most men are wont to speak so: for
instance, if one receive from another a gift greater than any former
one, he often says, “Now I know that such an one loves me,” not hereby
meaning that he knew not in the time past, but as intending to declare
what is now given to be greater than all. So also God, speaking after
the manner of men, saith, “Now I know,” intending only to mark the
exceeding greatness of the exploit; not that He “then” came to know
either his fear or the greatness of it. For when He saith, “Come, let Us
go down and see,” ([Gen. 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007), [Gen.
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021)<span id="v.iii-p80.1"></span>.)
He saith it not as needing to go down, (for He both filleth all things
and knoweth all things certainly,) but to teach us not to give sentence
lightly. And when He saith, “The Lord looked down from Heaven:” ([Ps.
xiv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002)<span id="v.iii-p80.2"></span>.)
it describeth His perfect knowledge by a metaphor taken from men. So
also here He saith, “Now I know,” to declare this to be greater than all
which had preceded it. Of this itself too He furnisheth proof by adding,
“Because thou sparedst not thy son, thy well-beloved, for My sake; He
saith not “thy son” only, but yet more, “thy well-beloved.” For it was
not nature only, but also parental fondness, which having both by
natural disposition and by the great goodness of his child, he yet dared
in him to spurn <span id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) . And if about
worthless children parents are not easily indifferent, but mourn even
for them; when it is his son, his only-begotten, and his well-beloved,
even Isaac, and the father himself is on the point of immolating him;
who can describe the excessiveness of such philosophy? This exploit
outshineth thousands of diadems and crowns innumerable. For the wearer
of that crown, both death ofttimes assaileth and annoyeth, and before
death, assaults of circumstances without number; but this diadem shall
no one have strength to take from him that weareth it; no not even after
death; neither of his own household, nor of strangers. And let me point
you out the costliest stone in this diadem. For as a costly stone, so
this comes at the end and clasps it. What then is this? the words, “for
My sake?” for not herein is the marvel, that he spared not, but that it
was “for His sake.”

<span id="v.iii-p82"></span><span id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_292"></span>Oh! blessed right hand, of what a knife was
it accounted worthy? oh! wondrous knife, of what a right hand was it
accounted worthy? Oh! wondrous knife, for what a purpose was it
prepared? to what an office did it serve? to what a type did it
minister? How was it bloodied? how was it not bloodied? For I know not
what to say, so awful was that mystery. It touched not the neck of the
child, nor passed through the throat of that holy one: nor was crimsoned
with the blood of the righteous; rather it both touched, and passed
through, and was crimsoned, and was bathed in it, yet was not bathed.
Perchance I seem to you beside myself, uttering such contradictions.
For, in truth, I am beside myself, with the thought of the wondrous deed
of that righteous man; but I utter no contradictions. For indeed the
righteous man’s hand thrust it in the throat of the lad, but God’s Hand
suffered it not, so thrust, to be stained with blood of the lad. For it
was not Abraham alone that held it back, but God also: and he by his
purpose gave the stroke, God by His voice restrained it. For the same
voice both armed and disarmed <span id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514)
that right hand, which, marshalled under God, as if under a leader,
performed all things at His beck, and all were ministered at His voice.
For observe; He said, “Slay,” and straightway it was armed: He said,
“Slay not,” and straightway it was disarmed: for every thing \[before\]
had been fully prepared.

<span id="v.iii-p84"></span>And now God showed the soldier and general
to the whole world; this crowned victor to the theatre of the angels;
this priest, this king, crowned with that knife beyond a diadem, this
trophy-bearer, this champion, this conqueror without a fight. For as if
some general having a most valiant soldier, should use his mastery of
his weapons, his bearing, his ordered movements <span
id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) to dismay the adversary; so also God,
by the purpose, the attitude, the bearing only of that righteous man,
dismayed and routed the common enemy of us all, the Devil. For I deem
that even he then shrunk away aghast. But if any one say, ‘And why did
he not suffer that right hand to be bathed, and then forthwith raise him
up after being sacrificed?’ Because God might not accept such bloody
offerings; such a table were that of avenging demons. But here two
things were displayed, both the loving kindness of the Master, and the
faithfulness of the servant. And before, indeed, he went out from his
country: but then he abandoned even nature. Wherefore also he received
his principal with usury: and very reasonably. For he chose to lose the
name of father, to show himself a faithful servant. Wherefore he became
not a father only, but also a priest; and because for God’s sake he gave
up his own, therefore also did God give him with these His own besides.
When then enemies devise mischief, He allows it to come even to the
trial, and then works miracles; as in the case of the furnace and the
lions; ([Dan. 3:0](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#000), [Dan.
6:0](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#000)<span id="v.iii-p85.5"></span>.)
but when Himself biddeth, readiness <span
id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516) attained, He stayeth His bidding. What
then, I ask, was wanting further in this noble deed? For did Abraham
foreknow what would happen? Did he bargain for the mercy of God? For
even though he were a prophet, yet the prophet knoweth not all things.
So the actual sacrifice afterwards was superfluous and unworthy of God.
And if it was fit he should learn that God was able to raise from the
dead, by the womb he had learnt this much more marvellously, or rather
he learnt it even before that proof, for he had faith.

<span id="v.iii-p87"></span>\[7.\] Do not then only admire this
righteous man, but also imitate him, and when thou seest him amid so
great uproar and surge of waves sailing as in a calm, take thou in hand
in like way the helm of obedience and fortitude. For look, pray, not
only at this that he built up the altar and the wood; but remember too
the voice of the lad, and reflect what hosts like snow storms <span
id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) assaulted him to dismay him, when he
heard the lad say, “My father, where is the lamb?” Bethink thee how many
thoughts were then stirred up armed not with iron, but with darts of
flame; and piercing into and cutting him through on every side. If even
now many, and those not parents, are broken down <span
id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) , and would have wept, did they not
know the end: and many, I see, do weep, though they know it; what must
it be thought he would feel, who begat, who nurtured him, in old age had
him, had him only, him such an one, who sees, who hears him, and is
presently about to slay him? What intelligence in the words!  What
meekness in the question!  Who then is here at work? The Devil that he
might set nature in a flame? God forbid! but God, the more to prove the
golden soul of the righteous man. For when indeed the wife of Job
speaks, a Devil is at work. For of such sort the advice is. But this one
uttereth nothing blasphemous, but what is both very devout and
thoughtful; and great the grace that overspread the words, much the
honey that dropped therefrom, flowing from a calm and gentle soul. Even
a heart of stone these words were enough to soften. But they turned not
aside, nay, shook not that adamant. Nor said he, ‘Why callest thou him
father, who in a little while will not be thy father, yea, who <span
id="page_293">p. 293</span> <span id="v.iii-Page_293"></span>hath
already lost that title of honor?’ And why doth the lad ask the
question? Not of impertinence merely, not of curiosity, but as anxious
about what was proposed. For he reflected that had his father not meant
to make him a partner in what was done, he would not have left the
servants below, and taken him only with him. For this reason, too,
surely, it is that when they were alone, then he asks him, when none
heard what was said. So great was the judgment of the lad. Are ye not
all warmed towards him, both men and women? Doth not each one of you
mentally infold and kiss the child, and marvel at his judgment; and
venerate the piety which, when he was both bound and laid on the wood,
made him not be dismayed nor struggle nor accuse his father as mad; but
he was even bound and lifted up and laid upon it, and endured all in
silence, like a lamb, yea, rather like the common Lord of all. For of
Him he both imitated the gentleness, and kept to the type. For “He was
led like a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep dumb before his
shearer.” ([Is. liii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span
id="v.iii-p89.2"></span>.) And yet Isaac spake; for his Lord spake also.
How dumb then? This meaneth, he spake nothing wilful or harsh, but all
was sweet and mild, and the words more than the silence manifested his
gentleness. For Christ also said, “If I have spoken evil, bear witness
of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou Me?” ([John xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023)<span id="v.iii-p89.3"></span>.) and
manifested His gentleness more than if He had held His peace. And as
this one speaketh with his father from the altar, so too doth He from
the Cross, saying, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do.” What then said the Patriarch? ([Gen.
22.8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008)<span id="v.iii-p89.4"></span>.)
“God will provide Himself a lamb for a burnt-offering, my son.” Either
uses the names of nature; the former, father; the latter, son; and on
either side arduous is the war stirred up, and mighty the storm, and yet
wreck no where: for religion <span id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519)
triumphed over all. Then after he heard of God, he spoke no further word
nor was impertinently curious <span id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) .
Of such judgment was the child even in the very bloom of youth. Seest
thou the king, over how many armies, in how many battles which beset
him, he hath been victorious? For the barbarians were not so fearful to
the city of Jerusalem when they assaulted her oftentimes, as were to
this man the thoughts on every side besieging him: but still he overcame
all. Wouldest thou see the priest also? The instance is at hand. For
when thou hast seen him with fire and a knife; and standing over an
altar, what doubtest thou after as to his priesthood? But if thou
wouldest see the sacrifice also, lo, here a twofold one. For he offered
a son, he offered also a ram, yea, more and above all, his own will. And
with the blood of the lamb he consecrated his right hand <span
id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) , with the sacrifice of his son, his
soul. Thus was he ordained a priest, by the blood of his only-begotten,
by the sacrifice of a lamb; for the priests also were consecrated by the
blood of the victims which were offered to God. Wouldest thou see the
prophet also? It is written, “Your father Abraham rejoiced to see My
day, and he saw it, and was glad.” ([Lev.
8:0](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#000), [John
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)<span id="v.iii-p92.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii-p93"></span>So also art thou thyself made king and
priest and prophet in the Laver; a king, having dashed to earth all the
deeds of wickedness and slain thy sins; a priest, in that thou offerest
thyself to God, having sacrificed thy body and being thyself slain also,
“for if we died with Him,” saith he, “we shall also live with Him;” ([2
Tim. ii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011)<span
id="v.iii-p93.1"></span>.) a prophet, knowing what shall be, and being
inspired of God <span id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) , and
sealed <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) .   For as upon soldiers
a seal, so is also the Spirit put upon the faithful. And if thou desert,
thou art manifest \[by it\] to all. For the Jews had circumcision for a
seal, but we, the earnest of the Spirit. Knowing then all this, and
considering our high estate, let us exhibit a life worthy of the
grace <span id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) , that we may obtain also
the kingdom to come; which may we all obtain through the grace and love
towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom, to the Father, together
with the Holy Spirit, be glory, power, honor, now and for ever, and
world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_476"></span>[286:477](1120052.htm#fr_476) <span
id="v.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span> The rec. text has <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p4.1"></span>εἰλικρινείᾳ θεοῦ</span>. Chrysostom omits <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iii-p4.2"></span> θεοῦ</span>.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[286:478](1120052.htm#fr_477) <span
id="v.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p6.1"></span>βαπτιζομένην</span>.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[286:479](1120052.htm#fr_478) <span
id="v.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span> The clause “God comforted us,” is inserted
by Mr. Field on the authority of two ancient <span class="c18"><span
id="v.iii-p7.1"></span>mss</span>.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[286:480](1120052.htm#fr_479) <span
id="v.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span> i.e. the Apostles.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[286:481](1120052.htm#fr_480) <span
id="v.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p9.1"></span>οἵκοθεν</span>.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[286:482](1120052.htm#fr_481) <span
id="v.iii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p10.1"></span>οἰκεῖον κατόρθωμα</span>.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[286:483](1120052.htm#fr_482) <span
id="v.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p11.1"></span>ἠρέμα καθαπτόμενος</span>.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[286:484](1120052.htm#fr_483) <span
id="v.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p13.1"></span>τὴν ἔξω παίδευσιν</span>.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[286:485](1120052.htm#fr_484) <span
id="v.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p14"></span> Or “boast” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p14.1"></span> καύχησις</span>.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[286:486](1120052.htm#fr_485) <span
id="v.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p15.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p15.2"></span>πούλον</span>.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[286:487](1120052.htm#fr_486) <span
id="v.iii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p16"></span> i.e. the false Apostles.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[286:488](1120052.htm#fr_487) <span
id="v.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p17.1"></span>ἐκ πολλοῦ τοῦ περιόντος</span>.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[287:489](1120052.htm#fr_488) <span
id="v.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p21"></span> These words are not found in the <span
class="c18"><span id="v.iii-p21.1"></span>mss</span>. though the
commentary seems to require them. If they are omitted, there is no stop.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[287:490](1120052.htm#fr_489) <span
id="v.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p23.1"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p23.2"></span>κρίβειαν</span>.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[287:491](1120052.htm#fr_490) <span
id="v.iii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p24.1"></span>τὰ σκάμματα ὑπερέβη</span>.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[287:492](1120052.htm#fr_491) <span
id="v.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p29.1"></span>συστέγγειν τόν ὄγκον</span>.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[287:493](1120052.htm#fr_492) <span
id="v.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p33"></span> R.T. om. ‘our’ and ‘Christ.’ \[R.V. omits
the latter. C.\]

<span id="fn_493"></span>[287:494](1120052.htm#fr_493) <span
id="v.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p35.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p35.2"></span>ποτέμνεται</span>.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[287:495](1120052.htm#fr_494) <span
id="v.iii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p36.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p36.2"></span>νεγγυήσατο</span>.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[287:496](1120052.htm#fr_495) <span
id="v.iii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p37.1"></span>μηδαμόθεν παραλογιζομενους</span>.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[288:497](1120052.htm#fr_496) <span
id="v.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p43.1"></span>χάριν</span>.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[288:498](1120052.htm#fr_497) <span
id="v.iii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p44.1"></span>χαράν</span>.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[288:499](1120052.htm#fr_498) <span
id="v.iii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p46"></span> Chrysostom, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p46.1"></span>βουλόμενος</span>. Received text, <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iii-p46.2"></span>βουλενόμενος</span>.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[288:500](1120052.htm#fr_499) <span
id="v.iii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p50.1"></span>σύνηθες θεώρημα</span>.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[288:501](1120052.htm#fr_500) <span
id="v.iii-p50.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p51.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p51.2"></span>λήκεγκται</span>.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[289:502](1120052.htm#fr_501) <span
id="v.iii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p54"></span> \[The later critics have the present “is.”
C.\]

<span id="fn_502"></span>[289:503](1120052.htm#fr_502) <span
id="v.iii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p62.1"></span>δογμάτων</span>.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[289:504](1120052.htm#fr_503) <span
id="v.iii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p63"></span> Ben. omits “and.”

<span id="fn_504"></span>[289:505](1120052.htm#fr_504) <span
id="v.iii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p64"></span> Rec. text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p64.1"></span>εἰς ἀπολύτρωσιν τῆς περιποιήσεως, εὶς ἔπαινον
τῆς δόξης αὐτού</span>. Chrys. <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p64.2"></span>εἰς περιποίησιν τῆς δ. ἀ</span>.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[290:506](1120052.htm#fr_505) <span
id="v.iii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p68"></span> St. Chrysostom plainly means by “these,”
not what was last mentioned but what they are to lead to. There are
other instances in his writings of similar inaccuracies.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[290:507](1120052.htm#fr_506) <span
id="v.iii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p69"></span> The Ben. and other Editions insert some
words, “much more will He who gave these supply these also.”

<span id="fn_507"></span>[290:508](1120052.htm#fr_507) <span
id="v.iii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p71"></span> [Rom. 12.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span id="v.iii-p71.1"></span>. where
the Rec. text has <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p71.2"></span>σώματα</span>, not <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p71.3"></span> μέλη</span>, as St. Chrysos. reads.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[290:509](1120052.htm#fr_508) <span
id="v.iii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p73.1"></span>ποὶκιλον</span>.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[290:510](1120052.htm#fr_509) <span
id="v.iii-p73.6"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p74"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p74.1"></span>εκπεσόντας</span>.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[290:511](1120052.htm#fr_510) <span
id="v.iii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p75"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p75.1"></span>χαλεπώτερον</span>.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[291:512](1120052.htm#fr_511) <span
id="v.iii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p78"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p78.1"></span>τἀνδρός</span>.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[291:513](1120052.htm#fr_512) <span
id="v.iii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p79"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p79.1"></span>τῆς περὶ τὸν Θεὸν εῦνόιας</span>.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[291:514](1120052.htm#fr_513) <span
id="v.iii-p80.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p81"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p81.1"></span>κατετόλμησεν</span>.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[292:515](1120052.htm#fr_514) <span
id="v.iii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p83"></span> Ben. “checked.”

<span id="fn_515"></span>[292:516](1120052.htm#fr_515) <span
id="v.iii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p85"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p85.1"></span>ῥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p85.2"></span>υθμοῦ</span> Ben. <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p85.3"></span>ῥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p85.4"></span>ώμης</span>.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[292:517](1120052.htm#fr_516) <span
id="v.iii-p85.6"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p86"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p86.1"></span>μέχρι προθυμίας</span>.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[292:518](1120052.htm#fr_517) <span
id="v.iii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p88"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p88.1"></span>νιφάδες στρατοπέδων</span>.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[292:519](1120052.htm#fr_518) <span
id="v.iii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p89"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p89.1"></span>κατακλῶνται</span>.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[293:520](1120052.htm#fr_519) <span
id="v.iii-p89.5"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p90"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p90.1"></span>φιλοσοφία</span>.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[293:521](1120052.htm#fr_520) <span
id="v.iii-p90.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p91"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p91.1"></span>περιειργάσατο</span>.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[293:522](1120052.htm#fr_521) <span
id="v.iii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p92"></span> In Levitical consecrations, the thumb of
the priest’s right hand was sprinkled with blood. [Lev. viii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#023)<span id="v.iii-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[293:523](1120052.htm#fr_522) <span
id="v.iii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p94"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p94.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p94.2"></span>νθους</span>.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[293:524](1120052.htm#fr_523) <span
id="v.iii-p94.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p95"></span> vid. Hom. iii. on Rom., comment on v. 11.
p. 113. Oxford Transl.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[293:525](1120052.htm#fr_524) <span
id="v.iii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p96"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p96.1"></span>τῆς χάριτος</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily IV](1120053)
