[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120005)  [Next](1120007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="iv.iii-Page_6"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Homily II.</span>

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span><span id="iv.iii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span>I thank my God always concerning you, for
the Grace of God which was given you in Jesus Christ; that in every
thing you were enriched in him.

<span id="iv.iii-p4"></span>\[1.\] <span class="c18"><span
id="iv.iii-p4.1"></span>That</span> which he exhorts others to do,
saying, “([Philip. 4.6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.iii-p4.2"></span>.) Let your requests with thanksgiving be made
known unto God,” the same also he used to do himself: teaching us to
begin always from these words, and before all things to give thanks unto
God. For nothing is so acceptable to God as that men should be thankful,
both for themselves and for others: wherefore also he prefaces almost
every Epistle with this. But the occasion for his doing so is even more
urgent here than in the other Epistles. For he that gives thanks, does
so, both as being well off, and as in acknowledgment of a favor: now a
favor is not a debt nor a requital nor a payment: which indeed every
where is important to be said, but much more in the case of the
Corinthians who were gaping after the dividers of the Church.

<span id="iv.iii-p5"></span>\[2.\] “Unto my God.”  Out of great
affection he seizes on that which is common, and makes it his own; as
the prophets also from time to time use to say, ([Ps.
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004.md), [Ps.
62:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii-p5.1"></span>..md)
“O God, my God;” and by way of encouragement he incites them to use the
same language also themselves. For such expressions belong to one who is
retiring from all secular things, and moving towards Him whom he calls
on with so much earnestness: since he alone can truly say this, who from
things of this life is ever mounting upwards unto God, and always
preferring Him to all, and giving thanks continually, not \[only\] for
the grace already given, <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) but whatever
blessing hath been since at any time bestowed, for this also he offereth
unto Him the same praise. Wherefore he saith not merely, “I give
thanks,” but “at all times, concerning you;” instructing them to be
thankful both always, and to no one else save God only.

<span id="iv.iii-p7"></span>\[3.\] “For the grace of God.” Seest thou
how from every quarter he draws topics for correcting them? For where
“grace” is, “works” are not; where “works,” it is no more “grace.” If
therefore it be “grace,” why are ye high-minded? Whence is it that ye
are puffed up?

<span id="iv.iii-p8"></span>“Which is given you.” And by whom was it
given? By me, or by another Apostle? Not at all, but “by Jesus Christ.”
For the expression, “In Jesus Christ,” signifies this. Observe how in
divers places he uses the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii-p8.1"></span>ἐν</span>, “in,” instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii-p8.2"></span>δἰ οὗ</span>, “through means
of whom;” therefore its sense is no less. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md)

<span id="iv.iii-p10"></span>“That in every thing ye were enriched.”
Again, by whom? By Him, is the reply. And not merely “ye were enriched,”
but “in every thing.” Since then it is first of all, “riches” then,
“riches of God,” next, “in every thing,” and lastly, “through the
Only-Begotten,” reflect on the ineffable treasure!

<span id="iv.iii-p11"></span>[1 Cor.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.iii-p11.1"></span>.
“In all utterance, and all knowledge.” “Word” \[“or utterance,”\] not
such as the heathen, but that of God. For there is knowledge without
“word,” and there is knowledge with “word.” For so there are many who
possess knowledge, but have not the power of speech; as those who are
uneducated and unable to exhibit clearly what they have in their mind.
Ye, saith he, are not such as these, but competent both to understand
and to speak.

<span id="iv.iii-p12"></span>[1 Cor.
1.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iii-p12.1"></span>.
“Even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you.” Under the color
of praises and thanksgiving he touches them sharply. “For not by heathen
philosophy,” saith he, “neither by heathen discipline, but “the grace of
God,” and by the “riches,” and the “knowledge,” and the “word” given by
Him, were you enabled to learn the doctrines of the truth, and to be
confirmed unto the testimony of the Lord; that is, unto the Gospel. For
ye had the benefit of many signs, many wonders, unspeakable grace, to
make you receive the Gospel. If therefore ye were established by signs
and grace, why do ye waver?” Now these are the words of one both
reproving, and at the same time prepossessing them in his favor.

<span id="iv.iii-p13"></span>\[4.\] [1 Cor.
1.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.iii-p13.1"></span>.
“So that ye come behind in no gift.” A great question here arises. They
who had been “enriched in all utterance,” so as in no respect to “come
behind in any gift,” are they carnal? For if they were such at the <span
id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span id="iv.iii-Page_7"></span>beginning, much
more now. How then does he call them “carnal?” For, saith he, ([1 Cor.
iii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.iii-p13.2"></span>.) “I was not able to speak unto you as unto
spiritual, but as unto carnal.” What must we say then? That having in
the beginning believed, and obtained all gifts, (for indeed they sought
them earnestly,) they became remiss afterwards. Or, if not so, that not
unto all are either these things said or those; but the one to such as
were amenable to his censures, the other to such as were adorned with
his praises. For as to the fact that they still had gifts; ([1 Cor.
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#026.md),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#029)<span id="iv.iii-p13.3"></span>..md)
“Each one,” saith he, “hath a psalm, hath a revelation, hath a tongue,
hath an interpretation; let all things be done unto edifying.” And, “Let
the prophets speak two or three.” Or we may state it somewhat
differently; that as it is usual with us to call the greater part the
whole, so also he hath spoken in this place. Withal, I think he hints at
his own proceedings; for he too had shewn forth signs; even as also he
saith in the second Epistle to them, ([2 Cor.
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#013)<span id="iv.iii-p13.4"></span>..md)
“Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in all patience:”
and again, “For what is there wherein you were inferior to other
churches?”

<span id="iv.iii-p14"></span>Or, as I was saying, he both reminds them
of his own miracles and speaks thus with an eye to those who were still
approved. For many holy men were there who had “set themselves to
minister unto the saints,” and had become “the first fruits of Achaia;”
as he declareth ([1 Cor. 16.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iii-p14.1"></span>.) towards the end.

<span id="iv.iii-p15"></span>\[5.\] In any case, although the praises be
not very close to the truth, still however they are inserted by way of
precaution, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii-p15.1"></span>οἰκονομικῶς</span>) preparing the way
beforehand for his discourse. For whoever at the very outset speaks
things unpleasant, excludes his words from a hearing among the weaker:
since if the hearers be his equals in degree they feel angry; if vastly
inferior they will be vexed. To avoid this, he begins with what seem to
be praises. I say, seem; for not even did this praise belong to them,
but to the grace of God. For that they had remission of sins, and were
justified, this was of the Gift from above. Wherefore also he dwells
upon these points, which shew the loving-kindness of God, in order that
he may the more fully purge out their malady.

<span id="iv.iii-p16"></span>\[6.\] “Waiting for the revelation (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii-p16.1"></span>ἀποκάλυψιν</span>.) of our
Lord Jesus Christ.” “Why make ye much ado,” saith he, “why are ye
troubled that Christ is not come? Nay, he is come; and the Day is
henceforth at the doors.” And consider his wisdom; how withdrawing them
from human considerations he terrifies them by mention of the fearful
judgment-seat, and thus implying that not only the beginnings must be
good, but the end also. For with all these gifts, and with all else that
is good, we must be mindful of that Day: and there is need of many
labors to be able to come unto the end. “Revelation” is his word;
implying that although He be not seen, yet He is, and is present even
now, and then shall appear. Therefore there is need of patience: for to
this end did ye receive the wonders, that ye may remain firm.

<span id="iv.iii-p17"></span>\[7.\] [1 Cor.
1.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.iii-p17.1"></span>.
“Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be unreprovable.”
Here he seems to court them, but the saying is free from all flattery;
for he knows also how to press them home; as when he saith, ([1 Cor.
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#018.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021)<span id="iv.iii-p17.2"></span>..md)
“Now some are puffed up as though I would not come to you:” and again,
“What will ye? shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the
spirit of meekness?” And, ([2 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii-p17.3"></span>..md)
“Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me.” But he is also
covertly accusing them: for, to say, “He shall confirm,” and the word
“unreprovable” marks them out as still wavering, and liable to reproof.

<span id="iv.iii-p18"></span>But do thou consider how he always
fasteneth them as with nails to the Name of Christ. And not any man nor
teacher, but continually the Desired One Himself is remembered by him:
setting himself, as it were to arouse those who were heavy-headed after
some debauch. For no where in any other Epistle doth the Name of Christ
occur so continually. But here it is, many times in a few verses; and by
means of it he weaves together, one may say, the whole of the proem.
Look at it from the beginning. “Paul called \[to be\] an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, to them that have been sanctified in Jesus Christ, who
call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, grace \[be\] unto you and
peace from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. I thank my God for
the grace which hath been given you by Jesus Christ, even as the
testimony of Christ hath been confirmed in you, waiting for the
revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall confirm you unreprovable
in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye have
been called into the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ our Lord. And I
beseech you by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.” Seest thou the
constant repetition of the Name of Christ? From whence it is plain even
to the most unobservant, that not by chance nor unwittingly he doeth
this, but in order that by incessant application <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) of that glorious Name he may foment <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) their inflammation, and purge out the
corruption of the disease.

<span id="iv.iii-p21"></span><span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="iv.iii-Page_8"></span>\[8.\] [1 Cor.
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.iii-p21.1"></span>.
“God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of His
Son.” Wonderful!  How great a thing saith he here!  How vast in the
magnitude of the gift which he declares!  Into the fellowship of the
Only-Begotten have ye been called, and do ye addict yourselves unto men?
What can be worse than this wretchedness? And how have ye been called?
By the Father. For since “through Him,” and “in Him,” were phrases which
he was constantly employing in regard of the Son, lest men might suppose
that he so mentioneth Him as being less, he ascribeth the same to the
Father. For not by this one and that one, saith he, but “by the Father”
have ye been called; by Him also have ye been “enriched.” Again, “ye
have been called;” ye did not yourselves approach. But what means, “into
the fellowship of His Son?” Hear him declaring this very thing more
clearly elsewhere. ([2 Tim. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012)<span id="iv.iii-p21.2"></span>..md) If
we suffer, we shall also reign with Him; if we die with Him, we shall
also live with Him. Then, because it was a great thing which He had
said, he adds an argument fraught with unanswerable conviction; for,
saith he, “God is faithful,” i.e. “true.” Now if “true,” what things He
hath promised He will also perform. And He hath promised that He will
make us partakers of His only-begotten Son; for to this end also did He
call us. For ([Rom. xi. 29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iii-p21.3"></span>.) “His gifts, and the calling of God,” are
without repentance.

<span id="iv.iii-p22"></span>These things, by a kind of divine art he
inserts thus early, lest after the vehemence of the reproofs they might
fall into despair. For assuredly God’s part will ensue, if we be not
quite impatient of His rein. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii-p22.1"></span>ἀφηνιάσωμεν</span>)  As the Jews, being called,
would not receive the blessings; but this was no longer of Him that
called, but of their lack of sense. For He indeed was willing to give,
but they, by refusing to receive, cast themselves away. For, had He
called to a painful and toilsome undertaking, not even in that case were
they pardonable in making excuse; however, they would have been able to
say that so it was: but if the call be unto cleansing, (Comp. [1 Cor.
1.4-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii-p22.2"></span>..md)
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, and grace, and a
free gift, and the good things in store, which eye hath not seen, nor
ear heard; and it be God that calls, and calls by Himself; what pardon
can they deserve, who come not running to Him? Let no one therefore
accuse God; for unbelief cometh not of Him that calleth, but of those
who start away (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii-p22.3"></span>ἀποπηδῶντας</span>) from Him.

<span id="iv.iii-p23"></span>\[9.\] But some man will say, “He ought to
bring men in, even against their will.” Away with this. He doth not use
violence, nor compel; <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) for who that
bids to honors, and crowns, and banquets, and festivals, drags people,
unwilling and bound? No one. For this is the part of one inflicting an
insult. Unto hell He sends men against their will, but unto the kingdom
He calls willing minds. To the fire He brings men bound and bewailing
themselves: to the endless state of blessings not so. Else it is a
reproach to the very blessings themselves, if their nature be not such
as that men should run to them of their own accord and with many thanks.

<span id="iv.iii-p25"></span>“Whence it is then,” say you, “that all men
do not choose them?” From their own infirmity. “And wherefore doth He
not cut off their infirmity?” And how tell me—in what way—ought He to
cut it off? Hath He not made a world that teacheth His loving-kindness
and His power? For ([Ps. xix. 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.iii-p25.1"></span>.) “the heavens,” saith one, “declare the glory
of God.” Hath He not also sent prophets? Hath He not both called and
honored us? Hath He not done wonders? Hath He not given a law both
written and natural?  Hath He not sent His Son? Hath he not commissioned
Apostles?  Hath He not wrought sins? Hath He not threatened hell? Hath
He not promised the kingdom? Doth He not every day make His sun to rise?
Are not the things which He hath enjoined so simple and easy, that many
transcend His commandments in the greatness of their self-denial? <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md)   “What was there to do unto the vineyard
and I have not done it?” ([Is. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii-p26.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.iii-p27"></span>\[10.\] “And why,” say you, “did He not
make knowledge and virtue natural to us?” Who speaketh thus? The Greek
or the Christian? Both of them, indeed, but not about the same things:
for the one raises his objection with a view to knowledge, the other
with a view to conduct. First, then, we will reply to him who is on our
side; for I do not so much regard those without, as our own members.

<span id="iv.iii-p28"></span>What then saith the Christian? “It were
<span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span id="iv.iii-Page_9"></span>meet to
have implanted in us the knowledge itself of virtue.” He hath implanted
it; for if he had not done so, whence should we have known what things
are to be done, what left undone? Whence are the laws and the tribunals?
But “God should have imparted not \[merely\] knowledge, but also the
very doing of it \[virtue\].” For what then wouldest thou have to be
rewarded, if the whole were of God?  For tell me, doth God punish in the
same manner thee and the Greek upon committing sin <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) ? Surely not. For up to a certain point
thou hast confidence, viz. that which ariseth from the true knowledge.
What then, if any one should now say that on the score of knowledge thou
and the Greek will be accounted of like desert? Would it not disgust
thee? I think so, indeed. For thou wouldest say that the Greek, having
of his own wherewith to attain knowledge, was not willing. If then the
latter also should say that God ought to have implanted knowledge in us
naturally, wilt thou not laugh him to scorn, and say to him, “But why
didst thou not seek for it? why wast thou not in earnest even as I?” And
thou wilt stand firm with much confidence, and say that it was extreme
folly to blame God for not implanting knowledge by nature. And this thou
wilt say, because thou hast obtained what appertains to knowledge. So
also hadst thou performed what appertains to practice, thou wouldest not
have raised these questions: but thou art tired of virtuous practice,
therefore thou shelterest thyself with these inconsiderate words. But
how could it be at all right to cause that by necessity one should
become good? Then shall we next have the brute beasts contending with us
about virtue, seeing that some of them are more temperate than
ourselves.

<span id="iv.iii-p30"></span>But thou sayest, “I had rather have been
good by necessity, and so forfeited all rewards, than evil by deliberate
choice, to be punished and suffer vengeance.” But it is impossible that
one should ever be good by necessity. If therefore thou knowest not what
ought to be done, shew it, and then we will tell you what is right to
say. But if thou knowest that uncleanness is wicked, wherefore dost thou
not fly from the evil thing?

<span id="iv.iii-p31"></span>“I cannot,” thou sayest. But others who
have done greater things than this will plead against thee, and will
more than prevail to stop thy mouth. For thou, perhaps, though living
with a wife, art not chaste; but another even without a wife keeps his
chastity inviolate. Now what excuse hast thou for not keeping the rule,
while another even leaps beyond the lines <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) that have been drawn to mark it?

<span id="iv.iii-p33"></span>But thou sayest “I am not of this sort in
my bodily frame, or my turn of mind.” That is for want, not of power,
but of will. For thus I prove that all have a certain aptness towards
virtue: That which a man cannot do, neither will he be able to do though
necessity be laid upon him; but, if, necessity being laid upon him, he
is able, he that leaveth it undone, leaveth it undone out of choice. The
kind of thing I mean is this: to fly up and be borne towards heaven,
having a heavy body, is even simply impossible. What then, if a king
should command one to do this, and threaten death, saying, “Those men
who do not fly, I decree that they lose their heads, or be burnt, or
some other such punishment:” would any one obey him?  Surely not. For
nature is not capable of it. But if in the case of chastity this same
thing were done, and he were to lay down laws that the unclean should be
punished, be burnt, be scourged, should suffer the extremity of torture,
would not many obey the law?  “No” thou wilt say: “for there is
appointed, even now, a law forbidding to commit adultery <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) and all do not obey it.” Not because the
fear looses its power, but because the greater part expect to be
unobserved. So that if when they were on the point of committing an
unclean action the legislator and the judge came before them, the fear
would be strong enough to cast out the lust. Nay, were I to apply
another kind of force inferior to this; were I to take the man and
remove him from the beloved person, and shut him up close in chains, he
will be able to bear it, without suffering any great harm. Let us not
say then that such an one is by nature evil: for if a man were by nature
good, he could never at any time become evil; and if he were by nature
evil, he could never be good. But now we see that changes take place
rapidly, and that men quickly shift from this side to the other, and
from that fall back again into this. And these things we may see not in
the Scriptures only, for instance, that publicans have become apostles;
and disciples, traitors; and harlots, chaste; and robbers, men of good
repute; and magicians have worshipped; and ungodly men passed over unto
godliness, both in the New Testament and in the Old; but even every day
a man may see many such things occurring. Now if things were natural,
they could not change. For so we, being by nature susceptible, could
never by any exertions become void <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="iv.iii-Page_10"></span>of feeling. For that which is whatever it is
by nature, can never fall away from such its natural condition. No one,
for example, ever changed from sleeping to not sleeping: no one from a
state of corruption unto incorruption: no one from hunger to the
perpetual absence of that sensation. Wherefore neither are these things
matters of accusation, nor do we reproach ourselves for them; nor ever
did any one, meaning to blame another, say to him, “O thou, corruptible
and subject to passion:” but either adultery or fornication, or
something of that kind, we always lay to the charge of those who are
responsible; and we bring them before judges, who blame and punish, and
in the contrary cases award honors.

<span id="iv.iii-p35"></span>\[11.\] Since then both from our conduct
towards one another, and from others’ conduct to us when judged, and
from the things about which we have written laws, and from the things
wherein we condemn ourselves, though there be no one to accuse us; and
from the instances of our becoming worse through indolence, and better
through fear; and from the cases wherein we see others doing well and
arriving at the height of self-command, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii-p35.1"></span>φιλοσοφίας</span>) it is quite clear that we
also have it in our power to do well: why do we, the most part, deceive
ourselves in vain with heartless pretexts and excuses, bringing not only
no pardon, but even punishment intolerable? When we ought to keep before
our eyes that fearful day, and to give heed to virtue; and after a
little labor, obtain the incorruptible crowns? For these words will be
no defence to us; rather our fellow-servants, and those who have
practised the contrary virtues, will condemn all who continue in sin:
the cruel man will be condemned by the merciful; the evil, by the good;
the fierce, by the gentle; the grudging, by the courteous; the
vain-glorious, by the self-denying; the indolent, by the serious; the
intemperate, by the sober-minded. Thus will God pass judgment upon us,
and will set in their place both companies; on one bestowing praise, on
the other punishment. But God forbid that any of those present should be
among the punished and dishonored, but rather among those who are
crowned and the winners of the kingdom. Which may God grant us all to
obtain through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ;
with Whom unto the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, power, honor, now
and ever, and unto everlasting ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[6:8](1120006.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p6"></span> This seems to mean the grace given in
Baptism once for all.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[6:9](1120006.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p9"></span> \[This is true, but modern criticism
prefers the literal sense of the preposition; *in* *Jesus Christ*, i.e.,
in your fellowship with him. C.\]

<span id="fn_9"></span>[7:10](1120006.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p19"></span> The image here seems to be taken from the
vulgar use, in medicine, of a charm or amulet.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[7:11](1120006.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p20"></span> \[Dr. Field’s text reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii-p20.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii-p20.2"></span>παντλῶν</span>.\]

<span id="fn_11"></span>[8:12](1120006.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p24"></span> Yet in St. [Luke xiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#023.md)<span id="iv.iii-p24.1"></span>. it
is, “*compel* them to come in.” But our Lord is there speaking of the
kingdom of heaven, S. Chrysostom here, of heaven itself. \[A better
answer is that the words denote not physical violence or literal
compulsion but intense moral earnestness.\]

<span id="fn_12"></span>[8:13](1120006.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p26"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii-p26.1"></span>τῆ περιουσία τῆς φιλοσοφιας</span>. Lit. “by
the excess of philosophy.” The term *philosophy* came to be used by the
early Christian writers to denote a contemplative, self-denying life.
The reference in the text is to the so-called “counsels of perfection,”
such as voluntary poverty, voluntary celibacy, etc., which as they
exceed what is enjoined in the Gospel were supposed to establish a
peculiar merit and secure a higher degree of blessedness. This two-fold
standard of moral excellence may be traced back as far as the middle of
the second century. See *Pastor* Hermae *Simil*. v. 3. C.\]

<span id="fn_13"></span>[9:14](1120006.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p29"></span> The meaning seems to be, “Whatever other
sins you commit, you have not the sin of unbelief to answer for; and
would, I suppose, think it hard, if *cæteris paribus* you were counted
as guilty as an unbeliever. Now this your instinctive judgment confutes
any hope you may have that nature and circumstances may excuse you in
any other sin.”

<span id="fn_14"></span>[9:15](1120006.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii-p32.1"></span>Τὰ σκὰμματα</span>. The image is borrowed from
the gymnastic exercise of leaping.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[9:16](1120006.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p34"></span> From the time of Constantine to that of
Justinian it was a capital offence. Gibbon, e. 44. note 197.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily III](1120007.md)
