[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120029)  [Next](1120031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXVI.</span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p2"></span><span id="iv.xxvii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxvii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p3"></span>Now I praise you that ye remember me in
all things, and hold fast the traditions, even as I delivered them to
you.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p4.1"></span>Having</span> completed the discourse
concerning the idol-sacrifices as became him, and having rendered it
most perfect in all respects, he proceeds to another thing, which also
itself was a complaint, but not so great a one. For that which I said
before, this do I also now say, that he doth not set down all the heavy
accusations continuously, but after disposing them in due order, he
inserts among them the lighter matters, mitigating what the readers
would else feel offensive in his discourse on account of his continually
reproving.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="page_149">p. 149</span> <span
id="iv.xxvii-Page_149"></span>Wherefore also he set the most serious of
all last, that relating to the resurrection. But for the present he goes
to another, a lighter thing, saying, “Now I praise you that ye remember
me in all things.” Thus when the offence is admitted, he both accuses
vehemently and threatens: but when it is questioned, he first proves it
and then rebukes. And what was admitted, he aggravates: but what was
likely to be disputed, he shows to be admitted. Their fornication, for
instance, was a thing admitted. Wherefore there was no need to show that
there was an offence; but in that case he proved the magnitude of the
transgression, and conducted his discourse by way of comparison. Again,
their going to law before aliens was an offence, but not so great a one.
Wherefore he considered by the way, and proved it. The matter of the
idol-sacrifices again was questioned. It was however, a most serious
evil. Wherefore he both shows it to be an offence, and amplifies it by
his discourse. But when he doeth this, he not only withdraws them from
the several crimes, but invites them also to their contraries. Thus he
said not only that one must not commit fornication, but likewise that
one ought to exhibit great holiness. Wherefore he added, “Therefore
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit.” (c. [1 Cor.
6.20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020)<span id="iv.xxvii-p5.1"></span>.)
And having said again that one ought not to be wise with the wisdom that
is without, he is not content with this, but bids him also to “become a
fool.” (c. [1 Cor. 3.18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p5.2"></span>.) And where he advises them not to go to law
before them that are without, and to do no wrong; he goeth further, and
takes away even the very going to law, and counsels them not only to do
no wrong, but even to suffer wrong. (c. [1 Cor.
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxvii-p5.3"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxvii-p6"></span>And discoursing concerning the
idol-sacrifices, he said not that one ought to abstain from things
forbidden only, but also from things permitted when offence is given:
and not only not to hurt the brethren, but not even Greeks, nor Jews.
Thus, “give no occasion of stumbling,” saith he, “either to Jews, or to
Greeks, or to the Church of God.” (c. [1 Cor.
10.32](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#032)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p6.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxvii-p7"></span>\[2.\] Having finished therefore all the
discourses concerning all these things, he next proceeds also to another
accusation. And what was this? Their women used both to pray and
prophesy unveiled and with their head bare, (for then women also used to
prophesy;) but the men went so far as to wear long hair as having spent
their time in philosophy <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) , and
covered their heads when praying and prophesying, each of which was a
Grecian custom. Since then he had already admonished them concerning
these things when present, and some perhaps listened to him and others
disobeyed; therefore in his letter also again, he foments the place,
like a physician, by his mode of addressing them, and so corrects the
offence. For that he had heretofore admonished them in person is evident
from what he begins with. Why else, having said nothing of this matter
any where in the Epistle before, but passing on from other accusations,
doth he straightway say, “Now I praise you that ye remember me in all
things, and hold fast the traditions, even as I delivered them to you?”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p9"></span>Thou seest that some obeyed, whom he
praises; and others disobeyed, whom he corrects by what comes
afterwards, saying, “Now if any man seem to be contentious, we have no
such custom.” ([1 Cor. 11.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p9.1"></span>.) For if after some had done well but others
disobeyed, he had included all in his accusation, he would both have
made the one sort bolder, and have caused the others to become more
remiss; whereas now by praising and approving the one, and rebuking the
other, he both refreshes the one more effectually, and causes the other
to shrink before him. For the accusation even by itself was such as
might well wound them; but now that it takes place in contrast with
others who have done well and are praised, it comes with a sharper
sting. However, for the present he begins not with accusation, but with
encomiums and great encomiums, saying, “Now I praise you that ye
remember me in all things.” For such is the character of Paul; though it
be but for small matters he weaves a web of high praise; nor is it for
flattery that he doth so: far from it; how could he so act to whom
neither money was desirable, nor glory, nor any other such thing? but
for their salvation he orders all his proceedings. And this is why he
amplifies the encomium, saying, “Now I praise you that ye remember me in
all things.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p10"></span>All what things? For hitherto his
discourse was only concerning their not wearing long hair and not
covering their heads; but, as I said, he is very bountiful in his
praises, rendering them more forward. Wherefore he saith,

<span id="iv.xxvii-p11"></span>“That ye remember me in all things, and
hold fast the traditions, even as I delivered them to you.” It appears
then that he used at that time to deliver many things also not in
writing, which he shows too in many other places. But at that time he
only delivered them, whereas now he adds an explanation of their reason:
thus both rendering the one sort, the obedient, more steadfast, and
pulling down the others’ pride, who oppose themselves. Further, he doth
not say, “ye have obeyed, whilst others disobeyed,” but without exciting
suspicion, intimates it by his mode of teaching in what follows, where
he saith,

<span id="iv.xxvii-p12"></span><span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span
id="iv.xxvii-Page_150"></span>[1 Cor.
11.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="iv.xxvii-p12.1"></span>.
“But I would have ye know, that the head of every man is Christ; and the
head of every woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p13"></span>This is his account of the reason of the
thing, and he states it to make the weaker more attentive. He indeed
that is faithful, as he ought to be, and steadfast, doth not require any
reason or cause of those things which are commanded him, but is content
with the ordinance <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) alone. But he
that is weaker, when he also learns the cause, then both retains what is
said with more care and obeys with much readiness.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p15"></span>Wherefore neither did he state the cause
until he saw the commandment transgressed. What then is the cause?  “The
head of every man is Christ.” Is He then Head of the Gentile also? In no
wise. For if “we are the Body of Christ, and severally members thereof,”
(c. [1 Cor. 12.27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p15.1"></span>.) and in this way He is our head, He cannot
be the head of them who are not in the Body and rank not among the
members. So that when he says, “of every man,” one must understand it of
the believer. Perceivest thou how every where he appeals to the hearer’s
shame by arguing from on high? Thus both when he was discoursing on
love, and when on humility, and when on alms-giving, it was from thence
that he drew his examples.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p16"></span>\[3.\] “But the head of the woman is the
man; and the head of Christ is God.” Here the heretics rush upon us with
a certain declaration of inferiority, which out of these words they
contrive against the Son. But they stumble against themselves. For if
“the man be the head of the woman,” and the head be of the same
substance with the body, and “the head of Christ is God,” the Son is of
the same substance with the Father. “Nay,” say they, “it is not His
being of another substance which we intend to show from hence, but that
He is under subjection.” What then are we to say to this? In the first
place, when any thing lowly is said of him conjoined as He is with the
Flesh, there is no disparagement of the Godhead in what is said, the
Economy admitting the expression. However, tell me how thou intendest to
prove this from the passage? “Why, as the man governs the wife, saith
he, “so also the Father, Christ.” Therefore also as Christ governs the
man, so likewise the Father, the Son. “For the head of every man,” we
read, “is Christ.” And who could ever admit this? For if the superiority
of the Son compared with us, be the measure of the Father’s compared
with the Son, consider to what meanness thou wilt bring Him. So that we
must not try <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) all things by like
measure in respect of ourselves and of God, though the language used
concerning them be similar; but we must assign to God a certain
appropriate excellency, and so great as belongs to God. For should they
not grant this, many absurdities will follow. As thus; “the head of
Christ is God:” and, “Christ is the head of the man, and he of the
woman.” Therefore if we choose to take the term, “head,” in the like
sense in all the clauses, the Son will be as far removed from the Father
as we are from Him. Nay, and the woman will be as far removed from us as
we are from the Word of God. And what the Son is to the Father, this
both we are to the Son and the woman again to the man. And who will
endure this?

<span id="iv.xxvii-p18"></span>But dost thou understand the term “head”
differently in the case of the man and the woman, from what thou dost in
the case of Christ? Therefore in the case of the Father and the Son,
must we understand it differently also. “How understand it differently?”
saith the objector. According to the occasion <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) . For had Paul meant to speak of rule
and subjection, as thou sayest, he would not have brought forward the
instance of a wife, but rather of a slave and a master. For what if the
wife be under subjection to us? it is as a wife, as free, as equal in
honor. And the Son also, though He did become obedient to the Father, it
was as the Son of God, it was as God. For as the obedience of the Son to
the Father is greater than we find in men towards the authors of their
being, so also His liberty is greater. Since it will not of course be
said that the circumstances of the Son’s relation to the Father are
greater and more intimate than among men, and of the Father’s to the
Son, less. For if we admire the Son that He was obedient so as to come
even unto death, and the death of the cross, and reckon this the great
wonder concerning Him; we ought to admire the Father also, that He begat
such a son, not as a slave under command, but as free, yielding
obedience and giving counsel. For the counsellor is no slave. But again,
when thou hearest of a counsellor, do not understand it as though the
Father were in need, but that the Son hath the same honor with Him that
begat Him. Do not therefore strain the example of the man and the woman
to all particulars.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p20"></span>For with us indeed the woman is
reasonably subjected to the man: since equality of honor causeth
contention. And not for this cause only, but by reason also of the
deceit ([1 Tim. ii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p20.1"></span>.) which happened in the beginning. Wherefore
you see, she was not subjected as soon as she was made; nor, when He
brought her to the man, did either she hear any such thing from <span
id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span id="iv.xxvii-Page_151"></span>God, nor
did the man say any such word to her: he said indeed that she was “bone
of his bone, and flesh of his flesh:” ([Gen. ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023)<span id="iv.xxvii-p20.2"></span>.)
but of rule or subjection he no where made mention unto her. But when
she made an ill use of her privilege and she who had been made a helper
was found to be an ensnarer and ruined all, then she is justly told for
the future, “thy turning shall be to thy husband.” ([Gen. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)<span id="iv.xxvii-p20.3"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxvii-p21"></span>To account for which; it was likely that
this sin would have thrown our race into a state of warfare; (for her
having been made out of him would not have contributed any thing to
peace, when this had happened, nay, rather this very thing would have
made the man even the harsher, that she made as she was out of him
should not have spared even him who was a member of herself:)  wherefore
God, considering the malice of the Devil, raised up the bulwark of this
word and what enmity was likely to arise from his evil device, He took
away by means of this sentence and by the desire implanted in us: thus
pulling down the partition-wall, i.e., the resentment caused by that sin
of hers. But in God and in that undefiled Essence, one must not suppose
any such thing.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p22"></span>Do not therefore apply the examples to
all, since elsewhere also from this source many grievous errors will
occur. For so in the beginning of this very Epistle, he said, ([1 Cor.
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#023)<span id="iv.xxvii-p22.1"></span>.)
“All are yours, and ye are Christ’s, and Christ is God’s.” What then?
Are all in like manner ours, as “we are Christ’s, and Christ is God’s?”
In no wise, but even to the very simple the difference is evident,
although the same expression is used of God, and Christ, and us. And
elsewhere also having called the husband “head of the wife,” he added,
([Ephes. v. 23](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p22.2"></span>.) “Even as Christ is Head and Saviour and
Defender of the Church, so also ought the man to be of his own wife.”
Are we then to understand in like manner the saying in the text, both
this, and all that after this is written to the Ephesians concerning
this subject? Far from it. It is impossible. For although the same words
are spoken of God and of men, they do not have the same force in respect
to God and to men, but in one way those must be understood, and in
another these. Not however on the other hand all things diversely: since
contrariwise they will seem to have been introduced at random and in
vain, we reaping no benefit from them. But as we must not receive all
things alike, so neither must we absolutely reject all.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p23"></span>Now that what I say may become clearer, I
will endeavor to make it manifest in an example. Christ is called “the
Head of the Church.” If I am to take nothing from what is human in the
idea, why, I would know, is the expression used at all? On the other
hand, if I understand all in that way, extreme absurdity will result.
For the head is of like passions with the body and liable to the same
things. What then ought we to let go, and what to accept? We should let
go these particulars which I have mentioned, but accept the notion of a
perfect union, and the first principle; and not even these ideas
absolutely, but here also we must form a notion, as we may by ourselves,
of that which is too high for us and suitable to the Godhead: for both
the union is surer and the beginning more honorable.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p24"></span>Again, thou hearest the word “Son;” do
not thou in this case admit all particulars; yet neither oughtest thou
to reject all: but admitting whatever is meet for God, e.g. that He is
of the same essence, that He is of God; the things which are incongruous
and belong to human weakness, leave thou upon the earth.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p25"></span>Again, God is called “Light.” Shall we
then admit all circumstances which belong to natural light? In no wise.
For this light yields to darkness, and is circumscribed by space, and is
moved by another power, and is overshadowed; none of which it is lawful
even to imagine of That Essence. We will not however reject all things
on this account, but will reap something useful from the example. The
illumination which cometh to us from God, the deliverance from darkness,
this will be what we gather from it.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p26"></span>\[4.\] Thus much in answer to the
heretics: but we must also orderly go over the whole passage. For
perhaps some one might here have doubt also, questioning with himself,
what sort of a crime it was for the woman to be uncovered, or the man
covered?  What sort of crime it is, learn now from hence.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p27"></span>Symbols many and diverse have been given
both to man and woman; to him of rule, to her of subjection: and among
them this also, that she should be covered, while he hath his head bare.
If now these be symbols you see that both err when they disturb the
proper order, and transgress the disposition of God, and their own
proper limits, both the man falling into the woman’s inferiority, and
the woman rising up against the man by her outward habiliments.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p28"></span>For if exchange of garments be not
lawful, so that neither she should be clad with a cloak, nor he with a
mantle or a veil: (“for the woman,” saith He, “shall not wear that which
pertaineth to a man, neither shall a man put on a woman’s garments:”) 
much more is it unseemly for these ([Deut. xxii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#005)<span id="iv.xxvii-p28.1"></span>.)
things to be interchanged. For the former indeed were ordained by men,
even although God afterwards ratified them: but this by nature, I mean
the being covered or uncovered. But when I say Nature, I mean God. For
He it is Who created Nature. When <span id="page_152">p. 152</span>
<span id="iv.xxvii-Page_152"></span>therefore thou overturnest these
boundaries, see how great injuries ensue.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p29"></span>And tell me not this, that the error is
but small. For first, it is great even of itself: being as it is
disobedience. Next, though it were small, it became great because of the
greatness of the things whereof it is a sign. However, that it is a
great matter, is evident from its ministering so effectually to good
order among mankind, the governor and the governed being regularly kept
in their several places by it.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p30"></span> So that he who transgresseth disturbs
all things, and betrays the gifts of God, and casts to the ground the
honor bestowed on him from above; not however the man only, but also the
woman. For to her also it is the greatest of honors to preserve her own
rank; as indeed of disgraces, the behavior of a rebel. Wherefore he laid
it down concerning both, thus saying,

<span id="iv.xxvii-p31"></span>[1 Cor.
11.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004)<span id="iv.xxvii-p31.1"></span>.
“Every man praying or prophesying having his head covered, dishonoreth
his head. But every woman praying or prophesying with her head unveiled
dishonoreth her head.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p32"></span>For there were, as I said, both men who
prophesied and women who had this gift at that time, as the daughters of
Philip, ([Acts xxi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#009)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p32.1"></span>.) as others before them and after them:
concerning whom also the prophet spake of old:  “your sons shall
prophesy, and your daughters shall see visions.” ([Joel
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028), [Acts
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p32.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxvii-p33"></span>Well then: the man he compelleth not to
be always uncovered, but only when he prays. “For every man,” saith he,
“praying or prophesying, having his head covered, dishonoreth his head.”
But the woman he commands to be at all times covered. Wherefore also
having said, “Every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head
unveiled, dishonoreth her head,” he stayed not at this point only, but
also proceeded to say, “for it is one and the same thing as if she were
shaven.” But if to be shaven is always dishonorable, it is plain too
that being uncovered is always a reproach. And not even with this only
was he content, but added again, saying, “The woman ought to have a sign
of authority on her head, because of the angels.” He signifies that not
at the time of prayer only but also continually, she ought to be
covered. But with regard to the man, it is no longer about covering but
about wearing long hair, that he so forms his discourse. To be covered
he then only forbids, when a man is praying; but the wearing long hair
he discourages at all times. Wherefore, as touching the woman, he said,
“But if she be not veiled, let her also be shorn;” so likewise touching
the man, “If he have long hair, it is a dishonor unto him.” He said not,
“if he be covered” but, “if he have long hair.” Wherefore also he said
at the beginning, “Every man praying or prophesying, having any thing on
his head, dishonoreth his head.” He said not, “covered,” but “having any
thing on his head;” signifying that even though he pray with the head
bare, yet if he have long hair, he is like to one covered. “For the
hair,” saith he, “is given for a covering.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p34"></span>[1 Cor.
11.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#006)<span id="iv.xxvii-p34.1"></span>.
“But if a woman is not veiled, let her also be shorn: but if it be a
shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be veiled.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p35"></span>Thus, in the beginning he simply requires
that the head be not bare: but as he proceeds he intimates both the
continuance of the rule, saying, “for it is one and the same thing as if
she were shaven,” and the keeping of it with all care and diligence. For
he said not merely covered, but “covered over <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) ,” meaning that she be carefully
wrapped up on every side. And by reducing it to an absurdity, he appeals
to their shame, saying by way of severe reprimand, “but if she be not
covered, let her also be shorn.” As if he had said, “If thou cast away
the covering appointed by the law of God, cast away likewise that
appointed by nature.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p37"></span>But if any say, “Nay, how can this be a
shame to the woman, if she mount up to the glory of the man?” we might
make this answer; “She doth not mount up, but rather falls from her own
proper honor.” Since not to abide within our own limits and the laws
ordained of God, but to go beyond, is not an addition but a diminuation.
For as he that desireth other men’s goods and seizeth what is not his
own, hath not gained any thing more, but is diminished, having lost even
that which he had, (which kind of thing also happened in paradise:)  so
likewise the woman acquireth not the man’s dignity, but loseth even the
woman’s decency which she had. And not from hence only is her shame and
reproach, but also on account of her covetousness.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p38"></span>Having taken then what was confessedly
shameful, and having said, “but if it be a shame for a woman to be shorn
or shaven,” he states in what follows his own conclusion, saying, “let
her be covered.” And he said not, “let her have long hair,” but, “let
her be covered,” ordaining both these to be one, and establishing them
both ways, from what was customary and from their contraries: in that he
both affirms the covering and the hair to be one, and also that she
again who is shaven is the same with her whose head is bare. “For it is
one and the same thing,” saith he, “as if she were shaven.” But if any
say, “And how is it one, if this woman have the covering of nature, but
the other who is shaven have not even this?” we answer, that as far as
her will goes, she threw <span id="page_153">p. 153</span> <span
id="iv.xxvii-Page_153"></span>that off likewise by having the head bare.
And if it be not bare of tresses, that is nature’s doing, not her own.
So that as she who is shaven hath her head bare, so this woman in like
manner. For this cause He left it to nature to provide her with a
covering, that even of it she might learn this lesson and veil herself.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p39"></span>Then he states also a cause, as one
discoursing with those who are free: a thing which in many places I have
remarked. What then is the cause?

<span id="iv.xxvii-p40"></span>[1 Cor.
11.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007)<span id="iv.xxvii-p40.1"></span>.
“For a man indeed ought not to have his head veiled, forasmuch as he is
the image and glory of God.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p41"></span>This is again another cause. “Not only,”
so he speaks, “because he hath Christ to be His Head ought he not to
cover the head, but because also he rules over the woman.” For the ruler
when he comes before the king ought to have the symbol of his rule. As
therefore no ruler without military girdle and cloak, would venture to
appear before him that hath the diadem:  so neither do thou without the
symbols of thy rule, (one of which is the not being covered,) pray
before God, lest thou insult both thyself and Him that hath honored
thee.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p42"></span>And the same thing likewise one may say
regarding the woman. For to her also is it a reproach, the not having
the symbols of her subjection. “But the woman is the glory of the man.”
Therefore the rule of the man is natural.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p43"></span>\[5.\] Then, having affirmed his point,
he states again other reasons and causes also, leading thee to the first
creation, and saying thus:

<span id="iv.xxvii-p44"></span>[1 Cor.
11.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxvii-p44.1"></span>.
“For the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p45"></span>But if to be of any one, is a glory to
him of whom one is, much more the being an image of him.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p46"></span>[1 Cor.
11.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#009)<span id="iv.xxvii-p46.1"></span>.
“For neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the
man.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p47"></span>This is again a second superiority, nay,
rather also a third, and a fourth, the first being, that Christ is the
head of us, and we of the woman; a second, that we are the glory of God,
but the woman of us; a third, that we are not of the woman, but she of
us; a fourth, that we are not for her, but she for us.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p48"></span>[1 Cor.
11.10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p48.1"></span>. “For this cause ought the woman to have a
sign of authority on her head.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p49"></span>“For this cause:” what cause, tell me? 
“For all these which have been mentioned,” saith he; or rather not for
these only, but also “because of the angels.” “For although thou despise
thine husband,” saith he, “yet reverence the angels.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p50"></span>It follows that being covered is a mark
of subjection and authority. For it induces her to look down and be
ashamed and preserve entire her proper virtue. For the virtue and honor
of the governed is to abide in his obedience.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p51"></span>Again: the man is not compelled to do
this; for he is the image of his Lord: but the woman is; and that
reasonably. Consider then the excess of the transgression when being
honored with so high a prerogative, thou puttest thyself to shame,
seizing the woman’s dress. And thou doest the same as if having received
a diadem, thou shouldest cast the diadem from thy head, and instead of
it take a slave’s garment.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p52"></span>[1 Cor.
11.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#011)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p52.1"></span>. “Nevertheless, neither is the man without
the woman, nor the woman without the man, in the Lord.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p53"></span>Thus, because he had given great
superiority to the man, having said that the woman is of him and for him
and under him; that he might neither lift up the men more than was due
nor depress the women, see how he brings in the correction, saying,
“Howbeit neither is the man without the woman, nor the woman without the
man, in the Lord.” “Examine not, I pray,” saith he, “the first things
only, and that creation. Since if thou enquire into what comes after,
each one of the two is the cause of the other; or rather not even thus
each of the other, but God of all.” Wherefore he saith, “neither is the
man without the woman, nor the woman without the man, in the Lord.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p54"></span>[1 Cor.
11.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#012)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p54.1"></span>. “For as the woman is of the man, so is the
man also by the woman.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p55"></span>He said not, “of the woman,” but he
repeats the expression, (from [1 Cor.
11.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p55.1"></span>.) “of the man.” For still this particular
prerogative remains entire with the man. Yet are not these excellencies
the property of the man, but of God. Wherefore also he adds, “but all
things of God.” If therefore all things belong to God, and he commands
these things, do thou obey and gainsay not.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p56"></span>[1 Cor.
11.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#013)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p56.1"></span>. “Judge ye in yourselves: is it seemly that
a woman pray unto God veiled?” Again he places them as judges of the
things said, which also he did respecting the idol-sacrifices. For as
there he saith, “judge ye what I say:” (c. [1 Cor.
10.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#015)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p56.2"></span>.) so here, “judge in yourselves:” and he
hints something more awful here. For he says that the affront here
passes on unto God: although thus indeed he doth not express himself,
but in something of a milder and more enigmatical form of speech: “is it
seemly that a woman pray unto God unveiled?”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p57"></span>[1 Cor.
11.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p57.1"></span>. “Doth not even nature itself teach you,
that if a man have long hair, it is a dishonor unto him?”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p58"></span>[1 Cor.
11.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#015)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p58.1"></span>. “But if a woman have long hair, it is a
glory to her; for her hair is given her for a covering.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p59"></span>His constant practice of stating commonly
<span id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span
id="iv.xxvii-Page_154"></span>received reasons he adopts also in this
place, betaking himself to the common custom, and greatly abashing those
who waited to be taught these things from him, which even from men’s
ordinary practice they might have learned. For such things are not
unknown even to Barbarians: and see how he every where deals in piercing
expressions: “every man praying having his head covered dishonoreth his
head;” and again, “but if it be a shame for a woman to be shorn or
shaven, let her be veiled:” and here again, “if a man have long hair, it
is a shame unto him; but if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to
her, for her hair is given her for a covering.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p60"></span>“And if it be given her for a covering,”
say you, “wherefore need she add another covering?” That not nature
only, but also her own will may have part in her acknowledgment of
subjection. For that thou oughtest to be covered nature herself by
anticipation enacted a law. Add now, I pray, thine own part also, that
thou mayest not seem to subvert the very laws of nature; a proof of most
insolent rashness <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) , to buffet
not only with us, but with nature also. This is why God accusing the
Jews said, ([Ezek. 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#022)<span id="iv.xxvii-p61.3"></span>.)
“Thou hast slain thy sons and thy daughters: this is beyond all thy
abominations.” <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138)

<span id="iv.xxvii-p63"></span>And again, Paul rebuking the unclean
among the Romans thus aggravates the accusation, saying, that their
usage was not only against the law of God, but even against nature. “For
they changed the natural use into that which is against nature.” ([Rom.
i. 26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p63.1"></span>.) For this cause then here also he employs
this argument signifying this very thing, both that he is not enacting
any strange law and that among Gentiles their inventions would all be
reckoned as a kind of novelty against nature. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139)   So also Christ, implying the same,
said, “Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye also so
them;” showing that He is not introducing any thing new.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p65"></span>[1 Cor.
11.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p65.1"></span>. “But if any man seems to be contentious, we
have no such custom, neither the Churches of God.”

<span id="iv.xxvii-p66"></span>It is then contentiousness to oppose
these things, and not any exercise of reason. Notwithstanding, even thus
it is a measured sort of rebuke which he adopts, to fill them the more
with self-reproach; which in truth rendered his saying the more severe.
“For we,” saith he, “have no such custom,” so as to contend and to
strive and to oppose ourselves. And he stopped not even here, but also
added, “neither the Churches of God;” signifying that they resist and
oppose themselves to the whole world by not yielding. However, even if
the Corinthians were then contentious, yet now the whole world hath both
received and kept this law. So great is the power of the Crucified.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p67"></span>\[6.\] But I fear lest having assumed the
dress, yet in their deeds some of our women should be found immodest and
in other ways uncovered. For therefore also writing to Timothy Paul was
not content with these things, but added others, saying, “that they
adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety;
not with braided hair, or gold.” ([1 Tim. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009)<span id="iv.xxvii-p67.1"></span>.)
For if one ought not to have the head bare, but everywhere to carry
about the token of authority, much more is it becoming to exhibit the
same in our deeds. Thus at any rate the former women also used both to
call their husbands lords, ([1 Pet. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#006)<span id="iv.xxvii-p67.2"></span>.)
and to yield the precedence to them. “Because they for their part,” you
say, “used to love their own wives.” I know that as well as you: I am
not ignorant of it. But when we are exhorting thee concerning thine own
duties, let not theirs take all thine attention. For so, when we exhort
children to be obedient to parents, saying, that it is written, “honor
thy father and thy mother,” they reply to us, “mention also what
follows, ‘and ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath,’” ([Eph.
vi. 1-4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001)<span
id="iv.xxvii-p67.3"></span>.) And servants when we tell them that it is
written that they should “obey their masters, and not serve with
eye-service,” they also again demand of us what follows, bidding us also
give the same advice to masters. For Paul bade them also, they saw, “to
forbear threatening.” But let us not do thus nor enquire into the things
enjoined on others, when we are charged with regard to our own: for
neither will thy obtaining a partner in the charges free thee from the
blame: but look to one thing only, how thou mayest rid thyself of those
charges which lie against thyself. Since Adam also laid the blame on the
woman, and she again on the serpent, but this did in no wise deliver
them. Do not thou, therefore, for thy part, say this to me now, but be
careful with all consideration to render what thou owest to thy husband:
since also when I am discoursing with thy husband, advising him to love
and cherish thee, I suffer him not to bring forward the law that is
appointed for the woman, but I require of him that which is written for
himself. And do thou therefore busy thyself with those things only which
belong to thee, and show thyself tractable to thy consort. And
accordingly if it be really for God’s sake that thou obeyest thy
husband, tell me not of the things which ought to be done by him, but
for what things thou hast been made responsible by the lawgiver, those
perform with exactness. For this is especially to obey God, not to
transgress the law <span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span
id="iv.xxvii-Page_155"></span>even when suffering things contrary to it.
And by the same rule, he that being beloved loves, is not reckoned to do
any great thing. But he that waits upon a person who hateth him, this
above all is the man to receive a crown. In the same manner then do thou
also reckon that if thy husband give thee disgust, and thou endure it,
thou shalt receive a glorious crown: but if he be gentle and mild, what
will there be for God to reward in thee? And these things I say, not
bidding the husbands be harsh; but persuading the wives to bear even
with harshness in their husbands. Since when each is careful to fulfil
his own duty, his neighbor’s part also will quickly follow: as when the
wife is prepared to bear even with rough behavior in the husband, and
the husband refrains from abusing her in her angry mood; then all is a
calm and a harbor free from waves.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p68"></span>\[7.\] So also was it with those of old
time. Each was employed in fulfilling his own duty, not in exacting that
of his neighbor. Thus, if you mark it, Abraham took his brother’s son:
his wife found no fault with him. He commanded her to travel a long
journey; she spake not even against this but followed. Again, after
those many miseries and labors and toils having become lord of all, he
yielded the precedency to Lot. And so far from Sarah being offended at
this, she did not even open her mouth, nor uttered any such thing as
many of the women of these days utter, when they see their own husbands
coming off inferior in such allotments, and especially in dealing with
inferiors; reproaching them, and calling them fools and senseless and
unmanly and traitors and stupid. But no such thing did she say or think,
but was pleased with all things that were done by him.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p69"></span>And another thing, and that a greater:
after that Lot had the choice put in his power, and had thrown the
inferior part upon his uncle, a great danger fell upon him.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p70"></span>Whereof the patriarch hearing, armed all
his people, and set himself against the whole army of the Persians with
his own domestics only, and not even then did she detain him, nor say,
as was likely, “O man, whither goest thou, thrusting thyself down
precipices, and exposing thyself to so great hazards; for one who
wronged thee and seized on all that was thine, shedding thy blood? Yea,
and even if thou make light of thyself, yet have pity on me which have
left house and country and friends and kindred, and have followed thee
in so long a pilgrimage; and involve me not in widowhood, and in the
miseries of widowhood.” None of these things she said: she thought not
of them but bore all in silence.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p71"></span>After this, her womb continuing barren,
she herself suffers not the grief of women nor laments: but he
complains, though not to his wife, but to God. And see how each
preserves his own appropriate part: for he neither despised Sarah as
childless, nor reproached her with any such thing: and she again was
anxious to devise some consolation to him for her childlessness by means
of the handmaid. For these things had not yet been forbidden then as
now. For now neither is it lawful for women to indulge their husbands in
such things, nor for the men, with or without the wife’s knowledge, to
form such connexions, even though the grief of their childlessness
should infinitely harass them: since they also shall hear the sentence,
“their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched.” For
now it is not permitted, but then it had not been forbidden. Wherefore
both his wife commanded this, and he obeyed, yet not even thus for
pleasure’s sake. But “behold,” it will be said, “how he cast Hagar out
again at her bidding.” Well, this is what I want to point out, that both
he obeyed her in all things, and she him. But do not thou give heed to
these things only, but examine, thou who urgest this plea, into what had
gone before also, Hagar’s insulting her, her boasting herself against
her mistress; than which what can be more vexatious to a free and
honorable woman?

<span id="iv.xxvii-p72"></span>\[8.\] Let not then the wife tarry for
the virtue of the husband and then show her own, for this is nothing
great; nor, on the other hand, the husband, for the obedience of the
wife and then exercise self-command; for neither would this any more be
his own well-doing; but let each, as I said, furnish his own share
first. For if to the Gentiles smiting us on the right, we must turn the
other cheek; much more ought one to bear with harsh behavior in a
husband.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p73"></span>And I say not this for a wife to be
beaten; far from it: for this is the extremest affront, not to her that
is beaten, but to him who beateth. But even if by some misfortune thou
have such a yokefellow allotted thee, take it not ill, O woman,
considering the reward which is laid up for such things and their praise
too in this present life. And to you husbands also this I say: make it a
rule that there can be no such offence as to bring you under the
necessity of striking a wife. And why say I a wife? since not even upon
his handmaiden could a free man endure to inflict blows and lay violent
hands. But if the shame be great for a man to beat a maidservant, much
more to stretch forth the right hand against her that is free. And this
one might see even from heathen legislatures who no longer compel her
that hath been so treated to live with him that beat her, as being
unworthy of her fellowship. For surely it comes of extreme lawlessness
when thy partner <span id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span
id="iv.xxvii-Page_156"></span>of life, she who in the most intimate
relations and in the highest degree, is united with thee; when she, like
a base slave, is dishonored by thee. Wherefore also such a man, if
indeed one must call him a man and not rather a wild beast, I should
say, was like a parricide and a murderer of his mother. For if for a
wife’s sake we were commanded to leave even father and mother, not
wronging them but fulfilling a divine law; and a law so grateful to our
parents themselves that even they, the very persons whom we are leaving,
are thankful, and bring it about with great eagerness; what but extreme
frenzy can it be to insult her for whose sake God bade us leave even our
parents?

<span id="iv.xxvii-p74"></span>But we may well ask, Is it only madness?
There is the shame too: I would fain know who can endure it. And what
description can set it before us; when shrieks and wailings are borne
along the alleys, and there is a running to the house of him that is so
disgracing himself, both of the neighbors and the passers by, as though
some wild beast were ravaging within?  Better were it that the earth
should gape asunder for one so frantic, than that he should be seen at
all in the forum after it.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p75"></span>“But the woman is insolent,” saith he.
Consider nevertheless that she is a woman, the weaker vessel, whereas
thou art a man. For therefore wert thou ordained <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) to be ruler; and wert assigned to her
in place of a head, that thou mightest bear with the weakness of her
that is set under thee. Make then thy rule glorious. And glorious it
will be when the subject of it meets with no dishonor from thee. And as
the monarch will appear so much the more dignified, as he manifests more
dignity in the officer under him; but if he dishonor and depreciate the
greatness of that rank, he is indirectly cutting off no small portion of
his own glory likewise: so also thou dishonor her who governs next to
thyself, wilt in no common degree mar the honor of thy governance.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p77"></span>Considering therefore all these things,
command thyself: and withal think also of that evening on which the
father having called thee, delivered thee his daughter as a kind of
deposit, and having separated her from all, from her mother, from
himself, from the family, intrusted her entire guardianship to thy right
hand. Consider that (under God) through her thou hast children and hast
become a father, and be thou also on that account gentle towards her.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p78"></span>Seest thou not the husbandmen, how the
earth which hath once received the seed, they tend with all various
methods of culture, though it have ten thousand disadvantages; e.g.,
though it be an unkindly soil or bear ill weeds, or though it be vexed
with excessive rain through the nature of its situation? This also do
thou. For thus shalt thou be first to enjoy both the fruit and the calm.
Since thy wife is to thee both a harbor, and a potent healing charm to
rejoice thy heart. Well then: if thou shalt free thy harbor from winds
and waves, thou shalt enjoy much tranquility on thy return from the
market-place: but if thou fill it with clamor and tumult, thou dost but
prepare for thyself a more grievous shipwreck.  In order then to prevent
this, let what I advise be done: When any thing uncomfortable happens in
the household, if she be in the wrong console her and do not aggravate
the discomfort. For even if thou shouldest lose all, nothing is more
grievous than to have a wife without good-will sharing thine abode. And
whatever offence thou canst mention, thou wilt tell me of nothing so
very painful as being at strife with her. So that if it were only for
such reasons as these, let her love be more precious than all things.
For if one another’s burdens are to be borne, much more our own wife’s.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p79"></span>Though she be poor do not upbraid her: 
though she be foolish, do not trample on her, but train her rather:
because she is a member of thee, and ye are become one flesh.  “But she
is trifling and drunken and passionate.” Thou oughtest then to grieve
over these things, not to be angry; and to beseech God, and exhort her
and give her advice, and do every thing to remove the evil. But if thou
strike her thou dost aggravate the disease: for fierceness is removed by
moderation, not by rival fierceness. With these things bear in mind also
the reward from God: that when it is permitted thee to cut her off, and
thou doest not so for the fear of God, but bearest with so great
defects, fearing the law appointed in such matters which forbids to put
away a wife whatsoever disease she may have: thou shalt receive an
unspeakable reward. Yea, and before the reward thou shalt be a very
great gainer, both rendering her more obedient and becoming thyself more
gentle thereby. It is said, for instance, that one of the heathen
philosophers <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) , who had a bad
wife, a trifler and a brawler, when asked, “Why, having such an one, he
endured her;” made reply, “That he might have in his house a school and
training-place of philosophy. For I shall be to all the rest meeker,”
saith he, “being here disciplined every day.” Did you utter a great
shout? Why, I at this moment am greatly mourning, when heathens prove
better lovers of wisdom than we; we who are commanded to imitate angels,
nay rather who are commanded to follow God Himself in respect of
gentleness.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p81"></span>But to proceed: it is said that for this
reason the philosopher having a bad wife, cast her not <span
id="page_157">p. 157</span> <span id="iv.xxvii-Page_157"></span>out; and
some say that this very thing was the reason of his marrying her. But I,
because many men have dispositions not exactly reasonable, advise that
at first they do all they can, and be careful that they take a suitable
partner and one full of all virtue. Should it happen, however, that they
miss their end, and she whom they have brought into the house prove no
good or tolerable bride, then I would have them at any rate try to be
like this philosopher, and train her in every way, and consider nothing
more important than this. Since neither will a merchant, until he have
made a compact with his partner capable of procuring peace, launch the
vessel into the deep, nor apply himself to the rest of the transaction.
And let us then use every effort that she who is partner with us in the
business of life and in this our vessel, may be kept in all peace
within. For thus shall our other affairs too be all in calm, and with
tranquility shall we run our course through the ocean of the present
life. Compared with this, let house, and slaves, and money, and lands,
and the business itself of the state, be less in our account. And let it
be more valuable than all in our eyes that she who with us sits at the
oars should not be in mutiny and disunion with us. For so shall our
other matters proceed with a favoring tide, and in spiritual things also
we shall find ourselves much the freer from hindrance, drawing this yoke
with one accord; and having done all things well, we shall obtain the
blessings laid up in store; unto which may we all attain, through the
grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, with
the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, and honor, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[149:133](1120030.htm#fr_132) <span
id="iv.xxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p8"></span> To let the hair and beard grow was a
token of devotion to any study; as Poetry, Hor. *A. P.* 297; Philosophy,
as it is told of Julian the Apostate that it was part of his affectation
to let his hair and beard grow.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[150:134](1120030.htm#fr_133) <span
id="iv.xxvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p14.1"></span>τῇ παραδόσει</span>.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[150:135](1120030.htm#fr_134) <span
id="iv.xxvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p17.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p17.2"></span>ξεταστέον</span>.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[150:136](1120030.htm#fr_135) <span
id="iv.xxvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p19.1"></span>τὸ αἴτιον</span>.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[152:137](1120030.htm#fr_136) <span
id="iv.xxvii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p36.1"></span>οὐδὲ γὰρ καλύπτεσθαι, ἀλλα
κατακαλύπτεσθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[154:138](1120030.htm#fr_137) <span
id="iv.xxvii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p61"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p61.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p61.2"></span>ταμότητος</span>.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[154:139](1120030.htm#fr_138) <span
id="iv.xxvii-p61.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p62.1"></span>βδελύγματα</span>. rec. text. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxvii-p62.2"></span>πορνείαν</span>.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[154:140](1120030.htm#fr_139) <span
id="iv.xxvii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p64.1"></span>τὰ τῆς καινοτομὶας ἃπαντα τῆς παρὰ
φύσιν</span>. Perhaps the text is mutilated.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[156:141](1120030.htm#fr_140) <span
id="iv.xxvii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p76.1"></span>ἓ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxvii-p76.2"></span>χειροτονήθης</span>.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[156:142](1120030.htm#fr_141) <span
id="iv.xxvii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p80"></span> Socrates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXVII](1120031)
