[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120077)  [Next](1120079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxix"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="v.xxix-p1.1"></span>Homily XXIX.</span>

<span id="v.xxix-p2"></span><span id="v.xxix-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.xxix-p2.2"></span>[2 Cor. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#001)<span id="v.xxix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p3"></span>This is the third time I am coming to you.
At the mouth of two witnesses or three shall every word be established.

<span id="v.xxix-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.xxix-p4.1"></span>The</span> wisdom <span
id="fr_1028"></span>[1029](#fn_1028) of Paul and his much tender
affection, one may observe in many other circumstances, but especially
in this, his being so abundant and vehement in his admonitions, but so
tardy and procrastinating in his punishments. For he did not chastise
them immediately on their sinning, but warned them once and again; and
not even so, upon their paying no attention, does he exact punishment,
but warns again, saying, “This is the third time I am coming to you;”
and ‘before I come I write again.’ Then, that his procrastinating may
not produce indifference, <span id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029) see
how he corrects this result also, by threatening continually and holding
the blow suspended over them, and saying, “If I come again I will not
spare;” and “lest when I come again I should mourn for many.” These
things, then, he doeth and speaketh, in this too imitating the Lord of
all: because that God also threateneth indeed continually and warneth
often, but not often chastiseth and punisheth. And so in truth also doth
Paul, and therefore he said also before, “To spare you I came not as yet
to Corinth.” What is, “to spare you?” Lest finding you to have sinned
and to continue unamended, I should visit with chastisement and
punishment. And here, “This is the third time I am coming to you. At the
mouth of two witnesses or three shall every word be established.” He
joins the unwritten to the written, as he has done also in another
place, saying, “He that is joined to an harlot is one body; for the
twain,” saith He, “shall become one flesh.” ([1 Cor. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#016)<span id="v.xxix-p6.2"></span>.)
Howbeit, this was spoken of lawful marriage; but he diverted its
application <span id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030) unto this
thing <span id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031) conveniently, so as to
terrify them the more. And so he doth here also, setting his comings and
his warnings in the place of witnesses. And what he says is <span
id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span id="v.xxix-Page_412"></span>this: ‘I
spoke once and again when I was with you; I speak also now by letter.
And if indeed ye attend to me, what I desired is accomplished; but if ye
pay no attention, it is necessary henceforth to stop speaking, and to
inflict the punishment.’ Wherefore he says,

<span id="v.xxix-p9"></span>[2 Cor.
13.2](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#002)<span id="v.xxix-p9.1"></span>. “I
have said beforehand, and I do say beforehand when I was present the
second time; so now being absent I write to them that sinned heretofore
and to all the rest, that if I come again, I will not spare.”

<span id="v.xxix-p10"></span>‘For if at the mouth of two witnesses or
three every word shall be established, and I have come twice and spoken,
and speak now also by this Epistle; it follows, I must after this keep
my word. <span id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032)   For think not, I
pray you, that my writing is of less account than my coming; for as I
spoke when present, so now I write also when absent.’ Seest thou his
fraternal solicitude? Seest thou forethought becoming a teacher? He
neither kept silence nor punished, but he both foretells often, and
continues ever threatening, and puts off the punishment, and if they
should continue unamended, then he threatens to bring it to the proof.
‘But what didst thou tell them before when present, and when absent
writest?’ “That if I come again, I will not spare.” Having showed before
that he is unable to do this unless he is compelled, and having called
the thing a mourning, and a humbling; (for he saith, “lest my God should
humble me before you, and I should mourn for them that have sinned
heretofore, and not repented;—[2 Cor.
12.21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021)<span id="v.xxix-p11.3"></span>.)
and having made his excuse unto them, namely, that he had told them
before, once and twice and thrice, and that he does and contrives all he
can so as to hold back the punishment, and by the fear of his words to
make them better, he then used this unpleasing and terrifying
expression, “If I come again, I will not spare.” He did not say, ‘I will
avenge and punish and exact satisfaction:’ but again expresses even
punishment itself in paternal language; showing his tender affection,
and his heart to be grieved along with them; because that he always to
“spare” them put off. Then that they may not think now also that there
will be again a putting off, and merely a threat in words, therefore he
both said before, “At the mouth of two witnesses or three shall every
word be established;” and \[now\], “If I come again, I will not spare.”
Now what he means is this: ‘I will no longer put off, if (which God
forbid) I find you unamended; but will certainly visit it, and make good
what I have said.’

<span id="v.xxix-p12"></span>\[2.\] Then with much anger and vehement
indignation against those who make a mock of him as weak, and ridicule
his presence, and say, “his presence is weak, and his speech of no
account;” ([2 Cor. 10.10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010)<span
id="v.xxix-p12.1"></span>.) aiming his efforts <span
id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033) at these men, he says,

<span id="v.xxix-p14"></span>[2 Cor.
13.3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003)<span id="v.xxix-p14.1"></span>.
“Seeing that ye seek a proof of Christ that speaketh in me.”

<span id="v.xxix-p15"></span>For he said this, dealing at once a blow at
these, and at the same time lashing those <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034) also. Now what he means is this;
‘Since ye are desirous of proving whether Christ dwelleth in me, and
call me to an account, and on this score make a mock of me as mean and
despicable, as if I were destitute of that Power; ye shall know that we
are not destitute, if ye give us occasion, which God forbid.’ What then?
tell me. Dost thou therefore punish, because they seek a proof? ‘No,’ he
says; for had he sought this, he would have punished them at the first
on their sinning, and would not have put off. But that he does not seek
this, he has shown more clearly as he proceeds, saying, “Now I pray that
ye do no evil, not that we may appear approved, but that ye may be
approved, though we be as reprobates.” ([2 Cor.
13.7](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#007)<span id="v.xxix-p16.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.xxix-p17"></span>He doth not employ those words then as
assigning a reason, <span id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035) but
rather in indignation, rather as attacking those that despise him.
‘For,’ he says, ‘I have no desire indeed to give you such a proof, but
if you yourselves should furnish cause and should choose to challenge
me, ye shall know by very deeds.’ And observe how grievous he makes what
he says. For he said not, ‘Since ye seek a proof of me,’ but “of Christ
that speakest in me, showing that it was against Him they sinned.” And
he did not say merely, ‘dwelling in me,’ but “speaking in me,” showing
that his words are spiritual. But if he doth not display His power nor
punish, (for thenceforward the Apostle transferred what he said from
himself to Christ, thus making his threat more fearful,) it is not from
weakness; for He can do it: but from long suffering. Let none then think
His forbearance to be weakness. For why marvellest thou that He doth not
now proceed against sinners, nor in his forbearance and long suffering
exacts satisfaction, seeing that He endured even to be crucified, and
though suffering such things punished not? Wherefore also he added,

<span id="v.xxix-p19"></span>[2 Cor.
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span id="v.xxix-p19.1"></span>.
“Who to you-ward is not weak, but is mighty in you. For though He was
crucified through weakness, yet He liveth through the Power of God.”

<span id="v.xxix-p20"></span>These words have much obscurity and give
disturbance to the weaker sort. Wherefore it is necessary to unfold them
more clearly, and to explain the signification of the expression as to
which the obscurity exists, that no one may be offended, even of the
simpler sort. <span id="page_413">p. 413</span> <span
id="v.xxix-Page_413"></span>What then, at all, is that which is here
said, and what the term “weakness” designates, and in what signification
it is used, it is necessary to learn. For the term is indeed one, but it
has many meanings. For bodily sickness is termed ‘weakness:’ whence it
is even said in the Gospel, “Behold, he whom Thou lovest is weak,” <span
id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036) ([John
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#004)<span id="v.xxix-p21.3"></span>.)
concerning Lazarus; and He Himself said, “This weakness is not unto
death;” and Paul, speaking of Epaphras, “For indeed he was weak nigh
unto death, but God had mercy on him;” ([Philip. ii.
57](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#057)<span id="v.xxix-p21.4"></span>.)
and of Timothy, “Use a little wine for thy stomach’s sake and thine
often weaknesses.” ([1 Tim. v. 23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)<span
id="v.xxix-p21.5"></span>.) For all these denote bodily sickness. Again,
the not being established firmly in the faith is called ‘weakness;’ the
not being perfect and complete. And denoting this Paul said, “Him that
is weak in the faith receive ye but not to doubtful disputations:”
([Rom. 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002)<span id="v.xxix-p21.6"></span>.)
and again, “One believeth that he may eat all things; another, who is
weak, eateth herbs,” denoting him who is weak in the faith. Here then
are two significations of the term ‘weakness;’ there is yet a third
thing which is called ‘weakness.’ What then is this?  Persecutions,
plottings, insults, trials, assaults. And denoting this Paul said, “For
this thing I besought the Lord thrice. And He said unto me, My grace is
sufficient for thee: for My power is made perfect in weakness.” ([2 Cor.
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="v.xxix-p21.7"></span>.)
What is “in weakness?” In persecutions, in dangers, in trials, in
plottings, in deaths. And denoting this he said, Wherefore, I take
pleasure in weakness. <span id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037)   Then
showing what kind of weakness he means, he spake not of fever, nor of
doubt about the faith; but what? “in injuries, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, that the power of Christ may
rest upon me. For when I am weak, then am I strong.” ([2 Cor.
12.10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010)<span id="v.xxix-p22.1"></span>.)
That is to say ‘when I am persecuted, when I am driven up and down, when
I am plotted against, then am I strong, then the rather I prevail over,
and get the better of them that plot against me, because that grace
resteth upon <span id="fr_1038"></span>[1039](#fn_1038) me, more
largely. It is then in this third sense that Paul useth “weakness;” and
this is what he means by it; aiming again, as I said also before, at
that point, his seeming to them to be mean and contemptible. For indeed
he had no desire to boast, nor to seem to be what he really was, nor yet
to display the power which he possessed of punishing and revenging;
whence also he was accounted to be mean. When then as so accounting they
were going on in great indifference and insensibility, and repented not
of their sins, he seizes a favorable opportunity, discourses with much
vigor upon these points also, and shows that it was not from weakness he
did nothing, but from long-suffering.

<span id="v.xxix-p24"></span>\[3.\] Then, as I said, by transferring the
argument from himself to Christ, he enhances their fear, he increases
his threat. And what he says is this; ‘for even supposing I should do
something and chastise and take vengeance on the guilty ones, is it I
that chastise and take vengeance? it is He that dwelleth in me, Christ
Himself. But if ye do not believe this, but are desirous of receiving a
proof by deeds of Him that dwelleth in me, ye shall know presently; “For
he is not weak to you-ward, but is even powerful.”’ And wherefore added
he “to you-ward,” seeing He is mighty everywhere? for should He be
minded to punish unbelievers, He is able; or demons, or anything
whatsoever. What then is the import of the addition? The expression is
either as shaming them exceedingly by remembrance of the proofs they
have already received; or else as declaring this, that meanwhile He
shows His power in you who ought to be corrected. As he said also in
another place, “For what have I to do to judge them also that are
without?” ([1 Cor. v. 12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012)<span
id="v.xxix-p24.1"></span>.) ‘For those that are without,’ he says, ‘He
will then call to account in the day of judgment, but you even now, so
as to rescue you from that punishment.’ But nevertheless even this
instance of his solicitude, although arising from tender affection,
observe how he combines with fear and much anger, saying, “Who to
you-ward is not weak, but is powerful in you.”

<span id="v.xxix-p25"></span>[2 Cor.
13.4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span id="v.xxix-p25.1"></span>.
“For though He was crucified through weakness, yet He liveth through the
Power of God.”

<span id="v.xxix-p26"></span>What is, “though He was crucified through
weakness?” ‘For though He chose,’ he says, ‘to endure a thing which
seems to carry a notion of weakness, still this in no way breaks in
upon <span id="fr_1039"></span>[1040](#fn_1039) His Power. That still
remains invincible, and that thing which seemeth to be of weakness, hath
nothing harmed it, nay this very thing itself shows His Power most of
all, in that He endured even such a thing, and yet His Power was not
mutilated.’ <span id="fr_1040"></span>[1041](#fn_1040)   Let not then
the expression “weakness” disturb thee; for elsewhere also he says, “The
foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is
stronger than men;” ([1 Cor. i.
55](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#055)<span id="v.xxix-p28.3"></span>.)
although in God is nothing either foolish or weak: but he called the
Cross so, as setting forth the conception of the unbelieving regarding
it. Hear him, at least, interpreting himself. “For the preaching of the
Cross is to them that perish foolishness, but unto us which are saved it
is the pow<span id="page_414">p. 414</span> <span
id="v.xxix-Page_414"></span>er of God.” ([1 Cor.
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018)<span id="v.xxix-p28.4"></span>.)
And again; “But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a
stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which
are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom
of God.” ([1 Cor. 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="v.xxix-p28.5"></span>.)
And again; “But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit,
for they are foolishness unto him.” ([1 Cor. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span id="v.xxix-p28.6"></span>.)
Observe, how in every place he expresseth the conception of the
unbelieving, who look upon the Cross as foolishness and weakness. And
so, in truth, here also he means not “weakness” really such, but what
was suspected to be such with the unbelieving. He doth not then say
this, that because He was weak He was crucified. Away with the thought! 
For that He had it in His power not to have been crucified He showed
throughout; when He now cast men down prostrate, now turned back the
beams of the sun, and withered a fig-tree, and blinded their eyes that
came against Him, and wrought ten thousand other things. What then is
this which he says, “through weakness!” That even although He was
crucified after enduring peril and treachery, (for we have showed that
peril and treachery are called weakness,) yet still He was nothing
harmed thereby. And he said this to draw the example unto his own case.
For since the Corinthians beheld them persecuted, driven about,
despised, and not avenging nor visiting it, in order to teach them that
neither do they so suffer from want of power, <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[1042](#fn_1041) nor from being unable to visit it,
he leads on the argument up to The Master, because ‘He too,’ saith he,
‘was crucified, was bound, suffered ten thousand things, and He visited
them not, but continued to endure things which appeared to argue
weakness, and in this way displaying His Power, in that although He
punishes not nor requites, He is not injured any thing at all. For
instance, the Cross did not cut asunder His life, nor yet impeded His
resurrection, but He both rose again and liveth.’ And when thou hearest
of the Cross and of life, expect to find the doctrine concerning the
Incarnation, <span id="fr_1042"></span>[1043](#fn_1042) for all that is
said here hath reference to that. And if he says “though the Power of
God,” it is not as though He were Himself void of strength to quicken
His flesh; but it was indifferent with him to mention either Father or
Son. For when he said, “the Power of God,” he said by His own Power. For
that both He Himself raised it up and sustains it, hear Him saying,
“Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.”  ([John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="v.xxix-p30.2"></span>.)
But if that which is His, this he <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[1044](#fn_1043) saith to be the Father’s, be not
disturbed; “For,” He saith, “all My Father’s things are Mine.” ([John
xvi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="v.xxix-p31.1"></span>.) And again, “All Mine are Thine, and Thine
are Mine.” ([John 17.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span
id="v.xxix-p31.2"></span>.) ‘As then He that was crucified was nothing
harmed,’ he says, ‘so neither are we when persecuted and warred
against;’ wherefore also he adds,

<span id="v.xxix-p32"></span>“For even we also if <span
id="fr_1044"></span>[1045](#fn_1044) we are weak in Him, yet we shall
live with Him through the Power of God.” <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[1046](#fn_1045)

<span id="v.xxix-p35"></span>What is the meaning of “we are weak in
Him?” We are persecuted, are driven here and there, suffer extremity.
But what is “with Him?” ‘Because of the preaching,’ he says, ‘and our
faith in Him. But if for His sake we undergo what is sad and
disagreeable, it is quite plain that we shall what is pleasant also:’
and so he added, “but we are saved with Him by the Power of God.”

<span id="v.xxix-p36"></span>\[4.\] [2 Cor.
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#006)<span id="v.xxix-p36.1"></span>.
“Try your own selves, whether ye be in the faith, prove your own selves.
Know ye not as to your own selves, that Christ is in you, unless indeed
ye be reprobate? But I hope that ye shall know that we are not
reprobate.”

<span id="v.xxix-p37"></span>For since by what he has said he hath shown
that even if he does not punish, it is not because he hath not Christ in
himself, but because he intimates His long-suffering, Who was crucified
and yet avenged not Himself; he again, in another manner, produces the
same effect, and still more irrefragably, <span
id="fr_1046"></span>[1047](#fn_1046) establishing his argument by the
disciples. ‘For why speak I of myself,’ he says ‘the teacher, who have
so much care upon me and am entrusted with the whole world and have done
such great miracles. For if ye will but examine yourselves who are in
the rank of disciples, ye will see that Christ is in you also. But if in
you, then much more in your teacher. For if ye have faith, Christ is in
you also.’ For they who then believed wrought miracles. Wherefore also
he added, “Try your own selves, prove your own selves, whether ye be in
the faith. Know ye not as to your own selves, unless indeed that Christ
is in you, ye be reprobate?” ‘But if in you, much more in your teacher?’
He seems to me here to speak of the “faith” which relates to miracles.
‘For if ye have faith,’ he says, “Christ is in you, except ye have
become reprobates.” Seest thou how again he terrifies them, and shows
even to superfluity that Christ is with Him. For he seems to me to be
here alluding to them, even as to their lives. For since faith is not
enough \[by itself\] to draw down the energy of the Spirit, and he had
said that ‘“if ye are in the faith” ye have Christ in you,’ and it
happened that many who had faith <span id="page_415">p. 415</span> <span
id="v.xxix-Page_415"></span>were destitute of that energy; in order to
solve the difficulty, he says, “except ye be reprobate,” except \[that
is\] ye are corrupt in life. “But I hope that ye shall know that we are
not reprobate.” What followed naturally was to have said, “but if ye
have become reprobate, yet we have not.” He doth not, however, say so,
for fear of wounding them, but he hints it in an obscure manner, without
either making the assertion thus, ‘ye are reprobate,’ or proceeding by
question and saying, ‘But if ye are reprobate,’ but leaving out even
this way of putting it by question, he indicates it obscurely by adding,
“But I hope that ye shall know that we are not reprobate.” Here also
again, great is the threat, great the alarm. ‘For since ye desire,’ he
says, ‘in this way, by your own punishment to receive the proof, we
shall have no difficulty in giving you that demonstration.’ But he does
not indeed so express himself, but with more weight and threatening.
“But I hope that ye shall know that we are not reprobate.” ‘For ye ought
indeed,’ he saith, ‘to have known even without this what we are, <span
id="fr_1047"></span>[1048](#fn_1047) and that we have Christ speaking
and working in us; but since ye desire to receive the proof of it by
deeds also, ye shall know that we are not reprobate.’ Then when he has
held the threat suspended over their heads, and brought the punishment
now up to their doors, and has set them a trembling, and made them look
for vengeance; see how again he sweetens down his words and soothes
their fear, and shows his unambitious temper, his tender solicitude
towards his disciples, his high-principledness of purpose, his loftiness
and freedom from vain-glory. For he exhibits all these qualities in what
he adds, saying,

<span id="v.xxix-p40"></span>[2 Cor.
13.7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#007)<span id="v.xxix-p40.1"></span>.
“Now I pray to God that ye do no evil, not that we may appear approved,
but that ye may do that which is honorable, though we be as reprobate.
For we can do nothing against the truth but for the truth. For we
rejoice when we are weak, and ye are strong. For this also we pray for
even your perfecting.

<span id="v.xxix-p41"></span>\[5.\] What can be equal to this soul? He
was despised, he was spit upon, he was ridiculed, he was mocked, as
mean, as contemptible, as a braggart, as boastful in his words but in
his deeds unable to make even a little show; and although seeing so
great a necessity for showing his own power, he not only puts off, not
only shrinks back, but even prays that he may not fall into such a
position. For he says, “I pray that ye do no evil, not that we may
appear approved, but that ye may do that which is honorable, though we
be as reprobate.” What is it he says?  ‘I entreat God. I beseech Him,’
he says, ‘that I may find no one unreformed, may find no one’ that has
not repented? yea, rather, not this alone, but that none may have sinned
at all. For,’ he says, ‘that ye have done no \[evil\], but if ye have
perchance sinned, then that ye may have changed your conduct, and been
beforehand with me in reforming, and arresting all wrath. For this is
not what I am eager about, that we should be approved in this way, but
clean the contrary, that we should not appear approved. For if ye should
continue,’ he says, ‘sinning and not repenting, it will be necessary for
us to chastise, to punish, to maim your bodies; (as happened in the case
of Sapphira and of Magus;) and we have given proof of our power. But we
pray not for this, but the contrary, that we may not be shown to be
approved in this way, that we may not in this way exhibit the proof of
the power which is in us, by chastising you and punishing you as sinning
and as incurably diseased, but what? “That ye should do that which is
honorable,” we pray for this, that ye should ever live in virtue, ever
in amendment; “and we should be as reprobate,” not displaying our power
of punishing.’ And he said not, “reprobate” for he would not “be”
reprobate, even though he did not punish, nay rather for this very
reason he would be “approved;” ‘but even if some suspect us,’ he says,
‘on account of our not displaying our power, to be contemptible and cast
away, we care nothing for this. Better we should be so deemed of by
those, than display the power which God hath given to us in those
stripes, and in that unreformedness of heart.’

<span id="v.xxix-p42"></span>“For we can do nothing against the truth,
but for the truth.” For that he may not seem \[merely\] to be gratifying
them, (for this is what one who was void of vain-glory might do,) but to
be doing what the nature of the thing demanded, he added this, “for we
can do nothing against the truth.” ‘For if we find you,’ he says, ‘in
good repute, having driven away your sins by repentance and having
boldness towards God; we shall not be able thereafter, were we never so
willing, to punish you, but should we attempt it even, God will not work
with us. For to this end gave He us our power that the judgment we give
should be true and righteous, not contrary to the truth.’ Seest thou how
in every way he can, he makes what he says void of offensiveness, and
softens the harshness of his menace? Moreover as he has eagerly
endeavored this, so is he desirous also to show that his mind was quite
joined <span id="fr_1048"></span>[1049](#fn_1048) to them; wherefore
also he added, “For we rejoice when we are weak and ye are strong, and
this also we pray for even your perfecting.” ‘For most certainly,’ he
says, ‘we cannot do any thing against the truth, that is, punish you if
you are well pleasing \[to God\]; besides, because we <span
id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span id="v.xxix-Page_416"></span>cannot, we
therefore do not wish it, and even desire the contrary. Nay, we are
particularly glad of this very thing, when we find you giving us no
occasion to show that power of ours for punishment. For even if the
doing of such things shows men glorious and approved and strong; still
we desire the contrary, that ye should be approved and unblamable, and
that we should never at any time reap the glory thence arising.’
Wherefore he says, “For we are glad when we are weak.” What is, “are
weak?” ‘When we may be thought weak.’ Not when we are weak, but when we
are thought weak; for they were thought so by their enemies, because
they displayed not their power of punishing. ‘But still we are glad,
when your behavior is of such a sort as to give us no pretence for
punishing you. And it is a pleasure to us to be in this way considered
weak, so that only ye be blameless;’ wherefore he adds, “and ye are
strong,” that is, ‘are approved, are virtuous. And we do not only wish
for this, but we pray for this, that ye may be blameless, perfect, and
afford us no handle.’

<span id="v.xxix-p44"></span>\[6.\] This is paternal affection, to
prefer the salvation of the disciples before his own good name. This is
the part of a soul free from vainglory; this best releaseth from the
bonds of the body and makes one to rise aloft from earth to heaven, the
being pure from vain-glory; just as therefore the contrary leadeth unto
many sins. For it is impossible that one who is not pure from
vain-glory, should be lofty and great and noble; but he must needs
grovel on the ground, and do much damage, whilst the slave of a polluted
mistress, more cruel than any barbarian. For what can be fiercer than
she who, when most courted, is then most savage? Even wild beasts are
not this, but are tamed by much attention. But vain-glory is quite the
contrary, by being contemned she is made tame, by being honored she is
made savage and is armed against her honorer.  The Jews honored her and
were punished with exceeding severity; the disciples slighted her and
were crowned. And why speak I of punishment and crowns? for to this very
point of being seen to be glorious, it contributes more than any thing,
to spit upon vainglory. And thou shalt see even in this world that they
who honor it are damaged, whilst those who slight it are benefited. For
the disciples who slighted it, (for there is no obstacle to our using
the same example again,) and preferred the things of God, outshine the
sun, having gained themselves an immortal memory even after their death;
whilst the Jews who crouched <span id="fr_1049"></span>[1050](#fn_1049)
to it are become cityless, heartless, degraded, fugitives, exiles, mean,
contemptible. Do thou, therefore, if thou desirest to receive glory,
repel glory; but if thou pursuest glory, thou shalt miss glory. And, if
ye will, let us also try this doctrine in worldly matters. For whom do
we make sport of in our jests? Is it not of those whose minds are set
upon it? Certainly then, these men are the most entirely destitute of
it, having countless accusers and being slighted by all. And whom do we
admire, tell me; is it not those who despise it? Certainly then, these
are they that are glorified. For as he is rich, not who is in need of
many things, but who is in need of nothing; so he is glorious, not who
loveth glory, but who despiseth it; for this glory is but a shadow of
glory. No one having seen a loaf painted, though he should be pressed
with hunger ever so much, will attack the picture. Neither then do thou
pursue these shadows, for this is a shadow of glory, not glory. And that
thou mayest know that this is the manner of it and that it is a shadow,
consider this that it must be so, when the thing hath a bad name amongst
men, when all consider it a thing to be avoided, they even who desire
it; and when he who hath it and he covets it are ashamed to be called
after it. ‘Whence then is this desire,’ saith one, ‘and how is the
passion engendered?’ By littleness of soul, (for one ought not only to
accuse it, but also to correct it,) by an imperfect mind, by a childish
judgment. Let us then cease to be children, and let us become men: and
let us every where pursue the reality, not the shadows, both in wealth,
and in pleasure, and in luxury, and in glory, and in power; and this
disease will cease, and many others also. For to pursue shadows is a
madman’s part. Wherefore also Paul said, “Awake up righteously and sin
not.” ([1 Cor. xv. 34](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#034)<span
id="v.xxix-p45.3"></span>.) For there is yet another madness, sorer than
that caused by devils, than that from frenzy. For that admits of
forgiveness, but this is destitute of excuse, seeing the soul itself is
corrupted and its right judgment lost; and that of frenzy indeed is an
affection of the body, but this madness hath its seat in the artificer
mind. As then of fevers those are sorer, yea incurable, which seize upon
firm bodies and lurk in the recesses <span
id="fr_1050"></span>[1051](#fn_1050) of the nerves and are hidden away
in the veins, so truly is this madness also, seeing it lurks in the
recesses of the mind itself, perverting and destroying it. For how is it
not clear and evident madness, yea, a distemper sorer than any madness,
to despise the things which abide forever, and to cling with great
eagerness to those which perish? For, tell me, if one were to chase the
wind or try to hold it, should we not say that he was mad? And what? if
one should grasp a shadow and neglect the reality; <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[1052](#fn_1051) if one <span id="page_417">p.
417</span> <span id="v.xxix-Page_417"></span>should hate his own wife
and embrace her shadow; or loathe his son and again love his shadow,
wouldest thou seek any other clearer sign in proof of madness? Such are
they also who greedily follow the present things. For they are all
shadow, yea, whether thou mention glory, or power, or good report, or
wealth, or luxury, or any other thing of this life. And therefore truly
it is that the prophet said, “Surely man walketh in a shadow, yea, he
disquieth himself in vain;” ([Ps. xxxix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)<span id="v.xxix-p47.2"></span>.) and
again, “Our days decline like a shadow.” ([Ps. cii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011)<span id="v.xxix-p47.3"></span>.)
And in another place, he calls human things smoke and the flower of
grass. But it is not only his good things which are shadow, but his
evils also, whether it be death thou mention, or poverty, or disease, or
any other thing. What then are those things which abide, both good and
evil? The eternal kingdom and the everlasting hell. For “neither shall
the worm die, nor shall the fire be quenched:” ([Mark ix.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044)<span id="v.xxix-p47.4"></span>.)
and “these shall rise again to everlasting life: and these to
everlasting punishment.” (Mark xxv. 46<span id="v.xxix-p47.5"></span>.)
That then we may escape the one and enjoy the other, letting go the
shadow, let us cling to the real things with all earnestness, for so
shall we obtain the kingdom of heaven, which may we all obtain though
the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be
glory and might for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[411:1029](1120078.htm#fr_1028) <span
id="v.xxix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p5.2"></span>κμάζοντα</span>.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[411:1030](1120078.htm#fr_1029) <span
id="v.xxix-p5.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p6.1"></span>φιλοσοφίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[411:1031](1120078.htm#fr_1030) <span
id="v.xxix-p6.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p7.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p7.2"></span>πεχρήσατο.</span>

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[411:1032](1120078.htm#fr_1031) <span
id="v.xxix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p8"></span> i.e. Fornication.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[412:1033](1120078.htm#fr_1032) <span
id="v.xxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p11.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p11.2"></span>ληθεῦσαι</span>.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[412:1034](1120078.htm#fr_1033) <span
id="v.xxix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p13.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p13.2"></span>ποτεινόμενος</span>.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[412:1035](1120078.htm#fr_1034) <span
id="v.xxix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p16"></span> i.e. the Corinthians themselves.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[412:1036](1120078.htm#fr_1035) <span
id="v.xxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p18.1"></span>αἰτιολογικῶς</span>.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[413:1037](1120078.htm#fr_1036) <span
id="v.xxix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p21.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p21.2"></span>σθενεῖ</span>, A.V. *is sick*.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[413:1038](1120078.htm#fr_1037) <span
id="v.xxix-p21.8"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p22"></span> A.V. *infirmities*.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[413:1039](1120078.htm#fr_1038) <span
id="v.xxix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p23.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p23.2"></span>νιζανούσης</span>.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[413:1040](1120078.htm#fr_1039) <span
id="v.xxix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p27.1"></span>διακόπτει</span>.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[413:1041](1120078.htm#fr_1040) <span
id="v.xxix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p28.1"></span>ἠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p28.2"></span>κρωτηριάσθη</span>.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[414:1042](1120078.htm#fr_1041) <span
id="v.xxix-p28.7"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p29.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p29.2"></span>τονίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[414:1043](1120078.htm#fr_1042) <span
id="v.xxix-p29.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p30.1"></span>τῆς οικονομίας</span>.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[414:1044](1120078.htm#fr_1043) <span
id="v.xxix-p30.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p31"></span> i.e. Paul.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[414:1045](1120078.htm#fr_1044) <span
id="v.xxix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p33.1"></span>εἰ</span> om. R.T.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[414:1046](1120078.htm#fr_1045) <span
id="v.xxix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p34"></span> ‘Toward you’ R.T.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[414:1047](1120078.htm#fr_1046) <span
id="v.xxix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p38.1"></span>ἐκ πλείονος περιουσίας</span>.

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[415:1048](1120078.htm#fr_1047) <span
id="v.xxix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p39.1"></span>τὰ ἡμέτερα</span>.

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[415:1049](1120078.htm#fr_1048) <span
id="v.xxix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p43.1"></span>ᾠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p43.2"></span>κειωμένην</span>.

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[416:1050](1120078.htm#fr_1049) <span
id="v.xxix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p45.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p45.2"></span>ποκατακλιθέντες</span>.

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[416:1051](1120078.htm#fr_1050) <span
id="v.xxix-p45.4"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p46.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p46.2"></span>νδομυχοῦντες</span>.

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[416:1052](1120078.htm#fr_1051) <span
id="v.xxix-p46.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p47.1"></span>τῶν ἀληθῶν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXX](1120079)
