[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120033)  [Next](1120035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Homily XXX.</span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p2"></span><span id="iv.xxxi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxxi-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.xxxi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p3"></span>For as the body is one, and hath many
members, and all the members of the body, being many, are one body; so
also is Christ.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p4.1"></span>After</span> soothing them from the
considerations that the thing given was of free favor; that they
received all from “one and the self-same Spirit;” that it was given “to
profit withal,” that even by the lesser gifts a manifestation was made;
and withal having also stopped their mouth from the duty of yielding to
the authority of the Spirit: (“for all these,” saith he, “worketh the
one and the same Spirit, dividing to each one severally even as he
will;” wherefore it is not right to be over-curious:)  he proceeds now
to soothe them in like manner from another common example, and betakes
himself to nature itself, as was his use to do.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p5"></span>For when he was discoursing about the hair
of men and women, after all the rest he drew matter thence also to
correct them, saying, “Doth not even nature itself teach you that if a
man have long hair, it is a dishonor to him? but if a woman have long
hair, it is a glory to her?” ([1 Cor.
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#015)<span id="iv.xxxi-p5.1"></span>..md)
And when he spake concerning the idol-sacrifices, forbidding to touch
them, he drew an argument from the examples also of them that are
without, both making mention of the Olympic games, where he saith, “they
which run in a race run all, but one receiveth the prize:” ([1 Cor. ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024)<span id="iv.xxxi-p5.2"></span>..md)
and confirming these views from shepherds and soldiers and husbandmen.
Wherefore he brings forward here also a common example by which he
presses on and fights hard to prove that no one was really put in a
worse condition: a thing which was marvellous and surprising to be able
to show, and calculated to refresh the weaker sort, I mean, the example
of the body. For nothing so consoles the person of small spirit and
inferior gifts, or so persuades him not to grieve, as the being
convinced that he is not left with less than his share. Wherefore also
Paul making out this point, thus expresses himself: “for as the body is
one and hath many members.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p6"></span>Seest thou his exact consideration? He is
pointing out the same thing to be both one and many. Wherefore also he
adds, pressing the point more vigorously, “and all the members of the
one body, being many, are one body.” He said not, “being many, are of
one body,” but “the one body itself is many:” and those many members are
this one thing. If therefore the one is many, and the many are one,
where is the difference? where the superiority? where the disadvantage?
For all, saith he, are one: and not simply one, but being strictly
considered in respect of that even which is principal, i.e., their being
a body, they are found all to be one: but when considered as to their
particular natures, then the difference comes out, and the difference is
in all alike. For none of them by itself can make a body, but each is
alike deficient in the making a body, and there is need of a coming
together since when the many become one, then and not till then is there
one <span id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span
id="iv.xxxi-Page_176"></span>body. Wherefore also covertly intimating
this very thing, he said, “And all the members of the one body, being
many, are one body.” And he said not, “the superior and the inferior,”
but “being many,” which is common to all.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p7"></span>And how is it possible that they should be
one?  When throwing out the difference of the members, thou considerest
the body. For the same thing which the eye is, this also is the foot in
regard of its being a member and constituting a body. For there is no
difference in this respect. Nor canst thou say that one of the members
makes a body of itself, but another does not. For they are all equal in
this, for the very reason that they are all one body.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p8"></span>But having said this and having shown it
clearly from the common judgment of all, he added, “so also is Christ.”
And when he should have said, “so also is the Church,” for this was the
natural consequent he doth not say it but instead of it places the name
of Christ, carrying the discourse up on high and appealing more and more
to the hearer’s reverence. But his meaning is this: “So also is the body
of Christ, which is the Church.” For as the body and the head <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177.md) are one man, so he said that the
Church and Christ are one. Wherefore also he placed Christ instead of
the Church, giving that name to His body. “As then,” saith he, “our body
is one thing though it be composed of many: so also in the Church we all
are one thing. For though the Church be composed of many members, yet
these many form one body.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p10"></span>\[2.\] Thus having, you see, recovered and
raised up by this common example him who thought himself depreciated,
again he leaves the topic of common experience, and comes to another, a
spiritual one, bringing greater consolation and indicative of great
equality of honor. What then is this?

<span id="iv.xxxi-p11"></span>[1 Cor.
12.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.xxxi-p11.1"></span>.
“For in one Spirit, saith he, were we all baptized into one body,
whether Jews or Greeks, whether bond or free.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p12"></span>Now his meaning is this: that which
established us to become one body and regenerated us, is one Spirit: for
not in one Spirit was one baptized, and another another. And not only is
that which hath baptized us one, but also that unto which <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md) He baptized us, i.e., for which <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md) He baptized us, is one. For we were
baptized not that so many several bodies might be formed, but that we
might all preserve one with another the perfect nature of one body:
i.e., that we might all be one body, into the same were we baptized.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p15"></span>So that both He who formed it is one, and
that into which He formed it is one. And he said not, “that we might all
come to be of the same body;” but, “that we might all be one body.” For
he ever strives to use the more expressive phrases. And well said he,
“we all,” adding also himself. “For not even I, the Apostle, have any
more than thou in this respect,” saith he. “For thou art the body even
as I, and I even as thou, and we have all the same Head and have passed
through <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md) the same birth-pains.
Wherefore we are also the same body.” “And why speak I,” saith he, “of
the Jews? since even the Gentiles who were so far off from us, He hath
brought into the entireness of one body.” Wherefore having said, “we
all,” he stopped not here, but added, “whether Jews or Greeks, whether
bond or free.” Now if, having before been so far off, we were united and
have become one, much more after that we have become one, we can have no
right to grieve and be dejected. Yea, the difference, in fact, hath no
place. For if to Greeks and Jews, to bond and free, He hath vouchsafed
the same blessings, how can it be that after so vouchsafing He divides
them, now that He hath bestowed a greater perfection of unity by the
supply of His gifts?

<span id="iv.xxxi-p17"></span>“And were all made to drink of one
Spirit.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p18"></span>[1 Cor.
12.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.xxxi-p18.1"></span>.
“For the body is not one member, but many.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p19"></span>i.e., We are come to the same initiation,
we enjoy the same Table. And why said he not, “we are nourished by the
same body and drink the same blood?” Because by saying “Spirit,” he
declared them both, as well the flesh as the blood. For through both are
we “made to drink of the Spirit.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p20"></span>But to me he appears now to speak of that
visitation of the Spirit which takes place in us after Baptism and
before the Mysteries. And he said, “We were made to drink,” because this
metaphorical speech suited him extremely well for his proposed subject:
as if he had said respecting plants and a garden, that by the same
fountain all the trees are watered, or by the same water; so also here,
“we all drank the same Spirit, we enjoyed the same grace,” saith he.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p21"></span>If now one Spirit both formed us and
gathered us all together into one body; for this is the meaning of, “we
were baptized into one body:” and vouchsafed us one table, and gave us
all the same watering, (for this is the mean<span id="page_177">p.
177</span> <span id="iv.xxxi-Page_177"></span>ing of, “we were made to
drink into one Spirit <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) ,”.md) and
united persons so widely separated; and if many things then become a
body when they are made one: why, I pray, art thou continually tossing
to and from their difference? But if thou sayest, “Because there are
many members and diverse,” know that this very thing is the wonder and
the peculiar excellency of the body, when the things which are many and
diverse make one. But if they were not many, it were not so wonderful
and incredible that they should be one body; nay, rather they would not
be a body at all.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p23"></span>\[3.\] This however he states last; but
for the present he goes to the members themselves, saying thus:

<span id="iv.xxxi-p24"></span>[1 Cor.
12.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.xxxi-p24.1"></span>.
“If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body;
is it therefore not of the body?”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p25"></span>[1 Cor.
12.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.xxxi-p25.1"></span>.
“And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the
body; is it therefore not of the body?”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p26"></span>For if the one being made inferior and the
other superior, doth not allow their being of the body, the whole is
done away. Do not say therefore, “I am not the body, because I am
inferior.” For the foot also hath the inferior post, yet is it of the
body: for the being or not being part of the body, is not from the one
lying in this place and the other in that; (which is what constitutes
difference of place;) but from the being conjoined or separated. For the
being or not being a body, arises from the having been made one or not.
But do thou, I pray, mark his considerate way, how he applies their
words to our members. For as he said above, “These things have I in a
figure transferred to myself and Apollos,” ([1 Cor. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006)<span id="iv.xxxi-p26.1"></span>..md)
just so likewise here, to make his argument free from invidiousness and
acceptable, he introduces the members speaking: that when they shall
hear nature answering them, being thus convicted by experience herself
and by the general voice, they may have nothing further to oppose. “For
say, if you will,” saith he, “this very thing, murmur as you please, you
cannot be out of the body. For as the law of nature, so much more doth
the power of grace guard all things and preserve them entire.” And see
how he kept to the rule of having nothing superfluous; not working out
his argument on all the members, but on two only and these the extremes;
having specified both the most honorable of all, the eye, and the
meanest of all, the feet. And he doth not make the foot to discourse
with the eye, but with the hand which is mounted a little above it; and
the ear with the eyes. For because we are wont to envy not those who are
very far above us, but those who are a little higher, therefore he also
conducts his comparison thus.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p27"></span>[1 Cor.
12.17](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.xxxi-p27.1"></span>.
“If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole
were hearing, where were the smelling?”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p28"></span>Thus, because, having fallen upon the
difference of the members, and having mentioned feet, and hands, and
eyes, and ears, he led them to the consideration of their own
inferiority and superiority: see how again he consoles them, intimating
that so it was expedient: and that their being many and diverse, this
especially causeth them to be a body. But if they all were some one,
they would not be a body. Wherefore, he saith, “If they were all one
member, where were the body?” This however, he mentions not till
afterwards; but here he points out also something more; that besides the
impossibility of any one being a body, it even takes away the being of
the rest.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p29"></span>“For if the whole were hearing, where were
the smelling,” saith he.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p30"></span>\[4.\] Then because after all they were
yet disturbed: that which he had done above, the same he doth also now.
For as there he first alleged the expediency to comfort them and
afterwards stopped their mouths, vehemently saying, “But all these
worketh the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each one man severally
even as He will:” so also here having stated reasons for which he showed
that it was profitable that all should so be, he refers the whole again
to the counsel of God, saying,

<span id="iv.xxxi-p31"></span>[1 Cor.
12.18](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.xxxi-p31.1"></span>.
“But now God hath set the members each one of them in the body, even as
it pleased Him.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p32"></span>Even as he said of the Spirit, “as He
will,” so also here, “as it pleased Him.” Now do not thou seek further
into the cause, why it is thus and why not thus. For though we have ten
thousand reasons to give, we shall not be so able to show them that it
is well done, as when we say, that as the best Artificer pleased, so it
came to pass. For as it is expedient, so He wills it. Now if in this
body of ours we do not curiously enquire about the members, much more in
the Church. And see his thoughtfulness in that he doth not state the
difference which arises from their nature nor that from their operation,
but that from their local situation. For “now,” saith he, “God hath set
the members each one of them in the body even as it pleased Him.” And he
said well, “each one,” pointing out that the use extends to all. For
thou canst not say, “This He hath Himself placed but not that: <span
id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span id="iv.xxxi-Page_178"></span>but every
one according to His will, so it is situated.” So that to the foot also
it is profitable that it should be so stationed, and not to the head
only: and if it should invert the order and leaving its own place,
should go to another, though it might seem to have bettered its
condition, it would be the undoing and ruin of the whole. For it both
falls from its own, and reaches not the other station.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p33"></span>\[5.\] [1 Cor.
12.19](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.xxxi-p33.1"></span>.
“And if they were all one member, where were the body?” [1 Cor.
12.20](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.xxxi-p33.2"></span>.
“But now are they many members, but one body.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p34"></span>Thus having silenced them sufficiently by
God’s own arrangement, again he states reasons. And he neither doth this
always nor that, but alternates and varies his discourse. Since on the
one hand, he who merely silences, confounds the hearer, and he, on the
contrary, who accustoms him to demand reasons for all things, injures
him in the matter of faith; for this cause then Paul is continually
practising both the one and the other, that they may both believe and
may not be confounded; and after silencing them, he again gives a reason
likewise. And mark his earnestness in the combat and the completeness of
his victory. For from what things they supposed themselves unequal in
honor because in them there was great diversity, even from these things
he shows that for this very reason they are equal in honor. How, I will
tell you.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p35"></span>“If all were one member,” saith he, “where
were the body?”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p36"></span>Now what he means is, If there were not
among you great diversity, ye could not be a body; and not being a body,
ye could not be one; and not being one, ye could not be equal in honor.
Whence it follows again that if ye were all equal in honor, ye were not
a body; and not being a body, ye were not one; and not being one, how
could ye be equal in honor? As it is, however, because ye are not all
endowed with some one gift, therefore are ye a body; and being a body,
ye are all one, and differ nothing from one another in this that ye are
a body. So that this very difference is that which chiefly causeth your
equality in honor. And accordingly he adds, “But now they are many
members, yet one body.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p37"></span>\[6.\] These things then let us also
consider and cast out all envy, and neither grudge against them that
have greater gifts nor despise them that possess the lesser. For thus
had God willed: let us then not oppose ourselves. But if thou art still
disturbed, consider that thy work is oft-times such as thy brother is
unable to perform. So that even if thou art inferior, yet in this thou
hast the advantage: and though he be greater, he is worse off in this
respect; and so equality takes place. For in the body even the little
members seem to contribute no little, but the great ones themselves are
often injured by them, I mean by their removal. Thus what in the body is
more insignificant than the hair? Yet if thou shouldest remove this,
insignificant as it is, from the eyebrows and the eyelids, thou hast
destroyed all the grace of the countenance, and the eye will no longer
appear equally beautiful. And yet the loss is of a trifle; but
notwithstanding even thus all the comeliness is destroyed. And not the
comeliness only, but much also of the use of the eyes. The reason is
that every one of our members hath both a working of its own and one
which is common; and likewise there is in us a beauty which is peculiar
and another which is common. And these kinds of beauty appear indeed to
be divided, but they are perfectly bound together, and when one is
destroyed, the other perishes also along with it. To explain myself: let
there be bright eyes, and a smiling cheek, and a red lip, and straight
nose, and open brow; nevertheless, if thou mar but the slightest of
these, thou hast marred the common beauty of all; all is full of
dejection; all will appear foul to look on, which before was so
beautiful: thus if thou shouldest crush only the tip of the nose thou
hast brought great deformity upon all: and yet it is the maiming of but
a single member. And likewise in the hand, if thou shouldest take away
the nail from one finger, thou wouldest see the same result. If now thou
wouldest see the same taking place in respect of their function <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182.md) also, take away one finger, and thou
wilt see the rest less active and no longer performing their part
equally.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p39"></span>Since then the loss of a member is a
common deformity, and its safety beauty to all, let us not be lifted up
nor trample on our neighbors. For through that small member even the
great one is fair and beautiful, and by the eyelids, slight as they are,
is the eye adorned. So that he who wars with his brother wars with
himself: for the injury done reaches not only unto that one, but himself
also shall undergo no small loss.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p40"></span>\[7.\] That this then may not be, let us
care for our neighbors as for ourselves, and let us transfer this image
of the body now also to the Church, and be careful for all as for our
own members. For in the Church there are members many and diverse: and
some are more honorable and some more deficient. For example, there are
choirs of virgins, there are assemblies of widows, there are
fraternities <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183.md) of those who shine
in holy wedlock <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md) ; in short, many
are the <span id="page_179">p. 179</span> <span
id="iv.xxxi-Page_179"></span>degrees of virtue. And in almsgiving again
in like manner. For some empty themselves of all their goods: others
care for a competency alone and seek nothing more than necessaries;
others give of their superfluity: nevertheless, all these adorn one
another; and if the greater should set at nought the less, he would in
the greatest degree injure himself. Thus, suppose a virgin to deal
scornfully with a married woman, she hath cut off no small part of her
reward; and he again that emptied himself of all should he upbraid him
that hath not done so, hath emptied himself of much of the fruit of his
labors. And why speak I of virgins, and widows, and men without
possessions? What is meaner than those who beg? and yet even these
fulfill a most important office in the Church, clinging to the doors of
the sanctuary <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185.md) and supplying one
of its greatest ornaments: and without these there could be no
perfecting the fulness of the Church. Which thing, as it seems, the
Apostles also observing made a law from the beginning, as in regard to
all other things, so also that there should be widows: and so great care
did they use about the matter as also to set over them seven deacons.
For as bishops and presbyters and deacons and virgins and continent
persons, enter into my enumeration, where I am reckoning up the members
of the Church, so also do widows. Yea, and it is no mean office which
they fill. For thou indeed comest here when thou wilt: but these both
day and night sing psalms and attend: not for alms only doing this;
since if that were their object, they might walk in the market place and
beg in the alleys: but there is in them piety also in no small degree.
At least, behold in what a furnace of poverty they are; yet never shalt
thou hear a blasphemous word from them nor an impatient one, after the
manner of many rich men’s wives. Yet some of them often lie down to
their rest in hunger, and others continue constantly frozen by the cold;
nevertheless, they pass their time in thanksgiving and giving glory.
Though you give but a penny, they give thanks and implore ten thousand
blessings on the giver; and if thou give nothing they do not complain,
but even so they bless, and think themselves happy to enjoy their daily
food.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p44"></span>“Yes,” it is replied, “since whether they
will or no, they must bear it.” Why, tell me? Wherefore hast thou
uttered this bitter expression? Are there not shameful arts which bring
gain to the aged, both men and women? Had they not power to support
themselves by those means in great abundance, provided they had chosen
to cast off all care of upright living?  Seest thou not how many persons
of that age, by becoming pimps and panders and by other such
ministrations, both live, and live in luxury <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186.md) ? Not so these, but they choose rather
to perish of hunger than to dishonor their own life and betray their
salvation; and they sit throughout the whole day, preparing a medicine
of salvation for thee.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p46"></span>For no physician stretching out the hand
to apply the knife, works so effectually to cut out the corruption from
our wounds, as doth a poor man stretching out his right hand and
receiving alms, to take away the scars which the wounds have left. And
what is truly wonderful, they perform this excellent chirurgery without
pain and anguish: and we who are set over the people and give you so
much wholesome advice, do not more truly discourse than he doth, who
sits before the doors of the church, by his silence and his countenance.
For we too sound these things in your ears every day, saying, “Be not
high-minded, O man; human nature is a thing that soon declines and is
ready to fall away; our youth hastens on to old age, our beauty to
deformity, our strength to weakness, our honor to contempt, our health
falls away to sickness, our glory to meanness, our riches to poverty;
our concerns are like a violent current that never will stand still, but
keeps hastening down the steep.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p47"></span>The same advice do they also give and more
than this, by their appearance and by their experience itself too, which
is a yet plainer kind of advice. How many, for instance, of those who
now sit without, were in the bloom of youth and did great things? How
many of these loathsome looking persons surpassed many, both in vigor of
body and in beauty of countenance? Nay, disbelieve it not nor deride.
For surely, life is full of ten thousand such examples. For if from mean
and humble persons many have oftentimes become kings, what marvel is it
if from being great and glorious, some have been made humble and mean?
Since the former is much the more extraordinary: but the latter, of
perpetual occurrence. So that one ought not to be incredulous that any
of them ever flourished in arts, and arms, and abundance of wealth, but
rather to pity them with great compassion and to fear for ourselves,
lest we too should sometime suffer the same things. For <span
id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span id="iv.xxxi-Page_180"></span>we too
are men and are subject to this speedy change.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p48"></span>\[8.\] But perchance some one of the
thoughtless, and of those who are accustomed to scoff, will object to
what hath been said, and will altogether deride us, saying, “How long
wilt thou not cease continually introducing poor men and beggars in thy
discourses, and prophesying to us of misfortunes, and denouncing poverty
to come, and desiring to make us beggars?” Not from a desire to make
beggars of you, O man, do I say these things, but hastening to open unto
you the riches of heaven. Since he too, who to the healthy man makes
mention of the sick and relates their anguish, saith it not to make him
diseased, but to preserve him in health, by the fear of their calamities
cutting off his remissness. Poverty seems to you to be a fearful thing
and to be dreaded, even to the mere name of it. Yea, and therefore are
we poor, because we are afraid of poverty; though we have ten thousand
talents. For not he who hath nothing is poor, but he who shudders at
poverty. Since in men’s calamities also it is not those who suffer great
evils whom we lament and account wretched, but those who know not how to
bear them, even though they be small. Whereas he that knows how to bear
them is, as all know, worthy of praises and crowns. And to prove that
this is so, whom do we applaud in the games? Those who are much beaten
and do not vex themselves, but hold their head on high; or those who fly
after the first strokes? Are not those even crowned by us as manly and
noble; while we laugh at these as unmanly and cowards? So then let us do
in the affairs of life. Him that bears all easily let us crown, as we do
that noble champion <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187.md) ; but weep
over him that shrinks and trembles at his dangers, and who before he
receives the blow is dead with fear. For so in the games; if any before
he raised his hands, at the mere sight of his adversary extending his
right hand, should fly, though he receive no wound, he will be laughed
to scorn as feeble and effeminate and unversed in such struggles. Now
this is like what happens to these who fear poverty, and cannot so much
as endure the expectation of it.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p50"></span>Evidently then it is not we that make you
wretched, but ye yourselves. For how can it be that the devil should not
hence-forth make sport of thee, seeing thee even before the stroke
afraid and trembling at the menace? Or rather, when thou dost but esteem
this a threat, he will have no need so much as to strike thee any more,
but leaving thee to keep thy wealth, by the expectation of its being
taken away he will render thee softer than any wax. And because it is
our nature (so to speak,) not to consider the objects of our dread so
fearful after suffering, as before and while yet untried: therefore to
prevent thee from acquiring even this virtue, he detains thee in the
very height of fear; by the fear of poverty, before all experience of
it, melting thee down as wax in the fire. Yea, and such a man is softer
than any wax and lives a life more wretched than Cain himself. For the
things which he hath in excess, he is in fear: for those which he hath
not, in grief; and again, concerning what he hath he trembles, keeping
his wealth within as a wilful runaway slave, and beset by I know not
what various and unaccountable passions. For unaccountable desire, and
manifold fear and anxiety, and trembling on every side, agitate them.
And they are like a vessel driven by contrary winds from every quarter,
and enduring many heavy seas. And how much better for such a man to
depart than to be enduring a continual storm? Since for Cain also it
were more tolerable to have died than to be for ever trembling <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188.md) .

<span id="iv.xxxi-p52"></span>Lest we then for our part suffer these
things, let us laugh to scorn the device of the devil, let us burst his
cords asunder, let us sever the point of his terrible spear and fortify
every approach. For if thou laugh at money, he hath not where to strike,
he hath not where he may lay hold. Then hast thou rooted up the root of
evils; and when the root is no more, neither will any evil fruit grow.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p53"></span>\[9.\] Well: these things we are always
saying and never leave off saying them: but whether our sayings do any
good, the day will declare, even that day which is revealed by fire,
which trieth every man’s work, ([1 Cor. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013)<span id="iv.xxxi-p53.1"></span>..md)
which showeth what lamps are bright and what are not so. Then shall he
who hath oil, and he who hath it not, be manifest. But may none then be
found destitute of the comfort; rather may all, bringing in with them
abundance of mercy, and having their lamps bright, enter in together
with the Bridegroom.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p54"></span>Since nothing is more fearful and full of
anguish than that voice which they who departed without abundant
almsgiving shall then hear the Bridegroom, “I know you not.” (S. [Matt.
xxv. 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.xxxi-p54.1"></span>.) But may we never hear this voice, but
rather that most pleasant and desirable one, “Come, ye blessed of My
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.” (S. [Matt. xxv. 34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.xxxi-p54.2"></span>.) For thus shall we live the happy life, and
enjoy all the good things which even pass man’s understanding: unto
which may we all attain, through the grace and mercy, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_177"></span>[176:178](1120034.htm#fr_177.md) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p9"></span> \[The author seems here to imply that the
Apostle speaks of Christ simply as the head of the church, the same view
which Meyer advocates. It is better to consider the expression as
denoting the analogy of the body to Christ, since it is one body yet has
many members. Christ is the personal subject, the “Ego” whose body is
the church. “Christus non localiter, sed mystice et virtualiter, sive
operative et per efficentiam, est corpus, hypostasis, anima et spiritus
totius Ecclesiæ.” (Cor. a Lap.) Principal Edwards says that the
Apostle’s meaning if expressed in modern phrase would run thus: “As the
Person is one while the members of his body are many, so also Christ is
one but the members of his mystical body, the church, are many.” C.\]

<span id="fn_178"></span>[176:179](1120034.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p13.1"></span>εἰς ὃ</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p13.2"></span>ἐφ̓ ᾧ</span>.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[176:180](1120034.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p14.1"></span>εἰς ὃ</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p14.2"></span>ἐφ̓ ᾧ</span>.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[176:181](1120034.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p16.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p16.2"></span>λύσαμεν</span>.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[177:182](1120034.htm#fr_181.md) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p22"></span> \[The phrase here “drink into one Spirit”
differs from that used in the citation above, where we read “drink of
one Spirit.” The difference exists in the Greek original. Chrysostom
quotes what is now considered to be the correct text, omitting the
preposition, but writes afterward, inserting it. There is unusual
obscurity in his treatment of the passage. He expressly excludes any
reference to the sacraments, saying it is “after baptism and before the
mysteries,” (i.e. the Lord’s Supper), and then speaks of it as if it
meant a watering of plants, which however is not natural. Most
interpreters refer it baptism. C.\]

<span id="fn_182"></span>[178:183](1120034.htm#fr_182.md) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p38.1"></span>ἐπὶ ἐνεργείας</span>.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[178:184](1120034.htm#fr_183.md) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p41.1"></span>φρατρίαι</span>.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[178:185](1120034.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p42"></span> See Bingham, vii. 2. 6; and as quoted by
him, S. Athanas, *ad Dracont*, t. i. p. 263; S. Augustin. *de Hæres*. c.
40; in support of the opinion, that “there was an order of monks which
lived in a married state, and enjoyed their own property and possessions
as the primitive ascetics were used to do.” If the opinion is correct,
(the places quoted seem hardly to prove it,) this place of St.
Chrysostom may perhaps refer to that order.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[179:186](1120034.htm#fr_185.md) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p43"></span> Bingham, iv. 4. 1. “At the entrance of
the interior Narthex,” or Choir, “the Poor of the Church placed
themselves, both before and after Divine Service, to ask alms of such as
came from the Altar.” S. Chrys. on 1 Thess. Hom. xi. near the end, “In
the Churches, and in the Chapels of the Martyrs, the poor sit in front
of the vestibules…When we enter into earthly palaces, there is no such
thing to be seen, but grave, splendid, rich, wise men are hastening
about on all sides. But at our entrance into the true palaces, the
Church, and the houses of prayer of the Martyrs, there are possessed
persons, maimed, poor, old, blind, distorted in their limbs.” “They are
an admirable sort of watch-dogs, keeping guard in the Courts of the
Palace. Feed them therefore, for the honor redounds to their king…That
human things are nought, thou art excellently instructed by the very
Porch of the Church: that God delights not in wealth, thou art taught by
those who sit before Him.” For the custom of the Church of Rome, see the
account of St. Lawrence’s martyrdom in Prudentius, as quoted by Hooker,
E. P. V. lxxix. 14.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[179:187](1120034.htm#fr_186.md) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p45.1"></span>τρέφονται καὶ τρυφῶσεν</span>.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[180:188](1120034.htm#fr_187.md) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p49.1"></span>παγκρατιαστήν</span>.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[180:189](1120034.htm#fr_188.md) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p51"></span> [Gen. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.xxxi-p51.1"></span>;
vid. supr. Hom. vii. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXI](1120035.md)
