[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120009)  [Next](1120011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p1"></span> <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="iv.vii-Page_29"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Homily VI.</span>

<span id="iv.vii-p2"></span><span id="iv.vii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.vii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.vii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p3"></span>And I, brethren, when I came to you, came
not with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the
testimony of God. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save
Jesus Christ, and Him crucified.

<span id="iv.vii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.vii-p4.1"></span>Nothing</span> was ever more prepared for combat
than the spirit of Paul; or rather, I should say, not his spirit, (for
he was not himself the inventor of these things,) but, nothing was ever
equal to the grace working within him, which overcometh all things. For
sufficient indeed is what had been said before to cast down the pride of
the boasters about wisdom; nay, even a part of it had been enough. But
to enhance the splendor of the victory, he contends anew for the points
which he had been affirming; trampling upon the prostrate foe. Look at
it in this way. He had brought forward the prophecy which saith, “I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise.” He had shewn the wisdom of God, in that
by means of what seemed to be foolishness, He destroyed the philosophy
of the Gentiles; he had shewn that the “foolishness of God is wiser than
men;” he had shewn that not only did He teach by untaught persons, but
also chose untaught persons to learn of Him. Now he sheweth that both
the thing itself which was preached, and the manner of preaching it,
were enough to stagger people; and yet did not stagger them. As thus:
“not only,” saith he, “are the disciples uneducated, but I myself also,
who am the preacher.”

<span id="iv.vii-p5"></span>Therefore he saith, “And I, brethren,”
(again he useth the word “brethren,” to smooth down the harshness of the
utterance,) “came not with excellency of speech, declaring unto you the
testimony of God.” “What then? tell me, hadst thou chosen to come ‘with
excellency,’ wouldest thou have been able?” “I, indeed, had I chosen,
should not have been able; but Christ, if He had chosen, was able. But
He would not, in order that He might render His trophy more brilliant.”
Wherefore also in a former passage, shewing that it was His work which
had been done, His will that the word should be preached in an unlearned
manner, he said, “For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel; not with wisdom of words.” But far greater, yea, infinitely
greater, than Paul’s willing this, is the fact that Christ willed it.

<span id="iv.vii-p6"></span>“Not therefore,” saith he, “by display of
eloquence, neither armed with arguments from without, do I declare the
testimony of God.” He saith not “the preaching,” but “the
testimony <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md) of God;” which word was
itself sufficient to withhold him. For he went about preaching death:
and for this reason he added, “for I determined not to know anything
among you, save Jesus Christ, and Him crucified.” This was the meaning
he meant to convey, that he is altogether destitute of the wisdom which
is without; as indeed he was saying above, “I came not with excellency
of speech:” for that he might have possessed this also is plain; for he
whose garments raised the dead and whose shadow expelled diseases, <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) much more was his soul capable of
receiving eloquence. For this is a thing which may be taught: but the
former transcendeth all art. He then who knows things beyond the reach
of art, much more must he have had strength for lesser things. But
Christ permitted not; for it was not expedient. Rightly therefore he
saith, “For I determined not to know any thing: “for I, too, for my part
have just the same will as Christ.”

<span id="iv.vii-p9"></span>And to me it seems that he speaks to them in
a lower tone even than to any others, in order to repress their pride.
Thus, the expression, “I determined to know nothing,” was spoken in
contradistinction to the wisdom which is without. “For I came not
weaving syllogisms nor sophisms, nor saying unto you anything else than
“Christ was crucified.” They indeed have ten thousand things to say, and
concerning ten thousand things they speak, winding out long courses of
words, framing arguments and syllogisms, compounding sophisms without
end. But I came unto you saying no other thing than “Christ was
crucified,” and all of them I out-stripped: which is a sign such as no
words can express of the power of Him whom I preach.”

<span id="iv.vii-p10"></span><span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span
id="iv.vii-Page_30"></span>\[2.\] [1 Cor.
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.vii-p10.1"></span>.
“And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling.”

<span id="iv.vii-p11"></span>This again is another topic: for not only
are the believers unlearned persons; not only is he that speaketh
unlearned; not only is the manner of the teaching of an unlearned cast
throughout; not only was the thing preached of itself enough to stagger
people; (for the cross and death were the message brought;) but together
with these there were also other hindrances, the dangers, and the plots,
and the daily fear, and the being hunted about. For the word “weakness,”
with him in many places stands for the persecutions: as also elsewhere.
“My weakness which I had in my flesh ye did not set at nought:” ([Gal.
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#014)<span id="iv.vii-p11.1"></span>..md)
and again, “If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which
concern my weakness.” ([2 Cor. xi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#030)<span id="iv.vii-p11.2"></span>..md)
What \[weakness\]?  “The governor under Aretas the king guarded the city
of the Damascenes, desirous to apprehend me.” ([2 Cor. v.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#032)<span id="iv.vii-p11.3"></span>..md)
And again, “Wherefore I take pleasure in weakness:” ([2 Cor. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010)<span id="iv.vii-p11.4"></span>..md)
then, saying in what, he added, “In injuries, in necessities, in
distresses.” And here he makes the same statement; for having said, “And
I was in weakness,” etc. he did not stop at this point, but explaining
the word “weakness” makes mention of his dangers. He adds again, “and in
fear, and in much trembling, I was with you.”

<span id="iv.vii-p12"></span>“How sayest thou? Did Paul also fear
dangers?” He did fear, and dreaded them excessively; for though he was
Paul, yet he was a man. But this is no charge against Paul, but
infirmity of human nature; and it is to the praise of his fixed purpose
of mind that when he even dreaded death and stripes, he did nothing
wrong because of this fear. So that they who assert that he feared not
stripes, not only do not honor him, but rather abridge greatly his
praises. For if he feared not, what endurance or what self-restraint was
there in bearing the dangers? I, for my part, on this account admire
him; because being in fear, and not simply in “fear,” but even in
“trembling” at his perils, he so ran as ever to keep his crown; and gave
not in for any danger, in his task of purging out <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) the world, and everywhere both by sea and
land sowing the Gospel.

<span id="iv.vii-p14"></span>\[3.\] [1 Cor.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.vii-p14.1"></span>.
“And my speech and my preaching was not in persuasive words of wisdom:”
that is, had not the wisdom from without. Now if the doctrine preached
had nothing subtle, and they that were called were unlearned, and he
that preached was of the same description, and thereto was added
persecution, and trembling and fear; tell me, how did they overcome
without Divine power? And this is why, having said, “My speech and my
preaching was not in persuasive words of wisdom,” he added, “but in
demonstration of the Spirit and of power.”

<span id="iv.vii-p15"></span>Dost thou perceive how “the foolishness of
God is wiser than men, and the weakness stronger?” They for their part,
being unlearned and preaching such a Gospel, in their chains and
persecution overcame their persecutors. Whereby? was it not by their
furnishing that evidence which is of the Spirit? For this indeed is
confessed demonstration. For who, tell me, after he had seen dead men
rising to life and devils cast out, could have helped admitting it?

<span id="iv.vii-p16"></span>But seeing that there are also deceiving
wonders, such as those of sorcerers, he removes this suspicion also. For
he said not simply “of power,” but first, “of the Spirit,” and then, “of
power:” signifying that the things done were spiritual.

<span id="iv.vii-p17"></span>It is no disparagement, therefore, that the
Gospel was not declared by means of wisdom; rather it is a very great
ornament. For this, it will be allowed, is the clearest token of its
being divine and having its roots from above, out of the heavens.
Wherefore he added also,

<span id="iv.vii-p18"></span>[1 Cor.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.vii-p18.1"></span>.
“That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power
of God.”

<span id="iv.vii-p19"></span>Seest thou how clearly in every way he hath
set forth the vast gain of this “ignorance,” and the great loss of this
“wisdom?” For the latter made void the Cross, but the former proclaimed
the power of God: the latter, besides their failing to discover any of
those things which they most needed, set them also upon boasting of
themselves; the former, besides their receiving the truth, led them also
to pride themselves in God. Again, wisdom would have persuaded many to
suspect that the doctrine was of man: this clearly demonstrated it to be
divine, and to have come down from heaven. Now when demonstration is
made by wisdom of words, even the worse oftentimes overcome the better,
having more skill in words; and falsehood outstrips the truth. But in
this case it is not so: for neither doth the Spirit enter into an
unclean soul, nor, having entered in, can it ever be subdued; even
though all possible cleverness of speech assail it. For the
demonstration by works and signs is far more evident than that by words.

<span id="iv.vii-p20"></span>\[4.\] But some one may say perhaps, “If
the Gospel is to prevail and hath no need of words, lest the Cross be
made of none effect; for what reason are signs withholden now?” For what
reason? Speakest thou in unbelief and not allowing that they were done
even in the times of the Apostles, or dost thou truly seek to know? If
in unbelief, I will first make my stand against <span id="page_31">p.
31</span> <span id="iv.vii-Page_31"></span>this. I say then, If signs
were not done at that time, how did they, chased, and persecuted, and
trembling, and in chains, and having become the common enemies of the
world, and exposed to all as a mark for ill usage, and with nothing of
their own to allure, neither speech, nor show, nor wealth, nor city, nor
nation, nor family, nor pursuit (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p20.1"></span>ἐπιτήδευμα</span>,) nor glory, nor any such
like thing; but with all things contrary, ignorance, meanness, poverty,
hatred, enmity, and setting themselves against whole commonwealths, and
with such a message to declare; how, I say, did they work conviction?
For both the precepts brought much labor, and the doctrines many
dangers. And they that heard and were to obey, had been brought up in
luxury and drunkenness, and in great wickedness. Tell me then, how did
they convince? Whence had they their credibility? For, as I have just
said, If without signs they wrought conviction, far greater does the
wonder appear. Do not then urge the fact that signs are not done now, as
a proof that they were not done then. For as then they were usefully
wrought; so now are they no longer so wrought.

<span id="iv.vii-p21"></span>Nor doth it necessarily follow from
discourse being the only instrument of conviction, that now the
“preaching” is in “wisdom.” For both they who from the beginning sowed
the word were unprofessional (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p21.1"></span>ὶδιῶται</span>) and unlearned, and spake
nothing of themselves; but what things they received from God, these
they distributed to the world: and we ourselves at this time introduce
no inventions of our own; but the things which from them we have
received, we speak unto all. And not even now persuade we by
argumentation; but from the Divine Scriptures and from the miracles done
at that time we produce the proof of what we say. On the other hand,
even they at that time persuaded not by signs alone, but also by
discoursing. And the signs and the testimonies out of the Old
Scriptures, not the cleverness of the things said, made their words
appear more powerful.

<span id="iv.vii-p22"></span>\[5.\] How then, you will say, is it that
signs were expedient then, and now inexpedient? Let us suppose a case,
(for as yet I am contending against the Greek, and therefore I speak
hypothetically of what must certainly come to pass,) let us, I say,
suppose a case; and let the unbeliever consent to believe our
affirmations, though it be only by way of concession: (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii-p22.1"></span>κἄν κατὰ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii-p22.2"></span>συνδρομήν</span>) for
instance, That Christ will come. When then Christ shall come and all the
angels with Him, and be manifested as God, and all things made subject
unto Him; will not even the Greek believe? It is quite plain that he
will also fall down and worship, and confess Him God, though his
stubbornness exceed all reckoning. For who, at sight of the heavens
opened and Him coming upon the clouds, and all the congregation of the
powers above spread around Him, and rivers of fire coming on, and all
standing by and trembling, will not fall down before Him, and believe
Him God? Tell me, then; shall that adoration and knowledge be accounted
unto the Greek for faith? No, on no account. And why not? Because this
is not faith. For necessity hath done this, and the evidence of the
things seen, and it is not of choice, but by the vastness of the
spectacle the powers of the mind are dragged along. It follows that by
how much the more evident and overpowering the course of events, by so
much is the part of faith abridged. For this reason miracles are not
done now.

<span id="iv.vii-p23"></span>And that this is the truth, hear what He
saith unto Thomas (St. [John xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029)<span id="iv.vii-p23.1"></span>..md)
“Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed.” Therefore,
in proportion to the evidence wherewith the miracle is set forth is the
reward of faith lessened. So that if now also miracles were wrought, the
same thing would ensue. For that then we shall no longer know Him by
faith, Paul hath shewn, saying, “For now we walk by faith, not by
sight.” ([2 Cor. v. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.vii-p23.2"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p23.3"></span>νῦν</span> not in the received text.) As at
that time, although thou believe, it shall not be imputed unto thee,
because the thing is so palpable; so also now, supposing that such
miracles were done as were formerly. For when we admit things which in
no degree and in no way can be made out by reasoning, then it is faith.
It is for this that hell is threatened, but is not shewn: for if it were
shewn, the same would again ensue.

<span id="iv.vii-p24"></span>\[6.\] Besides if signs be what thou
seekest after, even now thou mayest see signs, although not of the same
kind; the numberless predictions and on an endless variety of subject:
the conversion of the world, the self-denying (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p24.1"></span>φιλοσοφίαν</span>) course of the Barbarians,
the change from savage customs, the greater intenseness of piety. “What
predictions?” you will say. “For all the things just mentioned were
written after the present state of things had begun.” When? Where? By
whom? Tell me. How many years ago? Will you have fifty, or an hundred?
They had not then, a hundred years ago, anything written at all. How
then did the world retain the doctrines and all the rest, since memory
would not be sufficient? How knew they that Peter was crucified? (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii-p24.2"></span>ἀνεσκολοπίσθη</span>)  How
could it have entered the minds of men who came after the events had
taken place to foretell, for instance, that the Gospel should be
preached in every part of the whole world? that the Jewish institutions
should cease, and never return again? And they who <span id="page_32">p.
32</span> <span id="iv.vii-Page_32"></span>gave up their lives for the
Gospel, how would they have endured to see the Gospel adulterated? And
how would the writers have won credit, miracles having ceased? And how
could the writings have penetrated to the region of Barbarians, and of
Indians, and unto the very bounds of the ocean, if the relators had not
been worthy of credit? The writers, too, who were they?  When, how, and
why, did they write at all? Was it to gain glory to themselves? Why then
inscribed they the books with other men’s names? “Why, from a wish to
recommend the doctrine.” As true, or as false? For if you say, they
stuck to it, as being false; their joining it at all was out of all
likelihood: but if as being truth, there was no need of inventions such
as you speak of. And besides, the prophecies are of such a kind, as that
even until now time has been unable to force aside the predicted course
of things: (<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii-p24.3"></span>ὡς
μὴ</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii-p24.4"></span> δυνάσθαι
βιαζὲσθαι</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p24.5"></span>χρόνῳ τα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p24.6"></span> εἰρημένα</span>) for the destruction indeed of
Jerusalem took place many years ago; but there are also other
predictions which extend along from that time until His coming; which
examine as you please: for instance, this, “I am with you alway, even
unto the end of the world: (St. [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="iv.vii-p24.7"></span>..md)
and, “Upon this Rock I will build My Church, and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it:” (St. [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="iv.vii-p24.8"></span>..md)
and, “This Gospel shall be preached unto all nations:” (St. [Matt. xxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)<span id="iv.vii-p24.9"></span>..md)
and that which the woman which was an harlot did: <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md)   and many others more than these. Whence
then the truth of this prediction if indeed it were a forgery? How did
“the gates of hell” not “prevail” against “the Church?” How is Christ
always “with us?” For had He not been “with us,” the Church would not
have been victorious. How was the Gospel spread abroad in every part of
the world? They also who have spoken against us are enough to testify
the antiquity of the books; I mean, such as Celsus <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md) and he of Batanea <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) , who came after him. For they, I
suppose, were not speaking against books composed after their time.

<span id="iv.vii-p28"></span>\[7\] And besides, there is the whole world
which with one consent hath received the Gospel. Now there could not
have been so great agreement from one end of the earth to the other,
unless it had been the Grace of the Spirit; but the authors of the
forgery would have been quickly found out. Neither could so great
excellencies have originated from inventions and falsehoods. Dost thou
not see the whole world coming in; error extinguished; the austere
wisdom (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p28.1"></span>φιλοσυφίαν</span>) of the old monks shining
brighter than the sun; the choirs of the virgins; the piety among
Barbarians; all men serving under one yoke? For neither by us alone were
these things foretold, but also from the beginning, by the Prophets. For
you will not, I trow, cavil at their predictions also: for the books are
with their enemies, and through the zeal of certain Greeks they have
been transferred into the Greek tongue. Many things then do these also
foretell concerning these matters, shewing that it was God who should
come among us.

<span id="iv.vii-p29"></span>\[8\] Why then do not all believe now?
Because things have degenerated: and for this we are to blame. (For from
hence the discourse is addressed unto us also.) For surely not even then
did they trust to signs alone, but by the mode of life also many of the
converts were attracted. For, “Let your light so shine before men,”
saith He, “that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father
which is in heaven.” (St. [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="iv.vii-p29.1"></span>..md)
And, “They were all of one heart and one soul, neither said any man that
aught of the things which he possessed was his own, but they had all
things common; and distribution was made unto every man, according as he
had need;” ([Acts 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032.md),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035)<span id="iv.vii-p29.2"></span>..md)
and they lived an angelic life. And if the same were done now, we should
convert the whole world, even without miracles. But in the meanwhile,
let those who will be saved attend to the Scriptures; for they shall
find there both these noble doings, and those which are greater than
these. For it may be added that the Teachers themselves surpassed the
deeds of the others; living in hunger, in thirst, and nakedness. But we
are desirous of enjoying great luxury, and rest, and ease; not so they:
they cried aloud, “Even unto the present hour we both hunger, and
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling
place. ([1 Cor. iv. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.vii-p29.3"></span>.) And some ran from Jerusalem unto Illyricum,
([Rom. xv. 19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.vii-p29.4"></span>.) and another unto the country of the Indians,
and another unto that of the Moors, and this to one part of the world,
that to another. Whereas we have not the courage to depart even out of
our own country; but seek for luxurious living and splendid houses and
all other superfluities. For which of us ever was famished for the word
of God’s sake?  Which ever abode in a wilderness? Which ever <span
id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span id="iv.vii-Page_33"></span>set out on a
distant peregrination? Which of our teachers lived by the labor of his
hands to assist others?  Which endured death daily? Hence it is that
they also who are with us have become slothful. For suppose that one saw
soldiers and generals struggling with hunger, and thirst, and death, and
with all dreadful things, and bearing cold and dangers and all like
lions, and so prospering; then afterwards, relaxing that strictness, and
becoming enervated, and fond of wealth, and addicted to business and
bargains, and then overcome by their enemies, it were extreme folly to
seek for the cause of all this. Now let us reason thus in our own case
and that of our ancestors; for we too have become weaker than all, and
are nailed down unto this present life.

<span id="iv.vii-p30"></span>And if one be found having a vestige of the
ancient wisdom, leaving the cities and the market-places, and the
society of the world, and the ordering of others, he betakes himself to
the mountains: and if one ask the reason of that retirement, he invents
a plea which cannot meet with allowance. For, saith he, “lest I perish
too, and the edge of my goodness be taken off, I start aside.” Now how
much better were it for thee to become less keen, and to gain others,
than abiding on high to neglect thy perishing brethren?

<span id="iv.vii-p31"></span>When, however, the one sort are careless
about virtue, and those who do regard it withdraw themselves far from
our ranks, how are we to subdue our enemies? For even if miracles were
wrought now, who would be persuaded? Or who of those without would give
heed unto us, our iniquity being thus prevalent? For so it is, that our
upright living seems unto the many the more trustworthy argument of the
two: miracles admitting of a bad construction on the part of obstinate
bad men: whereas a pure life will have abundant power to stop the mouth
of the devil himself.

<span id="iv.vii-p32"></span>\[9.\] These things I say, both to
governors and governed; and, before all others, unto myself; to the end
that the way of life shown forth in us may be truly admirable, that
taking our appropriate stations, we may look down on all things present;
may despise wealth, and not despise hell; overlook glory, and not
overlook salvation; endure toil and labor here, lest we fall into
punishment there. Thus let us wage war with the Greeks; thus let us take
them captive with a captivity better than liberty.

<span id="iv.vii-p33"></span>But while we say these things without
intermission, over and over, they occur very seldom. Howbeit, be they
done or not, it is right to remind you of them continually. For if some
are engaged in deceiving by their fair speech, so much more is it the
duty of those who allure back unto the truth, not to grow weary of
speaking what is profitable. Again: if the deceivers make use of so many
contrivances—spending as they do money, and applying arguments, and
undergoing dangers, and making a parade of their patronage—much more
should we, who are winning men from deceit, endure both dangers and
deaths, and all things; that we may both gain ourselves and others, and
become to our enemies irresistible, and so obtain the promised
blessings, through the grace and loving-kindness, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[29:32](1120010.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p7.1"></span>τὸ μαρτύριον</span>, the martyrdom, or testimony
by death: see [1 Tim. ii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.vii-p7.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[29:33](1120010.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p8"></span> Here again what is written of St. Peter is
taken as if written of St. Paul: see [Acts
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012.md), [Acts
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.vii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[30:34](1120010.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p13.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii-p13.2"></span>κκαθαίρων</span>: there seems to be an allusion
to the classical fable about Hercules, who is represented as “purging
the world” of monsters and oppressors; Soph. *Trach*. 1078. ed.
Musgrave.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[32:35](1120010.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p24.10"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p25"></span> Vid. St. [Matt.
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#013.md), [Luke
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037.md)<span id="iv.vii-p25.1"></span>.
which two texts St. Chrys. apparently considers as relating to the same
person: but in his commentary on St. [Matthew xxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.vii-p25.2"></span>. he
distinctly says they were not the same. The Fathers are divided on this
point. Tertullian (*de Pudic*. 11.) and, St. Augustin (*de Consensu
Evangelist* ii. 79.) consider them as the same, St. Augustin adding ,
that she was led to repeat the action with circumstances that shewed her
increased perfection:  Ambrosiaster (*in loc*.) leaves the matter
doubtful.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[32:36](1120010.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p26"></span> Celsus, the Epicurean philosopher, against
whom Origen wrote about A.D. 170.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[32:37](1120010.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p27"></span> Porphyry; so called also by St. Jerome, in
the Preface to his *Commentary on Galatians* where the Editor’s
conjecture is, that the name was that of Porphyry’s residence or birth,
but that it was also a term of reproach, alluding to the fat bulls of
Basan, [Ps. xxii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.vii-p27.1"></span>. He is commonly called a Tyrian, but they
suppose that Batanea, which is in Syria, was a colony of Tyre.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VII](1120011.md)
