[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120064)  [Next](1120066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="v.xvi-p1.1"></span>Homily XVI.</span>

<span id="v.xvi-p2"></span><span id="v.xvi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.xvi-p2.2"></span>[2 Cor. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#013)<span id="v.xvi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p3"></span>And in your comfort, we joyed the more
exceedingly for the joy of Titus, because his spirit hath been refreshed
by you all.

<span id="v.xvi-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.xvi-p4.1"></span>See</span> again how he exalts their praises, and
showeth their love. For having said, ‘I was pleased that my Epistle
wrought so much and that ye gained so much,’ for “I rejoice,” he saith,
“not that ye were made sorry, but that ye were made sorry unto
repentance;” and having shown his own love, for he saith, “Though I
wrote unto you, I wrote not for his cause that did the wrong, nor for
his cause that suffered the wrong, but that our care for you might be
made manifest to you:” again he mentioneth another sign of their good
will, which bringeth them great praise and showeth the genuineness of
their affection. For, “in your comfort <span
id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800) ,” he saith, “we joyed the more
exceedingly for the joy of Titus.” And yet this is no sign of one that
loveth them exceedingly; rejoicing rather for Titus than for them.
‘Yes,’ he replies, ‘it is, for I joyed not so much for his cause as for
yours.’ Therefore also he subjoins the reason, saying, “because his
bowels were refreshed by you all.” He said not, ‘he,’ but “his bowels;”
that is, ‘his love for you.’ And how were they refreshed? “By all.” For
this too is a very great praise.

<span id="v.xvi-p6"></span>[2 Cor.
7.14](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#014)<span id="v.xvi-p6.1"></span>.
“For if in anything I have gloried to him on your behalf.”

<span id="v.xvi-p7"></span>It is high praise when the teacher boasted,
for he saith, “I was not put to shame.” I therefore rejoiced, because ye
showed yourselves to be amended and proved my words by your deeds. So
that the honor accruing to me was twofold; first, in that ye had made
progress; next, in that I was not found to fall short of the truth.

<span id="v.xvi-p8"></span>[2 Cor.
7.14](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#014)<span id="v.xvi-p8.1"></span>.
“But as we spake always to you in <span id="page_356">p. 356</span>
<span id="v.xvi-Page_356"></span>truth, so our glorying also which I
made before Titus was found to be truth.”

<span id="v.xvi-p9"></span>Here he alludes to something further. As we
spake all things among you in truth, (for it is probable that he had
also spoken to them much in praise of this man <span
id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801) ,) so also, what we said of you to
Titus has been proved true.

<span id="v.xvi-p11"></span>[2 Cor.
7.15](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#015)<span id="v.xvi-p11.1"></span>.
“And his inward affection <span id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802) is
more abundant toward you.”

<span id="v.xvi-p13"></span>What follows is in commendation of him, as
exceedingly consumed with love and attached to them. And he said not
‘his love.’ Then that he may not appear to be flattering, he everywhere
mentions the causes of his affection; in order that he may, as I said,
both escape the imputation of flattery and the more encourage them by
making the praise redound unto them, and by showing that it was they who
had infused into him the beginning and ground of this so great love. For
having said, “his inward affection is more abundant toward you;” he
added,

<span id="v.xvi-p14"></span>“Whilst he remembereth the obedience of you
all.” Now this both shows that Titus was grateful to his benefactors,
seeing he had returned, having them all in his heart, and continually
remembereth them, and beareth them on his lips and in his mind; and also
is a greater distinction to the Corinthians, seeing that so vanquished
they sent him away. Then he mentions their obedience also, magnifying
their zeal: wherefore also he addeth these words,

<span id="v.xvi-p15"></span>“How with fear and trembling ye received
him.” Not with love only, but also with excessive honor. Seest thou how
he bears witness to a twofold virtue in them, both that they loved him
as a father and had feared him as a ruler, neither for fear dimming
love, nor for love relaxing fear. He expressed this also above, “That ye
sorrow after a godly sort, what earnest care it wrought in you; yea what
fear, yea what longing.”

<span id="v.xvi-p16"></span>[2 Cor.
7.16](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#016)<span id="v.xvi-p16.1"></span>. “I
rejoice therefore, that in every thing I am of good courage concerning
you.” Seest thou that he rejoiceth more on their account; ‘because,’ he
saith, ‘ye have in no particular shamed your teacher, nor show
yourselves unworthy of my testimony.’ So that he joyed not so much for
Titus’ sake, that he enjoyed so great honor; as for their own, that they
had displayed so much good feeling. For that he may not be imagined to
joy rather on Titus’ account, observe how in this place also he states
the reason. As then he said above, “If in anything I have gloried to him
on your behalf I was not put to shame;” so here also, “In everything I
am of good courage concerning you.” ‘Should need require me to rebuke, I
have no apprehension of your being alienated; or again to boast, I fear
not to be convicted of falsehood; or to praise you as obeying the rein,
or as loving, or as full of zeal, I have confidence in you. I bade you
cut off, and ye did cut off; I bade you receive, and ye did receive; I
said before Titus that ye were great and admirable kind of people and
knew to reverence teachers: ye proved these things true by your conduct.
And he learnt these things not so much from me as from you. At any rate
when he returned, he had become a passionate lover of you: your behavior
having surpassed what he had been told.’

<span id="v.xvi-p17"></span>\[2.\] [2 Cor.
8.1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001)<span id="v.xvi-p17.1"></span>.
“Moreover, brethren, we make known to you the grace of God which hath
been given in the Churches of Macedonia.”

<span id="v.xvi-p18"></span>Having encouraged them with these encomiums,
he again tries exhortation. For on this account he mingled these praises
with his rebuke, that he might not by proceeding from rebuke to
exhortation make what he had to say ill received; but having soothed
their ears, might by this means pave the way for his exhortation. For he
purposeth to discourse of alms-giving; wherefore also he saith
beforehand, “I rejoice that in everything I am of good courage
concerning you;” by their past good works, making them the more ready to
this duty also. And he said not at once, ‘Therefore give alms,’ but
observe his wisdom, how he draws from a distance and from on high the
preparation for his discourse. For he says, “I make known to you the
grace of God which hath been given in the Churches of Macedonia.” For
that they might not be uplifted he calleth what they did “grace;” and
whilst relating what others did he worketh greater zeal in them by his
encomiums on others. And he mentions together two praises of the
Macedonians, or rather three; namely, that they bear trials nobly; and
that they know how to pity; and that, though poor, they had displayed
profuseness in almsgiving, for their property had been also plundered.
And when he wrote his Epistle to them, it was as signifying this that he
said, “For ye became imitators of the Churches of God which are in
Judæa, for ye also suffered the same things of your own countrymen, even
as they did of the Jews.” ([1 Thess. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#014)<span id="v.xvi-p18.1"></span>.)
Hear what he said afterwards in writing to the Hebrews, “For ye took
joyfully the spoiling of your possessions.” ([Heb. x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034)<span id="v.xvi-p18.2"></span>.) But
He calls what they did “grace,” not in order to keep them humble merely;
but both to provoke them to emulation and to prevent what he said from
proving invidious. Wherefore he also added the name of “brethren” so as
to undermine all envious feeling; for he is about to praise them in
high-flown <span id="page_357">p. 357</span> <span
id="v.xvi-Page_357"></span>terms. Listen, at least, to his praises. For
having said, “I make known to you the grace of God,” he said not  ‘which
hath been given in this or that city,’ but praiseth the entire nation,
saying, “in the Churches of Macedonia.” Then he details also this same
grace.

<span id="v.xvi-p19"></span>[2 Cor.
8.2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002)<span id="v.xvi-p19.1"></span>.
“How that in much proof of affliction the abundance of their joy.”

<span id="v.xvi-p20"></span>Seest thou his wisdom? For he says not
first, that which he wishes; but another thing before it, that he may
not seem to do this of set purpose <span
id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803) , but to arrive at it by a different
connection. “In much proof of affliction.” This was what he said in his
Epistle to the Macedonians themselves, “Ye became imitators of the Lord,
having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy
Ghost;” and again, “From you sounded forth the word of the Lord, not
only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place, your faith to
God-ward is gone forth.” ([1 Thess.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#006),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#008)<span id="v.xvi-p21.3"></span>.) But
what is, “in much proof of affliction the abundance of their joy?” Both,
he says, happened to them in excess; both the affliction and the joy.
Wherefore also the strangeness was great that so great an excess of
pleasure sprang up to them out of affliction. For in truth the
affliction not only was not the parent of grief, but it even became unto
them an occasion of gladness; and this too, though it was “great.” Now
this he said, to prepare them to be noble and firm in their trials. For
they were not merely afflicted, but so as also to have become approved
by their patience: yea rather, he says not by their patience, but what
was more than patience, “joy.” And neither said he “joy” simply, but
“abundance of joy,” for it sprang up in them, great and unspeakable.

<span id="v.xvi-p22"></span>\[3.\] “And their deep poverty abounded unto
the riches of their liberality.”

<span id="v.xvi-p23"></span>Again, both these with excessiveness. For as
their great affliction gave birth to great joy, yea, “abundance of joy,”
so their great poverty gave birth to great riches of alms. For this he
showed, saying, “abounded unto the riches of their liberality.” For
munificence is determined not by the measure of what is given, but by
the mind of those that bestow it.

<span id="v.xvi-p24"></span>Wherefore he nowhere says, ‘the richness of
the gifts,’ but “the riches of their liberality.” Now what he says is to
this effect; ‘their poverty not only was no impediment to their being
bountiful, but was even an occasion to them of abounding, just as
affliction was of feeling joy. For the poorer they were, the more
munificent they were and contributed the more readily.’ Wherefore also
he admires them exceedingly, for that in the midst of so great poverty
they had displayed so great munificence. For “their deep,” that is,
‘their great and unspeakable,’ “poverty,” showed their “liberality.” But
he said not ‘showed,’ but “abounded;” and he said not “liberality,” but
“riches of liberality;” that is, an equipoise to the greatness of their
poverty, or rather much outweighing it, was the bountifulness they
displayed. Then he even explains this more clearly, saying,

<span id="v.xvi-p25"></span>[2 Cor.
8.3](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#003)<span id="v.xvi-p25.1"></span>.
“For according to their power, I bear witness.” Trustworthy is the
witness. “And beyond their power.” That is, it “abounded unto the riches
of their liberality.” Or rather, he makes this plain, not by this
expression alone, but also by all that follows; for he says, “of their
own accord.” Lo! yet another excessiveness.

<span id="v.xvi-p26"></span>[2 Cor.
8.4](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#004)<span id="v.xvi-p26.1"></span>.
“With much intreaty.” Lo! yet a third and a fourth. “Praying us.” Lo!
even a fifth. And when they were in affliction and in poverty. Here are
a sixth and seventh. And they gave with excessiveness. Then since this
is what he most of all wishes to provide for in the Corinthians’ case,
namely, the giving deliberately, he dwells especially upon it, saying,
“with much intreaty,” and “praying us.” ‘We prayed not them, but they
us.’ Pray us what? “That the grace <span
id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804) and the fellowship in the ministering
to the saints.” Seest thou how he again exalts the deed, calling it by
venerable names. For since they were ambitious <span
id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805) of spiritual gifts <span
id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806) , he calls it by the name grace that
they might eagerly pursue it; and again by that of “fellowship,” that
they might learn that they receive, not give only. ‘This therefore they
intreated us,’ he says, ‘that we would take upon us such a
ministry <span id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807) .’

<span id="v.xvi-p31"></span>[2 Cor.
8.5](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#005)<span id="v.xvi-p31.1"></span>.
“And” this, “not as we hoped.” This he says with reference both to the
amount and to their afflictions. ‘For we could never have hoped,’ he
says, ‘that whilst in so great affliction and poverty, they would even
have urged us and so greatly intreated us.’ He showed also their
carefulness of life in other respects, by saying,

<span id="v.xvi-p32"></span>“But first they gave their own selves to the
Lord, and to us by the will of God.”

<span id="v.xvi-p33"></span>‘For in everything their obedience was
beyond our expectations; nor because they showed mercy did they neglect
the other virtues,’ “but first gave themselves to the Lord.” What is,
“gave themselves to the Lord?” ‘They offered up \[themselves\]; they
showed themselves approved in faith; they displayed much fortitude in
their trials, order, goodness, love, in all things both readiness and
zeal.’ What means, “and to us?” ‘They were tractable to the rein, loved,
obeyed us; both <span id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span
id="v.xvi-Page_358"></span>fulfilling the laws of God and bound unto us
by love.’ And observe how here also he again shows their
earnestness <span id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808) , saying, “gave
themselves to the Lord.” They did not in some things obey God, and in
some the world; but in all things Him; and gave themselves wholly unto
God. For neither because they showed mercy were they filled up with
senseless pride, but displaying much lowlymindedness, much obedience,
much reverence, much heavenly wisdom, they so wrought their almsdeeds
also. But what is, “by the will of God?” Since he had said, they “gave
themselves to us,” yet was it not “to us,” after the manner of men, but
they did this also according to the mind of God.

<span id="v.xvi-p35"></span>\[4.\] [2 Cor.
8.6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006)<span id="v.xvi-p35.1"></span>.
“Insomuch that we exhorted Titus, that as he made a beginning before, so
he would also complete in you this grace also <span
id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809) .”

<span id="v.xvi-p37"></span>And what connexion is there here? Much; and
closely bearing on what went before. ‘For because we saw them vehement,’
he says, ‘and fervent in all things, in temptations, in almsgiving, in
their love toward us, in the purity otherwise of their life: in order
that ye too might be made their equals, we sent Titus.’ Howbeit he did
not say this, though he implied it. Behold excessiveness of love. ‘For
though intreated and desired by them,’ he says, ‘we were anxious about
your state, lest by any means ye should come short of them. Wherefore
also we sent Titus, that by this also being stirred up and put in mind,
ye might emulate the Macedonians.’ For Titus happened to be there when
this Epistle was writing. Yet he shows that he had made a beginning in
this matter before Paul’s exhortation; “that as he had made a beginning
before,” he says. Wherefore also he bestows great praise on him; for
instance, in the beginning \[of the Epistle\]; “Because I found not
Titus my brother, I had no relief for my spirit:” ([2 Cor.
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013)<span id="v.xvi-p37.1"></span>.)
and here all those things which he has said, and this too itself. For
this also is no light praise, the having begun before even: for this
evinces a warm and fervent spirit. Wherefore also he sent him,
infusing <span id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810) amongst them in this
also a very great incentive unto giving, the presence of Titus. On this
account also he extols him with praises, wishing to endear him more
exceedingly to the Corinthians. For this too hath a great weight unto
persuading, when he who counsels is upon intimate terms. And well does
he both once and twice and thrice, having made mention of almsgiving,
call ‘it grace,’ now indeed saying, “Moreover, brethren, I make known to
you the grace of God bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia;” and now,
“they of their own accord, praying us with much intreaty in regard of
this grace and fellowship:” and again, “that as he had begun, so he
would also finish in you this grace also.”

<span id="v.xvi-p39"></span>\[5.\] For this is a great good and a gift
of God; and rightly done assimilates us, so far as may be, unto God; for
such an one <span id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811) is in the highest
sense a man. A certain one, at least, giving a model of a man has
mentioned this, for “Man,” saith he, “is a great thing; and a merciful
man is an honorable thing.” ([Prov. xx.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#006)<span id="v.xvi-p40.4"></span>. LXX.)
Greater is this gift than to raise the dead. For far greater is it to
feed Christ when an hungered than to raise the dead by the name of
Jesus: for in the former case thou doest good to Christ, in the latter
He to thee. And the reward surely comes by doing good, not by receiving
good. For here indeed, in the case of miracles I mean, thou art God’s
debtor; in that of almsgiving, thou hast God for a debtor. Now it is
almsgiving, when it is done with willingness, when with bountifulness,
when thou deemest thyself not to give but to receive, when done as if
thou wert benefitted, as if gaining and not losing; for so this were not
a grace. For he that showeth mercy on another ought to feel joyful, not
peevish. For how is it not absurd, if whilst removing another’s
downheartedness, thou art thyself downhearted? for so thou no longer
sufferest it to be alms. For if thou art downhearted because thou hast
delivered another from downheartedness, thou furnishest an example of
extreme cruelty and inhumanity; for it were better not to deliver him,
than so to deliver him. And why art thou also downhearted at all, O man?
for fear thy gold should diminish? If such are thy thoughts, do not give
at all: if thou art not quite sure that it is multiplied for thee in
heaven, do not bestow. But thou seekest the recompense here. Wherefore?
Let thine alms be alms, and not traffic. Now many have indeed received a
recompense even here; but have not so received it, as if they should
have an advantage over those who received it not here; but some of them
as being weaker than they ought, because they were not so strongly
attracted by the things which are there. And as those who are greedy,
and ill-mannered <span id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812) , and slaves of
their bellies, being invited to a royal banquet, and unable to wait till
the proper time, just like little children mar their own enjoyment, by
taking food beforehand and stuffing themselves with inferior dishes:
even so in truth do these who seek for and receive \[recompense\] <span
id="page_359">p. 359</span> <span id="v.xvi-Page_359"></span>here,
diminish their reward there. Further, when thou lendest, thou wishest to
receive thy principal after a longer interval, and perhaps even not to
receive it at all, in order that by the delay thou mayest make the
interest greater; but, in this case, dost thou ask back immediately; and
that too when thou art about to be not here, but there forever; when
thou art about not to be here to be judged, but to render thine
account?  And if indeed one were building thee mansions where thou wert
not going to remain, thou wouldest deem it to be a loss; but now,
desirest thou here to be rich, whence possibly thou art to depart even
before the evening? Knowest thou not that we live in a foreign land, as
though strangers and sojourners? Knowest thou not that it is the lot of
sojourners to be ejected when they think not, expect not? which is also
our lot. For this reason then, whatsoever things we have prepared, we
leave here. For the Lord does not allow us to receive them and depart,
if we have built houses, if we have bought fields, if slaves, if gear,
if any other such thing. But not only does He not allow us to take them
and depart hence, but doth not even account to thee the price of them.
For He forwarned thee that thou shouldest not build, nor spend what is
other men’s but thine own. Why therefore, leaving what is thine own,
dost thou work and be at cost in what is another’s, so as to lose both
thy toil and thy wages and to suffer the extremest punishment? Do not
so, I beseech thee; but seeing we are by nature sojourners, let us also
be so by choice; that we be not there sojourners and dishonored and cast
out. For if we are set upon being citizens here, we shall be so neither
here nor there; but if we continue to be sojourners, and live in such
wise as sojourners ought to live in, we shall enjoy the freedom of
citizens both here and there. For the just, although having nothing,
will both dwell here amidst all men’s possessions as though they were
his own; and also, when he hath departed to heaven, shall see those his
eternal habitations. And he shall both here suffer no discomfort, (for
none will ever be able to make him a stranger that hath every land for
his city;) and when he hath been restored to his own country, shall
receive the true riches. In order that we may gain both the things of
this life and of that, let us use aright the things we have. For so
shall we be citizens of the heavens, and shall enjoy much boldness;
whereunto may we all attain, through the grace and love towards men of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father with the Holy Ghost, be
glory and power for ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_800"></span>[355:801](1120065.htm#fr_800) <span
id="v.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p5"></span> In the R.T. the words “in your comfort” are
connected with what precedes, not what follows them. \[The Rev. Vers.
adopts Chrysostom’s connection but changes the pronoun from the second
person to the first, reading “in our comfort.” C.\]

<span id="fn_801"></span>[356:802](1120065.htm#fr_801) <span
id="v.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p10"></span> i.e. Titus.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[356:803](1120065.htm#fr_802) <span
id="v.xvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p12"></span> Gr. *bowels*.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[357:804](1120065.htm#fr_803) <span
id="v.xvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p21.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p21.2"></span>πίτηδες</span>.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[357:805](1120065.htm#fr_804) <span
id="v.xvi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p27.1"></span>χαρὶν</span>.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[357:806](1120065.htm#fr_805) <span
id="v.xvi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p28.1"></span>ζηλωταὶ</span>.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[357:807](1120065.htm#fr_806) <span
id="v.xvi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p29"></span> Literally, *spirits*.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[357:808](1120065.htm#fr_807) <span
id="v.xvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p30"></span> \[Critical authority is altogether in favor
of the text of this clause which is adopted in the Rev. Vers. C.\]

<span id="fn_808"></span>[358:809](1120065.htm#fr_808) <span
id="v.xvi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.2"></span>πίτασιν</span>.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[358:810](1120065.htm#fr_809) <span
id="v.xvi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p36.1"></span>ἐν ὐμῖν</span> St. C. <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p36.2"></span>εἰς ὑμᾶς</span>, R.T., \[which is the true text.
C.\]

<span id="fn_810"></span>[358:811](1120065.htm#fr_810) <span
id="v.xvi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p38.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p38.2"></span>ντιθεὶς</span>.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[358:812](1120065.htm#fr_811) <span
id="v.xvi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p40.1"></span>τοῦτο</span>, in sense equivalent to <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p40.2"></span>ὁ τοιοῦτος</span>. See Dr.
Field’s *Index to Hom. on St. Matt*. on the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p40.3"></span>οὗτος</span>.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[358:813](1120065.htm#fr_812) <span
id="v.xvi-p40.5"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p41.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p41.2"></span>πειρόκαλοι</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XVII](1120066)
