[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120069)  [Next](1120071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxi"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p1"></span> <span id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span
id="v.xxi-Page_375"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="v.xxi-p1.1"></span>Homily XXI.</span>

<span id="v.xxi-p2"></span><span id="v.xxi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.xxi-p2.2"></span>[2 Cor.
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#002)<span id="v.xxi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p3"></span>Now I Paul myself entreat you by the meekness
and gentleness of Christ, I who in your presence am lowly among you, but
being absent am of good courage toward you: yea, I beseech you, that I
may not when present show courage with the confidence, wherewith I count
to be bold against some, which count of us as if we walked according to
the flesh.

<span id="v.xxi-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.xxi-p4.1"></span>Having</span> completed, in such sort as behoved
his discourse of almsgiving, and having shown that he loves them more
than he is loved, and having recounted the circumstances of his patience
and trials, he now opportunely enters upon points involving more of
reproof, making allusion to the false apostles, and concluding his
discourse with more disagreeable matter, and with commendations of
himself. For he makes this his business also throughout the Epistle.
Which also perceiving, he hence oftentimes corrects himself, saying in
so many words <span id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882) ; “Do we begin
again to commend ourselves?” ([2 Cor.
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001)<span id="v.xxi-p5.2"></span>.) and
further on; “We commend not ourselves again, but give you occasion to
glory:” ([2 Cor. 5.12](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#012)<span
id="v.xxi-p5.3"></span>.) and afterwards; “I am become a fool in
glorying; ye have compelled me.” ([2 Cor.
12.11](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#011)<span id="v.xxi-p5.4"></span>.)
And many such correctives doth he use. And one would not be wrong in
styling this Epistle an eulogium of Paul; he makes such large mention
both of his grace and his patience. For since there were some amongst
them who thought great things of themselves, and set themselves above
the Apostle, and accused him as a boaster, and as being nothing, and
teaching no sound doctrine; (now this was in itself the most certain
evidence of their own corruptness;) see how he begins his rebuke of
them; “Now I Paul myself.” Seest thou what severity, what dignity, is
here? For what he would say is this, ‘I beseech you do not compel me,
nor leave me to use my power against those that hold us cheap, and think
of us as carnal.’ This is severer than those threats towards them
uttered in the former Epistle; “Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in
love and a spirit of meekness?” ([1 Cor. iv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021)<span id="v.xxi-p5.5"></span>.) and
then again; “Now some are puffed up as though I were not coming to you;
but I will come, and will know, not the word of them that are puffed up,
but the power.” ([2 Cor. 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#019)<span id="v.xxi-p5.6"></span>.) For
in this place he shows both things, both his power, and his philosophy
and forbearance; since he so beseeches them, and with such earnestness,
that he may not be compelled to come to a display of the avenging power
pertaining to him, and to smite and chastise them and exact the extreme
penalty. For he implied this in saying, “But I beseech you, that I may
not when present show courage with the confidence, wherewith I count to
be bold against some which count of us as if we walked according to the
flesh.” For the present, however, let us speak of the commencement. “Now
I Paul myself.” Great emphasis, great weight <span
id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) is here. So he says elsewhere, “Behold
I Paul say unto you;” ([Gal. v. 2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002)<span
id="v.xxi-p6.1"></span>.) and again, “As Paul the aged;” ([Philem.
9](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#009)<span id="v.xxi-p6.2"></span>.) and
again in another place, “Who hath been a succorer of many, and of me.”
([Rom. xvi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#002)<span
id="v.xxi-p6.3"></span>.) So also here, “Now I Paul myself.” This even
is a great thing, that himself beseecheth; but that other is greater
which he added, saying, “by the meekness and gentleness of Christ.” For
with the wish of greatly shaming them, he puts forward that “meekness
and gentleness,” making his entreaty in this way more forcible; as if he
had said, ‘Reverence the gentleness of Christ by which I beseech you.’
And this he said, at the same time also showing that although they
should lay ever so strong <span id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884) a
necessity upon him, he himself is more inclined to this: it is from
being meek, not from want of power, that he does not proceed against
them: for Christ also did in like manner.

<span id="v.xxi-p8"></span>“Who in your presence am lowly among you, but
being absent am of good courage toward you.” What, pray, is this? Surely
he speaks in irony, using their speeches. For they said this, that ‘when
he is present indeed, he is worthy of no account, but poor and
contemptible; but when absent, swells, and brags, and sets himself up
against us, and threatens.’ This at least he implies also afterwards,
saying, “for his letters,” say they, “are weighty, but his <span
id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span id="v.xxi-Page_376"></span>bodily
presence is weak, and his speech of no account.” ([2 Cor.
10.10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010)<span id="v.xxi-p8.1"></span>.)
He either then speaks in irony, manifesting great severity and saying,
‘I, the base, I, the mean, when present, (as they say,) and when absent,
lofty:’ or else meaning that even though he should utter great things,
it is not out of pride, but out of his confidence in them.

<span id="v.xxi-p9"></span>“But I beseech you, that I may not when
present show courage with the confidence, wherewith I count to be bold
against some which count of us as if we walked according to the flesh.”
Seest thou how great his indignation, and how complete his refutation of
those sayings of theirs? For he saith, ‘I beseech you, do not compel me
to show that even present I am strong and have power.’ For since they
said that ‘when absent, he is quite bold against us and exalteth
himself,’ he uses their very words, ‘I beseech therefore that they
compel me not to use my power.’ For this is the meaning of, “the
confidence.” And he said not, ‘wherewith I am prepared,’ but ‘wherewith
I count.’ ‘For I have not yet resolved upon this; they however give me
reason enough, but not even so do I wish it.’ And yet he was doing this
not to vindicate himself, but the Gospel. Now if where it was necessary
to vindicate the Message, he is not harsh, but draws back and delays,
and beseeches that there may be no such necessity; much more would he
never have done any thing of the kind in his own vindication. ‘Grant me
then this favor,’ he saith, ‘that ye compel me not to show, that even
when present I am able to be bold against whomsoever it may be
necessary; that is, to chastise and punish them.’ Seest thou how free he
was from ambition, how he did nothing for display, since even where it
was matter of necessity, he hesitates not to call the act, boldness.
“For I beseech you,” he says, “that I may not when present show courage
with the confidence, wherewith I think to be bold” against some. For
this especially is the part of a teacher, not to be hasty in taking
vengeance, but to work a reformation, and ever to be reluctant and slow
in his punishments. How, pray, does he describe those whom he threatens?
“Those that count of us as though we walked according to the flesh:” for
they accused him as a hypocrite, as wicked, as a boaster.

<span id="v.xxi-p10"></span>\[2.\] [2 Cor.
10.3](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#003)<span id="v.xxi-p10.1"></span>.
“For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war according to the flesh.

<span id="v.xxi-p11"></span>Here he goes on to alarm them also by the
figure <span id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885) he uses, ‘for,’ says he,
‘we are indeed encompassed with flesh; I own it, but we do not live by
the flesh;’ or rather, he said not even this, but for the present
reserves it, for it belongs to the encomium on his life: but first
discourseth of the Preaching, and shows that it is not of man, nor
needeth aid from beneath. Wherefore he said not, ‘we do not live
according to the flesh,’ but, “we do not war according to the flesh,”
that is, ‘we have undertaken a war and a combat; but we do not war with
carnal weapons, nor by help of any human succors.’

<span id="v.xxi-p13"></span>[2 Cor.
10.4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004)<span id="v.xxi-p13.1"></span>.
“For our weapons are not of the flesh.”

<span id="v.xxi-p14"></span>For what sort of weapons are of the flesh? 
Wealth, glory, power, fluency, cleverness, circumventions <span
id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886) , flatteries, hypocrisies, whatsoever
else is similar to these. But ours are not of this sort: but of what
kind are they?

<span id="v.xxi-p16"></span>“Mighty before God.”

<span id="v.xxi-p17"></span>And he said not, ‘we are not carnal,’ but,
“our weapons.” For as I said, for the present he discourseth of the
Preaching, and refers the whole power to God. And he says not,
‘spiritual,’ although this was the fitting opposite <span
id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887) to “carnal,” but “mighty,” in this
implying the other also, and showing that their <span
id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888) weapons are weak and powerless. And
mark the absence of pride in him; for he said not, ‘we are mighty,’ but,
“our weapons are mighty before God.” ‘We did not make them such, but God
Himself.’ For because they were scourged, were persecuted, and suffered
wrongs incurable <span id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889) without number,
which things were proofs of weakness: to show the strength of God he
says, “but they are mighty before God.” For this especially shows His
strength, that by these things He gains the victory. So that even though
we are encompassed with them, yet it is He that warreth and worketh by
them. Then he goes through a long eulogium upon them, saying,

<span id="v.xxi-p21"></span>“To the casting down of strong holds.” And
lest when hearing of strong holds thou shouldest think of aught
material <span id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890) , he says,

<span id="v.xxi-p23"></span>[2 Cor.
10.5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)<span id="v.xxi-p23.1"></span>.
“Casting down imaginations.”

<span id="v.xxi-p24"></span>First giving emphasis by the figure, and
then by this additional expression declaring the spiritual <span
id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891) character of the warfare. For these
strongholds besiege souls, not bodies. Whence they are stronger than the
others, and therefore also the weapons they require are mightier. But by
strongholds he means the Grecian pride, and the strength of their
sophisms and their syllogisms. But nevertheless, ‘these weapons,’ he
says, ‘confounded every thing that stood up against them; for they cast
down imaginations,

<span id="v.xxi-p26"></span>‘And every high thing that is exalted
against the knowledge of God.’ He persisted in the metaphor that he
might make the emphasis greater. ‘For though there should be
strongholds,’ he saith, ‘though fortifications, <span id="page_377">p.
377</span> <span id="v.xxi-Page_377"></span>though any other thing
soever, they yield and give way before these weapons.

<span id="v.xxi-p27"></span>“And bringing every thought into captivity
to the obedience of Christ.” And yet the name, “captivity,” hath an ill
sound with it; for it is the destruction of liberty. Wherefore then has
he used it? With a meaning of its own, in regard to another point. For
the word “captivity” conveys two ideas, the loss of liberty, and the
being so violently overpowered as not to rise up again. It is therefore
in respect to this second meaning that he took it. As when he shall say
“I robbed other churches,” ([2 Cor. xi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#008)<span id="v.xxi-p27.1"></span>.) he
does not intend the taking stealthily, but the stripping and taking
their all, so also here in saying, “bringing into captivity.” For the
fight was not equally maintained, but he conquered with great ease.
Wherefore he did not say, ‘we conquer and have the better,’ only; but
‘we even bring “into captivity;”’ just as above, he did not say, ‘we
advance engines against the “strongholds:”’ but, ‘we cast them down, for
great is the superiority of our weapons.’ ‘For we war not with words,’
he saith, but with deeds against words, not with fleshly wisdom, but
with the spirit of meekness and of power. How was it likely then I
should hunt after honor, and boast in words, and threaten by letters;’
(as they accused him, saying, “his letters are weighty,”) ‘when our
might lay not in these things?’ But having said, “bringing every thought
into captivity to the obedience of Christ,” because the name of
“captivity” was unpleasant, he presently afterwards put an end to the
metaphor, saying, “unto the obedience of Christ:” from slavery unto
liberty, from death unto life, from destruction to salvation. For we
came not merely to strike down, but to bring over to the truth those who
are opposed to us.

<span id="v.xxi-p28"></span>\[3.\] [2 Cor.
10.6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span id="v.xxi-p28.1"></span>.
“And being in readiness to avenge all disobedience, when your obedience
shall be fulfilled.”

<span id="v.xxi-p29"></span>Here he alarmed these <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) also, not those <span
id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893) alone: ‘for,’ says he, ‘we were
waiting for you, that when by our exhortations and threatenings we have
reformed you, and purged and separated you from their fellowship; then,
when those only are left who are incurably diseased, we may visit with
punishment, after we see that you have really <span
id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894) separated from them. For even now
indeed ye obey, but not perfectly.’ ‘And yet if thou hadst done it now,’
saith one, ‘thou wouldest have wrought greater gain.’ ‘By no means, for
if I had done it now, I should have involved you also in the punishment.
Howbeit it behoved to punish them, indeed, but to spare you. Yet if I
spared, I should have seemed to do it out of favor: now this I do not
desire, but first to amend you, and then to proceed against them.’ What
can be tenderer than the heart of the Apostle? who because he saw his
own mixed up with aliens, desires indeed to inflict the blow, but
forbears, and restrains his indignation until these shall have
withdrawn, that he may smite these alone; yea rather, not these even.
For he therefore threatens this, and says he is desirous to separate
unto punishment them alone, that they also being amended by the fear may
change, and he let loose his anger against no one. For just like a most
excellent physician, and common father, and patron, and guardian <span
id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895) , so did he all things, so cared he
for all, removing impediments, checking the pestilent, running about
every whither. For not by fighting did he so achieve the work, but
advancing as if to a ready and an easy victory, he planted his trophies,
undermining, casting down, overthrowing the strongholds of the devil,
and the engines of the demons; and carried over their whole booty to the
camp of Christ. Nor did he even take breath a little, bounding off from
these to those, and from those again to others, like some very able
general, raising trophies every day, or rather every hour. For having
entered into the battle with nothing but a little tunic <span
id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896) , the tongue of Paul took the cities
of his enemies with their men and bows and spears and darts and all.

<span id="v.xxi-p35"></span>For he spake only; and, falling upon his
enemies more fiercely than any fire, his words drave out the demons and
brought over unto him the men that were possessed of them. For when he
cast out that demon, the evil one, fifty thousand sorcerers coming
together burnt their books of magic and revolted to the truth. (See
[Acts xix. 19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#019)<span
id="v.xxi-p35.1"></span>.) And like as in a war, when a tower has fallen
or a tyrant been brought low, all his partizans cast away their arms and
run unto the \[opposing\] general; so truly did it happen then also. For
when the demon was cast out, they all having been besieged, and having
cast away, yea rather having destroyed, their books, ran unto the feet
of Paul. But he setting himself <span id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897)
against the world as though against a single army, no where stayed his
march, but did all things as if he were some man endued with wings <span
id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) : and now restored a lame, now raised
a dead man, now blinded a third, (I mean the sorcerer,) nor even when
shut up in a prison indulged in rest, but even there brought over to
himself the jailor, effecting the goodly captivity we treat of.

<span id="v.xxi-p38"></span><span id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span
id="v.xxi-Page_378"></span>\[4.\] Let us also imitate him after our
power. And why do I say, after our power? For he that wills may come
even near unto him, and behold his valor, and imitate his heroism. For
still he is doing this work, “casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God.” And although many
heretics have attempted to cut him in pieces; yet still, even though
dismembered, he displayeth a mighty strength. For both Marcion and
Manichæus use him indeed, but after cutting him in pieces; but still
even so they are refuted by the several members. For even a hand only of
this champion being found among them puts them utterly to the rout; and
a foot only, left amongst others, pursues and prostrates them, in order
that thou mayest learn the superabundance of his power, and that,
although shorn of his limbs even, he is able to destroy all his
adversaries. ‘This however,’ saith one, ‘is an instance of perversion,
that those who are battling with each other should all use him.’ An
instance of perversion certainly, but not in Paul, (God forbid,) but in
them who use him. For he was not parti-colored <span
id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) , but uniform and clear, but they
perverted his words to their own notions. ‘And wherefore,’ saith one,
‘were they so spoken as to give handles to those that wished for them?’
He did not give handles, but their frenzy used his words not rightly;
since this whole world also is both wonderful and great, and a sure
proof of the wisdom of God, and “the heavens declare the glory of God,
and day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night declareth
knowledge;” ([Ps. 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002)<span id="v.xxi-p39.2"></span>.) but
nevertheless, many have stumbled at it and in contrary directions to one
another. And some have admired it so much above its worth as to think it
God; whilst others have been so insensible of its beauty as to assert it
to be unworthy of God’s creating hand <span
id="fr_900"></span>[901](#fn_900) , and to ascribe the greater share in
it to a certain evil matter. And yet God provided for both points by
making it beautiful and great that it might not be deemed alien from his
wisdom; yet defective and not sufficient unto itself that it might not
be suspected to be God. But nevertheless those who were blinded by their
own reasonings fell away into contradictory notions, refuting one
another, and becoming each the other’s accuser, and vindicating the
wisdom of God even by the very reasonings which led them astray. And why
do I speak of the sun and the heaven? The Jews saw so many marvels
happen before their eyes, yet straightway worshipped a calf. Again they
saw Christ casting out demons, yet called him one that had a demon. But
this was no imputation against him that cast them out, but an accusation
of their understanding who were so blinded. Condemn not then Paul on
account of their judgment who have used him amiss; but understand well
the treasures in him, and develop his riches, so shalt thou make noble
stand against all, fenced by his armor. So shalt thou be able to stop
the mouths both of Greeks and Jews. ‘And how,’ saith one, ‘seeing they
believe him not?’ By the things wrought through him, by the reformation
effected in the world. For it was not of human power <span
id="fr_901"></span>[902](#fn_901) that so great things could be done,
but the Might of the Crucified, breathing on him, made him such as he
was, and showed him more powerful than orators and philosophers and
tyrants and kings and all men. He was not only able to arm himself and
to strike down his adversaries, but to make others also such as himself.
Therefore in order that we may become useful both to ourselves and to
others, let us continually have him in our hands, using his writings for
a meadow and garden of delight <span id="fr_902"></span>[903](#fn_902) .
For so shall we be able both to be delivered from vice and to choose
virtue, and to obtain the promised good things, whereunto may we all
attain, through the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with Whom to the Father with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor,
now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_882"></span>[375:883](1120070.htm#fr_882) <span
id="v.xxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p5.1"></span>αὐτὸ τοῦτο</span>.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[375:884](1120070.htm#fr_883) <span
id="v.xxi-p5.7"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p6"></span> Or, ‘severity.’

<span id="fn_884"></span>[375:885](1120070.htm#fr_884) <span
id="v.xxi-p6.4"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p7.1"></span>μυρίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[376:886](1120070.htm#fr_885) <span
id="v.xxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p12.1"></span>τροπῇ</span>.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[376:887](1120070.htm#fr_886) <span
id="v.xxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p15.1"></span>περιδρομαὶ</span>.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[376:888](1120070.htm#fr_887) <span
id="v.xxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p18.1"></span>τὸ πρὸς ἀντιδιαστολὴν</span>.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[376:889](1120070.htm#fr_888) <span
id="v.xxi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p19"></span> The false Apostles.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[376:890](1120070.htm#fr_889) <span
id="v.xxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p20.1"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p20.2"></span>νήκεστα</span>.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[376:891](1120070.htm#fr_890) <span
id="v.xxi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p22.1"></span>αἵσθητὸν</span>.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[376:892](1120070.htm#fr_891) <span
id="v.xxi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p25.1"></span>νοητὸν</span>.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[377:893](1120070.htm#fr_892) <span
id="v.xxi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p30"></span> The Corinthians.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[377:894](1120070.htm#fr_893) <span
id="v.xxi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p31"></span> The False Apostles.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[377:895](1120070.htm#fr_894) <span
id="v.xxi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p32.1"></span>γνησίως</span>.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[377:896](1120070.htm#fr_895) <span
id="v.xxi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p33.1"></span>κηδεμὼν</span>.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[377:897](1120070.htm#fr_896) <span
id="v.xxi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p34.1"></span>χιτωνίσκου</span>.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[377:898](1120070.htm#fr_897) <span
id="v.xxi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p36.1"></span>παραταττομενος</span>.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[377:899](1120070.htm#fr_898) <span
id="v.xxi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p37.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p37.2"></span>πόπτερος</span>.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[378:900](1120070.htm#fr_899) <span
id="v.xxi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p39.1"></span>ποικἰλος τις</span>.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[378:901](1120070.htm#fr_900) <span
id="v.xxi-p39.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p40.1"></span>δημίουργίας</span>.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[378:902](1120070.htm#fr_901) <span
id="v.xxi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p41"></span> \[Some remarks of Hodge *in loco* are worth
quoting here as confirming Chrysostom’s view of the passage and showing
its permanent application. “The conflict to which the Apostle refers is
that between truth and error. When the Gospel was first proclaimed it
found itself in conflict with all the forms of religion and philosophy
then prevailing among men. To the wise of this world the Gospel appeared
as foolishness. It was, however, the wisdom and power of God. The
conflict then begun has continued ever since, and is now as deadly as at
any former period. Men of science and philosophers are as confident in
their conclusions, and as much disposed to exalt themselves, or their
opinions, against the knowledge of God as ever. There is no doubt as to
the issue of this contest. It is a contest between God and man, in
which, of course, God must prevail. The instructive lesson which the
Apostle designs here to inculcate is that this warfare must not be
conducted on the part of the advocates of the Gospel with carnal
weapons. They must not rely upon their own resources and attempt to
overcome their enemies by argument. They must not become philosophers
and turn the Gospel into a philosophy. This would be to make it a human
conflict on both sides. It would be human reason against human reason,
the intellect of one man against the intellect of another man. Paul told
the Corinthians in his former Epistle that he did not appear among them
as a philosopher, but as a witness; he came not with the words of man’s
wisdom: he did not rely for success on his powers of argument or of
persuasion, but on the demonstration of the Spirit. The faith which he
labored to secure was not to be founded on the wisdom of men, but on the
power of God; not on arguments addressed to the understanding but on the
testimony of God. That testimony has the same effect which intuition
has. It reveals the truth to the mind and conscience as self-evident:
and therefore it cannot be resisted. A rationalistic Christian, a
philosophizing theologian, therefore, lays aside the divine for the
human, the wisdom of God for the wisdom of man, the infinite and
infallible for the finite and the fallible.” The whole history of the
Church shows that whenever high imaginations were cast down and
strongholds overthrown, it was by the simple testimony of the word of
God, presented not as something to be proved but as something to be
believed. C.\]

<span id="fn_902"></span>[378:903](1120070.htm#fr_902) <span
id="v.xxi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxi-p42.1"></span>ἀντὶ λειμῶνος καὶ παραδείσου ἐντρυφῶντες</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXII](1120071)
