[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120003)  [Next](1120005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="iv.i-Page_1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>Homilies of St. John Chrysostom,</span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.i-p2.1"></span>archbishop of constantinople,</span>

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.i-p3.1"></span>on the</span>

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iv.i-p4.1"></span>first epistle of St. paul the apostle.</span>

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.i-p5.1"></span>to the</span>

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iv.i-p6.1"></span>corinthians.</span>

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span>————————————

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iv.i-p8.1"></span>Argument.</span>

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span>\[1.\] As Corinth is now the first city of
Greece, so of old it prided itself on many temporal advantages, and more
than all the rest, on excess of wealth. And on this account one of the
heathen writers entitled the place “the rich <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) .” For it lies on the isthmus of the
Peloponnesus, and had great facilities for traffic. The city was also
full of numerous orators, and philosophers, and one, <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) I think, of the seven called wise men, was
of this city. Now these things we have mentioned, not for ostentation’s
sake, nor to make, a display of great learning: (for indeed what is
there in knowing these things?) but they are of use to us in the
argument of the Epistle.

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>Paul also himself suffered many things in
this city; and Christ, too, in this city appears to him and says, ([Acts
xviii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.i-p12.1"></span>), “Be not silent, but speak; for I have much
people in this city:” and he remained there two years. In this city
\[[Acts xix. 16](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.i-p12.2"></span>. Corinth put here, by lapse of memory, for
Ephesus.\] also the devil went out, whom the Jews endeavoring to
exorcise, suffered so grievously. In this city did those of the
magicians, who repented, collect together their books and burn them, and
there appeared to be fifty thousand. ([Acts xix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.i-p12.3"></span>. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i-p12.4"></span>ἀργυρίου</span> omitted.) In
this city also, in the time of Gallio the Proconsul, Paul was beaten
before the judgment seat. <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md)

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span>\[2.\] The devil, therefore, seeing that a
great and populous city had laid hold of the truth, a city admired for
wealth and wisdom, and the head of Greece; (for Athens and Lacedæmon
were then and since in a miserable state, the dominion having long ago
fallen away from them;) and seeing that with great readiness they had
received the word of God; what doth he? He divides the men. For he knew
that even the strongest kingdom of all, divided against itself, shall
not stand. He had a vantage ground too, for this device in the wealth,
the wisdom of the inhabitants. Hence certain men, having made parties of
their own, and having become self-elected made themselves leaders of the
people, and some sided with these, and some with those; with one sort,
as being rich; with another, as wise and able to teach something out of
the common. Who on their part, receiving them, set themselves up
forsooth to teach more than the Apostle did: <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md)   at which he was hinting, when he said, “I
was not able to speak unto you as unto spiritual” ([1 Cor.
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)<span id="iv.i-p15.1"></span>..md);
evidently not his inability, but their infirmity, was the cause of their
not having been abundantly instructed. And this, ([1 Cor.
4.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#008)<span id="iv.i-p15.2"></span>..md) “Ye
are become rich without us,” is the remark of one pointing that way. And
this was no small matter, but of all things most pernicious; that the
Church should be torn asunder.

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span><span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span
id="iv.i-Page_2"></span>And another sin, too, besides these, was openly
committed there: namely, a person who had had intercourse with his
step-mother not only escaped rebuke, but was even a leader of the
multitude, and gave occasion to his followers to be conceited. Wherefore
he saith, ([1 Cor. 5.2](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.i-p16.1"></span>.) “And ye are puffed up, and have not rather
mourned.” And after this again, certain of those who as they pretended
were of the more perfect sort, and who for gluttony’s sake used to eat
of things offered unto idols, and sit at meat in the temples, were
bringing all to ruin. Others again, having contentions and strifes about
money, committed unto the heathen courts (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i-p16.2"></span>τοῖς ἔξωθεν σικαδτηρίοις</span>) all matters of
that kind. Many persons also wearing long hair used to go about among
them; whom he ordereth to be shorn. There was another fault besides, no
trifling one; their eating in the churches apart by themselves, and
giving no share to the needy.

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span>And again, they were erring in another point,
being puffed up with the gifts; and hence jealous of one another; which
was also the chief cause of the distraction of the Church. The doctrine
of the Resurrection, too, was lame (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i-p17.1"></span>ἐχώλευε</span>) among them: for some of them had
no strong belief that there is any resurrection of bodies, having still
on them the disease of Grecian foolishness. For indeed all these things
were the progeny of the madness which belongs to Heathen Philosophy, and
she was the mother of all mischief. Hence, likewise, they had become
divided; in this respect also having learned of the philosophers. For
these latter were no less at mutual variance, always, through love of
rule and vain glory contradicting one another’s opinions, and bent upon
making some new discovery in addition to all that was before. And the
cause of this was, their having begun to trust themselves to reasonings.

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span>\[3.\] They had written accordingly to him by
the hand of Fortunatus and Stephanas and Achaicus, by whom also he
himself writes; and this he has indicated in the end of the Epistle: not
however upon all these subjects, but about marriage and virginity;
wherefore also he said, ([1 Cor.
7.1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001)<span id="iv.i-p18.1"></span>..md)
“Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote” &c. And he proceeds to give
injunctions, both on the points about which they had written, and those
about which they had not written; having learnt with accuracy all their
failings. Timothy, too, he sends with the letters, knowing that letters
indeed have great force, yet that not a little would be added to them by
the presence of the disciple also.

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span>Now whereas those who had divided the Church
among themselves, from a feeling of shame lest they should seem to have
done so for ambition’s sake, contrived cloaks for what had happened,
their teaching (forsooth) more perfect doctrines, and being wiser than
all others; Paul sets himself first against the disease itself, plucking
up the root of the evils, and its offshoot, the spirit of separation.
And he uses great boldness of speech: for these were his own disciples,
more than all others. Wherefore he saith ([1 Cor.
9.2](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#002)<span id="iv.i-p19.1"></span>..md) “If
to others I be not an Apostle, yet at least I am unto you; for the seal
of my apostleship are ye.” Moreover they were in a weaker condition (to
say the least of it) than the others. Wherefore he saith, ([1 Cor.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.i-p19.2"></span>. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i-p19.3"></span>οὐδὲ</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i-p19.4"></span> οὔτε</span>). “For I have
not spoken unto you as unto spiritual; for hitherto ye were not able,
neither yet even now are ye able.” (This he saith, that they might not
suppose that he speaks thus in regard of the time past alone.)

<span id="iv.i-p20"></span>However, it was utterly improbable that all
should have been corrupted; rather there were some among them who were
very holy. And this he signified <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) in
the middle of the Epistle, where he says, ([1 Cor.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006)<span id="iv.i-p21.1"></span>..md) “To
me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you:” and adds,
“these things I have in a figure transferred unto myself and Apollos.”

<span id="iv.i-p22"></span>Since then from arrogance all these evils
were springing, and from men’s thinking that they knew something out of
the common, this he purgeth away first of all, and in beginning saith,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:2](1120004.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="iv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span> Homer, *Il*. ii. 570; Thucyd. i. 13; Strabo,
viii. 20.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:3](1120004.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="iv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span> Periander; but vid. Plutarch. *in Solon*.
tom. i. p. 185. ed. Bryan.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[1:4](1120004.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="iv.i-p12.5"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span> This is said of Sosthenes, [Acts xviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.i-p13.1"></span>. But
the context makes it probable that St. Paul was beaten also. \[Hardly.\]

<span id="fn_4"></span>[1:5](1120004.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="iv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span> St. Irenæus, *Adv. Hær*. iii. v. 1, points
out this as a main topic of heretical teaching. “These most futile of
Sophisters affirm that the Apostles taught feignedly, after the capacity
of the hearers, and gave answer after the prejudices of those who
enquired of them, discoursing with the blind blindly according to their
blindness, with the feeble according to their feebleness, and with the
erring according to their error.”

<span id="fn_5"></span>[2:6](1120004.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="iv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p21"></span> It appears by the subsequent commentary on
these verses, that S. Chrysostom understood the Apostle to be alluding
in them to persons among the Corinthians, who had suffered from unjust
censure and party spirit. See Hom. ii. §. 1; xi. near the end; and the
opening of Hom. xii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily I](1120005.md)
