[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120008)  [Next](1120010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Homily V.</span>

<span id="iv.vi-p2"></span><span id="iv.vi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.vi-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)<span
id="iv.vi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p3"></span>*For behold* <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) *your calling, brethren, that not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, \[are
called;\] but God chose the foolish things of the world, that he might
put to shame them that are wise.*

<span id="iv.vi-p5"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.vi-p5.1"></span>He</span> hath said that “the foolishness of God
is wiser than men;” he hath shewed that human wisdom is cast out, both
by the testimony of the Scriptures and by the issue of events; by the
testimony, where he says, “I will destroy the wisdom of the wise;” by
the event, putting his argument in the form of a question, and saying,
“Where is the wise? Where the Scribe?” Again; he proved at the same time
that the thing is not new, but ancient, as it was presignified and
foretold from the beginning. For, “It is written,” saith he, “I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise.” Withal he shews that it was neither
inexpedient nor unaccountable for things to take this course: (for,
“seeing that in the wisdom of God the world,” saith he, “knew not God,
God was well pleased through the foolishness of preaching to save them
which believe:”)  and that the Cross is a demonstration of ineffable
power and wisdom, and that the foolishness of God is far mightier than
the wisdom of man. And this again he proves not by means of the
teachers, but by means of the disciples themselves. For, “Behold your
calling,” saith he: that not only teachers of an untrained sort, but
disciples also of the like class, were objects of His choice; that He
chose “not many wise men” (that is his word) “according to the flesh.”
And so that of which he is <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span
id="iv.vi-Page_23"></span>speaking is proved to surpass both in strength
and wisdom, in that it convinces both the many and the unwise: it being
extremely hard to convince an ignorant person, especially when the
discourse is concerning great and necessary things. However, they did
work conviction. And of this he calls the Corinthians themselves as
witnesses. For, “behold your calling, brethren,” saith he: consider;
examine: for that doctrines so wise, yea, wiser than all, should be
received by ordinary men, testifies the greatest wisdom in the teacher.

<span id="iv.vi-p6"></span>\[2.\] <span class="c18"><span
id="iv.vi-p6.1"></span>But</span> what means, “according to the flesh?”
According to what is in sight; according to the life that now is;
according to the discipline of the Gentiles. Then, lest he should seem
to be at variance with himself, (for he had convinced both the
Proconsul, ([Acts xiii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.vi-p6.2"></span>.) and the Areopagite, ([Acts xvii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#034)<span id="iv.vi-p6.3"></span>.) and
Apollos; ([Acts xviii. 26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026)<span
id="iv.vi-p6.4"></span>: through Aquila and Priscilla) and other wise
men, too, we have seen coming over to the Gospel;) he said not, No wise
man, but, “Not many wise men.” For he did not designedly (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p6.5"></span>ἀποκεκληρωμένως</span>) call
the ignorant and pass by the wise, but these also he received, yet the
others in much larger number. And why? Because the wise man according to
the flesh is full of extreme folly; and it is he who especially answers
to the term “foolish,” when he will not cast away his corrupt doctrine.
And as in the case of a physician who might wish to teach certain
persons the secrets of his art, those who know a few things, having a
bad and perverse mode of practicing the art which they make a point of
retaining, would not endure to learn quietly, but they who knew nothing
would most readily embrace what was said: even so it was here. The
unlearned were more open to conviction, for they were free from the
extreme madness of accounting themselves wise. For indeed the excess of
folly is in these more than any, these, I say, who commit unto reasoning
things which cannot be ascertained except by faith. Thus, suppose the
smith by means of the tongs drawing out the red-hot iron; if any one
should insist on doing it with his hand, we should vote him guilty of
extreme folly: so in like manner the philosophers who insisted on
finding out these things for themselves disparaged the faith. And it was
owing to this that they found none of the things they sought for.

<span id="iv.vi-p7"></span>“Not many mighty, not many noble;” for these
also are filled with pride. And nothing is so useless towards an
accurate knowledge of God as arrogance, and being nailed down (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p7.1"></span>προσηλῶσθαι</span>) to
wealth: for these dispose a man to admire things present, and make no
account of the future; and they stop up the ears through the multitude
of cares: but “the foolish things of the world God chose:” which thing
is the greatest sign of victory, that they were uneducated by whom He
conquers. For the Greeks feel not so much shame when they are defeated
by means of the “wise,” but are then confounded, when they see the
artisan and the sort of person one meets in the market more of a
philosopher than themselves. Wherefore also he said himself, “That He
might put to shame the wise.” And not in this instance alone hath he
done this, also in the case of the other advantages of life. For, to
proceed, “the weak things of the world He chose that He might put to
shame the strong.” For not unlearned persons only, but needy also, and
contemptible and obscure He called, that He might humble those who were
in high places.

<span id="iv.vi-p8"></span>[1 Cor.
1.28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#028)<span id="iv.vi-p8.1"></span>.
“And the base things of the world, and the things that are despised, and
the things that are not, that he might bring to naught the things that
are.” Now what doth He call things “that are not?” Those persons who are
considered to be nothing because of their great insignificance. Thus
hath He shown forth His great power, casting down the great by those who
seem to be nothing. The same elsewhere he thus expresses, ([2 Cor. xii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="iv.vi-p8.2"></span>.) “For
my strength is made perfect in weakness.” For a great power it is, to
teach outcasts and such as never applied themselves to any branch of
learning, how all at once to discourse wisely on the things which are
above the heavens. For suppose a physician, an orator, or any one else:
we then most admire him, when he convinces and instructs those
completely uneducated. Now, if to instil into an uneducated man the
rules of art be a very wonderful thing, much more things which pertain
to so high philosophy.

<span id="iv.vi-p9"></span>\[3.\] But not for the wonders sake only,
neither to shew His own power, hath He done this, but to check also the
arrogant. And therefore he both said before, “That he might confound the
wise and the strong, that He might bring to nought the things which
are,” and here again,

<span id="iv.vi-p10"></span>[1 Cor.
1.29](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#029)<span id="iv.vi-p10.1"></span>.
“That no flesh should glory in the presence of God.” For God doeth all
things to this end, to repress vainglory and pride, to pull down
boasting.” “Do you, too,” saith he, “employ yourselves in that work.” He
doth all, that we may put nothing to our own account; that we may
ascribe all unto God. And have ye given yourselves over unto this person
or to that? And what pardon will ye obtain?”

<span id="iv.vi-p11"></span>For God Himself hath shown that it is not
possible we should be saved only by ourselves: and this He did from the
beginning. For neither then could men be saved by themselves; <span
id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span id="iv.vi-Page_24"></span>but it
required their compassing the beauty of the heaven, and the extent of
the earth, and the mass of creation besides; if so they might be led by
the hand to the great artificer of all the works. And He did this,
repressing beforehand the self-conceit which was after to arise. Just as
if a master who had given his scholar charge to follow wheresoever he
might lead, when he sees him forestalling, and desiring to learn all
things of himself, should permit him to go quite astray; and when he
hath proved him incompetent to acquire the knowledge, should thereupon
at length introduce to him what himself has to teach: so God also
commanded in the beginning to trace Him by the idea which the creation
gives; but since they would not, He, after showing by the experiment
that they are not sufficient for themselves, conducts them again unto
Him by another way. He gave for a tablet, the world; but the
philosophers studied not in those things, neither were willing to obey
Him, nor to approach unto Him by that way which Himself commanded. He
introduces another way more evident than the former; one that might
bring conviction that man is not of himself alone sufficient unto
himself. For then scruples of reasoning might be started, and the
Gentile wisdom employed, on their part whom He through the creation was
leading by the hand; but now, unless a man become a fool, that is,
unless he dismiss all reasoning and all wisdom, and deliver up himself
unto the faith, it is impossible to be saved. You see that besides
making the way easy, he hath rooted up hereby no trifling disease,
namely, in forbidding to boast, and have high thoughts: “that no flesh
should glory:” for hence came the sin, that men insisted on being wiser
than the laws of God; not willing so to obtain knowledge as He had
enacted: and therefore they did not obtain it at all. So also was it
from the beginning. He said unto Adam, “Do such a thing, and such
another thou must not do.” He, as thinking to find out something more,
disobeyed; and even what he had, he lost. He spake unto those that came
after, “Rest not in the creature; but by means of it contemplate the
Creator.” They, forsooth, as if making out something wiser than what had
been commanded, set in motion windings innumerable. Hence they kept
dashing against themselves and one another, and neither found God, nor
concerning the creature had any distinct knowledge; nor had any meet and
true opinion about it. Wherefore again, with a very high hand, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p11.1"></span>ἐκ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p11.2"></span>πολλοῦ τοῦ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p11.3"></span> περίοντος</span>) lowering
their conceit. He admitted the uneducated first, showing thereby that
all men need the wisdom from above. And not only in the matter of
knowledge, but also in all other things, both men and all other
creatures He hath constituted so as to be in great need of Him; that
they might have this also as a most forcible motive of submission and
attachment, lest turning away they should perish. For this cause He did
not suffer them to be sufficient unto themselves. For if even now many,
for all their indigency, despise Him, were the case not so, whither
would they not have wandered in haughtiness? So that He stayed them from
boasting as they did, not from any grudge to them, but to draw them away
from the destruction thence ensuing.

<span id="iv.vi-p12"></span>\[4.\] [1 Cor.
1.30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span id="iv.vi-p12.1"></span>
“But of Him are ye in Christ Jesus, who was made unto us wisdom from
God, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.”

<span id="iv.vi-p13"></span>The expression “of Him,” I suppose he uses
here, not of our introduction into being, but with reference to the
faith: that is, to our having become children of God, “not of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh.” (St. [John i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span id="iv.vi-p13.1"></span>) 
“Think not then, that having taken away our glorying, He left us so: for
there is another, a greater glorying, His gift. For ye are the children
of Him in whose presence it is not meet to glory, having become so
through Christ.” And since he has said, “The foolish things of the world
He chose, and the base,” he signifies that they are nobler than all,
having God for their Father. And of this nobility of ours, not this
person or that, but Christ is the cause, having made us wise, and
righteous, and holy. For so mean the words, “He was made unto us
wisdom.”

<span id="iv.vi-p14"></span>Who then is wiser than we are who have not
the wisdom of Plato, but Christ Himself, God having so willed.

<span id="iv.vi-p15"></span>But what means, “of God?” Whenever he speaks
great things concerning the Only-Begotten, he adds mention of the
Father, lest any one should think that the Son is unbegotten. Since
therefore he had affirmed His power to be so great, and had referred the
whole unto the Son, saying that He had “become wisdom unto us, and
righteousness, and sanctification and redemption;”—through the Son again
referring the whole to the Father, he saith, “of God.”

<span id="iv.vi-p16"></span>But why said he not, He hath made us wise,
but “was made unto us wisdom?” To show the copiousness of the gift. As
if he had said, He gave unto us Himself. And observe how he goes on in
order. For first He made us wise by delivering from error, and then
righteous and holy, by giving us the Spirit; and He hath so delivered us
from all our evils as to be “of Him,” and this is not meant to express
communication of being, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p16.1"></span>οὐσιώσεως</span>) but is spoken concerning the
faith. Elsewhere we find him saying, “We were made righteousness in
Him;” in <span id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span
id="iv.vi-Page_25"></span>these words, “Him who knew no sin He made to
be sin for us that we might be made the righteousness of God in Him;”
([2 Cor. v. 21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.vi-p16.2"></span>.) but now he saith, “He hath been made
righteousness unto us; so that whosoever will may partake plentifully.”
For it is not this man or that who hath made us wise, but Christ. “He
that glorieth,” therefore, “let him glory in Him,” not in such or such
an one. From Christ have proceeded all things. Wherefore, having said,
“Who was made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption,” he added, “that, according as it is written, he that
glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.”

<span id="iv.vi-p17"></span>For this cause also he had vehemently
inveighed against the wisdom of the Greeks, to teach men this lesson,
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p17.1"></span>τοῦτο αὐτὸ</span>
Savile; <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p17.2"></span>τούτῳ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p17.3"></span>αὐτῶ</span> Bened.)
and no other:  that (as indeed is no more than just) they should boast
themselves in the Lord. For when of ourselves we seek the things which
are above us, nothing is more foolish, nothing weaker than we are. In
such case, a tongue well whetted we may have; but stability of doctrine
we cannot have. Rather, reasonings, being alone, are like the webs of
spider. For unto such a point of madness have some advanced as to say
that there is nothing real in the whole of being: yea, they maintain
positively that all things are contrary to what appears.

<span id="iv.vi-p18"></span>Say not therefore that anything is from
thyself, but in all things glory in God. Impute unto no man anything at
any time. For if unto Paul nothing ought to be imputed much less unto
any others. For, saith he, ([1 Cor.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="iv.vi-p18.1"></span>.) “I
planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase.” He that hath
learnt to make his boast in the Lord, will never be elated, but will be
moderate at all times, and thankful under all circumstances. But not
such is the mind of the Greeks; they refer all to themselves; wherefore
even of men they make gods. In so great shame hath desperate arrogance
plunged them. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p18.2"></span>ἐξετραχήλισεν</span>)

<span id="iv.vi-p19"></span>\[5.\] It is time then, in what remains, to
go forth to battle against these. Recollect where we left our discourse
on the former day. We were saying that it was not possible according to
human cause and effect that fishermen should get the better of
philosophers. But nevertheless it became possible: from whence it is
clear that by grace it became so. We were saying that it was not
possible for them even to conceive such great exploits:  and we shewed
that they not only conceived, but brought them to a conclusion with
great ease. Let us handle, to-day, the same head of our argument: viz.
From whence did it enter their thoughts to expect to overcome the world,
unless they had seen Christ after He was risen? What? Were they beside
themselves, to reckon upon any such thing inconsiderately and at random?
For it goes even beyond all madness, to look, without Divine grace, for
success in so great an undertaking. How did they succeed in it, if they
were insane and frenzied? But if they were in their sober senses, as
indeed the events shewed, how, but on receiving credible pledges from
the heavens and enjoying the influence which is from above, did they
undertake to go forth to so great wars, and to make their venture
against earth and sea, and to strip and stand their ground so nobly, for
a change in the customs of the whole world which had been so long time
fixed, they being but twelve men?

<span id="iv.vi-p20"></span>And, what is more, what made them expect to
convince their hearers, by inviting them to heaven and the mansions
above? Even had they been brought up in honor, and wealth, and power,
and erudition, not even so would it have been at all likely that they
should be roused to so burthensome an undertaking. However, there would
have been somewhat more of reason in their expectation. But as the case
now stands, some of them had been occupied about lakes, some about
hides <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) , some about the customs:
than which pursuits nothing is more unprofitable towards philosophy, and
the persuading men to have high imaginations: and especially when one
hath no example to shew. Nay, they had not only no examples to make
their success likely, but they had examples against all likelihood of
success, and those within their own doors. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29)   (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p22.1"></span>ἔναυλα</span>)  For many for attempting
innovations had been utterly extinguished, I say not among the Greeks,
for all that was nothing, but among the Jews themselves at that very
time; who not with twelve men, but with great numbers had applied
themselves to the work. Thus both Theudas and Judas, having great bodies
of men, perished together with their disciples. And the fear arising
from their examples was enough to control these, had they not been
strongly persuaded that victory without divine power was out of the
question.

<span id="iv.vi-p23"></span>Yea, even if they did expect to prevail,
with what sort of hopes undertook they such great dangers, except they
had an eye to the world to come? But let us suppose that they hoped for
no less than victory; what did they expect to gain from the bringing all
men unto Him, “who is not risen again,” as ye say? For if now, men who
believe concerning the kingdom of heaven and blessings unnumbered with
reluctance encounter dangers, how could they have undergone so many for
nothing, yea rather, for evil? For if the things which were done did
<span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span id="iv.vi-Page_26"></span>not take
place, if Christ did not ascend into heaven; surely in their obstinate
zeal to invent these things, and convince all the world of them, they
were offending God, and must expect ten thousand thunderbolts from on
high.

<span id="iv.vi-p24"></span>\[6.\] Or, in another point of view; if they
had felt this great zeal while Christ was living, yet on His death they
would have let it go out. For He would have seemed to them, had He not
risen, as a sort of deceiver and pretender. Know ye not that armies
while the general and king is alive, even though they be weak, keep
together; but when those in such office have departed, however strong
they may be, they are broken up?

<span id="iv.vi-p25"></span>Tell me then, what were the enticing
arguments whereupon they acted, when about to take hold of the Gospel,
and to go forth unto all the world? Was there any kind of impediment
wanting to restrain them? If they had been mad, (for I will not cease
repeating it,) they could not have succeeded at all; for no one follows
the advice of madmen. But if they succeeded as in truth they did
succeed, and the event proves, then none so wise as they. Now if none
were so wise as they, it is quite plain, they would not lightly have
entered upon the preaching. Had they not seen Him after He was risen,
what was there sufficient to draw them out unto this war? What which
would not have turned them away from it? He said unto them, “After three
days I will rise again,” and He made promises concerning the kingdom of
heaven. He said, they should master the whole world, after they had
received the Holy Spirit; and ten thousand other things besides these,
surpassing all nature. So that if none of these things had come to pass,
although they believed in Him while alive, after His death they would
not have believed in Him, unless they had seen Him after He was risen.
For they have said, “‘After three days,’ He said, ‘I will rise again,’
and He hath not arisen. He promised that He would give the Spirit, and
He hath not sent Him. How then shall His sayings about the other world
find credit with us, when His sayings about this are tried and found
wanting?”

<span id="iv.vi-p26"></span>And why, if He rose not again, did they
preach that He was risen? “Because they loved Him,” you will say. But
surely, it was likely that they would hate Him afterwards, for deceiving
and betraying them; and because, having lifted them up with innumerable
hopes, and divorced them from house, and parents, and all things, and
set in hostility against them the entire nation of Jews, He had betrayed
them after all. And if indeed the thing were of weakness, they might
have pardoned it; but now it would be deemed a result of exceeding
malice. For He ought to have spoken the truth, and not have promised
heaven, being a mortal man, as ye say. So that the very opposite was the
likely line for them to take; to proclaim the deception, and declare Him
a pretender and imposter. Thus again would they have been rid of all
their perils; thus have put an end to the war. Moreover, seeing that the
Jews gave money unto the soldiers to say that they stole the body, if
the disciples had come forward and said, “We stole Him, He is not risen
again,” what honor would they not have enjoyed?  Thus it was in their
power to be honored, nay, crowned. Why then did they for insults and
dangers barter away these things, if it was not some Divine power which
influenced them, and proved mightier than all these?

<span id="iv.vi-p27"></span>\[7.\] But if we do not yet convince, take
this also into consideration; that had this not been so, though they
were ever so well disposed, they would not have preached this Gospel in
His name, but would have treated Him with abhorrence. For ye know that
not even the names of those who deceive us in this sort are we willing
to hear. But for what reason preached they also His name? Expecting to
gain the mastery through Him? Truly the contrary was natural for them to
expect; that even if they had been on the point of prevailing they were
ruining themselves by bringing forward the name of a deceiver. But if
they wished to throw into the shade former events, their line was to be
silent; at any rate, to contend for them earnestly was to excite more
and more both of serious hostility and of ridicule. From whence then did
it enter their thoughts to invent such things? I say, “invent:” for what
they had heard, they had forgotten. But if, when there was no fear, they
forgot many things, and some did not even understand, (as also the
Evangelist himself saith,) now that so great a danger came upon them,
how could it be otherwise than that all should fleet away from them? Why
speak I of words? when even their love towards their Master Himself
began gradually to fade away, through fear of what was coming: wherewith
also He upbraided them. For since, before this, they hung upon him, and
were asking continually, “Whither goest Thou,” but afterwards on His
drawing out His discourse to so great length, and declaring the terrors
which at the very time of the Cross, and after the Cross should befal
them, they just continued speechless and frozen through fear;—hear how
He alleges to them this very point saying, “None of you asketh Me,
Whither goest Thou? But because I have said these things unto you,
sorrow hath filled your heart.” (St. [John xvi.
5-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#005)<span id="iv.vi-p27.1"></span>.)
Now if the expectation that He would die and rise again was such a grief
to them, had <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="iv.vi-Page_27"></span>they failed to see Him after He was risen, how
could it be less than annihilation? Yea, they would have been fain to
sink into the depths of the earth, what with dejection at being so
deceived, and what with dread of the future, feeling themselves sorely
straightened.

<span id="iv.vi-p28"></span>Again: from whence came their high
doctrines? for the higher points, He said, they should hear afterwards.
For, saith He, (St. [John xvi. 12](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#012)<span
id="iv.vi-p28.1"></span>.) “I have many things to speak unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now.” So that the things not spoken were higher. And
one of the disciples was not even willing to depart with Him into Judea,
when he heard of dangers, but said, “Let us also go that we may die with
Him,” (St. [John xi. 16](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#016)<span
id="iv.vi-p28.2"></span>.) taking it hardly <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) because he expected that he should die.
Now if that disciple, while he was with Him, expected to die and shrunk
back on that account, what must he not have expected afterwards, when
parted from Him and the other disciples, and when the exposure of their
shameless conduct was so complete?

<span id="iv.vi-p30"></span>\[8.\] Besides, what had they to say when
they went forth? For the passion indeed all the world knew: for He had
been hanged on high, upon the frame of wood, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p30.1"></span>ἰκρίου</span>) and in mid-day, and in a chief
city, and at a principal feast and that from which it was least
permitted that any should be absent. But the resurrection no man saw of
those who were without: which was no small impediment to them in working
conviction. Again, that He was buried, was the common talk of all: and
that His disciples stole His body, the soldiers and all the Jews
declared: but that He had risen again, no one of them who were without
knew by sight. Upon what ground then did they expect to convince the
world? For if, while miracles were taking place, certain soldiers were
persuaded to testify the contrary, upon what ground did these expect
without miracles to do the work of preachers, and without having a
farthing to convince land and sea concerning the resurrection? Again, if
through desire of glory they attempted this, so much the rather would
they have ascribed doctrines each one to himself, and not to Him that
was dead and gone. Will it be said, men would not have believed them?
And which of the two was the likelier, being preached, to win their
belief? He that was apprehended and crucified, or those who had escaped
the hands of the Jews?

<span id="iv.vi-p31"></span>\[9.\] Next, tell me with what view were
they to take such a course? They did not immediately, leaving Judæa, go
into the Gentile cities, but went up and down within its limit. But how,
unless they worked miracles, did they convince? For if such they really
wrought, (and work them they did,) it was the result of God’s power. If
on the other hand they wrought none and prevailed, much more wonderful
was the event. Knew they not the Jews—tell me—and their evil practice,
and their soul full of grudgings? For they stoned even Moses, ([Num.
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#010), [Exod.
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#004)<span id="iv.vi-p31.1"></span>.)
after the sea which they had crossed on foot; after the victory, and
that marvellous trophy which they raised without blood, by means of his
hands, over the Egyptians who had enslaved them; after the manna; after
the rocks, and the fountains of rivers which break out thence; after ten
thousand miracles in the land of Egypt and the Red Sea and the
wilderness. Jeremiah they cast into a pit, and many of the prophets they
slew. Hear, for example, what saith Elias, after that fearful famine,
and the marvellous rain, and the torch which he brought down from
heaven, and the strange holocaust; driven, as he was, to the very
extreme edge of their country: “Lord, thy prophets they have killed,
thine altars they have digged down, and I am left alone, and they seek
my life.” ([1 Kings xix. 10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#010)<span
id="iv.vi-p31.2"></span>.) Yet were not those (who were so persecuted)
disturbing any of the established rules. Tell me then, what ground had
men for attending to these of whom we are speaking? For, on one hand,
they were meaner persons than any of the prophets; on the other, they
were introducing just such novelties as had caused the Jews to nail even
their Master to the Cross.

<span id="iv.vi-p32"></span>And in another way, too, it seemed less
unaccountable for Christ to utter such things than for them; for He,
they might suppose, acted thus to acquire glory for himself; but these
they would have hated even the more, as waging war with them in behalf
of another.

<span id="iv.vi-p33"></span>\[10.\] But did the laws of the Romans help
them?  Nay, by these they were more involved in difficulties. For their
language was, (St. [John xix. 12](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#012)<span
id="iv.vi-p33.1"></span>.) “Whosoever maketh himself a king is not
Cæsar’s friend.” So that this alone was a sufficient impediment to them,
that of Him who was accounted an usurper they were first disciples, and
afterwards desirous to strengthen His cause. What in the world then set
them upon rushing into such great dangers? And by what statements about
Him would they be likely to gain credit? that He was crucified? That He
was born of a poor Jewish woman who had been betrothed to a Jewish
carpenter? That He was of a nation hated by the world? Nay, all these
<span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span id="iv.vi-Page_28"></span>things
were enough not only to fail of persuading and attracting the hearers,
but also to disgust every one; and especially when affirmed by the
tent-maker and the fisherman. Would not the disciples then bear all
these things in mind? Timid nature can imagine more than the reality,
and such were their natures. Upon what ground then did they hope to
succeed? Nay, rather, they had no hope, there being things innumerable
to draw them aside, if so be that Christ had not risen. Is it not quite
plain even unto most thoughtless that unless they had enjoyed a copious
and mighty grace, and had received pledges of the resurrection, they
would have been unable, I say not, to do and undertake these things, but
even so much as to have them in their minds? For if when there were so
great hinderances, in the way of their planning, I say not of their
succeeding, they yet both planned and brought to effect and
accomplishing things greater than all expectation, every one, I suppose,
can see that not by human power but by divine grace they wrought things.

<span id="iv.vi-p34"></span>Now these arguments we ought to practice,
not by ourselves only, but one with another; and thus also the discovery
of what remains will be easier to us.

<span id="iv.vi-p35"></span>\[11.\] And do not, because thou art an
artisan, suppose that this sort of exercise is out of your province; for
even Paul was a tent-maker.

<span id="iv.vi-p36"></span>“Yes,” saith some one, “but at that time he
was also filled with abundant grace, and out of that he spake all
things” Well; but before this grace, he was at the feet of Gamaliel;
yea, moreover, and he received the grace, because of this, that he
shewed a mind worthy of the grace; and after these things he again put
his hand to his craft. Let no one, therefore, of those who have trades
be ashamed; but those, who are brought up to nothing and are idle, who
employ many attendants, and are served by an immense retinue. For to be
supported by continual hard work is a sort of asceticism. (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p36.1"></span>φιλοσοφίας ?ἶδος</span>
comp. Hooker, *E. P.* V. lxxii. 18.) The souls of such men are clearer,
and their minds better strung. For the man who has nothing to do is
apter to say many things at random, and do many things at random; and he
is busy all day long about nothing, a huge lethargy taking him up
entirely. But he that is employed will not lightly entertain in himself
any thing useless, in deeds, in words, or in thoughts; for his whole
soul is altogether intent upon his laborious way of livelihood. Let us
not therefore despise those who support themselves by the labor of their
own hands; but let us rather call them happy on this account. For tell
me, what thanks are due unto thee, when after having received thy
portion from thy father, thou goest on not in any calling, but lavishing
away the whole of it at random?  Knowest thou not that we shall not all
have to render the same account, but those who have enjoyed greater
licence here a more exact one; those who were afflicted with labor, or
poverty, or any thing else of this kind, one not so severe? And this is
plain from Lazarus and the rich man. For as thou, for neglecting the
right use of the leisure, art justly accused; so the poor man, who
having full employment hath spent his remnant of time upon right
objects, great will be the crowns which he shall receive. But dost thou
urge that a soldier’s duties should at least excuse thee; and dost thou
charge them with thy want of leisure? The excuse cannot be founded in
reason. For Cornelius was a centurion, yet in no way did the soldier’s
belt impair his strict rule of life. But thou, when thou art keeping
holiday with dancers and players, and making entire waste of thy life
upon the stage, never thinkest of excusing thyself from such engagements
by the necessity of military service or the fear of rulers: but when it
is the Church to which we call you, then occur these endless
impediments.

<span id="iv.vi-p37"></span>And what wilt thou say in the day, when thou
seest the flame, and the rivers of fire, and the chains never to be
broken; and shalt hear the gnashing of teeth? Who shall stand up for
thee in that day, when thou shalt see him that hath labored with his own
hand and hath lived uprightly, enjoying all glory; but thyself, who art
now in soft raiment and redolent of perfumes, in incurable woe? What
good will thy wealth and superfluity do thee? And the artisan—what harm
will his poverty do him?

<span id="iv.vi-p38"></span>Therefore that we may not suffer then, let
us fear what is said now, and let all our time be spent in employment on
things which are really indispensable. For so, having propitiated God in
regard of our past sins, and adding good deeds for the future, we shall
be able to attain unto the kingdom of heaven:  through the favor and
loving-kindness, etc., etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[22:28](1120009.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iv.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p4.1"></span>βλέπετε</span>. He takes it imperatively; see
below. So also the Vulgate, *Videte*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[25:29](1120009.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iv.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p21"></span> That is, some were fishers in the sea or
lake of Tiberias, some, as St. Paul, engaged in making tents out of
hides.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[25:30](1120009.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iv.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p22"></span> \[Dr. Field prefers the reading, *and these
recent*.\]

<span id="fn_30"></span>[27:31](1120009.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iv.vi-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p29"></span> St. Chrys. Hom. 62. on St. John. “All
feared the violence of the Jews, but Thomas more than the rest.
Wherefore also he said, *Let us also &c*. Some indeed say that he
desired to share our Lord’s death: but it is not so: for it is the
saying rather of a coward. Yet he was not reproved. For as yet He went
on bearing their weakness. Afterwards, however, he (St. Thomas) became
stronger than any, and irreproachable: This being the great wonder, that
one so weak before the time of the Cross, after the Cross and faith in
the Resurrection should be seen more zealous than all. So great is the
power of Christ.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VI](1120010)
