[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120038)  [Next](1120040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXV.</span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p2"></span><span id="iv.xxxvi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p3"></span>Follow after love, yet desire earnestly
spiritual gifts; but rather that ye may prophesy.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>Thus</span>, inasmuch as he had with exactness
rehearsed unto them all the excellence of love, he exhorts them in what
follows, with alacrity to lay hold of it. Wherefore also he said,
“Follow after:” for he that is in chase beholds that only which is
chased, and towards that he strains himself, and leaves not off until he
lay hold of it. He that is in chase, when by himself he cannot, by those
that are before him he doth overtake the fugitive, beseeching those who
are near with much eagerness to seize and keep it so seized for him
until he shall come up. This then let us also do. When of ourselves we
do not reach unto love, let us bid them that are near her to hold her,
till we come up with her, and when we have apprehended, no more let her
go, that she may not again escape us. For continually she springs away
from us, because we use her not as we ought, but prefer all things unto
her. Therefore we ought to make every effort, so as perfectly to retain
her. For if this be done, we require not henceforth much labor, nay
rather scarce any; but taking our ease, and keeping holiday <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) , we shall march on in the narrow path
of virtue. Wherefore he saith, “Follow after her.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p6"></span>Then that they might not suppose that for
no other end he brought in the discourse of charity, except that he
might extinguish the gifts, he subjoins as follows;

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p7"></span>[1 Cor.
14.1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p7.1"></span>.
“Yet desire earnestly spiritual gifts; but rather that ye may prophesy.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p8"></span>[1 Cor.
14.2](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#002)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p8.1"></span>.
“For he that speaketh in a tongue, speaketh not unto men, but unto God:
for no man understandeth; but in the Spirit he speaketh mysteries.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p9"></span>[1 Cor.
14.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p9.1"></span>.
“But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men edification, and exhortation,
and comfort.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p10"></span>At this point he makes a comparison
between the gifts, and lowers that of the tongues, showing it to be
neither altogether useless, nor very profitable by itself. For in fact
they were greatly puffed up on account of this, because the gift was
considered to be a great one. And <span id="page_209">p. 209</span>
<span id="iv.xxxvi-Page_209"></span>it was thought great because the
Apostles received it first, and with so great display; it was not
however therefore to be esteemed above all the others. Wherefore then
did the Apostles receive it before the rest? Because they were to go
abroad every where. And as in the time of building the tower the one
tongue was divided into many; so then the many tongues frequently met in
one man, and the same person used to discourse both in the Persian, and
the Roman, and the Indian, and many other tongues, the Spirit sounding
within him: and the gift was called the gift of tongues because he could
all at once speak divers languages. See accordingly how he both
depresses and elevates it. Thus, by saying, “He that speaketh with
tongues, speaketh not unto men, but unto God, for no man understandeth,”
he depressed it, implying that the profit of it was not great; but by
adding, “but in the Spirit he speaketh mysteries” he again elevated it,
that it might not seem to be superfluous and useless and given in vain.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p11"></span>“But he that prophesieth speaketh unto
men edification, and exhortation, and comfort.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p12"></span>Seest thou by what he signifies the
choice nature of this gift? i.e., by the common benefit? and how every
where he gives the higher honor to that which tends to the profit of the
many? For do not the former speak unto men also? tell me. But not so
much “edification, and exhortation, and comfort.” So that the being
powered by the Spirit is common to both, as well to him that
prophesieth, as to him that speaketh with tongues; but in this, the one
(he, I mean, who prophesieth) hath the advantage in that he is also
profitable unto the hearers. For they who with tongues were not
understood by them that had not the gift.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p13"></span>What then? Did they edify no man? “Yes,”
saith he, “themselves alone:” wherefore also he adds,

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p14"></span>[1 Cor
14.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#004)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p14.1"></span>.
“He that speaketh in tongue edifieth himself.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p15"></span>And how, if he know not what he saith?
Why, for the present, he is speaking of them who understand what they
say;—understand it themselves, but know not how to render it unto
others.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p16"></span>“But he that prophesieth edifieth the
Church.” Now as great as is the difference between a single person and
the Church, so great is the interval between these two. Seest thou his
wisdom, how he doth not thrust out the gift and make nothing of it, but
signifies it to have some advantage, small though it be, and such as to
suffice the possessor only?

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p17"></span>\[2.\] Next, lest they should suppose
that in envy to them he depresses the tongues, (for the more part had
this gift,) to correct their suspicion he saith,

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p18"></span>[1 Cor.
14.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#005)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p18.1"></span>.
“I would have you all speak with tongues, but rather that ye should
prophesy: for greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with
tongues, except he interpret, that the Church may receive edifying.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p19"></span>But “rather” and “greater,” do not mark
opposition, but superiority. So that hence also it is evident that he is
not disparaging the gift, but leading them to better things, displaying
both his carefulness on their behalf, and a spirit free from all envy.
For neither did he say, “I would that two or three,” but, “that ye all
spake with tongues” and not this only, but also, “that ye prophesied;”
and this rather than that; “for greater is he that prophesieth.” For
since he hath established and proved it, he next proceeds also to assert
it; not however simply, but with a qualification. Accordingly he adds,
“except he interpret;” since if he be able to do this, I mean the
interpreting, “he hath become equal unto the prophet,” so he speaks,
“because then there are many who reap the advantage of it;” a thing to
be especially observed, how this throughout, before all else, is his
object,

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p20"></span>[1 Cor.
14.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#006)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p20.1"></span>.
“But now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall
I profit you, unless I speak to you either by way of revelation, or of
knowledge, or of prophesying, or of teaching?”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p21"></span>“And why speak I,” saith he, “of the
rest?  Nay, let the person who speaketh with tongues be Paul: for not
even so will any good come to the hearers.” And these things he saith to
signify that he is seeking their profit, not bearing any grudge against
them that have the gift; since not even in his own person doth he shrink
from pointing out its unprofitableness. And indeed it is his constant
way to work out the disagreeable topics in his own person: as in the
beginning of the Epistle he said, “Who then is Paul? and who is Apollos?
and who is Cephas?” This same then he doth also here, saying, “Not even
I shall profit you, except I speak to you either by way of revelation,
or of prophesying, or of knowledge, or of teaching.” And what he means
is, “if I say not somewhat that can be made intelligible to you and that
may be clear, but merely make display of my having the gift of
tongues;—tongues which ye do not understand, ye will go away with no
sort of profit. For how should you profit by a voice which ye understand
not?”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p22"></span>\[3\] [1 Cor.
14.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#007)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p22.1"></span>.
“Even things without life, giving a voice, whether pipe or harp, if they
give not a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is
piped?”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p23"></span>“And why do I say,” saith he, “that in
our <span id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvi-Page_210"></span>case this is unprofitable, and that only
useful which is clear and easy to be apprehended by the hearers? Since
even in musical instruments without life one may see this: for whether
it be pipe or harp, yet if it be struck or blown confusedly and
unskilfully, without proper cadence or harmony, it will captivate none
of the hearers. For even in these inarticulate sounds there is need of
some distinctness: and if thou strike not or breathe into the pipe
according to art, thou hast done nothing. Now if from things without
life we require so much distinctness, and harmony, and appropriateness,
and into those inarticulate sounds we strive and contend to infuse so
much meaning, much more in men indued with life and reason, and in
spiritual gifts, ought one to make significancy an object.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p24"></span>[1 Cor.
14.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p24.1"></span>.
“For if the trumpet give an uncertain voice, who shall prepare himself
for war?”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p25"></span>Thus from things merely ornamental he
carries on his argument to those which are more necessary and useful;
and saith that not in the harp alone, but in the trumpet also one may
see this effect produced. For in that also there are certain measures;
and they give out at one time a warlike note, and at another one that is
not so; and again sometimes it leads out to line of battle and at others
recalls from it: and unless one know this, there is great danger. Which
is just what he means, and the mischief of it what he is manifesting,
when he saith, “who shall prepare himself for war?” So then, if it have
not this quality, it is the ruin of all. “And what is this to us,” saith
one?  Truly it concerns you very especially; wherefore also he adds,

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p26"></span>[1 Cor.
14.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#009)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p26.1"></span>.
“So also ye, unless ye utter by the tongue, speech easy to be
understood, ye will be speaking into the air:” i.e., calling to nobody,
speaking unto no one. Thus every where he shows its unprofitableness.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p27"></span>\[4.\] “But if it be unprofitable, why
was it given?” saith one. So as to be useful to him that hath received
it. But if it is to be so to others also, there must be added
interpretation. Now this he saith, bringing them near to one another;
that if a person himself have not the gift of interpretation, he may
take unto him another that hath it, and make his own gift useful through
him. Wherefore he every where points out its imperfection, that so he
may bind them together. Any how, he that accounts it to be sufficient
for itself, doth not so much commend it as disparage it, not suffering
it to shine brightly by the interpretation. For excellent indeed and
necessary is the gift, but it is so when it hath one to explain what is
spoken. Since the finger too is a necessary thing, but when you separate
it from the other members, it will not be equally useful: and the
trumpet is necessary, but when it sounds at random, it is rather an
annoyance. Yea, neither shall any art come to light, without matter
subject to it; nor is matter put into shape, if no form be assigned to
it. Suppose then the voice to be as the subject-matter, but the
distinctness as that form, which not being present, there will be no use
in the material.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p28"></span>[1 Cor.
14.10](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#010)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p28.1"></span>. “There are, it may be, so many kinds of
voices in the world, and no kind is without signification:” i.e., so
many tongues, so many voices of Scythians, Thracians, Romans, Persians,
Moors, Indians, Egyptians, innumerable other nations.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p29"></span>[1 Cor.
14.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#011)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p29.1"></span>. “If then I know not the meaning of the
voice, I shall be to him that speaketh a barbarian.” “For suppose not,”
saith he, “that this happens only in our case; rather in all one may see
this taking place: so that I do not say this to disparage the voice, but
to signify that to me it is useless, as long as it is not intelligible.”
Next, that he may not render the accusation unpalatable, he makes his
charge alike for the two, saying, “He shall be unto me a barbarian, and
I to him.” Not from the nature of the voice, but from our ignorance.
Seest thou how by little and little he draws men to that which is akin
to the subject. Which is his use to do, to fetch his examples from afar,
and to end with what more properly belongs to the matter. For having
spoken of a pipe and harp, wherein is much that is inferior and
unprofitable, he comes to the trumpet, a thing more useful; next, from
that he proceeds to the very voice itself. So also before, when he was
discoursing to show that it was not forbidden the Apostles to receive,
beginning first with husbandmen, and shepherds, and soldiers, then he
brought the discourse on to that which is nearer to the subject, the
priests in the old covenant.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p30"></span>But do thou, I pray, consider, how every
where he hath given diligence to free the gift from censure, and to
bring round the charge to the receivers of it. For he said not, “I shall
be a barbarian,” but, “unto him that speaketh, a barbarian.” And again,
he did not say, “he that speaketh shall be a barbarian,” but “he that
speaketh shall be a barbarian unto me <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) .”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p32"></span>\[5.\] “What then must be done?” saith
he. Why, so far from disparaging, one ought to recommend and to teach
it; as indeed himself also doth. Since after he had accused and rebuked
it and shown its unprofitableness, he proceeds to counsel them; saying,

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p33"></span>[1 Cor.
14.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#012)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p33.1"></span>. “So also ye, since as ye are zealous of
spiritual gifts, seek that ye may abound unto the edifying of the
Church.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p34"></span><span id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvi-Page_211"></span>Seest thou his aim every where, how he
looks to one thing continually and in all cases, the general utility,
the profiting the Church; laying this down as a kind of rule? And he did
not say, “that ye may obtain the gifts” but, “that ye may abound,” i.e.,
that ye may even possess them in great plenitude. Thus, so far am I from
wishing you not to possess them, that I even wish you to abound in them,
only so that ye handle them with a view to the common advantage. And how
is this to be done? This he adds, saying,

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p35"></span>[1 Cor.
14.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#013)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p35.1"></span>. “Wherefore let him that speaketh in a
tongue pray that he may interpret.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p36"></span>[1 Cor.
14.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p36.1"></span>. “For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit
prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p37"></span>[1 Cor.
14.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p37.1"></span>. “What is it then? I will pray with the
spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also; I will sing with
the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p38"></span>Here he shows that it is in their power
to obtain the gift. For, “let him pray,” saith he, i.e., “let him
contribute his own part,” since if thou ask diligently, thou wilt surely
receive. Ask accordingly not to have the gift of tongue only, but also
of interpretation, that thou mayest become useful unto all, and not shut
up thy gift in thyself alone. “For if I pray in a tongue,” saith he, “my
spirit prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful.” Seest thou how by
degrees bringing his argument to a point, he signifies that not to
others only is such an one useless, but also to himself; if at least
“his understanding is unfruitful?” For if a man should speak only in the
Persian, or any other foreign tongue, and not understand what he saith,
then of course to himself also will he be thenceforth a barbarian, not
to another only, from not knowing the meaning of the sound. For there
were of old many who had also a gift of prayer, together with a tongue;
and they prayed, and the tongue spake, praying either in the Persian or
Latin language <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) , but their
understanding knew not what was spoken. Wherefore also he said, “If I
pray in a tongue, my spirit prayeth,” i.e., the gift which is given me
and which moves my tongue, “but my understanding is unfruitful.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p40"></span>What then may that be which is best in
itself, and doth good? And how ought one to act, or what request of God?
To pray, “both with the spirit,” i.e., the gift, and “with the
understanding.” <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227)   Wherefore also
he said, “I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the
understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with
the understanding also.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p42"></span>\[6.\] He signifieth the same thing here
also, that both the tongue may speak, and the understanding may not be
ignorant of the things spoken. For except this be so, there will also be
another confusion.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p43"></span>[1 Cor.
14.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p43.1"></span>. “Else,” saith he, “if thou bless with the
spirit, how shall he that filleth the place of the unlearned say the
Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he knoweth not what thou sayest?”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p44"></span>[1 Cor.
14.17](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#017)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p44.1"></span>. “For thou verily givest thanks well, but
the other is not edified.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p45"></span>Observe how again here he brings his
stone to the plumb-line, <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) every
where seeking the edification of the Church. Now by the
“unlearned” <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) he means the laymen,
and signifies that he also suffers no little loss when he is unable to
say the Amen. And what he saith is this: “if thou shalt bless in a
barbarian tongue, not knowing what thou sayest, nor able to interpret,
the layman cannot respond the Amen. For not hearing the words, ‘forever
and ever,’ which are at the end <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230)
, he doth not say the Amen.” Then again, comforting him concerning this,
that he might not seem to hold the gift too cheap; the same kind of
remark as he made above, that “he speaketh mysteries,” and “speaketh
unto God,” and “edifieth himself,” and “prayeth with the spirit,”
intending no little comfort from these things, this also he utters here,
saying, “for thou indeed givest thanks well,” since thou speakest being
moved by the Spirit: but the other hearing nothing nor knowing what is
said, stands there, receiving no great advantage by it.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p49"></span>\[7.\] Further, because he had run down
the possessors of this gift, as though they had no such great thing;
that he might not seem to hold them cheap, as being himself destitute of
it, see what he saith:

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p50"></span>[1 Cor.
14.18](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#018)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p50.1"></span>. “I thank God, speaking <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) with tongues more than ye all.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p52"></span>And this he doth also in another place
intending, namely, to take away the advantages of Judaism and to show
that henceforth they are nothing, he begins by declaring that himself
had been endowed with them, yea, and that in very great excess; and then
he calls them “loss,” thus saying, “If any man thinketh to have
confidence in the flesh, I more: circumcised the eighth day, of the
stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; as
touching the law, a Pharisee; as touching zeal, persecuting the Church;
as touching the righteousness which is the law, found blameless.”
([Philip. iii. 4-7](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#004)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p52.1"></span>.) And then, having <span id="page_212">p.
212</span> <span id="iv.xxxvi-Page_212"></span>signified himself to have
the advantage of all, he saith, “Howbeit what things were gain to me,
those have I counted loss for Christ.” So also he doth here, saying, “I
speak with tongues more than ye all.” Do not ye therefore glory as
though ye only had the gift. For I also possess it, yea more than ye.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p53"></span>[1 Cor.
14.19](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#019)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p53.1"></span>. “Howbeit in the Church I had rather speak
five words with my understanding, that I might instruct others also.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p54"></span>What is that, “speak with my
understanding, that I might instruct others also?” “Understanding what I
say,” and “words which I can both interpret to others, and speak
intelligently, and teach the hearers.” “Than ten thousand words in a
tongue.” Wherefore? “That I may instruct others,” saith he. For the one
hath but display only; the other, great utility: this being what he
everywhere seeks, I mean the common profit. And yet the gift of tongues
was strange, but that of prophecy familiar and ancient and heretofore
given to many; this on the contrary then first given: howbeit it was not
much cared for by him. Wherefore neither did he employ it; not because
he had it not, but because he always sought the more profitable things:
being as he was free from all vain-glory, and considering one thing
only, how he might render the hearers better.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p55"></span>\[8.\] And here is the reason of the
faculty he had of looking to the expedient both to himself and to
others: viz. because he was free from vain-glory. Since he assuredly
that is enslaved by it, so far from discerning what is good to others,
will not even know his own.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p56"></span>Such was Simon, who, because he looked to
vain-glory, did not even see his own advantage. Such also were the Jews,
who because of this sacrificed <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232)
their own salvation to the devil. Hence also did idols spring, and by
this madness did the heathen philosophers excite themselves, and make
shipwreck in their false doctrines. And observe the perverseness of this
passion: how because of it some of them also made themselves poor,
others were eager for wealth. So potent is its tyranny that it prevails
even in direct contraries. Thus one man is vain of chastity, and
contrariwise another of adultery; and this man of justice, and another
of injustice; so of luxury and fasting, modesty and rashness, riches and
poverty. I say poverty: since some of them that were with out, when it
was in their power to receive, for admiration’s sake forbore to receive.
But not so the Apostles: that they were pure from vainglory, they showed
by their doings: in that, when some were calling them Gods and were
ready to sacrifice-unto them oxen with garlands, they did not merely
just forbid what was doing, but they even rent their clothes. ([Acts
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p57.2"></span>.)
And after they had set the lame man upright, when all with open mouths
were gazing at them, they said, “Why look ye so earnestly on us, as
though by our own power we had made this man to walk <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) ?” And those, among men who admired
poverty, chose to themselves a state of poverty: but these among persons
who despised poverty and gave praise to wealth. And these, if they
received aught, ministered to the needy. Thus, not vain-glory but
benevolence, was the motive of all they did. But those quite the
reverse; as enemies and pests of our common nature, and no otherwise,
did they such things. Thus one sunk all his goods in <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) the sea for no good purpose, imitating
fools and madmen: and another let all his land go to sheep common. <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235)   Thus they did every thing for
vain-glory. But not so the Apostles; rather they both received what was
given them, and distributed to the needy with so great liberality that
they even lived in continual hunger. But if they had been enamored of
glory, they would not have practiced this, the receiving and
distributing, for fear of some suspicion arising against them. For he
who throws away his own for glory, will much more refuse to receive the
things of others, that he may not be accounted to stand in need of
others nor incur any suspicion. But these thou seest both ministering to
the poor, and themselves begging for them. So truly were they more
loving than any fathers.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p61"></span>\[9.\] And observe also their laws, how
moderate and freed from all vain-glory. Thus: “Having” saith he,” food
and covering, let us therewith be content.” ([1 Tim. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p61.1"></span>.)
Not like him of Sinope <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) , who
clothed in rags and living in a cask to no good end, astonished many,
but profited none: whereas Paul did none of these things; (for neither
had he an eye to ostentation;) but was both clothed in ordinary apparel
with all decency, and lived in a house continually, and displayed all
exactness in the practice of all other virtue; which the cynic despised,
living impurely and publicly disgracing himself, and dragged away by his
mad passion for glory. For if any one ask the reason of his living in a
cask, he will find no other but vain-glory alone. But Paul also paid
rent for the house wherein he abode at Rome. Although he who was able to
do things far severer, could much more have had strength for this. But
he looked not to glory, that savage monster, that fearful demon, that
pest of the world, that <span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvi-Page_213"></span>poisonous viper. Since, as that animal
tears through the womb of her parent with her teeth, so also this
passion tears in pieces him that begets it.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p63"></span>\[10.\] By what means then may one find a
remedy for this manifold distemper? By bringing forward those that have
trodden it under foot, and with an eye to their image so ordering one’s
own life. For so the patriarch Abraham.—nay, let none accuse me of
tautology if I often make mention of him, and on all occasions: this
being that which most of all shows him wonderful, and deprives them that
refuse to imitate him of all excuse. For, if we exhibit one doing well
in this particular, and another in that, some one might say that virtue
is hardly to be attained; for that it is scarcely possible to succeed in
all those things together, whereof each one of the saints hath performed
only a part. But when one and the same person is found to possess all,
what excuse will they have, who after the law and grace are not able to
attain unto the same measure with them that were before the law and
grace? How then did this Patriarch overcome and subdue this monster,
when he had a dispute with his nephew? ([Gen. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p63.1"></span>.)
For so it was, that coming off worst and losing the first share, he was
not vexed. But ye know that in such matters the shame is worse than the
loss to the vulgar-minded, and particularly when a person having all in
his own power, as he had then, and having been the first to give honor,
was not honored in return. Nevertheless, none of these things vexed him,
but he was content to receive the second place, and when wronged by the
young man, himself old, an uncle by a nephew, he was not indignant nor
took it ill, but loved him equally and ministered to him. Again, having
been victorious in that great and terrible fight, and having mightily
put to flight the Barbarians ([Gen.
xiv](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#000)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p63.2"></span>.)
he doth not add show to victory, nor erect a trophy.  For he wished to
save only, not to exhibit himself. Again, he entertained strangers, yet
did he not here act vain-gloriously, but himself both ran to them and
bowed down to them, not as though he were giving, but receiving a
benefit, and he calleth them lords, without knowing who they are who are
come to him, and presents his wife in the place of a handmaiden. ([Gen.
xviii](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#000)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p63.3"></span>.) And in Egypt too before this, when he had
appeared so extraordinary a person, and had received back this very
woman, his wife, and had enjoyed so great honor ([Gen.
xii](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#000)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p63.4"></span>.)
he showeth it to no man. And though the inhabitants of the place called
him prince, he himself even laid down the price of the sepulchre. ([Gen.
xxiii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#006)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p63.5"></span>.) And when he sent to betroth a wife for his
son, he gave no command to speak in high and dignified terms of him,
([Gen. xxiv](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#000)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p63.6"></span>.) but merely to bring the bride.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p64"></span>\[11.\] Wilt thou examine also the
conduct of those under grace, when from every side great was the glory
of the teaching flowing round them, and wilt thou see then also this
passion cast out? Consider, I pray, this same Apostle who speaks these
things, how he ever ascribes the whole to God, how of his sins he makes
mention continually, but of his good deeds never, unless perchance it
should be needful to correct the disciples; and even if he be compelled
to do this, he calls the matter folly, and yields the first place to
Peter, and is not ashamed to labor with Priscilla and Aquila, and every
where he is eager to show himself lowly, not swaggering in the market
place, nor carrying crowds with him, but setting himself down among the
obscure. Wherefore also he said, “but his bodily presence is weak.” ([2
Cor. x. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p64.1"></span>.) i.e., easy to be despised, and not at all
accompanied with display. And again, “I pray that ye do no evil, not
that we may appear approved.” And what marvel if he despise this glory?
seeing that he despises the glory of heaven, and the kingdom, and hell,
for that which was pleasing unto Christ: for he wishes <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) himself to be accursed from Christ for
the glory of Christ. For if he saith that he is willing to suffer this
for the Jews’ sake, he saith it on this account that none of those
without understanding might think to take to himself the promises made
to them. If therefore he were ready to pass by those things, what marvel
is it if he despise human things?

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p66"></span>\[12.\] But the men of our time are
overwhelmed by all things, not by desire of glory only, but also, on the
other hand, by insult and fear of dishonor. Thus, should any one praise,
it would puff thee up, and if he blame, it would cast thee down. And as
weak bodies are by common accidents injured, so also souls which grovel
on earth. For such not poverty alone, but even wealth destroys, not
grief only, but likewise joy, and prosperity more than adversity. For
poverty compels to be wise, but wealth leads on oftentimes into some
great evil. And as men in a fever are hard to be pleased in any thing,
so also they that are depraved in mind on every side receive hurt.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p67"></span>Knowing therefore these things, let us
not shun poverty, let us not admire riches: but prepare our soul to be
sufficient for all estates. For so any one building an house doth not
consider how neither rain may descend, nor sunbeam light on it, (for
this were impossible,) but how it may be made capable of enduring all.
And he again that builds a ship doth not fashion and design any thing to
keep waves from breaking against it, or any tempest from rising in the
sea: (for this too were impossible:)  but that <span id="page_214">p.
214</span> <span id="iv.xxxvi-Page_214"></span>the sides of the ship may
be ready to meet all. And again, he that cares for the body doth not
look to this that there may be no inequality in the temperature, but
that the body may easily endure all these things. So accordingly let us
act in respect of the soul, and neither be anxious to fly poverty nor to
become rich, but to regulate each of them for our own safety.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p68"></span>Wherefore, letting alone these things,
let us render our soul meet both for wealth and poverty. For although no
calamity, such as man is subject to, befall, which is for the most part
impossible, even thus, better is he that seeks not wealth, but knows how
to bear all things easily than he that is always rich. And why? First,
such an one hath his safety from within, but the other from without. And
as he is a better soldier who trusts to his bodily powers and skill in
fighting, than he that hath his strength in his armor only; so he that
relies on his wealth, compared with him that is fenced in by his virtue,
is inferior. Secondly, because even if he do not fall into poverty, it
is impossible that he should be without trouble. For wealth hath many
storms and troubles; but not so virtue, but pleasure only and safety.
Yea, and it puts a man out of the reach of them that lay snares for him,
but wealth quite the contrary, rendering him easy to be attacked and
taken. And as among animals, stags and hares are of all most easily
taken through their natural timidity, but the wild boar, and the bull,
and the lion, would not easily fall in the way of the liers-in-wait;
just so one may see in the case of the rich, and of them that live
voluntarily in poverty.  The one is like the lion and the bull, the
other like the stag and the hare. For whom doth not the rich man fear?
Are there not robbers, potentates, enviers, informers? And why speak I
of robbers and informers, in a case where a man suspects his very
domestics?

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p69"></span>\[13.\] And why say I, “when he is
alive?” Not even when dead is he freed from the villainy of the robbers,
nor hath death power to set him in safety, but the evil doers despoil
him even when dead, so dangerous a thing is wealth. For not only do they
dig into houses, but they even burst open tombs and coffins. What then
can be more wretched than this man, since not even death can furnish him
with this security, but that wretched body, even when deprived of life,
is not freed from the evils of life, those that commit such wickedness
hastening to war even with dust and ashes, and much more grievously than
when it was alive?  For then, it might be, entering his storehouse, they
would remove his chests, but abstain from his person, and would not take
so much as to strip the body itself but now the accursed hands of the
tombbreakers do not even abstain from these, but move and turn it about,
and with much cruelty insult it. For after it hath been committed to the
ground, having stripped it both of its covering of earth and of that
which its grave-clothes constitute, they leave it thus to be cast out.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p70"></span>What foe then so deadly as wealth, which
destroys both the soul of the living, and insults the body of the dead,
not suffering it even to lie buried in the ground, which is common even
to the condemned and to them that have been taken in the vilest crimes?
For of them the legislators having exacted the punishment of death,
inquire no further; but of these, wealth even after death exacts a most
bitter punishment, exposing them naked and unburied, a dreadful and
pitiable spectacle: since even those who suffer this after sentence and
by the anger of their judges, do not suffer so grievously as these. For
they indeed remain unburied the first and second day, and so are
committed to the ground; but these, when they have been committed to the
ground, are then stripped naked and insulted. And if the robbers depart
without taking the coffin too, there is still no thanks to their wealth,
but in this case also to their poverty. For she it is that guards it.
Whereas most assuredly, had we intruded wealth with even so much as
this, and leaving off to form it of stone, had forged it of gold, we
should have lost this also.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p71"></span>So faithless a thing is wealth; which
belongs not so much to them that have it, as to them that endeavor to
seize it. So that it is but a superfluous argument which aims to show
that wealth is irresistible, seeing that not even on the day of their
death do its possessors obtain security. And yet who is not reconciled
with the departed, whether it be wild beast, or demon, or whatever else?
The very sight being enough to bend even one who is altogether iron, and
quite past feeling. Wherefore, you know, when one sees a corpse, though
it be an enemy public or private whom he sees, yet he weeps for him in
common with his dearest friends; and his wrath is extinguished with
life, and pity is brought in. And it would be impossible, in time of
mourning and carrying out of burial, to distinguish an enemy from him
who is not such. So greatly do all men revere their common nature, and
the customs which have been introduced respecting it. But wealth not
even on obtaining this, remits her anger against her possessors; nay, it
renders them that have been no way wronged enemies of the dead; if at
least to strip the dead body be an act of persons very bitter and
hostile. And nature for her part reconciles even his enemies to him
then: but wealth makes foes of them that have noth<span id="page_215">p.
215</span> <span id="iv.xxxvi-Page_215"></span>ing to accuse him of, and
cruelly intreats the body in its utter desolation. And yet in that case
there are many things which might lead one to pity, the fact of its
being a corpse, its inability to move, and tending to earth and
corruption, the absence of any one to help: but none of these things
soften those accursed wretches, because of the tyranny they are under
from their base cupidity. For the passion of covetousness, like some
ruthless tyrant, is at hand, enjoining those inhuman commands and having
made wild beasts of them, so brings them to the tombs. Yea, like wild
beasts attacking the dead, they would not even abstain from their flesh,
if their limbs were any way useful unto them. Such is our enjoyment of
wealth; to be insulted even after death, and deprived of sepulture which
even the most desperate criminals obtain.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p72"></span>\[14.\] Are we still then, tell me, to be
fond of so grievous an enemy? Nay, I beseech you, nay, my brethren! but
let us fly from it without turning to look: and if it come into our
hands, let us not keep it within, but bind it fast by the hands of the
poor. For these are the bonds which have more power to hold it, and from
those treasuries it will never more escape; and so this faithless one
abides for the time to come faithful, tractable, tame, the right hand of
Mercy producing this effect on it.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p73"></span>As I have said then, if it ever come to
us, let us hand it over to her; but if it come not, let us not seek
after it, nor fret ourselves, nor count its possessors happy; for what
sort of a notion of happiness is this? Unless thou wouldest also say
that those who fight with beasts are to be envied, because those
high-priced animals are shut up and reserved by the proposers of such
contests for themselves: who however not daring themselves to approach
or to touch them, but fearing and trembling because of them, hand over
others to them. Something like this, I say, is the case of the wealthy,
when they have shut up their wealth in their treasuries as if it were
some savage beast, and day by day receive from it innumerable wounds: in
this latter unlike to the beasts: since they, when thou leadest them
out, then, and not till then, hurt such as meet them: but this, when it
is shut up and preserved, then destroys its possessors and hoarders.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p74"></span>But let us make this beast tame. And it
will be tame, if we do not shut it up, but give it into the hands of all
who are in need. So shall we reap from this quarter the greatest
blessings, both living in the present life with safety and a good hope,
and in the day that is to come standing with boldness: to which may we
all attain, through the grace and mercy, &c. &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_224"></span>[208:225](1120039.htm#fr_224) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>πανηγυρίζοντες</span>.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[210:226](1120039.htm#fr_225) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p31.1"></span>ὁ ἐμοι λαλῶν</span>, he that speaketh unto
me.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[211:227](1120039.htm#fr_226) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p39"></span> \[From this phrase—a similar one occurs
in the next homily—it seems that Chrysostom held the tongue to mean the
power of speaking in a language not before acquired. Most modern
expositors understand by it an ecstatic utterance, a view which
Tertullian alone of the patristic writers held.—C.\]

<span id="fn_227"></span>[211:228](1120039.htm#fr_227) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p41.1"></span>διανοίᾳ</span>.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[211:229](1120039.htm#fr_228) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p46.1"></span>πρὸς τὴν σπάρτην τὸν λίθον ἆγει</span>.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[211:230](1120039.htm#fr_229) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p47.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p47.2"></span>διώτην</span>.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[211:231](1120039.htm#fr_230) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p48"></span> i.e., at the end of the Long
Thanksgiving in that part of the Service for the Holy Eucharist, which
is called the Anaphora. Vid. Brett’s Liturgies, 1838, p. 9, 16, 37, &c.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[211:232](1120039.htm#fr_231) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p51.1"></span>λαλῶν</span>. Rec. vers. “I speak.”

<span id="fn_232"></span>[212:233](1120039.htm#fr_232) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p57.1"></span>προέπιον</span>.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[212:234](1120039.htm#fr_233) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p57.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p58"></span> [Acts iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p58.1"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p58.2"></span> ἢ εὐσεβεία</span>
om.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[212:235](1120039.htm#fr_234) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p58.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p59"></span> Aristippus. See Hor. *Sat.* ii. 3. 100;
Cic. *de Invent*. ii. 58.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[212:236](1120039.htm#fr_235) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p60"></span> Democritus. See Hor. *Ep*. i. 12.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[212:237](1120039.htm#fr_236) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p62"></span> Diogenes the Cynic.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[213:238](1120039.htm#fr_237) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p65"></span> \[Rather he *could* wish, i.e., if it
were proper. C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXVI](1120040)
