[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120078)  [Next](1120080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxx"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="v.xxx-p1.1"></span>Homily XXX.</span>

<span id="v.xxx-p2"></span><span id="v.xxx-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.xxx-p2.2"></span>[2 Cor. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#010)<span id="v.xxx-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p3"></span>For this cause I write these things while
absent, that I may not when present deal sharply, according to the
authority which the Lord gave me for building up, and not for casting
down.

<span id="v.xxx-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.xxx-p4.1"></span>He</span> was sensible he had spoken more
vehemently than his wont, and especially towards the end of the Epistle.
For he said before, “Now I Paul myself entreat you by the meekness and
gentleness of Christ; I who in your presence am lowly among you, but
being absent am of good courage towards you: Yea, I beseech you, that I
may not be bold when I am present, with the confidence wherewith I count
to be bold against some which count of us as if we walked according to
the flesh;” ([2 Cor. 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#002)<span id="v.xxx-p4.2"></span>.) and,
“being in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience shall
be fulfilled:” ([2 Cor. 10.6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span
id="v.xxx-p4.3"></span>.) and, “I fear lest when I come, I should find
you not such as I would, and should myself be found of you such as ye
would not;” ([2 Cor. 12.20](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#020)<span
id="v.xxx-p4.4"></span>.) and again, “lest when I come my God should
humble me before you, and that I should mourn many of them which have
sinned heretofore, and repented not of the lasciviousness and
uncleanness which they committed:” ([2 Cor.
12.21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021)<span id="v.xxx-p4.5"></span>.)
and afterwards, “I told you before and foretell you, as if I were
present the second time, and being absent now I write, that, if I come
again, I will not spare; seeing that ye seek a proof of Christ, that
speaketh in me.” ([2 Cor. 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003)<span id="v.xxx-p4.6"></span>.)
Since then he had said these things and more besides, terrifying,
shaming, reproaching, lashing them, he says, in excuse for all, “For
this cause I write these things while absent, that I may not when
present deal sharply.” For I am desirous the sharpness should lie in my
letters and not in my deeds. I wish my threats to be vehement, that they
may continue threats and never go forth into action. Again even in this
his apology he makes what he says more terrible, showing that it is not
himself who is to punish, but God; for he added, “according to the
authority which the Lord gave me;” and again, to show that he desires
not to use his power to their punishment, he added, “not for casting
down, but for building up.” And he hinted indeed this now, as I said,
but he left it to them to draw the conclusion that if they should
continue unamended, even this again is building up, to punish those that
are of such a mind. For so it is, and he knew it and showed it by his
deeds.

<span id="v.xxx-p5"></span>[2 Cor.
13.11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011)<span id="v.xxx-p5.1"></span>.
“For the rest, <span id="fr_1052"></span>[1053](#fn_1052) brethren,
rejoice, be perfected, be comforted, be of the same mind, live in peace,
and the God of love and peace shall be with you.”

<span id="v.xxx-p7"></span>What means, “for the rest, brethren,
rejoice?” Thou hast pained, terrified, thrown them into an agony, made
them to tremble and fear, and how biddest thou them rejoice? ‘Why, for
this very reason I bid them rejoice. For,’ he says, ‘if what is your
part follow’ upon mine, there will be nothing to prevent that joy. For
all my part has been done; I have suffered long, I have delayed, I have
forborne to cut off, I have besought, I have advised, I have alarmed,
<span id="page_418">p. 418</span> <span id="v.xxx-Page_418"></span>I
have threatened, so as by every means to gather you in unto the fruit of
repentance. And now it behoveth that your part be done, and so your joy
will be unfading.’

<span id="v.xxx-p8"></span>“Be perfected.” What is, “be perfected?” ‘Be
complete, fill up what is deficient.’

<span id="v.xxx-p9"></span>“Be comforted.” For, since their trials were
numerous, and their perils great, he says, ‘“be comforted,” both by one
another, and by us, and by your change unto the better. For if ye should
have joy of conscience and become complete, nothing is wanting unto your
cheerfulness and comfort. For nothing doth so produce comfort as a pure
conscience, yea, though innumerable trials surround.’

<span id="v.xxx-p10"></span>“Be of the same mind, live in peace.” The
request he made in the former Epistle also, at the opening. For it is
possible to be of one mind, and yet not to live in peace, \[for
instance\], when people agree in doctrine, but in their dealings with
each other are at variance. But Paul requires both.

<span id="v.xxx-p11"></span>“And the God of love and peace shall be with
you.” For truly he not only recommends and advises, but also prays. For
either he prays for this, or else foretells what shall happen; or
rather, both. ‘For if ye do these things,’ he says, ‘for instance, if ye
be “of one mind” and “live in peace,” God also will be with you, for He
is “the God of love and of peace,” and in these things He delighteth, He
rejoiceth. Hence shall peace also be yours from His love; hence shall
every evil be removed. This saved the world, this ended the long war,
this blended together heaven and earth, this made men angels. This then
let us also imitate, for love is the mother of countless good things. By
this we were saved, by this all those unspeakable good things \[come\]
to us.’

<span id="v.xxx-p12"></span>\[2.\] Then to lead them on unto it, he
says,

<span id="v.xxx-p13"></span>[2 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#012)<span id="v.xxx-p13.1"></span>.
“Salute one another with a holy kiss.”

<span id="v.xxx-p14"></span>What is “holy?” not hollow, <span
id="fr_1053"></span>[1054](#fn_1053) not treacherous, like the kiss
which Judas gave to Christ. For therefore is the kiss given, that it may
be fuel unto love, that it may kindle the disposition, that we may so
love each other, as brothers brothers, as children parents, as parents
children; yea, rather even far more. For those things are a disposition
implanted by nature, but these by spiritual grace. Thus our souls bound
unto each other. And therefore when we return after an absence we kiss
each other, our souls hastening unto mutual intercourse. For this is
that member which most of all declares to us the workings of the soul.
But about this holy kiss somewhat else may yet be said. To what effect?
We are the temple of Christ; we kiss then the porch and entrance of the
temple when we kiss each other. See ye not how many kiss even the porch
of this temple, some stooping down, others grasping it with their hand,
and putting their hand to their mouth. And through these gates and doors
Christ both had entered into us, and doth enter, whensoever we
communicate. Ye who partake of the mysteries understand what I say. For
it is in no common manner that our lips are honored, when they receive
the Lord’s Body. It is for this reason chiefly that we here kiss. Let
them give ear who speak filthy things, who utter railing, and let them
shudder to think what that mouth is they dishonor; let those give ear
who kiss obscenely. Hear what things God hath proclaimed by thy mouth,
and keep it undefiled. He hath discoursed of the life to come, of the
resurrection, of immortality, that death is not death, of those other
innumerable mysteries. For he that is about to be initiated comes to the
priest’s mouth as it were an oracle, to hear things full of awe. For he
lost his life even from his forefathers, and comes to seek it again, and
to ask how he may haply find and get it back. Then God announceth to him
how it may be found, and that mouth becomes more awful than the very
mercy-seat. For that mercy-seat never sent forth a voice like this, but
spake much of lesser things, of wars and such peace as is here below:
but this speaks all about heaven and the life to come, and things new
and that pass understanding. And having said,

<span id="v.xxx-p16"></span>[2 Cor.
13.13](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#013)<span id="v.xxx-p16.1"></span>.
“Salute one another with an holy kiss,” he added, “All the saints salute
you.”

<span id="v.xxx-p17"></span>By this also giving them good hopes. He has
added this in the place of the kiss, knitting them together by the
salutation, for the words also proceed from the same mouth from which
the kiss. Seest thou how he brings them all together, both those who are
widely separated in the body and those who are near, these by the kiss
and those by the written message?

<span id="v.xxx-p18"></span>\[3.\] [2 Cor.
13.14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014)<span id="v.xxx-p18.1"></span>.
“The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,” and the
Father, <span id="fr_1054"></span>[1055](#fn_1054) “and the communion of
the Holy Ghost, be with you all.” After having united them to one other
by the salutations and the kisses, he again closes his speech with
prayer, with much carefulness uniting them unto God also. Where now are
they who say that because the Holy Spirit is not inserted in the
beginnings of the Epistles, He is not of the same substance? For,
behold, he hath now enumerated Him with the Father and Son. And besides
this, one may remark, that when writing to the Colossians and saying,
“Grace to you, and peace from God our Father,” he was silent of the Son,
and added not, as in all his Epistles, and <span id="page_419">p.
419</span> <span id="v.xxx-Page_419"></span>from the Lord Jesus
Christ. <span id="fr_1055"></span>[1056](#fn_1055)   Is then the Son not
of the same substance either, because of this? Nay, these reasonings are
of extreme folly. For this very thing especially shows Him to be of the
same substance, that Paul useth the expression \[or not\] indifferently.
And that what is here said is no conjecture, hear how he mentions Son
and Spirit, and is quite silent of the Father. For, writing to the
Corinthians, he says, “But ye were washed, but ye were sanctified, but
ye were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and in the
Spirit of our God.” ([1 Cor. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)<span id="v.xxx-p20.2"></span>.)
What then, tell me? were these not baptized into the Father? Then
assuredly they were neither washed nor sanctified. But did they baptize
them? doubtless then just as also they did baptize. How then did he not
say, ‘Ye are washed in the name of the Father?’ Because it was
indifferent in his view, at one time to make mention of this, at another
of that Person; and you may observe this custom in many places of the
Epistles. For writing to the Romans he says, “I beseech you therefore by
the mercies of God,” ([Rom. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span id="v.xxx-p20.3"></span>.)
although those mercies are of the Son; and, “I beseech you by the love
of the Spirit,” ([Rom. xv. 30](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030)<span
id="v.xxx-p20.4"></span>.) although love is of the Father. Wherefore
then mentioned he not the Son in “the mercies,” nor the Father in “the
love?” Because as being things plain and admitted, he was silent about
them. Moreover, he will be found again, to put the gifts also themselves
transposedly. <span id="fr_1056"></span>[1057](#fn_1056)   For having
said here, “The grace of Christ, and the love of God and the Father, and
the communion of the Holy Ghost;” he in another place speaks of “the
communion of the Son,” and of “the love of the Spirit.” For, “I beseech
you,” he says, “by the love of the Spirit.” ([Rom. xv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030)<span id="v.xxx-p21.3"></span>.) And
in his Epistle to the Corinthians, “God is faithful, by Whom ye were
called into the communion of His Son.” ([1 Cor. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009)<span id="v.xxx-p21.4"></span>.) Thus
the things of the Trinity are undivided: and whereas the communion is of
the Spirit, it hath been found of the Son; and whereas the grace is of
the Son, it is also of the Father and of the Holy Spirit; for \[we
read\], “Grace be to you from God the Father.” And in another place,
having enumerated many forms of it, he added, “But all these worketh the
one and the same Spirit, dividing to each one severally as He will.” ([1
Cor. xii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="v.xxx-p21.5"></span>.) And I say these things, not confounding <span
id="fr_1057"></span>[1058](#fn_1057) the Persons, (away with the
thought!) but knowing both the individuality and distinctness <span
id="fr_1058"></span>[1059](#fn_1058) of These, and the Unity of the
Substance.

<span id="v.xxx-p24"></span>\[4.\] Let us then continue both to hold
these doctrines in their strictness, and to draw to us the love of God.
For before indeed He loved us when hating Him, and reconciled us who
were His enemies; but henceforth He wishes to love us as loving Him. Let
us then continue to love Him, so that we may be also loved by Him. For
if when beloved by powerful men we are formidable to all, much more when
\[beloved\] by God. And should it be needful to give wealth, or body, or
even life itself for this love, let us not grudge them. For it is not
enough to say in words that we love, but we ought to give also the proof
of deeds; for neither did He show love by words only, but by deeds also.
Do thou then also show this by thy deeds and do those things which
please Him, for so shalt thou thyself reap again the advantage. For He
needeth nothing that we have to bestow, and this is also a special proof
of a sincere love, when one who needeth nothing and is not in any
necessity, doth all for the sake of being loved by us.  Wherefore also
Moses said, “For what doth the Lord God require of you, but to love Him,
and that thou shouldest be ready to walk after Him?” ([Deut. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012)<span id="v.xxx-p24.1"></span>.) So
that when He biddeth thee love Him, He then most of all showeth that He
loves thee. For nothing doth so secure our salvation as to love Him. See
then, how that all His commandments even tend together to our repose and
salvation and good report. For when he says, “Blessed are the merciful,
blessed are the pure in heart, blessed are the meek, blessed are the
poor in spirit, blessed are the peacemakers;” ([Matt. v.
3-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="v.xxx-p24.2"></span>.) He
Himself indeed reaps no advantage from these, but he enjoins them for
our adorning and attuning; and when He says, “I was an hungred,” it is
not as needing that ministry from us, but as exciting thee to humanity.
For He was well able even without thee to feed the poor man; but as
bestowing upon thee an exceeding treasure, he laid these commands upon
thee. For if the sun, which is but a creature, needeth not our eyes; for
he abideth in his own proper brightness, even though none should look
upon him, and we it is who are the gainers when we enjoy his beams; much
more is this so with God. But that thou mayest learn this in yet another
way; how great wilt thou have the distance to be between God and us? as
great as between gnats and us, or much greater? Quite plainly it is much
greater, yea, infinite. If then we vainglorious creatures need not
service nor honor from gnats, much rather the Divine Nature \[none from
us\], seeing It is impassible and needing nothing. The measure of that
which He enjoyeth by us is but the greatness of our benefit, and the
delight He taketh in our salvation. For this reason He <span
id="page_420">p. 420</span> <span id="v.xxx-Page_420"></span>also
oftentimes relinquisheth His own, and seeketh thine. “For if any,” he
saith,” have a wife that believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell with
him, let him not put her away;” ([1 Cor. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#012)<span id="v.xxx-p24.3"></span>.)
and, “He that putteth away his wife, saving for the cause of
fornication, causeth her to commit adultery.” Seest thou what
unspeakable goodness? ‘If a wife be a harlot,’ He says, ‘I do not compel
the husband to live with her; and if she be an unbeliever, I do not
forbid him.’ Again, ‘if thou be grieved against any one, I command him
that hath grieved thee to leave My gift and to run to thee.’ For He
saith, “If thou art offering thy gift, and there remember that thy
brother hath aught against thee, leave thy gift before the altar, and go
thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy
gift.” ([Matt. 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024)<span id="v.xxx-p24.4"></span>.)
And what saith the parable of him that had devoured his all? ([Matt.
xviii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#024)<span
id="v.xxx-p24.5"></span>, &c.) Doth it not show this? For when he had
eaten up those ten thousand talents, He had mercy on him, and let him
go; but when he demanded of his fellowservant an hundred pence, he both
called him wicked and delivered him over to the punishment. So great
account doth He make of thy ease. The barbarian was about to sin against
the wife of the just man, and He says, “I spared thee from sinning
against me.” ([Gen. xx. 6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006)<span
id="v.xxx-p24.6"></span>.) Paul persecuted the Apostles, and He saith to
him, “Why persecutest thou Me?” Others are hungry, and He Himself saith
He is an hungred, and wanders about naked and a stranger, wishing to
shame thee, and so to force thee into the way of almsgiving.

<span id="v.xxx-p25"></span>Reflecting then upon the love, how great He
hath shown in all things, and still shows it to be, both having
vouchsafed to make Himself known to us, (which is the greatest crown of
good things, and light to the understanding and instruction in virtue,)
and to lay down laws for the best mode of life, and having done all
things for our sakes, having given His Son, and promised a kingdom, and
invited us to those unspeakable good things, and prepared for us a most
blessed life, let us do and say every thing so as both to appear worthy
of His love and to obtain the good things to come; whereunto may we all
attain, through the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ;
with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Spirit, be glory now and ever,
and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[417:1053](1120079.htm#fr_1052) <span
id="v.xxx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxx-p6.1"></span>Τὸ λοιπὸν</span>, Rec. Text <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxx-p6.2"></span>Λοιπὸν</span>.

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[418:1054](1120079.htm#fr_1053) <span
id="v.xxx-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxx-p15.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxx-p15.2"></span>πούλῳ</span>.

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[418:1055](1120079.htm#fr_1054) <span
id="v.xxx-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxx-p19.1"></span>καί Πάτρος</span> om. R.T.

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[419:1056](1120079.htm#fr_1055) <span
id="v.xxx-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p20"></span> See also Chrys. on Coloss. Oxford Trans.
183. ‘From God, saith he, our Father: although he useth not in this
place the name of Christ.’ Yet the Rec. Text has the words, [Col. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#002)<span id="v.xxx-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[419:1057](1120079.htm#fr_1056) <span
id="v.xxx-p20.5"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxx-p21.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxx-p21.2"></span>ντιστρόφως</span>.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[419:1058](1120079.htm#fr_1057) <span
id="v.xxx-p21.6"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxx-p22.1"></span>συναλείφων</span>.

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[419:1059](1120079.htm#fr_1058) <span
id="v.xxx-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxx-p23.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxx-p23.2"></span>διάζον καὶ διῃρημένον</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Subjects](1120080)
