[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120020)  [Next](1120022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>Homily XVII.</span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p2"></span><span id="iv.xviii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xviii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.xviii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p3"></span>“All things are lawful for me, but not all
things are expedient. All things are lawful for me, but I will not be
brought into the power of any.

<span id="iv.xviii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xviii-p4.1"></span>Here</span> he glances at the gluttons. For
since he intends to assail the fornicator again, and fornication arises
from luxuriousness and want of moderation, he strongly chastises this
passion. It cannot be that he speaks thus with regard to things
forbidden, such not being “lawful:” but of things which seem to be
indifferent. To illustrate my meaning: “It is lawful,” he says, “to eat
and to drink; but it is not expedient with excess.” And so that
marvellous and unexpected turn of his, which he is often wont to adopt;
(Cf. [Rom. 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021.md), [1 Cor.
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023)<span id="iv.xviii-p4.2"></span>..md)
bringing his argument clear round to its contrary, this he manages to
introduce here also; and he signifies that to do what is in one’s power
not only is not expedient, but even is not a part of power, but of
slavery.

<span id="iv.xviii-p5"></span>And first, he dissuades them on the ground
of the inexpediency of the thing, saying, “they are not expedient:” in
the next place, on that of its contrariety to itself, saying, “I will
not be brought under the power of any.” This is his meaning: “You are at
liberty to eat,” says he; “well then, remain in liberty, and take heed
that you do not become a slave to this appetite: for he who uses it
properly, he is master of it; but he that exceeds the proper measure is
no longer its master but its slave, since gluttony reigns paramount
within him.” Do you perceive how, where the man thought he had authority
Paul points out that he is under authority? For this is his custom, as I
was saying before, to give all objections a turn the contrary way. It is
just this which he has done here. For mark; each of them was saying, “I
have power to live luxuriously.” He replies, “In doing so, thou art not
so much acting as one who had power over a thing, but rather as being
thyself subject to some such power. For thou hast not power even over
thine own belly, so long as thou art dissolute, but it hath power over
thee.” And the same we may say both of riches and of other things.

<span id="iv.xviii-p6"></span>[1 Cor.
6.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.xviii-p6.1"></span>.
“Meats for the belly.” By “the belly” here he means not the stomach, but
the stomach’s voraciousness. As when he says, ([Philip. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span id="iv.xviii-p6.2"></span>..md)
“Whose God is their belly:” not speaking about that part of the body,
but about greediness. To prove that so it is, hear what follows: “And
the belly for meats; but the body is not for fornication, but for the
Lord.” And yet “the belly” also is of “the body.” But he puts down two
pairs of things, “meats” and gluttony, (which he terms “the belly;”)
“Christ,” and “the body.”

<span id="iv.xviii-p7"></span>What then is the meaning of, “Meats for
the belly?” “Meats,” he says, are on good terms with gluttony, and it
with them. It cannot therefore lead us unto Christ, but drags towards
these. For it is a strong and brutal passion, and makes us slaves, and
puts us upon ministering to the belly. Why then art thou excited and
gaping after food, O man? For the end of that service is this, and
nothing further shall be seen of it:  but as one was waiting on some
mistress, it abides keeping up this slavery, and advances no further,
and has no other employment but this same fruitless one. And the two are
connected together and destroyed together; “the belly” with “the meats,”
and “the meats” with “the belly;” winding out a sort of interminable
course; just as from a corrupt body worms may be produced, and again by
worms the body consumed; or as it were a wave swoln high and breaking,
and having no fur<span id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span
id="iv.xviii-Page_97"></span>ther effect. But these things he says not
concerning food and the body, but it is the passion of greediness and
excess in eatables which he is censuring: and what follows shews it. For
he proceeds:

<span id="iv.xviii-p8"></span>“But God shall bring to nought both it and
them:” speaking not of the stomach, but of immoderate desire:  not of
food but of high feeding. For with the former he is not angry, but even
lays down rules about them, saying, ([1 Tim. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008)<span id="iv.xviii-p8.1"></span>..md)
“Having food and covering we shall be therewith content.” However, thus
he stigmatizes the whole thing; its amendment (after advice given) being
left by him to prayer.

<span id="iv.xviii-p9"></span>But some say that the words are a
prophecy, declaring the state which shall be in the life to come, and
that there is no eating or drinking there. Now if that which is moderate
shall have an end, much more ought we to abstain from excess.

<span id="iv.xviii-p10"></span>Then lest any one should suppose that the
body is the object of his censure, and suspect that from a part he is
blaming the whole, and say that the nature of the body was the cause of
gluttony or of fornication, hear what follows. “I blame not,” he says,
“the nature of the body, but the immoderate license of the mind.” And
therefore he subjoins, “Now the body is not for fornication, but for the
Lord;” for it was not formed for this purpose, to live riotously and
commit fornication, as neither was the belly to be greedy; but that it
might follow Christ as a Head, and that the Lord might be set over the
body. Let us be overcome with shame, let us be horror-struck, that after
we have been counted worthy of such great honor as to become members of
Him that sitteth on high, we defile ourselves with so great evils.

<span id="iv.xviii-p11"></span>\[2.\] Having now sufficiently condemned
the glutton, he uses also the hope of things to come to divert us from
this wickedness: saying,

<span id="iv.xviii-p12"></span>[1 Cor.
6.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.xviii-p12.1"></span>.
And God both raised up the Lord, and will raise up us also through His
power.

<span id="iv.xviii-p13"></span>Do you perceive again his Apostolical
wisdom? For he is always establishing the credibility of the
Resurrection from Christ, and especially now. For if our body be a
member of Christ, and Christ be risen, the body also shall surely follow
the Head.

<span id="iv.xviii-p14"></span>“Through his power.” For since he had
asserted a thing disbelieved and not to be apprehended by reasonings, he
hath left entirely to His incomprehensible power the circumstances of
Christ’s own Resurrection, producing this too as no small demonstration
against them. And concerning the Resurrection of Christ he did not
insert this: for he did not say, “And God shall also raise up the
Lord;”—for the thing was past and gone;—but how? “And God both raised up
the Lord;” nor was there need of any proof. But concerning our
resurrection, since it has not yet come to pass, he spoke not thus, but
how? “And will raise up us also through His power:” by the reliance to
be placed on the power of the Worker, he stops the mouths of the
gainsayers.

<span id="iv.xviii-p15"></span>Further: if he ascribe unto the Father
the Resurrection of Christ, let not this at all disturb thee. For not as
though Christ were powerless, hath he put this down, for He it is
Himself who saith, (S. [John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="iv.xviii-p15.1"></span>..md)
“Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up:” and again,
(S. [John x. 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.xviii-p15.2"></span>.) “I have power to lay down My life, and I
have power to take it again.” And Luke also in the Acts says, (c. [Acts
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003)<span id="iv.xviii-p15.3"></span>..md)
“To whom also He shewed Himself alive.” Wherefore then does Paul so
speak? Because both the acts of the Son are imputed unto the Father, and
the Father’s unto the Son. For He saith, (S. [John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span id="iv.xviii-p15.4"></span>..md)
“Whatsoever things He doeth, these the Son also doeth in like manner.”

<span id="iv.xviii-p16"></span>And very opportunely he here made mention
of the Resurrection, keeping down by those hopes the tyranny of
gluttonous desire; and all but saying, Thou hast eaten, hast drunk to
excess: and what is the result? Nothing, save only destruction. Thou
hast been conjoined unto Christ; and what is the result? A great and
marvellous thing: the future Resurrection, that glorious one, and
transcending all utterance!

<span id="iv.xviii-p17"></span>\[3.\] Let no one therefore go on
disbelieving the Resurrection: but if a man disbelieve, let him think
how many things He made from nothing, and admit it as a proof also of
the other. For the things which are already past are stranger by far,
and fraught with overpowering wonder. Just consider. He took earth and
mixed it, and made man; earth which existed not before this. How then
did the earth become man? And how was it produced from nothing? And,
how, all the things that were made from it? the endless sorts of
irrational creatures; of seeds; of plants; no pangs of travail having
preceded in the one case, no rains having come down upon the others; no
tillage seen, no oxen, no plough, nor any thing else contributing to
their production?  Why, for this cause the lifeless and senseless thing
was made to put forth in the beginning so many kinds of plants and
irrational creatures, in order that from the very first He might
instruct thee in the doctrine of Resurrection. For this is more
inexplicable than the Resurrection. For it is not the same thing to
rekindle an extinguished lamp, and to shew fire that has never yet
appeared. It is not the same thing to raise up again a house which has
fallen down, and to produce one which has never at all had an exist<span
id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span id="iv.xviii-Page_98"></span>ence. For
in the former case, if nothing else, yet the material was given to work
with: but in the latter, not even the substance appeared. Wherefore He
made first that which seemed to be the more difficult, to the end that
hereby thou mightest admit that which is the more easy; more difficult,
I say, not to God, but as far as our reasonings can follow the subject.
For with God nothing is difficult: but as the painter who has made one
likeness will make ten thousand with ease, so also with God it is easy
to make worlds without number and end. Rather, as it is easy for you to
conceive a city and worlds without bound, so unto God is it easy to make
them; or rather again it is easier by far. For thou consumest time,
brief though it be, in thy conception; but God not even this, but as
much as stones are heavier than any of the lightest things, yea even
than our minds; so much is our mind surpassed by the rapidity of God’s
work of creation.

<span id="iv.xviii-p18"></span>Do you marvel at His power on the earth?
Think again how the heaven was made, not yet being; how the innumerable
stars, how the sun, how the moon; and all these things not yet being.
Again, tell me how after they were made they stood fast, and upon what?
What foundation have they? and what the earth?  What comes next to the
earth? and again, what after that which came next to the earth? Do you
see into what an eddy the eye of your mind is plunged, unless you
quickly take refuge in faith and the incomprehensible power of the
Maker?

<span id="iv.xviii-p19"></span>But if you choose from human things also
to make conjecture, you will be able by degrees to find wings for your
understanding. “What kind of human things?” may be asked. Do you not see
the potters, how they fashion the vase which had been broken in pieces
and become shapeless? Those who fuse the ore from the mine, how the
earth in their hands turns out (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xviii-p19.1"></span>τὴν γῆν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xviii-p19.2"></span>χρύσιον ἀποφαίνουσι</span>) gold, or silver,
or copper? Others again who work in glass, how they transform the sand
into one compact and transparent substance? Shall I speak of the
dressers of leather, the dyers of purple vestments; how they make that
which had received their tint shew as one thing, when it had been
another? Shall I speak of the generation of our own race? Doth not a
small seed, at first without form and impress, enter into the womb which
receives it? Whence then the so intricate formation of the living
creature? What is the wheat?  Is it not cast a naked seed into the
earth? After it has been cast there, doth it not decay? Whence is the
ear, the beard, the stalk, and all the other parts? Doth not often a
little grain of a fig fall into the ground, and produce both root, and
branches, and fruit? And dost thou hereupon admit each of these and make
no curious enquiries, and of God alone dost thou demand account, in His
work of changing the fashion of our body? And how can such things be
pardonable?

<span id="iv.xviii-p20"></span>These things and such like we say to the
Greeks. For to those who are obedient to the Scriptures, I have no
occasion to speak at all.

<span id="iv.xviii-p21"></span>I say, if you intend to pry curiously
into all His doings, what shall God have more than men? And yet even of
men there are many about whom we do not so enquire. Much more then ought
we to abstain from impertinent inquiry about the wisdom of God, and from
demanding accounts of it: in the first place, because He is trustworthy
who affirmeth: in the second place, because the matter admits not
investigation by reasonings. For God is not so abjectly poor as to work
such things only as can be apprehended by the weakness of thy
reasonings. And if thou comprehendest not the work of an artisan, much
less of God, the best of artificers. Disbelieve not then the
Resurrection, for very far will ye be from the hope of that which is to
come.

<span id="iv.xviii-p22"></span>But what is the wise argument of the
gain-sayers; rather, I should say, their exceeding senseless one? “Why
how, when the body is mixed up with the earth and is become earth, and
this again is removed elsewhere, how,” say they, “shall it rise again?”
To thee this seems impossible, but not to the unsleeping Eye. For unto
that all things are clear. And thou in that confusion seest no
distinction of parts; but He knows them all. Since also the heart of thy
neighbor thou knowest not, nor the things in it; but He knoweth all. If
then, because of thy not knowing how God raiseth men up, thou believest
not that He doth raise them, wilt thou disbelieve that He knoweth also
what is in thy mind? for neither is that obvious to view. And yet in the
body it is visible matter, though it be dissolved: but those thoughts
are invisible. Shall He then who knoweth with all certainty the
invisible things, not see the things which be visible, and easily
distinguish the scattered parts of the body?  I suppose this is plain to
every one.

<span id="iv.xviii-p23"></span>Do not then disbelieve the Resurrection;
for this is a doctrine of the Devil. This is what the Devil is earnest
for, not only that the Resurrection may be disbelieved, but good works
also may be done away with. For the man who does not expect that he
shall rise again and give an account of the things which he has done,
will not quickly apply himself to virtue; will in turn come to
disbelieve the Resurrection entirely: for both these are established by
each other; vice by unbelief, and unbelief by vice. For the conscience
filled with many wicked<span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span
id="iv.xviii-Page_99"></span>nesses, fearing and trembling for the
recompense to come and not willing to provide itself with comfort by
changing to what is most excellent, is fain to repose in unbelief. Thus
when thou deniest resurrection and judgment, the other for his part will
say, “Then shall I also not have to render account of my bold deeds.”

<span id="iv.xviii-p24"></span>\[4.\] But why saith Christ? (St. [Matt.
xxii. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.xviii-p24.1"></span>.) “Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures,
nor the power of God.” For God would not have wrought so many things,
had He intended not to raise us up again, but to dissolve and blot us
out in annihilation. He would not have spread out this heaven, He would
not have stretched the earth beneath, He would not have made all the
rest of the universe only for this short life. But if all these are for
the present, what will He not do for that which is to come? If, on the
contrary, there is to be no future life, we are in this respect of far
meaner account than the things which have been made for our sakes. For
both the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and the rivers, are more
lasting than we are: and some even of the brutes; since the raven, and
the race of elephants, and many other creatures, have a longer enjoyment
of the present life. To us, moreover, life is both short and toilsome,
but not to them. Theirs is both long, and freer from grief and cares.

<span id="iv.xviii-p25"></span>“What then? tell me:  hath he made the
slaves better than the masters?” Do not, I beseech thee, do not reason
thus, O man, nor be so poverty-stricken in mind, nor be ignorant of the
riches of God, having such a Master. For even from the beginning God
desired to make thee immortal, but thou wert not willing. Since the
things also of that time were dark hints of immortality: the converse
with God; the absence of uneasiness from life; the freedom from grief,
and cares, and toils, and other things which belong to a temporary
existence. For Adam had no need either of a garment or a shelter, or any
other provision of this sort; but rather was like to the Angels; and
many of the things to come he foreknew, and was filled with great
wisdom. Even what God did in secret, he knew, I mean with regard to the
woman: wherefore also he said, “This is now bone of my bone, and flesh
of my flesh.” ([Gen. ii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.xviii-p25.1"></span>.) Labor came into being afterwards: so did
sweat, so did shame, and cowardice, and want of confidence. But on that
day there was no grief, nor pain, nor lamentation. But he abode not in
that dignity.

<span id="iv.xviii-p26"></span>What then, saith one, am I to do? must I
perish on his account? I reply, first, It is not on his account: for
neither hast thou remained without sin: though it be not the same sin,
at least there is some other which thou hast committed. And again, you
have not been injured by his punishment, but rather have been a gainer.
For if you had been to remain altogether mortal, perchance what is said
would have had some reason in it. But now thou art immortal, and if thou
wilt, thou mayest shine brighter than the sun itself.

<span id="iv.xviii-p27"></span>\[5.\] “But,” says one, “had I not
received a mortal body, I had not sinned.” Tell me then, had he a mortal
body when he sinned? Surely not: for if it had been mortal before, it
would not have undergone death as a punishment afterwards. And that a
mortal body is no hindrance to virtue, but that it keeps men in order
and is of the greatest service, is plain from what follows. If the
expectation of immortality alone so lifted up Adam; had he been even
immortal in reality, to what a pitch of arrogance would he not have
proceeded? And as things are, after sinning you may do away with your
sins, the body being abject, falling away, and subject to dissolution:
for these thoughts are sufficient to sober a man. But if you had sinned
in an immortal body, your sins were likely to have been more lasting.

<span id="iv.xviii-p28"></span>Mortality then is not the cause of sin:
accuse it not: but the wicked will is the root of all the mischief. For
why was not Abel at all the worse for his body? Why are the devils not
at all the better for being incorporeal? Wilt thou hear why the body’s
becoming mortal, so far from hurting, has been positively useful? Mark
how much thou gainest thereby, if thou art sober. It drags thee back and
pulls thee off from wickedness, by griefs and pains and labors and other
such things. “But it tempts men to uncleanness,” perhaps you will say.
Not the body, but incontinence, doth this. For all these things which I
was mentioning certainly do belong to the body: on which account it is
impossible that a man who has entered into this life should escape
disease and pain and lowness of spirits: but that he commit no
uncleanness is possible. Thus it appears that if the affections of vice
were part of the nature of the body they would be universal: since all
things natural are so; but to commit fornication is not so. Pain indeed
cometh of nature: but to commit fornication proceeds from deliberate
purpose.

<span id="iv.xviii-p29"></span>Blame not the body then; let not the
Devil take away thine honor, which God hath given thee. For if we
choose, the body is an excellent bridle to curb the wanton sallies of
the soul, to pull down haughtiness, to repress arrogance, to minister to
us in the greatest achievements of virtue. For tell me not of those who
have lost their senses; since we often see horses, after they have
thrown out their drivers, dashing with their reins over the precipices,
and yet we do not blame the rein. For it is not the breaking of that
which caused it all, but the <span id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span
id="iv.xviii-Page_100"></span>driver not holding them in was the ruin of
every thing. Just so do thou reason in this case. If thou seest a young
person living in orphanhood and doing innumerable evil things, blame not
the body, but the charioteer who is dragged on, I mean, the man’s
faculty of reasoning. For as the reins give no trouble to the
charioteer, but the charioteer is the cruise of all the mischief through
his not holding them properly: (and therefore do they often exact a
penalty of him, entangling themselves with him, and dragging him on, and
compelling him to partake in their own mishap:)  so is it also in the
case before us. “I,” say the reins, “made bloody the horse’s mouth as
long as you held me: but since you threw me away, I require satisfaction
for your contempt, and I entwine myself about you, and drag you along,
so as not to incur the same usage again.” Let no one then blame the
reins, but himself and his own corrupt mind. For over us too is a
charioteer, even reason: and the reins are the body, connecting the
horses with the charioteer; if then these be in good condition, you will
suffer no harm: but if you let them go, you have annihilated and ruined
every thing. Let us be temperate then, and lay all blame not on the
body, but on the evil mind. For this is the Devil’s special work, to
make foolish men accuse the body and God and their neighbor, rather than
their own perverted minds; lest, having discovered the cause, they get
free from the root of the evils.

<span id="iv.xviii-p30"></span>But do ye, being aware of his design,
direct your wrath against him: and having set the charioteer upon the
car, bend the eye of your minds towards God. For in all other instances
he that appoints the games contributes nothing, but only awaits the end.
But in this case, He is all in all, who appointed the contest, even God.
Him therefore let us render propitious, and surely we shall obtain the
blessings in store; through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to Whom, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be glory,
power, honor, now, henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XVIII](1120022.md)
