[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120052)  [Next](1120054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span> <span id="page_294">p. 294</span> <span
id="v.iv-Page_294"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>Homily IV.</span>

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span><span id="v.iv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iv-p2.2"></span>[2 Cor. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023)<span id="v.iv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span>But I call God for a witness upon my soul,
that to spare you I forbare to come unto Corinth.

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.iv-p4.1"></span>What</span> sayest thou, O blessed Paul? To spare
them thou camest not to Corinth? Surely thou presentest us with
something of a contradiction. For a little above thou saidst that thou
therefore camest not, because thou purposest not according to the flesh
nor art thine own master, but art led about every where by the authority
of the Spirit, and didst set forth thine afflictions. But here thou
sayest it was thine own act that thou camest not, and not from the
authority of the Spirit; for he saith, “To spare you I forbare to come
to Corinth.” What then is one to say? either, that this too was itself
of the Spirit, and that he himself wished to come but the Spirit
suggested to him not to do so, urging the motive of sparing them; or
else, that he is speaking of some other coming, and would signify that
before he wrote the former Epistle he was minded to come, and for love’s
sake restrained himself lest he should find them yet unamended. Perhaps
also, after the second Epistle though the Spirit no longer forbade him
to go, he involuntarily stayed away for this reason. And this suspicion
is the more probable, that in the first instance the Spirit forbade him:
but afterwards upon his own conviction also that this was more
advisable, he stayed away.

<span id="v.iv-p5"></span>And observe, I pray you, how he remembers
again his own custom, (which I shall never cease to observe,) of making
what seems against him tell in his favor. For since it was natural for
them to respect this and say, ‘It was because thou hatedst us, thou
wouldest not come unto us,’ he shows on the contrary, that the cause for
which he would not come was that he loved them.

<span id="v.iv-p6"></span>What is the expression, “to spare you?” I
heard, he saith, that some among you had committed fornication; I would
not therefore come and make you sorry: for had I come, I must needs have
enquired into the matter, and prosecuted and punished, and exacted
justice from many. I judged it then better to be away and to give
opportunity for repentance, than to be with you and to prosecute, and be
still more incensed. For towards the end of this Epistle he hath plainly
declared it, saying, “I fear lest when I come, my God should humble me
before you, and that I should mourn for many of them that have sinned
heretofore, and repented not of the lasciviousness and uncleanness <span
id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525) which they committed.” ([2 Cor.
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021)<span id="v.iv-p7.1"></span>.) This
therefore here also he intimates, and he saith it indeed as in his own
defence; yet rebuketh <span id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526) them most
severely and putteth them in fear; for he implied that they were open to
punishment, and will also have somewhat to suffer, unless they be
quickly reformed. And he says the same thing again at the end of the
Epistle thus; “If I come again, I will not spare.” ([2 Cor. xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#002)<span id="v.iv-p8.3"></span>.) Only
there he says it more plainly: but here, as it was the proem, he does
not say it so but in a repressed <span id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527)
tone; nor is he content even with this, but he softens it down, applying
a corrective. For seeing the expression was that of one asserting great
authority, (for a man spares those whom he has also power to punish,) in
order to relieve it, and draw a shade over what seems harsh, he saith,

<span id="v.iv-p10"></span>[2 Cor.
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#024)<span id="v.iv-p10.1"></span>.
“Not for that we have lordship over your faith.”

<span id="v.iv-p11"></span>That is, I did not therefore say, “To spare
you I came not,” as lording it over you. Again, he said not you, but
“your faith,” which was at once gentler and truer. For him that hath no
mind to believe, who hath power to compel?

<span id="v.iv-p12"></span>“But are helpers of your joy.”

<span id="v.iv-p13"></span>For since, saith he, your joy is ours, I came
not, that I might not plunge you into sorrow and increase my own
despondency; but I stayed away that ye being reformed by the threat
might be made glad. For we do every thing in order to your joy, and give
diligence in this behalf, because we are ourselves partakers of it. “For
by faith ye stand.”

<span id="v.iv-p14"></span>Behold him again speaking repressedly. For he
was afraid to rebuke them again; since he had handled them severely in
the former Epistle, and they had made some reformation. And if, now that
they were reformed, they again re<span id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span
id="v.iv-Page_295"></span>ceived the same reproof, this was likely to
throw them back. Whence this Epistle is much gentler than the former.

<span id="v.iv-p15"></span>[2 Cor.
2.1](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001)<span id="v.iv-p15.1"></span>. “But
I determined <span id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528) for myself that I
would not come again to you with sorrow.”

<span id="v.iv-p17"></span>The expression “again” proves that he had
already been made sorry from thence, and whilst he seems to be speaking
in his own defence he covertly rebukes them. Now if they had both
already made him sorry and were about again to make him sorry, consider
how great the displeasure was likely to be. But he saith not thus, ‘Ye
made me sorry,’ but turns the expression differently yet implying the
very same thing thus, ‘For this cause I came not that I might not make
you sorry:’ which has the same force as what I said, but is more
palatable.

<span id="v.iv-p18"></span>\[2.\] [2 Cor.
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#002)<span id="v.iv-p18.1"></span>. “For
if I make you sorry, who then is he that maketh me glad, but he that is
made sorry by me?”

<span id="v.iv-p19"></span>What is this consequence? A very just one
indeed. For observe, I would not, he saith, come unto you, lest I should
increase your sorrow, rebuking, showing anger and disgust. Then seeing
that even this was strong and implied accusation that they so lived as
to make Paul sorry, he applies a corrective in the words, “For if I make
you sorry, who then is he that maketh me glad, but he that is made sorry
by me?”

<span id="v.iv-p20"></span>What he saith is of this kind. ‘Even though I
were to be in sorrow, being compelled to rebuke you and to see you
sorry, still nevertheless this very thing would have made me glad. For
this is a proof of the greatest love, that you hold me in such esteem as
to be hurt at my being displeased with you.’

<span id="v.iv-p21"></span>Behold too his prudence. Their doing what all
disciples do, namely, smarting and feeling it when rebuked, he produces
as an instance of their gratifying him; for, saith he, ‘No man maketh me
so glad as he that giveth heed to my words, and is sorry when he seeth
me angry.’

<span id="v.iv-p22"></span>Yet what followed naturally <span
id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529) was to say, ‘For if I make you sorry,
who then is he that can make you glad?’ But he doth not say this, but
turns his speech back again, dealing tenderly with them, and says,
‘Though I make you sorry, even herein ye bestow on me a very great favor
in that ye are hurt at what I say.’

<span id="v.iv-p24"></span>[2 Cor.
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#003)<span id="v.iv-p24.1"></span>. “And
I wrote this very thing unto you.”

<span id="v.iv-p25"></span>What? That for this cause I came not, to
spare you. When wrote he? In the former Epistle when he said, “I do not
wish to see you now by the way?” ([1 Cor. xvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#007)<span id="v.iv-p25.1"></span>.) I
think not; but in this Epistle when he said, “Lest when I come again, my
God should humble me before you.” ([2 Cor. xii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021)<span id="v.iv-p25.2"></span>.) I
have written then towards the end this same, saith he, “lest when I
come, my God will humble me, and I should mourn for many of them that
have sinned heretofore.”

<span id="v.iv-p26"></span>But why didst thou write? “Lest when I came I
should have sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice, having
confidence in you all, that my joy is the joy of you all?” For whereas
he said he was made glad by their sorrow, and this was too arrogant and
harsh, again he gave it a different turn and softened it by what he
subjoined. For, he saith, I therefore wrote unto you before, that I
might not with anguish find you unreformed; and I said this, “lest I
should have sorrow,” out of regard not to my own interest but yours. For
I know that if ye see me rejoicing ye rejoice, and if ye behold me sad
ye are sad. Observe therefore again the connection of what he said; for
so his words will be more easy to understand. I came not, he says, lest
I should cause you sorrow when finding you unreformed. And this I did,
not studying my own advantage, but yours. For as to myself, when ye are
made sorry I receive no little pleasure, seeing that you care so much
about me as to be sorry and distressed at my being displeased. “For who
is he that maketh me glad, but he that is made sorry by me.” However,
though it be so with myself, yet because I study your advantage, I wrote
this same thing to you that I might not be made sorry, herein also again
studying not my advantage, but yours; for I know, that were ye to see me
sad, ye also would be sorry; as also ye are glad when ye see me
rejoicing. Observe now his prudence. He said, I came not, that I might
not make you sorry; although, saith he, this makes me glad. Then, lest
he should seem to take pleasure in their pain, he saith, In this respect
I am glad inasmuch as I make you feel, for in another respect I am sorry
in that I am compelled to make those sorry who love me so much, not only
by this rebuke, but also by being myself in sorrow and by this means
causing you fresh sorrow.

<span id="v.iv-p27"></span>But observe how he puts this so as to mingle
praise; saying, “from them of whom I ought to rejoice,” for these are
the words of one testifying kindred and much tender affection; as if one
were speaking of sons on whom he had bestowed many benefits and for whom
he had toiled. If then for this I write and come not; it is with weighty
meaning <span id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530) I come not, and not
because I feel hate or aversion, but rather exceeding love.

<span id="v.iv-p29"></span>\[3.\] Next, whereas he said, he that makes
me sorry makes me glad; lest they should say ‘this then is what thou
studiest, that thou mightest <span id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span
id="v.iv-Page_296"></span>be made glad and mightest exhibit to all the
extent of thy power;’ he added,

<span id="v.iv-p30"></span>[2 Cor.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#004)<span id="v.iv-p30.1"></span>. “For
out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many
tears, not that ye should be made sorry, but that ye might know the love
which I have more abundantly unto you.”

<span id="v.iv-p31"></span>What more tenderly affectioned than this
man’s spirit is? for he showeth himself to have been not less pained
than they who had sinned, but even much more. For he saith not “out of
affliction” merely, but “out of much,” nor “with tears,” but “with many
tears” and “anguish of heart,” that is, I was suffocated, I was choked
with despondency; and when I could no longer endure the cloud of
despondency, “I wrote unto you: not that ye should be grieved, but that
ye might know the love,” saith he, “which I have more abundantly unto
you.” And yet what naturally followed was to say, not that ye might be
grieved, but that ye might be corrected: (for indeed with this purpose
he wrote.) This however he doth not say, but, (more to sweeten his
words, and win them to a greater affection,) he puts this for it,
showing that he doth all from love. And he saith not simply “the love,”
but “which I have more abundantly unto you.” For hereby also he desires
to win them, by showing that he loveth them more than all and feels
towards them as to chosen disciples. Whence he saith, “Even if I be not
an Apostle unto others, yet at least I am to you;” ([1 Cor. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#002)<span id="v.iv-p31.1"></span>.) and,
“Though ye have many <span id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531) tutors, yet
have ye not many fathers;” ([1 Cor. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)<span id="v.iv-p32.2"></span>.) and
again, “By the grace of God we behaved ourselves in the world, and more
abundantly to you ward;” ([2 Cor. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)<span id="v.iv-p32.3"></span>.) and
farther on, “Though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be
loved;” and here “Which I have more abundantly unto you;” ([2 Cor. xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#015)<span id="v.iv-p32.4"></span>.) So
that if my words were full of anger, yet out of much love and sadness
was the anger; and whilst writing the Epistle, I suffered, I was pained,
not because ye had sinned only, but also because I was compelled to make
you sorry. And this itself was out of love. Just as a father whose
legitimate <span id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532) son is afflicted with
a gangrene, being compelled to use the knife and cautery, is pained on
both accounts, that he is diseased and that he is compelled to use the
knife to him. So that what ye consider a sign of hating you was indeed a
sign of excessive love. And if to have made you sorry was out of love,
much more my gladness at that sorrow.

<span id="v.iv-p34"></span>\[4.\] Having made this defence of himself,
(for he frequently defends himself, without being ashamed; for if God
doth so, saying, “O My people, what have I done unto thee?” ([Micah vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#003)<span id="v.iv-p34.1"></span>.) much
more might Paul,) having, I say, made this defence of himself, and being
now about to pass on to the plea for him who had committed fornication,
in order that they might not be distracted as at receiving contradictory
commands, nor take to cavilling because he it was who both then was
angry and was now commanding to forgive him, see how he provided <span
id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533) for this beforehand, both by what he
has said and what he is going to say. For what saith he?

<span id="v.iv-p36"></span>[2 Cor.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#005)<span id="v.iv-p36.1"></span>. “But
if any hath caused sorrow, he hath caused sorrow not to me.”

<span id="v.iv-p37"></span>Having first praised them as feeling joy and
sorrow for the same things as himself, he then strikes into the subject
of this person, having said first, “my joy is the joy of you all.” But
if my joy is the joy of you all, need is that you should also now feel
pleasure with me, as ye then were pained with me: for both in that ye
were made sorry, ye made me glad; and now in that ye rejoice, (if as I
suppose ye shall feel pleasure,) ye will do the same. He said not, my
sorrow is the sorrow of you all; but having established this in the rest
of what he said, he has now put forward that only which he most desired,
namely, the joy: saying, my joy is the joy of you all. Then, he makes
mention also of the former matter, saying,

<span id="v.iv-p38"></span>“But if any hath caused sorrow he hath caused
sorrow not to me, but in part (that I press not too heavily) to you
all.”

<span id="v.iv-p39"></span>I know, he saith, that ye shared in my anger
and indignation against him that had committed fornication, and that
what had taken place grieved in part all of you. And therefore said I
“in part,” not as though ye were less hurt than I, but that I might not
weigh down him that had committed fornication. He did not then grieve me
only but you also equally, even though to spare him I said, “in part.”
Seest thou how at once he moderated their anger, by declaring that they
shared also in his indignation.

<span id="v.iv-p40"></span>[2 Cor.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#006)<span id="v.iv-p40.1"></span>.
“Sufficient to such a one is this punishment which was inflicted by the
many.”

<span id="v.iv-p41"></span>And he saith not “to him that hath committed
fornication,” but here again “to such a one,” as also in the former
Epistle. Not however for the same reason; but there out of shame, here
out of mercy. Wherefore he no where subsequently so much as mentions the
crime; for it was time now to excuse.

<span id="v.iv-p42"></span>[2 Cor.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#007)<span id="v.iv-p42.1"></span>. “So
that contrariwise ye should rather forgive him and comfort him, lest by
any means such a one should be swallowed up with his overmuch sorrow.”

<span id="v.iv-p43"></span>He bids them not only take off the censure;
<span id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span id="v.iv-Page_297"></span>but,
besides, restores him to his former estate; for if one let go him that
hath been scourged and heal him not, he hath done nothing. And see how
him too he keeps down lest he should be rendered worse by the
forgiveness. For though he had both confessed and repented, he makes it
manifest that he obtaineth remission not so much by his penitence as by
this free gift. Wherefore he saith, “to forgive <span
id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534) him and to comfort him,” and what
follows again makes the same thing plain. ‘For’ saith he, ‘it is not
because he is worthy, not because he has shown sufficient penitence; but
because he is weak, it is for this I request <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535) it.’ Whence also he added, “lest by
any means such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.” And
this is both as testifying to his deep repentance and as not allowing
him to fall into despair <span id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536) .

<span id="v.iv-p47"></span>But what means this, “swallowed up?” Either
doing as Judas did, or even in living becoming worse. For, saith he, if
he should rush away from longer enduring the anguish of this lengthened
censure, perchance also despairing he will either come to hang himself,
or fall into greater crimes afterwards. One ought then to take steps
beforehand <span id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537) , lest the sore
become too hard to deal with; and lest what we have well done we lose by
want of moderation.

<span id="v.iv-p49"></span>Now this he said, (as I have already
observed,) both to keep him low, and to teach him not to be
over-listless after this restoration. For, not as one who has washed all
quite away; but as fearing lest he should work aught of deeper mischief,
I have received him, he saith. Whence we learn that we must determine
the penance, not only by the nature of the sins, but by the disposition
and habit of them that sin. As the Apostle did in that instance. For he
feared his weakness, and therefore said, “lest he be swallowed up,” as
though by a wild beast, by a storm, by a billow.

<span id="v.iv-p50"></span>[2 Cor.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#008)<span id="v.iv-p50.1"></span>.
“Wherefore I beseech you.”

<span id="v.iv-p51"></span>He no longer commands but beseeches, not as a
teacher but as an equal; and having seated them on the judgment seat he
placed himself in the rank of an advocate; for having succeeded in his
object, for joy he adopts without restraint the tone of supplication.
And what can it be that thou beseechest?  Tell me.

<span id="v.iv-p52"></span>“To confirm your love toward him.”

<span id="v.iv-p53"></span>That is, ‘make it strong,’ not simply have
intercourse with him, nor any how. Herein, again, he bears testimony to
their virtue as very great; since they who were so friendly and so
applauded him as even to be puffed up, were so estranged that Paul takes
such pains to make them confirm their love towards him. Herein is
excellence of disciples, herein excellence of teachers; that they should
so obey the rein, he so manage their motions <span
id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538) . If this were so even now, they who
sin would not have transgressed senselessly. For one ought neither to
love carelessly, nor to be estranged without some reason.

<span id="v.iv-p55"></span>\[5.\] [2 Cor.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#009)<span id="v.iv-p55.1"></span>  “For
to this end also did I write to you <span
id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539) , that I might know the proof of you,
whether ye are obedient in all things;” not only in cutting off but also
in reuniting. Seest thou how here again he brings the danger to their
doors. For as when he sinned, he alarmed their minds, except they should
cut him off, saying, “A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump,” ([1
Cor. v. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006)<span
id="v.iv-p56.3"></span>.) and several other things; so here too again he
confronts them with the fear of disobedience, as good as saying, ‘As
then ye had to consult not for him, but for yourselves too, so now must
ye not less for yourselves than for him; lest ye seem to be of such as
love contention and have not human sensibilities, and not to be in all
things obedient. And hence he saith, “For to this end also did I write
to you, that I might know the proof of you, whether ye are obedient in
all things.”

<span id="v.iv-p57"></span>For the former instance might have seemed to
proceed even of envy and malice, but this shows very especially the
obedience to be pure, and whether ye are apt unto loving kindness. For
this is the test of right minded disciples; if they obey not only when
ordered to do certain things, but when the contrary also. Therefore he
said, “in all things,” showing that if they disobey, they disgrace not
him <span id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540) so much as themselves,
earning the character of lovers of contention; and he doth this that
hence also he may drive them to obey. Whence also he saith, “For to this
end did I write to you;” and yet he wrote not for this end, but he saith
so in order to win them. For the leading object was the salvation of
that person. But where it does no harm, he also gratifies them. And by
saying, “In all things,” he again praises them, recalling to memory and
bringing forth to view their former obedience.

<span id="v.iv-p59"></span>[2 Cor.
2.10](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#010)<span id="v.iv-p59.1"></span>. “To
whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also.”

<span id="v.iv-p60"></span>Seest thou how again he assigns the second
part to himself, showing them as beginning, himself following. This is
the way to soften an exasperated, to compose a contentious spirit. Then
lest he should make them careless, as though they were arbiters, and
they should refuse forgiveness; he again constrains them <span
id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span id="v.iv-Page_298"></span>unto this,
saying, that himself also had forgiven him.

<span id="v.iv-p61"></span>“For what I also have forgiven, if I have
forgiven any thing, for your sakes have I forgiven it.” For, this very
thing I have done for your sakes, he saith. And as when he commanded
them to cut him off, he left not with them the power to forgive, saying,
“I have judged already to deliver such an one unto Satan,” ([1 Cor.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#003),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span id="v.iv-p61.1"></span>.) and
again made them partners in his decision saying, “ye being gathered
together to deliver him,” ([2 Cor.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#005)<span id="v.iv-p61.2"></span>.)
(thereby securing two most important things, viz., that the sentence
should be passed; yet not without their consent, lest herein he might
seem to hurt them;) and neither himself alone pronounces it, lest they
should consider him self-willed, and themselves to be overlooked, nor
yet leaves all to them, lest when possessed of the power they should
deal treacherously with the offender by unseasonably forgiving him: so
also doth he here, saying, ‘I have already forgiven, who in the former
Epistle had already judged.’ Then lest they should be hurt, as though
overlooked, he adds, “for your sakes.” What then? did he for men’s sake
pardon? No; for on this account he added, “In the person of Christ.”

<span id="v.iv-p62"></span>What is “in the person of Christ?” Either he
means according to \[the will of\] God, or unto the glory of
Christ. <span id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541)

<span id="v.iv-p64"></span>[2 Cor.
2.11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span id="v.iv-p64.1"></span>.
“That no advantage may be gained over us by Satan: for we are not
ignorant of his devices.”

<span id="v.iv-p65"></span>Seest thou how he both committeth the power
to them and again taketh away that by that he may soften them, by this
eradicate their self will. But this is not all that he provides for by
this, but shows also that should they be disobedient the harm would
reach to all, just as he did at the outset also. For then too he said,
“A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.” ([1 Cor. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006)<span id="v.iv-p65.1"></span>.) And
here again, “Lest Satan should get an advantage of us.” And throughout,
he maketh this forgiveness the joint act of himself and them. Consider
it from the first. “But if any,” saith he, “have caused sorrow he hath
caused sorrow not to me, but in part (that I press not too heavily) to
you all.” Then again, “Sufficient to such a one is this punishment which
was” inflicted by the “many.” This is his own decision and opinion. He
rested not however with this decision, but again makes them partners
saying, “So that contrariwise ye should rather forgive” him “and
comfort” him. “Wherefore I beseech you to confirm your love towards
him.” Having thus again made the whole their act, he passes to his own
authority, saying, “For to this end did I write unto you, that I might
know the proof of you, whether ye are obedient in all things.” Then,
again, he makes the favor theirs, saying, “To whom ye forgive anything.”
Then, his own, “I” forgive “also:” saying, “if I have forgiven anything,
it is for your sakes.” Then both theirs and his, “For,” saith he, “if I
have forgiven any thing, for your sakes forgave I it in the person of
Christ,” either \[that is\] for the glory of Christ, or as though Christ
commanding this also, which was most effectual to prevail with them. For
after this they would have feared not to grant that which tended to His
glory and which He willed. Then again he signifieth the common harm
should they disobey, when he saith, “Lest Satan should get an advantage
of us;” well naming it, getting advantage. For he no more takes his own,
but violently seizeth ours, for he <span
id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542) is reformed <span
id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543) . And tell me not that this one only
becomes the wild beast’s prey, but consider this also, that the number
of the herd is diminished, and now especially when it might recover what
it had lost. “For we are not ignorant of his devices,” That he destroys
even under the show of piety. For not only by leading into fornication
can he destroy, but even by the contrary, the unmeasured sorrow
following on the repentance for it. When then besides his own he taketh
ours too, when both by bidding to sin, he destroys; and when we bid
repent, violently seizeth; how is not this case getting “advantage <span
id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544) ?” For he is not content with striking
down by sin, but even by repentance he doth this except we be vigilant.
Wherefore also with reason did he call it getting advantage, when he
even conquereth our own weapons. For to take by sin is his proper work;
by repentance, however, is no more his; for ours, not his, is that
weapon. When then even by this he is able to take, think how disgraceful
the defeat, how he will laugh at and run us down as weak and pitiful, if
he is to subdue us with our own weapons. For it were matter for
exceeding scorn and of the last disgrace, that he should inflict wounds
on us through our own remedies. Therefore he said, “for we are not <span
id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span id="v.iv-Page_299"></span>ignorant of
his devices,” exposing his versatility, his craftiness, his evil
devices, his malice, his capacity to injure under a show of piety.

<span id="v.iv-p69"></span>\[6.\] These things then having in mind, let
us too never despise any one; nor ever, though we fall into sin,
despair; on the other hand, again, let us not be easy-minded afterwards,
but, when we transgress, afflict our minds and not merely give vent to
words. For I know many who say indeed that they bewail their sins, but
do nothing of account. They fast and wear rough garments; but after
money are more eager than hucksters, are more the prey of anger than
wild beasts, and take more pleasure in detraction than others do in
commendations. These things are not repentance, these things are the
semblance and shadow only of repentance, not repentance itself.
Wherefore in the case of these persons too it is well to say, Take heed
“lest Satan should get an advantage of us, for we are not ignorant of
his devices;” for some he destroys through sins, others through
repentance; but these in yet another way, by suffering them to gain no
fruit from repentance. For when he found not how he might destroy them
by direct \[attack,\] he came another road, heightening their toils,
whilst robbing them of the fruits, and persuading them, as if they had
successfully accomplished all they had to do, therefore to be neglectful
of what remains.

<span id="v.iv-p70"></span>That we may not then fruitlessly afflict
ourselves, let us address a few words to women of this character; for to
women this disorder especially belongs. Praiseworthy indeed is even that
which now ye do, your fasting and lying on the ground and ashes; but
except the rest be added, these are of no avail. God hath showed how He
remitteth sins. Why then forsaking that path, do ye carve another for
yourselves. In old time the Ninevites sinned, and they did the things
which ye too now are doing. Let us see however what it was that availed
them. For as in the case of the sick, physicians apply many remedies;
howbeit the man of understanding regardeth not that the sick person has
tried this and that, but what was of service to him; such must be also
our inquiry here. What then was it that availed those barbarians? They
applied fasting unto the wounds, yea applied extreme fasting, lying on
the ground too, putting on of sackcloth, and ashes, and lamentations;
they applied also a change of life. Let us then see which of these
things made them whole. And whence, saith one, shall we know? If we come
to the Physician, if we ask Him: for He will not hide it from us, but
will even eagerly disclose it. Rather that none may be ignorant, nor
need to ask, He hath even set down in writing the medicine that restored
them. What then is this? “God,” saith He, “saw that they turned every
one from his evil way, and He repented of the evil that He had said He
would do unto them.” ([Jonah iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010)<span id="v.iv-p70.1"></span>.) He
said not, He saw \[their\] fasting and sackcloth and ashes. And I say
not this to overturn fasting, (God forbid!) but to exhort you that with
fasting ye do that which is better than fasting, the abstaining from all
evil. David also sinned. ([2 Sam. xii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#017)<span id="v.iv-p70.2"></span>. &c.)
Let us see then how he too repented. Three days he sat on ashes. But
this he did not for the sin’s sake, but for the child’s, being as yet
stupefied with that affliction. But the sin by other means did he wipe
away, by humbleness, contrition of heart, compunction of soul, by
falling into the like no more, by remembering it always, by bearing
thankfully every thing that befalls him, by sparing those that grieve
him, by forbearing to requite those who conspire against him; yea, even
preventing those who desire to do this. For instance, when Shimei was
bespattering him with reproaches without number ([2 Sam.
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#009)<span id="v.iv-p70.3"></span>.) and
the captain who was with him was greatly indignant, he said, “Let him
curse me, for the Lord hath bidden him:” for he had a contrite and
humbled heart, and it was this especially which wiped away his sins. For
this is confession, this is repentance. But if whilst we fast we are
proud, we have been not only nothing profited but even injured.

<span id="v.iv-p71"></span>\[7.\] Humble then thine heart, thou too,
that thou mayest draw God unto thee. “For the Lord is nigh unto them
that are of a contrite heart.” ([Ps. xxxiii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#019)<span id="v.iv-p71.1"></span>.)
Seest thou not in the gorgeous houses those who are in disgrace; how
they answer not again when even the lower servants insult them, but put
up with it because of the disgrace with which their fault hath
surrounded them? So do thou too: and if any one revile thee, wax not
fierce, but groan, not for the insult, but for that sin which cast thee
into disgrace. Groan when thou hast sinned, not because thou art to be
punished, (for this is nothing,) but because thou hast offended thy
Master, one so gentle, one so kind, one that so loveth thee and longeth
for thy salvation as to have given even His Son for thee. For this
groan, and do this continually: for this is confession. Be not to-day
cheerful, to-morrow of a sad countenance, then again cheerful; but
continue ever in mourning and self contrition. For, “Blessed,” saith he,
“are they that mourn,” that is, that do this perpetually. Continue then
to do this perpetually, and to take heed to thyself, and to afflict
thine heart; as one who had lost a beloved son might mourn. “Rend,”
saith he, “your hearts, and not your garments.” ([Joel ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013)<span id="v.iv-p71.2"></span>.) That
which is rent will not lift itself on high; that which hath been broken
cannot rise up again. Hence one saith, “Rend,” and another, “a broken
and a con<span id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span
id="v.iv-Page_300"></span>trite heart God will not despise.” ([Ps. li.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span id="v.iv-p71.3"></span>.) Yea,
though thou be wise, or wealthy, or a ruler, rend thine heart. Suffer it
not to have high thoughts nor to be inflated. For that which is rent is
not inflated, and even if there be something to make it rise, from being
rent it cannot retain the inflation. So also do thou be humble-minded.
Consider that the publican was justified by one word, although that was
not humiliation, but a true confession. Now if this hath power so great,
how much more humiliation. Remit offences to those who have transgressed
against thee, for this too remitteth sins. And concerning the former He
saith, “I saw that he went sorrowful, and I healed his ways;” ([Isa.
57:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#018)<span id="v.iv-p71.4"></span>.
LXX.) and in Ahab’s case, this appeased the wrath of God: ([1 Kings xxi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029)<span id="v.iv-p71.5"></span>.)
concerning the latter, “Remit, and it shall be remitted unto you.” There
is also again another way which bringeth us this medicine; condemning
what we have done amiss; for, “Declare thou first thy transgressions,
that thou mayest be justified.” ([Is. xliii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#026)<span id="v.iv-p71.6"></span>. LXX.)
And for one in afflictions to give thanks looseth his sins; and
almsgiving, which is greater than all.

<span id="v.iv-p72"></span>Reckon up therefore the medicines which heal
thy wounds, and apply all unremittingly <span
id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545) , humbleness, confession, forgetting
wrongs, giving thanks in afflictions, showing mercy both in alms and
actions, persevering in prayer. So did the widow propitiate the cruel
and unyielding judge. And if she the unjust, much more thou the gentle.
There is yet another way along with these, defending the oppressed;
“for,” He saith, “judge the fatherless, and plead for the widow; and
come, and let us reason together, and though your sins be as scarlet, I
will make them white as snow.” ([Isa.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)<span id="v.iv-p73.2"></span>.)
What excuse then can we deserve if with so many ways leading us up to
heaven, and so many medicines to heal our wounds, even after the Laver
we continue where we were. Let us then not only continue so, but let
those indeed who have never yet fallen abide in their proper loveliness;
yea, rather let them cultivate it more and more, (for these good works,
where they find not sins, make the beauty greater:)  and let us who in
many things have done amiss, in order to the correction of our sins use
the means mentioned: that we may stand at the tribunal of Christ with
much boldness, whereunto may all we attain through the grace and love
towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, together
with the Holy Spirit, be glory, and power, and honor, now and ever,
world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_525"></span>[294:526](1120053.htm#fr_525) <span
id="v.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p7"></span> Rec. text, “*uncleanness, and fornication,
and lasciviousness*.”

<span id="fn_526"></span>[294:527](1120053.htm#fr_526) <span
id="v.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p8.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p8.2"></span>πιστύφει</span>.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[294:528](1120053.htm#fr_527) <span
id="v.iv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p9.1"></span>ὐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p9.2"></span>πεσταλμένως</span>.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[295:529](1120053.htm#fr_528) <span
id="v.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p16"></span> Rec. text, *determined this*. Chrysostom
omits <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv-p16.1"></span>τοῦτο</span>.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[295:530](1120053.htm#fr_529) <span
id="v.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p23.1"></span>τὸ ἀκόλουθον</span>.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[295:531](1120053.htm#fr_530) <span
id="v.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p28.1"></span>μέγα τι οἰκονομῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[296:532](1120053.htm#fr_531) <span
id="v.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p32"></span> Rec. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p32.1"></span>μυρίους</span>.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[296:533](1120053.htm#fr_532) <span
id="v.iv-p32.5"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p33.1"></span>γνήσιος</span>.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[296:534](1120053.htm#fr_533) <span
id="v.iv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p35.1"></span>προῳκονόμησεν</span>.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[297:535](1120053.htm#fr_534) <span
id="v.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p44.1"></span>χαρὶσασθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[297:536](1120053.htm#fr_535) <span
id="v.iv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p45"></span> Or think it fitting.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[297:537](1120053.htm#fr_536) <span
id="v.iv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p46.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p46.2"></span>πονοίαν</span>, which is however seldom used in
this sense by St. Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[297:538](1120053.htm#fr_537) <span
id="v.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p48.1"></span>προκαταλαβεῖν</span>.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[297:539](1120053.htm#fr_538) <span
id="v.iv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p54.1"></span>ῥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p54.2"></span>υθμιζειν</span>.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[297:540](1120053.htm#fr_539) <span
id="v.iv-p55.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p56"></span> Rec. text omits <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p56.1"></span>ὖ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p56.2"></span>μιν</span>.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[297:541](1120053.htm#fr_540) <span
id="v.iv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p58"></span> The incestuous person.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[298:542](1120053.htm#fr_541) <span
id="v.iv-p62.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p63"></span> \[Modern critics understand this phrase
otherwise. They take it as meaning either that the Apostle acted as
Christ’s representative and by his authority (Luther, Wetstein, *et
al*.), or that he took the course which he did in the presence of
Christ, i.e., as though Christ were looking on. Either sense is good and
suits the connection, but the latter has commended itself to most
expositors, (Calvin, Meyer, Hodge, Beet, *et al*.), since nothing could
be better adapted to secure both fidelity and tenderness in
administering the discipline of God’s house than the feeling or rather
the conviction that the eyes of Christ were fixed upon the judges.
Calvin thinks such a sentiment fitted “to incline us to mercy,” but it
is not easy to see why it is not as well suited to make one firm in
adherence to principle. C.\]

<span id="fn_542"></span>[298:543](1120053.htm#fr_542) <span
id="v.iv-p65.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p66"></span> The incestuous person.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[298:544](1120053.htm#fr_543) <span
id="v.iv-p66.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p67"></span> So two <span class="c18"><span
id="v.iv-p67.1"></span>mss</span>. ap. Field.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[298:545](1120053.htm#fr_544) <span
id="v.iv-p67.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p68.1"></span>πλεονεξία</span>.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[300:546](1120053.htm#fr_545) <span
id="v.iv-p72.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv-p73.1"></span>συνεχῶς</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily V](1120054)
