[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dol04)  [Next](dol06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P883W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Devils of Loudun*, by Edmund Goldsmid, \[1887\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v3_28">p. 28</span> <span id="page_v3_29">p. 29</span>

### APPENDICES.

### APPENDIX I.

### THE DUKE OF LAUDERDALE ON WITCHCRAFT.

Instances sent me (<span class="smallcaps">Baxter</span>) from the Duke
of Lauderdale; more in other Letters of his I gave away, and some Books
of Forreign Wonders he sent me.

<span class="smallcaps">Sir</span>,

It is sad that the Sadducean, or rather atheistical denying of spirits,
or their apparitions, should so far prevail; and sadder, that the clear
testimonies of so many ancient and modern authors should not convince
them. But why should I wonder, if those who believe not Moses and the
prophets, will not believe though one should rise from the dead? One
great cause of the hardening of these infidels is, the frequent
impostures which the Romanists obtrude on the world

<span id="page_v3_30">p. 30</span>

in their exorcisms and pretended miracles. Another is the too great
credulity of some who make everything witchcraft which they do not
understand; and a third may be the ignorance of some judges and juries,
who condemn silly melancholy people upon their own confession, and
perhaps slender proofs. None of these three can be denied, but it is
impertinent arguing to conclude, that because there have been cheats in
the world, because there are some too credulous, and some have been put
to death for witches, and were not, therefore all men are deceived.
There is so much written, both at home and abroad, so convincingly, and
by so unquestionable authors, that I have not the vanity to add any
thing, especially to you; but because you have desired me to tell you
the story of the nuns at Loudun, and some others, I shall first tell you
of a real possession near the place I was born in; next of disquietings
by spirits, (both of which I had from unquestionable testimonies) and
then I shall tell you what I saw at Loudun, concerning that which I do
not doubt to call a pretended possession, sure I am a cheat. About 30
years ago, when I was a boy at school, there was a poor woman generally
believed to be really possessed. She lived near the town of Duns, in the
Mers, and Mr John Weems, then minister of Duns, (a man known by his
works to be a learned man, and I knew him to be a godly honest man,) was
perswaded she was possessed. I have heard him many times speak with my
father about it,

<span id="page_v3_31">p. 31</span>

and both of them concluded it a real possession. Mr Weems visited her
often, and being convinced of the truth of the thing, he, with some,
neighbour ministers, applied themselves to the king's privy council for
a warrant to keep days of humiliation for her; but the bishops being
then in power, would not allow any fasts to be kept. I will not trouble
you with many circumstances; one I shall only tell you, which I think
will evince a real possession. The report being spread in the country, a
knight of the name of Forbes, who lived in the north of Scotland, being
come to Edinborough, meeting there with a minister of the north, and
both of them desirous to see the woman, the northern minister invited
the knight to my father's house, (which was within ten or twelve miles
of the woman) whither they came, and next morning went to see the woman.
They found her a poor ignorant creature, and seeing nothing
extraordinary, the minister says in Latin to the knight, to "*Nondum
audivimus spiritum loquentem*." Presently a voice comes out of the
woman's mouth, "*Audi, loquentem, audis loquentem*." This put the
minister into some amazement, (which I think made him not mind his own
Latin,) he took off his hat, and said, "*Misereatur Deus pectatoris;*"
the voice presently out of the woman's mouth said, "*Dic peccatricis,
dic peccatricis;*" whereupon both of them came out of the house fully
satisfied, took horse immediately, and returned to my father's house at

<span id="page_v3_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thirlestoane
Castle, in Lauderdale, where they related this passage. This I do
exactly remember. Many more particulars might be got in that country,
but this Latin criticism, in a most illiterate ignorant woman, where
there was no pretence to dispossessing, is evidence enough, I think.

Within these 30 or 40 years, there was an unquestionable possession in
the United Provinces; a wench that spoke all the languages, of which I
have heard many particulars when I lived in the Low Countries. But that
being forreign, I will not insist on it.

As to houses disquieted with noises, I shall tell you one that happened
since I was a married man, and hint at more, which, if you please, I can
get you authentically attested.

Within four miles of Edinborough, there lived an aged godly minister,
one that was esteemed a Puritan; his son, now minister of the same
place, and then ordained his assistant. Their house was extraordinarily
troubled with noises, which they and their family, and many neighbours
(who for divers weeks used to go watch with them) did ordinarily hear.
It troubled them most on the Saturday night, and the night before their
weekly lecture day. Sometimes they would hear all the locks in the
house, on doors and chests, to fly open; yea, their cloaths, which were
at night locked up into trunks and chests, they found in the morning all
hanging about the walls. Once they

<span id="page_v3_33">p. 33</span>

found their best linnen taken out, the table covered with it, napkins as
if they had been used, yea, and liquor in their cups as if company had
been there at meat. The rumbling was extraordinary; the good old man
commonly called his family to prayer when it was most troublesome, and
immediately it was converted into gentle knocking, like the modest knock
of a finger; but as soon as prayer was done, they should hear excessive
knocking, as if a beam had been heaved by strength of many men against
the floor. Never was there voice or apparition; but one thing was
remarkable (you must know that it is ordinary in Scotland to have a half
cannon-bullet in the chimney-corner, on which they break their great
coals,) a merry maid in the house, being accustomed to the rumblings,
and so her fear gone, told her fellow maid-servant that if the devil
troubled them that night, she would brain him, so she took the half
cannon-bullet into bed; the noise did not fail to awake her, nor did she
fail in her design, but took up the great bullet, and with a threatning,
threw it, as she thought, on the floor, but the bullet was never more
seen; the minister turned her away for meddling and talking to it. Alt
these particulars I have had from the mouth of the minister, now living;
he is an honest man, of good natural parts, well bred both in learning
and by travel into foreign parts in his youth. I was not in the country
myself during the time, but I have it from many other witnesses; and my
father's

<span id="page_v3_34">p. 34</span>

steward lived then in a house of mine, within a mile of the place, and
sent his servants constantly thither; his son now serves me, who knows
it.

I could tell you an ancienter story before my time, in the house of one
Burnet, in the north of Scotland, where strange things were seen, which
I can get sufficiently attested, Also in the southwest border of
Scotland, in Annandale, there is a house called Powdine, belonging to a
gentleman called Johnston; that house hath been haunted these 50 or 60
years. At my coming to Worcester, 1651, I spoke with the gentleman,
(being myself quartered within two miles of the house,) he told me many
extraordinary relations consisting in his own knowledge; and I carried
him to my master, to whom he made the same relations,—noises and
apparitions, drums and trumpets heard before the last war, yea, he said
that some English soldiers [quartered](errata.htm#15) in his house were
soundly beaten by that irresistible inhabitant; (this last I wondered
at, for l rather expected he should have been a remonstrater, and
opposed the resistance,) and within this fortnight Mr. James Sharp was
with me, (him you know, and he is now at London,) he tells me that
spirit now speaks, and appears frequently in the shape of a naked arm;
but other discourses took me off from further inquiry. These things I
tell you in obedience to your desire, hut as I said before, I desire
them not to be printed. Atheists are not to be convinced by stories;
their own senses will no more

<span id="page_v3_35">p. 35</span>

convert them than sense will convert a papist from transubstantiation;
and Scottish stories would make the disaffected jeer Scotland, which is
the object of acorn enough already.

When I was in Dorsetshire, prisoner, one Mr Jo. Hodder, minister of
Hauke-church, in that county, told me of strange apparitions and
unquestionable evidences of the actings of spirits in a house, yea, a
religious house of that county, of which he was himself an ear and
eye-witness.

In Dorchester also, the son of a Reverend Mr Jo. White, (who was
assessor to the Assembly at Westminster,) told me many particulars of
that house in Lambeth, where his father lived in the time of the
Assembly, which then was unquestionably haunted with spirits. I do well
remember I dined with old Mr White there one day, and at dinner he told
me much of it; and that that morning the spirit called up the maid to
lay the beef to the fire. Of the two last you may be satisfied when you
please: and at this present I am told that there is a house at
Folie-John-Park, not three miles from the place, haunted with spirits.

But I must leave room for my Loudun nuns, and not write a book. In the
year 1637, being at Paris in the spring, the city was so full of the
possession of a whole cloyster of nuns, and some laick wenches at
Loudun, books printed, and strange stories told, that few doubted it;
and I, who was perswaded such a

<span id="page_v3_36">p. 36</span>

thing might be, and that it was not impossible the devil could possess a
nun as well as another, doubted it as little as any body. So coming into
that country, I went a day's journey out of my way to satisfy my
curiosity. Into the chappel I came in the morning of a holy day, and
with as little prejudice as any could have, for I believed verily to
have seen some strange sights; but when I had seen exorcising enough of
three or four of them in the chappel, and could hear nothing but wanton
wenches singing bandy songs in French, I began to suspect a fourbe, and
in great gravity went to a jesuite, and told him I had come a great way
in hope to see some strange thing, and was sorry to be disappointed. He
commended my holy curiosity, and after he had thought a while, he
desired me to go to the Castle, and from thence, at such an hour, to the
parish church, and I should be satisfied. I wondered at his
correspondence, yet gravely went where he directed me. In the Castle I
saw little, but in the parish church I saw a great many people gazing,
and a wench pretty well taught to play tricks, yet nothing so much as I
have seen twenty tumblers and rope-dancers do. Back I came to the nuns
chappel, where I saw the jesuits still hard at work, at several altars,
and one poor capuchin, who was an object of pity, for he was possessed
indeed with a melancholy fancy that devils were running about his head,
and constantly was applying relicks. I saw the mother superior
exorcised, and saw the hand on which they

<span id="page_v3_37">p. 37</span>

would have made us believe the names I. H. S. Maria Joseph were written
by miracles; (but it was apparent to me it was done with aquafortis)
then my patience was quite spent, and I went to a jesuit and told him my
mind freely. He still maintained a real possession, and I desired for a
tryal, to speak a strange language. He asked, "What language?" I told
him, "I would not tell; but neither he nor all those devils should
understand me." He asked, "If I would be converted upon the tryal?" (for
I had discovered I was no papist.) I told him, "That was not the
question, nor could all the devils in hell pervert me i but the question
was, if that was a real possession, and if any could understand me, I
shall confess it under my hand." His answer was, "These devils have not
travelled;" and this I replied to with a loud laughter, nor could I get
any more satisfaction; only in the town I heard enough that it was a
cheat invented to burn a curate, (his name, as I take it, was Cupiff,)
and the man had been really burned to ashes as a witch, but the people
said it was for his conversion from them. At my coming to Saumar next
day, my countryman, Dr, Duncan, Principle of the College at Saumar, told
me how he had made a clearer discovery of the cheat in presence of the
Bishop of Poitiers, and of all the country, how he had held fast one of
the pretended nuns arms, in spite of all the power of their exorcisms,
and challenged all the devils in hell to take it out of his hand. This,
with many more circumstances,

<span id="page_v3_38">p. 38</span>

he told me, and he printed them to the world; but this is already too
tedious. One more journey I made to see possessed women exorcised near
Antwerp, anno 16493 but saw only some great Holland wenches hear
exorcism patiently, and belch most abominably. So if those were devils,
they were windy devils, but I thought they were only possessed with a
morning's draught of too new beer. Some of the Loudun nuns, after great
resistance and squeaking, did, on great importunity, adore their host,
and the jesuites did desire us to see the power of the church, where all
I wondered at was his blasphemy, in saying to the pretended
devil,—"*Prostratum adorabis creatorem tuum, quem digitis teneo;*" but
my paper, as well as my discretion, calls for an end. Your desire, and
my obedience, is all I can plead for your receiving so long a rabble,
from, Sir,

Your most faithful Friend and Servant,

<span class="smallcaps">Lauderdaile</span>.

*Windsor Castle, March* 12, 1659.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix II](dol06)
