[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe317)  [Next](prwe319) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PENGERSWICK CASTLE.

** **THIS castellated building--for it does not now admit of being
called a castle, notwithstanding its embattled turrets and its
machicolated gate--is situated in a hollow running down to Pengerswick
Cove, in the Mount's Bay, where there never could have been anything to
defend; and certainly there is nothing to induce any one to incur the
cost of such a building.

Mr Milliton, in the reign of Henry VIII., slew in the streets of London
a man in a drunken brawl. He fled, and went to sea. It is not known to
what part of the world he went, but we are told that he became
excessively rich; so rich, indeed, that "when he loaded his ass with his
gold, the weight was so great as to break the poor animal's back."
Returning to his country, and not daring to appear in any of the large
towns, he bought the manor of Pengerswick, and built this castle, to
defend himself; in the event of his being approached by any of the
officers of the law.

A miserable man, Milliton is said to have lived in a secret chamber in
this tower, and **to** have been visited only by his most trusted
friends. Deeply deploring the crime that had condemned him to seclusion
from the world, he spent his dreary hours in ornamenting his dwelling.
His own story is supposed to be told in the painting of an overladen ass
in one room, with a black-letter legend, importing that a miser is like
an ass loaded with riches, who, without attending to his golden burden,
feeds on thistles. There is also a carving of water wearing a hollow in
a stone, and under it the word "Perseverance." Of the death of Milliton
we have no account.

There is very little doubt but that Pengerswick Castle is very much
older than the time of Milliton; indeed tradition informs us that he
purchased the place. The legends previously given, and others in my
possession, refer to a much earlier period. The castle was, it is said,
surrounded by trees; but John Hals, who inherited the property, had all
the timber cut down and sold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Clerks of Cornwall](prwe319)
