[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe085)  [Next](prwe087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CUDDEN POINT AND THE SILVER TABLE

 

THiS point is situated in the parish of Perranuthnoe; the parish, it
will be remembered, into which Trelawney escaped, aided by the fleetness
of his horse, from the deluge which buried the lands between this and
the Scilly Isles.

At the low-water of spring-tides, the children from all the
neighbourhood flock to the sands around this point, in the hope of
finding treasure, which they believe is buried in the sands beneath the
sea, and which is, it is said, occasionally discovered. Amongst other
things, an especial search is made for a silver table, which was lost by
a very wealthy lord, by some said to be the old Lord Pengerswick, who
enriched himself by grinding down the poor. On one occasion, when the
calmness of summer, the clearness of the skies, and the tranquillity of
the waters invited the luxurious to the enjoyments of the sea, this
magnate, with a party of gay and thoughtless friends, was floating in a
beautiful boat lazily with the tide, and feasting from numerous luxuries
spread on a silver table. Suddenly--no one lived to tell the cause--the
boat sank in the calm, transparent waters; and, long after the event,
the fishermen would tell of sounds of revelry heard from beneath the
waters, and some have said they have seen these wicked ones still seated
around the silver table.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Padstow "Hobby Horse"](prwe087)
