[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe015)  [Next](prwe017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

TOM THE GIANT, HIS WIFE JANE, AND JACK THE TINKEARD, AS TOLD BY THE
"DROLLS." \[a\]

  
WHEN Tom and his wife had settled themselves in the giant's castle, they
took good care not to allow any one to make a king's highway across
their grounds. Tom made the hedges higher, and the gates stronger than
ever, and he claimed all the run of land on the sea-side, and enclosed
it. Tom's wife, Jane, was a wonderful cleanly body--the castle seemed to
be always fresh swept and sanded, while all the pewter plates and
platters shone like silver. She never quarrelled with Tom; except when
he came in from hedging covered with mud; then in a pet she would
threaten to go home to her mother. Jane was very famous for her butter
and cheese, and Tom became no less so for his fine breed of cattle, so
that he fared luxuriously, and all went on happily enough with Tom and
his wife. They had plenty of children, and these were such fine healthy
babies, that it took two or three of the best cows to feed them, when
but a few weeks old. Tom and Jane thought that they had all that part of
the world to themselves, and that no one could scale their hedges or
break through their gates. They soon found their mistake. Tom was
working one morning, not far from the gate, on the Market-Jew side of
his property, when he heard a terrible rattle upon the bars. Running up,
he saw a man with a hammer smashing away, and presently down went the
bars, and in walked a travelling tinkeard, with his bag of tools on his
back.

"Holla where are you bound for?" says Tom.

"Bound to see if the giant, whom they say lives up here, wouldn't let a
body pass through where the road ought to be," says the tinkeard.

"Oh, ay! are you?" says Tom.

"He must be a better man than I am who stops me," says the tinkeard. "As
you are a fine stout chap, I expect you are the giant's eldest son. I
see you are hedging. That 's what all the people complain of. You are
hedging in all the country."

"Well," says Tom, "if I am his son, I can take my dad's part any way;
and we 'll have fair play too. I don't desire better fun than to try my
strength with somebody that is a man. Come on. Any way you like--naked
fists, single-stick, wrestling, bowling, slinging, or throwing the
quoits."

"Very well," says the tinkeard, " I 'll match my blackthorn stick
against anything in the way of timber that you can raise on this place."

Tom took the bar which the tinker had broken from the gate, and said,
"I'll try this piece of elm if you don't think it too heavy."

"Don't care if it 's heavier. Come on!"

The tinkeard took the thorn-stick in the middle, and made it fly round
Tom's head so fast that he couldn't see it. It looked like a wheel
whizzing round his ears, and Tom soon got a bloody nose and two black
eyes. Tom's blows had no effect on the tinkeard, because he wore such a
coat as was never seen in the West Country before. It was made out of a
shaggy black bull's hide, dressed whole with the hair on. The skin of
the forelegs made the sleeves, the hind quarters only were cut, pieces
being let in to make the spread of the skirts, while the neck and skin
of the head formed a sort of hood. The whole appeared as hard as iron;
and when Tom hit the tinkeard, it sounded, as if the coat roared, like
thunder. They fought until Tom got very hungry, and he found he had the
worst of it. " I believe thee art the devil, and no man," says Tom. "Let
's see thy feet before thee dost taste any more of my blood."

The tinkeard showed Tom that he had no cloven foot, and told him that it
depended more on handiness than strength to conquer with the
single-stick; and that a small man with science could beat a big man
with none. The tinkeard then took the clumsy bar of the gate from Tom,
gave him his own light and tough blackthorn, and proceeded to teach him
to make the easiest passes, cuts, &c. Whilst the two men were thus
engaged, Jane had prepared the dinner, and called her husband three
times. She wondered what could be keeping Tom, as he was always ready to
run to his dinner at the first call. At length she went out of the
castle to seek for him, and surprised she was, and--if truth must be
told--rather glad to see another man inside the gates, which no one had
passed for years. Jane found Tom and the tinkeard tolerable friends by
this time, and she begged them both to come into dinner, saying to the
tinkeard that she wished she had something better to set before him. She
was vexed that Tom hadn't sent her word, that she might have prepared
something better than the everlasting beef and pease; and vowed she
would give him a more savoury mess for supper, if she had to go to the
hills for a sheep or a kid herself.

At length the men were seated at the board, which groaned beneath the
huge piece of boiled beef, with mountains of pease pudding, and they
soon got fairly to work. Jane then went to the cellar, and tapped a
barrel of the strongest beer, which was intended to have been kept for a
tide (feast). Of the meat, Tom ate twice as much as the tinkeard, and
from the can of ale he took double draughts. The tinkeard ate heartily,
but not voraciously; and, for those days, he was no hard drinker.
Consequently, as soon as dinner was over, Tom fell back against the
wall, and was quickly snoring like a tempest. His custom was to sleep
two or three hours after every meal. The tinkeard was no sleepy-head, so
he told Jane to bring him all her pots and pans which required mending,
and he would put them in order. He seated himself amidst a vast pile,
and was soon at work. The louder Tom snored, the more Jack rattled and
hammered away at the kettles; and ere Tom was awake, he had restored
Jane's cooking vessels to something like condition.

At length Tom awoke, and, feeling very sore, he begged the tlnkeard to
put off until to-morrow a wrestling-match which they had talked of
before dinner. The tinkeard, nothing loath, agreed; so Tom took him up
to the topmost tower of the castle, to show him his lands and his
cattle. For miles and miles, farther over the hill than the eye could
reach, except on the southern side, everything belonged to Tom. In this
tower they found a long and strong bow. Tom said none but the old giant
could bend it. He had often tried, and fretted because he could not
bring the string to the notch. The tinkeard took the bow; he placed one
end to his toe, and, by what appeared like sleight-of-hand to Tom, he
bent the bow, brought the string to the notch, sent the arrow
off--thwang,--and shot a hare so far away that it could hardly be seen
from the heath and ferns. Tom was surprised, until the tinkeard showed
him how to bend the bow, more by handiness than strength, and again he
killed a kid which was springing from rock to rock on the cairns far
away. The hare and kid were brought home, cooked for supper, and the
tinkeard was invited to stop all night.

The story ordinarily rambles on, telling of the increasing friendship
between the three, and giving the tinkeard's story of himself, which was
so interesting to Tom and Jane that they stayed up nearly all night to
hear it. He told how he was born and bred in a country far away--more
than a score days' journey from this land, far to the north and east of
this, from which it was divided by a large river. This river the
tinkeard had swam across ; then there was a week's journey in a land of
hills and cairns, which were covered with snow a great part of the year.
In this land there were many giants, who digged for tin and other
treasures. With these giants he had lived and worked,--they always
treated him well; indeed, he always found the bigger the man the more
gentle. Half the evil that's told about them by the cowardly fools who
fear to go near them is false. Many, many more strange things did the
tinkeard tell. Amongst other matters, he spoke of wise men who came from
a city at no great distance from this land of tin for the purpose of
buying the tin from the giants, and they left them tools, and other
things, that the diggers required in exchange. One of these merchants
took a fancy to the tinkeard, named him Jack--he had no name
previously--and removed him to the city, where Jack was taught his
trade, and many other crafts. The tinkeard had left that city four
months since, and worked his way down to Market-Jew. Being there, he
heard of the giant, and he resolved to make his acquaintance. The rest
has been told.

While this, which was a long story, was being told, Jack the Tinkeard
was enjoying Jane's new barley-bread, with honey and cream, which he
moistened with metheglin. "Good night, Tom," says he at last; "you see
you have lived all your days like a lord on his lands, and know nothing.
I never knew father or mother, never had a home to call my own. All the
better for me, too. If I had possessed one, I would never have known
one-thousandth part of what I have learned by wandering up and down in
the world."

Morning came; and, after breakfast, Tom proposed to try "a hitch" on the
grass in the castle court. Jack knew nothing of wrestling; so he told
Tom he had never practised, but still he would try his strength. Tom put
the tinkeard on his back at every "hitch," but he took all the care he
could not to hurt him. At last the tinkeard cried for quarter, and
declared Tom to be best man.

Jane had made a veal-and-parsley pie, and put it down to bake, when,
being at leisure, she came out to see the sport. Now, it must be
remembered the tinkeard had broken down the gate, and no one had thought
of repairing it, or closing the opening. Two men of Tregender were
coming home from Bal, \[b\] and passing the giant's gate, they thought
it very strange that it should be broken down. After consulting for some
time, they summoned all their courage, and--it must be confessed, with
fear and trembling--they crawled into the grounds, and proceeded towards
the castle. Now, no one in that country except Tom and Jane knew that
the old giant was dead.

The two men turned round a corner, and saw three very large children
playing. The baby, a year old, was riding an old buck-goat about the
field. The two elder children, Tom Vean \[c\] and young Jane, were
mounted on a bull, back to back, one holding on by the horns, and the
other by the tail, galloping round the field like mad, followed by the
cows and dogs,--a regular "cow's courant."

"Lord, you," says one of the men to the other, "what dost a' think of
that for a change?"

"But to think," says the other, "that the old giant should ever have a
wife and young children here, and the people knaw nothing about it."

"Why, don't everybody say that he ate all his wives and chil'ren too.
What lies people tell, don't they, you?"

"Le 's go a little farther; he won't eat we, I suppose."

"I 'll throw my pick and sho'el down the throat of an, as soon as a' do
open as jaws."

"Look you," now shouts the other, "you come round a little farther just
peep round the corner and thee meest see two fellows wrestling, and a
woman looking on."

"Can I believe my eyes, you? Don't that woman look something like Jane I
used to be courson of?"

The miners satisfied themselves that it was Jane, sure enough, and
quietly beat a retreat. Soon was St Ives in a state of excitement, and
all Jane's cousins, believing from the accounts given by the miners that
Jane was well off, resolved to pay her a visit. These visits worked much
confusion in Tom's castle and family. He and his wife quarrel, but the
tinkeard is the never-failing friend. All this part of the story is an
uninteresting account of fair-weather friends.

Jack the Tinkeard taught Tom how to till his ground in a proper manner.
He had hitherto contented himself with gathering wild herbs, -- such as
nettles, wild beet, mallows, elecampane, various kinds of lentils, and
chick or cat-peas. Jack now planted a garden for his friends,--the first
in Cornwall,--and they grew all kinds of good vegetables. The tinkeard
also taught Jane to make malt and to brew beer; hitherto they had been
content with barley-wort, which was often sour. Jack would take the
children and collect bitter herbs to make the beer keep, such as the
alehoof (ground ivy), mugwort, bannell (the broom), agrimony, centuary,
woodsage, bettony, and pellitory. Jane's beer was now amongst the
choicest of drinks, and her St Ives cousins could never have enough of
it. Tom delighted in it, and often drank enough to bewilder his senses.

Tom had followed the example of the old giant, and killed his cattle by
flinging rocks at them. The giant's "bowls" are seen to this day
scattered all over the country. Jack gave Tom a knife of the keenest
edge and finest temper, and taught him how to slaughter the beasts. When
a calf was to be skinned, he instructed Tom how to take the skin off
whole from the fore legs, by Un-jointing the shoulders, and to remove it
entirely clear of grain, and without the smallest scratch. In addition
to all this, Tomy Vein (who was now a boy four years old, but bigger
than many at ten) must have a coat possessing all the virtues which
belonged to the tinkeard's. So a bull-calf's skin was put on to the boy,
and Jane had special instructions how she was to allow the coat to dry
on his back, and tan and dress it in a peculiar way. The skin thus
treated would shrink and thicken up until it came to his shape. Nobody
can tell how proud the young Tom was of his coat when all was done,
though the poor boy suffered much in the doing.

Now Jack the Tinkeard desired the intrusion of strangers as little as
did Tom and Jane, so he set to work to repair the gate which he had
broken down. He not only did this, but he constructed a curious latch
with the bobbin; it was so contrived that no stranger could find the
right end of it, and if they pulled at any other part, the latch was
only closed the tighter. While he was at work a swarm of Jane's St Ives
cousins came around him; they mistook Jack for Tom, and pointed out how
the children, who were playing near him, were like their father. Jack
"parlayed with them until he had completed his task, and then he closed
the gate in their faces.

Much more of this character is related by the "drolls;" but with the
exception of constant alterations of feasting and fighting, there is
little of novelty in the story, until at last a grand storm arises
between Tom and his wife, who is believed by the husband to be on too
intimate terms with Jack the Tinkeard. The result of this is, that Jane
goes home to Crowlas, fights with her mother, old Jenny, because old
Jenny abuses Tom, which Jane will not allow in her presence While yet at
Crowlas another boy is born, called Honey, and, as the cow was not at
hand as when she was in the castle, he was nursed by a goat, and it is
said a class of his descendants are yet known as the Zennor goats.

\[a\] In some of the old *geese dances* (guise dances, from *danse*
*diguis*!) the giant Blunderbuss and Tom performed a very active part.
Blunderbuss was always a big-bellied fellow--his smoke-frock being well
stuffed with straw. He fought with a tree, and the other giant with the
wheel and axle. The giant is destroyed, as in the story, by falling on
the axle. The tinker, of whom we have yet to tell, with his unfailing
coat of darkness, comes in and beats Tom, until Jane comes out with the
broom and beats the tinker; and then,--as in nearly all these rude
plays,--St George and the Turkish knight come in; but they have no part
in the real story of the drama.--See later note and Appendix E.

\[b\] Popular name for a mine: "*Bal*, a place of digging--*Balas*, to
dig."--PRYCE.

\[c\] *Vean*, a term of endearment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Tom and the Tinkeard found the Tin, and how it led to Morva
Fair](prwe017)
