[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe334)  [Next](prwe336) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

GEESE DANCING--GUISE DANCING-- GUIZARDS

"THE doings of the guizards--that is, masquers--form a conspicuous
feature in the New Year's proceedings throughout Scotland. The evenings
on which these personages are understood to be privileged to appear are
those of Christmas, Hogmanay, New Year's day, and Handsel Monday. Such
boys as can pretend to anything like a voice have, for weeks before,
been thumbing the collection of excellent new songs which lies hike a
bunch of rags in the window-sole; and being now able to screech up
'Barbara Allan,' or the 'Wee cot-house and the wee kail-yardie,' they
determine upon enacting the part of guizards. For this purpose they don
old shirts belonging to their fathers, and mount casques of brown paper,
shaped so like a mitre, that I am tempted to believe them to be borrowed
from the Abbot of Unreason; attached to this is a sheet of the same
paper, which, falling down in front, covers and conceals the whole face,
except where holes are made to let through the point of the nose, and
afford sight to the eyes and breath to the mouth. Each vocal guizard is,
like a knight of old, attended by a kind of humble squire, who assumes
the habiliments of a girl, with an old woman's cap and a broomstick, and
is styled 'Bessie.' Bessie is equal in no respects, except that she
shares fairly in the proceeds of the enterprise. She goes before her
principal, opens all the doors at which he pleases to exert his singing
powers, and busies herself during the time of the song in sweeping the
floor with her broomstick, or in playing any other antics that she
thinks may amuse the indwellers. The common reward of this entertainment
is a halfpenny; but many churlish persons fall upon the unfortunate
guizards and beat them out of the house. Let such persons, however, keep
a good watch over their cabbage-gardens next Hallowe'en.

.

"The more important of the guizards are of a theatrical character. There
is one rude and grotesque drama which they are accustomed to perform on
each of the four above-mentioned nights, and which, in various fragments
or versions, exists in every part of Lowland Scotland. The per. formers,
who are never less than three, but sometimes as many as six, having
dressed themselves, proceed in a band from house to house, generally
contenting themselves with the kitchen for an arena, whither, in
mansions presided over by the spirit of good-humour, the whole family
will resort to witness the spectacle. Sir Walter Scott, who delighted to
keep up old customs, and could condescend to simple things without
losing genuine dignity, invariably had a set of guizards to perform this
play before his family both at Ashiestiel and Abbotsford. The editor has
with some difficulty obtained what appears a tolerably complete copy."
\[a\]

"GOOSE-DANCING."

"OF late years, at this season, in the Islands of Scilly, the young
people exercise a sort of gallantry called 'goose-dancing.' The maidens
are dressed up for young men, and the young men for maidens; and thus
disguised, they visit their neighbours in companies, where they dance
and make jokes upon what has happened in the island, and every one is
humorously 'told their own,' without offence being taken. By this sort
of sport, according to yearly custom and toleration, there is a spirit
of wit and drollery kept up among the people. The music and dancing
done, they are treated with liquor, and then they go to the next house
of entertainment." \[b\]

This custom was by no means confined to the Islands of Scilly. In nearly
every town and large village in Cornwall, *geese-dancing*,--not
goose-dancing,--formed one of the Christmas entertainments. The term was
applied to the old Christmas plays, and indeed to any kind of sport in
which characters were assumed by the performers, or disguises worn.

It should be noted that these sports are never- termed *goose*, but
always *geese* or *guise* dancing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wayland Smith](prwe336)
