[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe194)  [Next](prwe196) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE BLACK DOGS.

ABOUT thirty years since, a man and a lad were engaged in sinking a
shaft at Wheal Vor Mine, when the lad, through carelessness or accident,
missed in charging a hole, so that a necessity arose for the dangerous
operation of picking out the charge. This they proceeded to do, the man
severely reprimanding the carelessness of his assistant. Several other
miners at the time being about to change their core, were on the plat
above, calling down and conversing occasionally with man and boy.
Suddenly the charge exploded, and the latter were seen to be thrown up
in the midst of a volume of flame, As soon as help could be procured, a
party descended, when the remains of the poor fellows were found to be
shattered and scorched beyond recognition. When these were brought to
the surface, the clothes and a mass of mangled flesh dropped from the
bodies. A bystander, to spare the feelings of the relatives, hastily
caught up the revolting mass in a shovel, and threw the whole into the
blazing furnace of Woolf's engine, close at hand. From that time the
engineman declared that troops of little black dogs continually haunted
the place, even when the doors were shut. Few of them liked to talk
about it; but it was difficult to obtain the necessary attendance to
work the machine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pitmen's Omens and Goblins](prwe196)
