[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe214)  [Next](prwe216) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE DEATH FETCH OF WILLIAM RUFUS.

ROBERT, Earl of Moreton, in Normandy,--who always carried the standard
of St Michael before him in battle,--was made Earl of Cornwall by
William the Conqueror. He was remarkable for his valour and for his
virtue, for the exercise of his power, and his benevolence to the
priests. This was the Earl of Cornwall who gave the Mount in Cornwall to
the monks of Mont St Michel in Normandy. He seized upon the priory of St
Petroc at Bodmin, and converted all the lands to his own use.

This Earl of Cornwall was an especial friend of William Rufus. It
happened that Robert, the earl, was hunting in the extensive woods
around Bodmin--of which some remains are still to be found in the Glyn
Valley. The chase had been a severe one; a fine old red deer had baffled
the huntsmen, and they were dispersed through the intricacies of the
forest, the Earl of Cornwall being left alone. He advanced beyond the
shades of the woods on to the moors above them, and he was surprised to
see a very large black goat advancing over the plain. As it approached
him, which it did rapidly, he saw that it bore on its back "King Rufus,"
all black and naked, and wounded through in the midst of his breast.
Robert adjured the goat, in the name of the Holy Trinity, to tell what
it was he carried so strangely. He answered, "I am carrying your king to
judgment; yea, that tyrant William Rufus, for I am an evil spirit, and
the revenger of his malice which he bore to the Church of God. It was I
that did cause this slaughter; the protomartyr of England, St Albyn,
commanding me so to do, who complained to God of him, for his grievous
oppression in this Isle of Britain, which he first hallowed." Having so
spoken, the spectre vanished. Robert, the earl, related the circumstance
to his followers, and they shortly after learned that at that very hour
William Rufus had been slain in the New Forest by the arrow of Walter
Tirell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sir John Arundell](prwe216)
