[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe063)  [Next](prwe065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE MERMAID'S VENGEANCE. \[a\]

IN one of the deep valleys of the parish of Perranzabuloe, which are
remarkable for their fertility, and especially for the abundance of
fruit which the orchards produce, lived in days long ago, amidst a
rudely-civilised people, a farmer's labourer, his wife, with one child,
a daughter. The man and woman were equally industrious. The neatly
white-washed walls of their mud-built cottage, the well-kept gravelled
paths, and carefully-weeded beds of their small garden, in which flowers
were cultivated for ornament, and vegetables for use, proclaimed at once
the character of the inmates. In contrast with the neighbouring
cottages, this one, although smaller than many others, had a superior
aspect, and the occupiers of it exhibited a strong contrast to those
peasants and miners amidst whom they dwelt.

Pennaluna, as the man was called, or Penna the Proud, as he was, in no
very friendly spirit, named by his less thoughtful and more impulsive
fellows, was, as we have said, a farmer's labourer.

His master was a wealthy yeoman, and he, after many years' experience,
was so convinced of the exceeding industry and sterling honesty of
Penna, that he made him the manager of an outlying farm in this parish,
under the hind (or hine--the Saxon pronunciation is still retained in
the West of England), or general supervisor of this and numerous other
extensive farms.

Penna was too great a favourite with the Squire to be a favourite of the
hind's; he was evidently jealous of him, and from not being himself a
man of very strict principles, he hated the unobtrusive goodness of his
underling, and was constantly on the watch to discover some cause of
complaint. It was not, however, often that he was successful in this.
Every task committed to the care of Penna,--and he was often purposely
overtasked, -- was executed with great care and despatch. With the wife
of Penna, however, the case was unfortunately different. Honour Penna
was as industrious as her husband, and to him she was in all respects a
helpmate. She had, however, naturally a proud spirit, and this had been
encouraged in her youth by her parents. Honour was very pretty as a
girl, and, indeed, she retained much beauty as a woman. The only
education she received was the wild one of experience, and this within a
very narrow circle. She grew an ignorant girl, amongst ignorant men and
women, few of them being able to write their names, and scarcely any of
them to read. There was much native grace about her, and she was
flattered by the young men, and envied by the young women, of the
village,--the envy and the flattery being equally pleasant to her. In
the same village was born, and brought up, Tom Chenalls, who had, in the
course of years, become hind to the Squire. Tom, as a young man, had
often expressed himself fond of Honour, but he was always distasteful to
the village maiden, and eventually, while yet young, she was married to
Pennaluna, who came from the southern coast, bringing with him the
recommendation of being a stranger, and an exceedingly hard-working man,
who was certain to earn bread, and something more, for his wife and
family. In the relations in which these people were now placed towards
each other, Chenalls had the opportunity of acting ungenerously towards
the Pennas. The man bore this uncomplainingly, but the woman frequently
quarrelled with him whom she felt was an enemy, and whom she still
regarded but as her equal. Chenalls was a skilled farmer, and hence was
of considerable value to the Squire; but although he was endured for his
farming knowledge and his business habits, he was never a favourite with
his employer. Penna, on the contrary, was an especial favourite, and the
evidences of this were so often brought strikingly under the observation
of Chenalls, that it increased the irritation of his hate, for it
amounted to that. For years things went on thus. There was the tranquil
suffering of an oppressed spirit manifested in Penna--the angry words
and actions of his wife towards the oppressor, .-- and, at the same
time, as she with much fondness studied to make their humble home
comfortable for her husband, she reviled him not unfrequently for the
meek spirit with which he endured his petty, but still trying, wrongs.
The hind dared not venture on any positive act of wrong towards those
people, yet he lost no chance of annoying them, knowing that the
Squire's partiality for Penna would not allow him to venture beyond
certain bounds, even in this direction.

Penna's solace was his daughter. She had now reached her eighteenth
year, and with the well-developed form of a woman, she united the
simplicity of a child. Selina, as she was named, was in many respects
beautiful. Her features were regular, and had they been lighted up with
more mental fire, they would have been beautiful; but the constant
repose, the want of animation, left her face merely a pretty one. Her
skin was beautifully white, and transparent to the blue veins which
traced their ways beneath it, to the verge of that delicacy which
indicates disease; but it did not pass that verge. Selina was full of
health, as her well moulded form at once showed, and her clear blue eye
distinctly told. At times there was a lovely tint upon the cheek--not
the hectic of consumptive beauty,--but a pure rosy dye, suffused by the
healthy life stream, when it flowed the fastest.

The village gossips, who were always busy with their neighbours, said
strange things of this girl. Indeed, it was commonly reported that the
real child of the Pennas was a remarkably plain child, in every respect
a different being from Selina. The striking difference between the
infant and the woman was variously explained by the knowing ones. Two
stories were, however, current for miles around the country. One was,
that Selina's mother was constantly seen gathering dew in the morning,
with which to wash her child, and that the fairies on the Towens had, in
pure malice, aided her in giving a temporary beauty to the girl, that it
might lead to her betrayal into crime. Why this malice, was never
clearly made out.

The other story was, that Honour Penna constantly bathed the child in a
certain pool, amidst the arched rocks of Perran, which was a favourite
resort of the mermaids; that on one occasion the child, as if in a
paroxysm of joy, leapt from her arms into the

water, and disappeared. The mother, as may well be supposed, suffered a
momentary agony of terror; but presently the babe swam up to the surface
of the water, its little face more bright and beautiful than it had ever
been before. Great was the mother's joy, and also--as the gossips say --
great her surprise at the sudden change in the appearance of her
offspring. The mother knew no difference in the child whom she pressed
lovingly to her bosom, but all the aged crones in the parish declared it
to be a changeling. This tale lived its day; but, as the girl grew on to
womanhood, and showed none of the special qualifications belonging
either to fairies or mermaids, it was almost forgotten. The
uncomplaining father had solace for all his sufferings in wandering over
the beautiful sands with his daughter. Whether it was when the summer
seas fell in musical undulations on the shore, or when, stirred by the
winter tempests, the great Atlantic waves came up in grandeur, and
lashed the resisting sands in giant rage, those two enjoyed the
solitude. Hour after hour, from the setting sun time, until the clear
cold moon flooded the ocean with her smiles of light, would the father
and child walk these sands. They seemed never to weary of them and the
ocean.

Almost every morning, throughout the milder seasons, Selina was in the
habit of bathing, and wild tales were told of the frantic joy with which
she would play with the breaking billows. Sometimes floating over, and
almost dancing on the crests of the waves, at other times rushing under
them, and allowing the breaking waters to beat her to the sands, as
though they were loving arms, endeavouring to encircle her form. Certain
it is, that Selina greatly enjoyed her bath, but all the rest must be
regarded as the creations of the imagination. The most eager to give a
construction unfavourable to the simple mortality of the maiden was,
however, compelled to acknowledge that there was no evidence in her
general conduct to support their surmises. Selina, as an only child,
fared the fate of others who are unfortunately so placed, and was, as
the phrase is, spoiled. She certainly was allowed to follow her own
inclinations without any check. Still her inclinations were bounded to
working in the garden, and to leading her father to the sea-shore.
Honour Penna, sometimes, it is true, did complain that Selina could not
be trusted with the most ordinary domestic duty. Beyond this, there was
one other cause of grief, that was, the increasing dislike which Selina
exhibited towards entering a church. The girl, notwithstanding the
constant excuses of being sick, suffering from headache, having a pain
in her side, and the like, was often taken, notwithstanding, by her
mother to the church. It is said

that she always shuddered as she passed the church-stile, and again on
stepping from the porch into the church itself. When once within the
house of prayer she evinced no peculiar liking or disliking, observing
respectfully all the rules during the performance of the church-service,
and generally sleeping, or seeming to sleep, during the sermon. Selina
Pennaluna had reached her eighteenth year; she was admired by many of
the young men of the parish, but, as if surrounded by a spell, she
appeared to keep them all at a distance from her. About this time, a
nephew to the Squire, a young soldier, -- who had been wounded in the
wars,--came into Cornwall to heal his wounds, and recover health, which
had suffered in a trying campaign.

This young man, Walter Trewoofe, was a rare specimen of manhood. Even
now, shattered as he was by the combined influences of wounds, an
unhealthy climate, and dissipation, he could not but be admired for
fineness of form, dignity of carriage, and masculine beauty. It was,
however, but too evident, that this young man was his own idol, and that
he expected every one to bow down with him, and worship it. His uncle
was proud of Walter, and although the old gentleman could not fail to
see many faults, yet he regarded them as the follies of youth, and
trusted to their correction with the increase of years and experience.
Walter, who was really suffering severely, was ordered by his surgeon,
at first, to take short walks on the sea-shore, and, as he gained
strength, to bathe. He was usually driven in his uncle's pony-carriage
to the edge of the sands. Then dismounting he would walk for a short
time, and quickly wearing, return in his carriage to the luxuriant
couches at the manor-house.

On some of those occasions Walter had observed the father and daughter
taking their solitary ramble. He was struck with the quiet beauty of the
girl, and seized an early opportunity of stopping Penna to make some
general inquiry respecting the bold and beautiful coast. From time to
time they thus met, and it would have been evident to any observer that
Walter did not so soon weary of the sands as formerly, and that Selina
was not displeased with the flattering things he said to her. Although
the young soldier had hitherto led a wild life, it would appear as if
for a considerable period the presence of goodness had repressed every
tendency to evil in his ill-regulated heart. He continued, therefore,
for some time playing with his own feelings and those of the childlike
being who presented so much of romance, combined with the most homely
tameness, of character. Selina, it is true, had never yet seen Walter
except in the presence of her father, and it is questionable if she had
ever for one moment had a warmer feeling than that of the mere
pleasure--a silent pride--that a gentleman, at once so handsome, so
refined, and the nephew of her father's master, should pay her any
attention. Evil eyes were watching with wicked earnestness the growth of
passion, and designing hearts were beating quicker with a consciousness
that they should eventually rejoice in the downfall of innocence. Tom
Chenalls hoped that he might achieve a triumph, if he could but once
asperse the character of Selina. He took his measures accordingly.
Having noticed the change in the general conduct of his master's nephew,
he argued that this was due to the refining influence of a pure mind,
acting on one more than ordinarily impressionable to either evil or
good.

Walter rapidly recovered health, and with renewed strength the manly
energy of his character began to develop itself. He delighted in
horse-exercise, and Chenalls had always the best horse on the farms at
his disposal. He was a good shot, and Chenalls was his guide to the best
shooting-grounds. He sometimes fished, and Chenalls knew exactly where
the choicest trout and the richest salmon were to be found. In fact,
Chenalls entered so fully into the tastes of the young man, that Walter
found him absolutely necessary to him to secure the enjoyments of a
country life.

Having established this close intimacy, Chenalls never lost an
opportunity of talking with Walter respecting Selina Penna. He soon
satisfied himself that Walter, like most other young men who had led a
dissipated life, had but a very low estimate of women generally. Acting
upon this, he at first insinuated that Selina's innocence was but a
mask, and at length he boldly assured Walter that the cottage girl was
to be won by him with a few words, and that then he might put her aside
at any time as a prize to some low-born peasant. Chenalls never failed
to impress on Walter the necessity of keeping his uncle in the most
perfect darkness, and of blinding the eyes of Selina's parents. Penna
was,--so thought Chenalls,--easily managed, but there was more to be
feared from the wife. Walter, however, with much artifice, having
introduced himself to Honour Penna, employed the magic of that flattery,
which, being properly applied, seldom fails to work its way to the heart
of a weak-minded woman. He became an especial favourite with Honour, and
the blinded mother was ever pleased at the attention bestowed with so
little assumption,--as she thought,--of pride, on her daughter, by one
so much above them. Walter eventually succeeded in separating
occasionally, though not often, Penna and his daughter. The witching
whispers of unholy love were poured into the trusting ear. Guileless
herself, this child-woman suspected no guile in others, least of all in
one whom she had been taught to look upon as a superior being to
herself. Amongst the villagers, the constant attention of Walter
Trewoofe was the subject of gossip, and many an old proverb was quoted
by the elder women, ill-naturedly, and implying that evil must come of
this intimacy, Tom Chenalls was now employed by WaIter to contrive some
means by which he could remove Penna for a period from home. He was not
long in doing this. He lent every power of his wicked nature to aid the
evil designs of the young soldier, and thus he brought about that
separation of father and child which ended in her ruin.

Near the Land's End the squire possessed some farms, and one of them was
reported to be in such a state of extreme neglect, through the
drunkenness and consequent idleness of the tenant, that Chenalls soon
obtained permission to take the farm from this occupier, which he did in
the most unscrupulous disregard for law or right. It was then suggested
that the only plan by which a desirable occupier could be found, would
be to get the farm and farm-buildings into good condition, and that
Penna, of all men, would be the man to bring this quickly about. The
squire was pleased with the plan. Penna was sent for by him, and was
proud of the confidence which his master reposed in him. There was some
sorrow on his leaving home. He subsequently said that he had had many
warnings not to go, but he felt that he dared not disoblige a master who
had trusted him so far--so he went.

Walter needed not any urging on the part of Chenalls, though he was
always ready to apply the spur when there was the least evidence of the
sense of right asserting itself in the young man's bosom. Week after
week passed on. Walter had rendered himself a necessity to Selina.
Without her admirer the world was cold and colourless. With him all was
sunshine and glowing tints.

Three months passed thus away, and during that period it had only been
possible for Penna to visit his home twice. The father felt that
something like a spirit of evil stood between him and his daughter.
There was no outward evidence of any change, but there was an inward
sense--undefined, yet deeply felt--like an overpowering fear--that some
wrong had been done. On parting, Penna silently but earnestly prayed
that the deep dread might be removed from his mind. There was an aged
fisherman, who resided in a small cottage built on the sands, who
possessed all the superstitions of his class. This old man had formed a
father's liking for the simple-hearted maiden, and he had persuaded
himself that there really was some foundation for the tales which the
gossips told. To the fisherman, Walter Trewoofe was an evil genius. He
declared that no good ever came to him, if he met Walter when he was
about to go to sea. With this feeling he curiously watched the young man
and maiden, and he, in after days, stated his conviction that he had
seen "merry maidens rising from the depth of the waters, and floating
under the billows to watch Selina and her lover. He has also been heard
to say that on more than one occasion Walter himself had been terrified
by sights and sounds. Certain, however, it is, these were insufficient
and the might of evil passions were more powerful than any of the
protecting influences of the unseen world.

Another three months had gone by, and Walter Trewoofe had disappeared
from Perranzabuloe. He had launched into the gay world of the
metropolis, and rarely, if ever, dreamed of the deep sorrow which was
weighing down the heart he had betrayed Penna returned home--his task
was done--and Chenalls had no reason for keeping him any longer from his
wife and daughter Clouds gathered slowly but unremittingly around him.
His daughter retired into herself no longer as of old reposing her whole
soul on her father's heart. His wife was somewhat changed too--she had
some secret in her heart which she feared to tell The home he had left
was not the home to which he had returned It soon became evident that
some shock had shaken the delicate frame of his daughter. She pined
rapidly; and Penna was awakened to a knowledge of the cause by the rude
rejoicing of Chenalls, who declared "that all people who kept themselves
so much above other people were sure to be pulled down." On one occasion
he so far tempted Penna with sneers, at his having hope to secure the
young squire for a son-in-law, that the long-enduring man broke forth
and administered a severe blow upon his tormentor. This was duly
reported to the squire, and added thereto was a magnified story of a
trap which had been set by the Penna to catch young Walter; it was
represented that even now they in tended to press their claims, on
account of grievous wrongs upon them, whereas it could be proved that
Walter was guiltless--that he was indeed the innocent victim of
designing people, who though to make money out of their assumed
misfortune. The squire made his inquiries, and there were not a few who
eagerly seized the opportunity to gain the friendship of Chenalls by
representing this family to have been hypocrites of the deepest dye; and
the poor girl especially was now loaded with a weight of iniquities of
which she had no knowledge. All this ended in the dismissal of Penna
from the Squire's service, and in his being deprived of the cottage in
which he had taken so much pride. Although thrown out upon the world a
disgraced man, Penna faced his difficulties manfully. He cast off, as it
were, the primitive simplicity of his character, and evidently worked
with a firm resolve to beat down his sorrows. He was too good a workman
to remain long unemployed; and although his new home was not his happy
home as of old, there was no repining heard from his lips. Weaker and
weaker grew Selina, and it soon became evident to all, that if she came
from a spirit-world, to a spirit-world she must soon return. Grief
filled the hearts of her parents--it prostrated her mother, but the
effects of severe labour, and the efforts of a settled mind, appeared to
tranquillise the breast of her father. Time passed on, the wounds of the
soul grew deeper, and there lay, on a low bed, from which she had not
strength to move, the fragile form of youth with the countenance of age.
The body was almot powerless, but there beamed from the eye the
evidences of a spirit getting free from the chains of clay.

The dying girl was sensible of the presence of creations other than
mortal, and with these she appeared to hold converse, and to derive
solace from the communion. Penna and his wife alternately watched
through the night hours by the side of their loved child, and anxiously
did they mark the moment when the tide turned, in the full belief that
she would be taken from them when the waters of the ocean began to
recede from the shore. Thus days passed on, and eventually the sunlight
of a summer morning shone in through the small window of this humble
cottage,--on a dead mother--and a living babe.

The dead was buried in the churchyard on the sands, and the living went
on their ways, some rejoicingly and some in sorrow.

Once more Walter Trewoofe appeared in Perran-on-the-sands. Penna would
have sacrificed him to his hatred; he emphatically protested that he had
lived only to do so; but the good priest of the Oratory contrived to lay
the devil who had possession, and to convince Penna that the Lord would,
in His own good time, and in His own way, avenge the bitter wrong. Tom
Chenalls had his hour of triumph; but from the day on which Selina died
everything went wrong. The crops failed, the cattle died, hay-stacks and
corn-ricks caught fire, cows slipped their calves, horses fell lame, or
stumbled and broke their knees,--a succession of evils steadily pursued
him. Trials find but a short resting-place with the good; they may be
bowed to the earth with the weight of a sudden sorrow, but they look to
heaven, and their elasticity is

restored. The evil-minded are crushed at once, and grovel on the ground
in irremediable misery. That Chenalls fled to drink in his troubles
appeared but the natural result to a man of his character. This unfitted
him for his duties, and he was eventually dismissed from his situation.
Notwithstanding that the Squire refused to listen to the appeals in
favour of Chenalls, which were urged upon him by Walter, and that indeed
he forbade his nephew to countenance "the scoundrel" in any way, Walter
still continued his friend. By his means Tom Chenalls secured a small
cottage on the cliff, and around it a little cultivated ground, the
produce of which was his only visible means of support. That lonely
cottage was the scene, however, of drunken carousals, and there the
vicious young men, and the no less vicious young women, of the district,
went after nightfall, and kept "high carnival" of sin. Walter Trewoofe
came frequently amongst them; and as his purse usually defrayed the
costs of a debauch, he was regarded by all with especial favour.

One midnight, Walter, who had been dancing and drinking for some hours,
left the cottage wearied with his excesses, and although not drunk, he
was much excited with- wine. His pathway lay along the edge of the
cliffs, amidst bushes of furze and heath, and through several irregular,
zigzag ways. There were lateral paths striking off from one side of the
main path, and leading down to the sea-shore. Although it was moonlight,
without being actually aware of the error, Walter wandered into one of
those; and before he was awake to his mistake, he found himself on the
sands. He cursed his stupidity, and, uttering a blasphemous oath, he
turned to retrace his steps.

The most exquisite music which ever flowed from human ups fell on his
ear; he paused to listen, and collecting his unbalanced thoughts, he
discovered that it was the voice of a woman singing a melancholy dirge

"The stars are beautiful, when bright  
They are mirror'd in the sea;  
But they are pale beside that light  
Which was so beautiful to me.  
My angel child, my earth-born girl,  
From all your kindred riven,  
By the base deeds of a selfish churl,  
And to a sand-grave driven!  
How shall I win thee back to ocean?  
How canst thou quit thy grave,  
To share again the sweet emotion  
Of gliding through the wave?"

Walter, led by the melancholy song, advanced slowly along the sands. He
discovered that the sweet, soft sounds proceeded from the other side of
a mass of rocks, which project far out over the sands, and that now, at
low-water, there was no difficulty in walking around it. Without
hesitation he did so, and he beheld, sitting at the mouth of a cavern,
one of the most beautiful women he had ever beheld. She continued her
song, looking upwards to the stars, not appearing to notice the
intrusion of a stranger. Walter stopped, and gazed on the lovely image
before him with admiration and wonder, mingled with something of terror.
He dared not speak, but fixed, as if by magic, he stood gazing on. After
a few minutes, the maiden, suddenly perceiving that a man was near her,
uttered a piercing shriek, and made as if to fly into the cavern. Walter
sprang forward and seized her by the arm, exclaiming, "Not yet, my
pretty maiden, not yet." She stood still in the position of flight, with
her arm behind her, grasped by Walter, and turning round her head, her
dark eyes beamed with unnatural lustre upon him. Impressionable he had
ever been, but never had he experienced anything so entrancing, and at
the same time so painful, as that gaze. It was Selina's face looking
lovingly upon him, but it seemed to possess some new power--a might of
mind from which he felt it was impossible for him to escape. Walter
slackened his hold, and slowly allowed the arm to fall from his hand.
The maiden turned fully round upon him. "Go!" she said. He could not
move. "Go, man!" she repeated. He was powerless.

"Go to the grave where the sinless one sleepeth!  
Bring her cold corse where her guarding one weepeth;  
Look on her, love her again, ay! betray her,  
And wreath with false smiles the pale face of her slayer!  
Go, go! now, and feel the full force of my sorrow!  
For the glut of my vengeance there cometh a morrow."

Walter was statue-like, and he awoke from this trance-like state only
when the waves washed his feet, and he became aware that even now it was
only by wading through the waters that he could return around the point
of rocks. He was alone. He called; no one answered. He sought wildly, as
far as he now dared, amidst the rocks, but the lovely woman was nowhere
to be discovered.

There was no real danger on such a night as this; therefore Walter
walked fearlessly through the gentle waves, and recovered the pathway up
from the sands. More than once he thought he heard a rejoicing laugh,
which was echoed in the rocks, but no

one was to be seen. Walter reached his home and bed, but he found no
sleep; and in the morning he arose with a sense of wretchedness which
was entirely new to him. He feared to make any one of his rough
companions a confidant, although he felt this would have relieved his
heart. He therefore nursed the wound which he now felt, until a bitter
remorse clouded his existence. After some days, he was impelled to visit
the grave - of the lost one, and in the fullness of the most selfish
sorrow, he sat on the sands and shed tears. The priest of the Oratory
observed him, and knowing Walter Trewoofe, hesitated not to inquire into
his cause of sorrow. His heart was opened to the holy man, and the
strange tale was told--the only result being, that the priest felt
satisfied it was but a vivid dream, which had resulted from a brain
over-excited by drink. He, however, counselled the young man, giving him
some religious instruction, and dismissed him with his blessing. There
was relief in this. For some days Walter did not venture to visit his
old haunt, the cottage of Chenalls. Since he could not be lost to his
companions without greatly curtailing their vicious enjoyments, he was
hunted up by Chenalls, and again enticed within the circle. His absence
was explained on the plea of illness. Walter was, however, an altered
man; there was not the same boisterous hilarity as formerly. He no
longer abandoned himself without restraint to the enjoyments of the
time. If he ever, led on by his thoughtless and rough-natured friends,
assumed for a moment his usual mirth, it was checked by some invisible
power. On such occasions he would turn deadly pale, look anxiously
around, and fail back, as if ready to faint, on the nearest seat. Under
these influences, he lost health. His uncle, who was really attached to
his nephew, although he regretted his dissolute conduct, became now
seriously alarmed. Physicians were consulted in vain; the young man
pined, and the old gossips came to the conclusion that Walter Trewoofe
was ill-wished, and there was a general feeling that Penna or his wife
was at the bottom of it. Walter, living really on one idea, and that one
the beautiful face which was, and yet was not, that of Selina, resolved
again to explore the spot on which he had met this strange being, of
whom nothing could be learned by any of the covert inquiries he made. He
lingered long ere he could resolve on the task; but wearied, worn by the
oppression of one undefined idea, in which an intensity of love was
mixed with a shuddering fear, he at last gathered sufficient courage to
seize an opportunity for again going to the cavern. On this occasion,
there being no moon, the night was dark, but the stars shone brightly
from a sky, cloudless, save a dark mist which hung heavily over the
western horizon. Every spot of ground being familiar to him, who, boy
and man, had traced it over many times, the partial darkness presented
no difficulty. Walter had scarcely reached the level sands, which were
left hard by the retiring tide, than he heard again the same magical
voice as before. But now the song was a joyous one, the burthen of it
being --

"Join all hands--  
Might and main,  
Weave the sands,  
Form a chain,  
He, my lover,  
Comes again!"

He could not entirely dissuade himself but that he heard this repeated
by many voices; but he put the thought aside, referring it, as well he
might, to the numerous echoes from the cavernous openings in the cliffs.

He reached the eastern side of the dark mass of rocks, from the point of
which the tide was slowly subsiding. The song had ceased, and a low
moaning sound - the soughing of the wind--passed along the shore. Walter
trembled with fear, and was on the point of returning, when a most
flute-like murmur rose from the other side of the rocky barrier, which
was presently moulded into words

"From your couch of glistering pearl,  
Slowly, softly, come away;  
Our sweet earth-child, lovely girl,  
Died this day,--died this day."

Memory told Walter that truly was it the anniversary of Selina
Pennaluna's death, and to him every gentle wave falling on the shore
sang, or murmured --

"Died this day,--died this day."

The sand was left dry around the- point of the rocks, and Walter
impelled by a power which he could not control, walked onward. The
moment he appeared on the western side of the rock, a wild laugh burst
into the air, as if from the deep cavern before him, at the entrance of
which sat the same beautiful being whom he had formerly met. There was
now an expression of rare joy on her face, her eyes glistened with
delight, and she extended her arms. as if to welcome him.

"Was it ever your wont to move so slowly towards your loved one?"

Walter heard it was Selina's voice. He saw it was Selina's features; but
he was conscious it was not Selina's form.

"Come, sit beside me, Walter, and let us talk of love." He sat down
without a word, and looked into the maiden's face with a vacant
expression of fondness. Presently she placed her hand upon his heart; a
shudder passed through his frame; but having passed, he felt no more
pain, but a rare intensity of delight. The maiden wreathed her arm
around his neck, drew Walter towards her, and then he remembered how
often he had acted thus towards Selina. She bent over him and looked
into his eyes. In his mind's mirror he saw himself looking thus into the
eyes of his betrayed one.

"You loved her once?" said the maiden.

"I did indeed," answered Walter, with a sigh.

"As you loved her, so I love you," said the maiden, with a smile which
shot like a poisoned dart through Walter's heart. She lifted the young
man's head lovingly between her hands, and bending over him, pressed her
lips upon and kissed his forehead, Walter curiously felt that although
he was the kissed, yet that he was the kisser.

"Kisses," she said, "are as true at sea as they are false on land. You
men kiss the earth-born maidens to betray them. The kiss of a sea-child
is the seal of constancy. You are mine till death."

"Death!" almost shrieked Walter.

A full consciousness of his situation now broke upon Walter. He had
heard the tales of the gossips respecting the mermaid origin of Selina;
but he had laughed at them as an idle fancy. he now felt they were true.
For hours Walter was compelled to sit by the side of his beautiful
tormentor, every word of assumed love and rapture being a torture of the
most exquisite kind to him. He could not escape from the arms which were
wound around him. He saw the tide rising rapidly. He heard the deep
voice of the winds coming over the sea from the far west. He saw that
which appeared at first as a dark mist, shape itself into a dense black
mass of cloud, and rise rapidly over the star-bedecked space above him.
He saw by the brilliant edge of light which occasionally fringed the
clouds that they were deeply charged with thunder. There was something
sublime in the steady motion of the storm; and now the roll of the
waves, which had been disturbed in the Atlantic, reached our shores, and
the breakers fell thunderingly within a few feet of Walter and his
companion. Paroxysms of terror shook him, and with each convulsion he
felt himself grasped with still more ardour, and pressed so closely to
the maiden's bosom, that he heard her heart dancing of joy.

At length his terrors gave birth to words, and he implored her to let
him go.

"The kiss of the sea-child is the seal of constancy." Walter vehemently
implored forgiveness. He confessed his deep iniquity. He promised a life
of penitence.

"Give me back the dead," said the maiden bitterly, and she planted
another kiss, which seemed to pierce his brain by its coldness, upon his
forehead.

The waves rolled around the rock on which;they sat; they washed their
seat. Walter was .still in the female's grasp, and she lifted him to a
higher ledge. The storm approached. Lightnings struck down from the
heavens into the sands; and thunders roared along the iron cliffs. The
mighty waves grew yet more rash, and washed up to this strange pair, who
now sat on the highest pinnacle of the pile of rocks. Walter's terrors
nearly overcame him; but he was roused by a liquid stream of fire, which
positively hissed by him, followed immediately by a crash of thunder,
which shook the solid earth. Tom Chenall's cottage on the cliff burst
into a blaze, and Walter saw, from his place amidst the raging waters, a
crowd of male and female roisterers rush terrified out upon the heath,
to be driven back by the pelting storm. The climax of horrors appeared
to surround Walter. He longed to end it in death, but he could not die.
His senses were quickened. He saw his wicked companion and evil adviser
struck to the ground, a blasted heap of ashes, by a lightning stroke,
and at the same moment he and his companion were borne off the rock on
the top of a mountainous wave, on which he floated; the woman holding
him by the hair of his head, and singing in a rejoicing voice, which was
like a silver bell heard amidst the deep base bellowings of the storm--

"Come away, come away,  
O'er the waters wild!  
Our earth-born child  
Died this day, died this day.

"Come away, come away!  
The tempest loud  
Weaves the shroud  
For him who did betray.

"Come away, come away!  
Beneath the wave  
Lieth the grave  
Of him we slay, him we slay.

"Come away, come away!  
He shall not rest  
In earth's own breast  
For many a day, many a day.

"Come away, come away!  
By billows to  
From coast to coast,  
Like deserted boat  
His corse shall float  
Around the bay, around the bay."

Myriads of voices on that wretched night were heard amidst the roar of
the storm. The waves were seen covered with a multitudinous host, who
were tossing from one to the other the dying Walter Trewoofe, whose
false heart thus endured the vengeance of the mermaid, who had, in the
fondness of her soul, made the innocent child of humble parents the
child of her adoption. Appendix M.

\[a\] Several versions of the following story have been given me. The
general idea of the tale belongs to the north coast; but the fact of
mermaidens taking innocents under their charge was common around the
Lizard, and in some of the coves near the Land's End.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cromlech and Druid Stones](prwe065)
