[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe264)  [Next](prwe266) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

SHOOTING STARS

 A MUCILAGINOUS substance is found on the damp ground near the granite
quarries of Penryn, this is often very phosphorescent at night. The
country people regard this as the substance of shooting stars. A
tradesman of Penryn once brought me a bottle full of this substance for
analysis, informing me that the men employed at the quarries, whenever
they observed a shooting star, went to the spot near which they supposed
it to fall, and they generally found a hatful of this mucus. It is
curious that the Belgian peasants also call it "the substance of
shooting stars" (" Phosphorescence," p. 109. By T. L. Phipson). This
author says, "I have sketched the history of this curious substance in
the *Journal dè Médecine et de Pharmacologie* of Bruxelles, for 1855. It
was analysed chemically by Mulder, and anatomically by Carus, and from
their observations appears to be the peculiar mucus which envelops the
eggs of the frog. It swells to an enormous volume when it has free
access to water. As seen upon the damp ground in spring, it was often
mistaken for some species of fungus; it is, however, simply the spawn of
frogs, which has been swallowed by some large crows or other birds, and
afterwards vomited, from its peculiar property of swelling to an immense
size in their bodies."

In Mulder's account of its chemical composition given by Berselius in
his *Rapport Annual*, he distinguishes it by designation of

mucilage atmosphérique.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sun Never Shines on the Perjured](prwe266)
