[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe017)  [Next](prwe019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE GIANT OF MORVA \[a\]

  
IN the Giant's Field in Morva still stand some granite fragments which
once constituted the Giant's House. From this we see the Giant's Castle
at Bosprenis, and the Giant's Cradle, thus perpetuating the infancy of
the great man, and his subsequent power. The quoits used by this giant
are numerous indeed. This great man, on the 1st day of August, would
walk up to Bosprenis Croft, and there perform some magical rites, which
were either never known, or they have 'been forgotten. On this day,--for
when thus engaged the giant was harmless,--thousands of people would
congregate to get a glimpse of the monster; and as he passed them,--all
being seated on the stone hedges, -- every one drank "to the health of
Mr Giant." At length the giant died, but the gathering on the 1st of
August has never been given up, or rather, the day shifts, and is made
to agree with Morva Feast, which is held on the first Sunday in August.

A Morva farmer writes:-- "A quarter of an acre would not hold the horses
ridden to the fair,--the hedges being covered by the visitors, who drink
and carouse as in former times. Morva Fair is, however, dying out."

The parish-clerk informed me that the giant had twenty sons; that he was
the first settler in these parts; and that he planted his children all
round the coast. It was his custom to bring all his family together on
the 1st of August, and hence the origin of the fair. Whichever may be
the true account of the cause which established the fair and the feast,
these romances clearly establish the fact that the giants were at the
bottom of it.

\[a\] The above notices were collected for me in Morva by the late C.
Taylor Stephens, author of "The Chief of Barat-Anac," and "some time
rural postman front St Ives to Zennor." Their connection with the
traditions of Jack and Tom will be evident to every reader.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Giant Bolster](prwe019)
