[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe217)  [Next](prwe219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE WHITE HARE

IT is a very popular fancy that when a maiden, who has loved not wisely
but too well, dies forsaken and broken-hearted, that she comes back to
haunt her deceiver in the shape of a white hare.

This phantom follows the false one everywhere, mostly invisible to all
but him. It sometimes saves him from danger, but invariably the white
hare causes the death of the betrayer in the end.

The following story of the white hare is a modification of several tales
of the same kind which have been told me. Many, many years have passed
away, and all who were in any way connected with my story have slept for
generations in the quiet churchyard of --.

A large landed proprietor engaged a fine, handsome young fellow to
manage his farm, which was a very extensive as well- as a high-class
one. When the young farmer was duly settled in his new farmhouse, there
came to live with him, to take the management of the dairy, a peasant's
daughter. She was very handsome, and of a singularly fine figure, but
entirely without education.

The farmer became desperately in love with this young creature, and
eventually their love passed all the bounds of discretion. It became the
policy of the young farmer's family to put down this unfortunate
passion, by substituting a more legitimate and endearing object

After a long trial, they thought they were successful, and the young
farmer was married.

Many months had not passed away when the discharged dairy maid was
observed to suffer from illness, which, however, she constantly spoke of
as nothing; but knowing dames saw too clearly the truth. One morning
there was found in a field a newly-born babe strangled. The unfortunate
girl was at once suspected as being the parent, and the evidence was
soon sufficient to charge her with the murder. She was tried, and,
chiefly by the evidence of the young farmer and his family, convicted
of, and executed for, the murder.

Everything now went wrong in the farm, and the young man suddenly left
it and went into another part of the country.

Still nothing prospered, and gradually he took to drink to drown some
secret sorrow. He was more frequently on the road by night than by day;
and, go where he would, a white hare was constantly crossing his path.
The white hare was often seen by others, almost always under the feet of
his horse; and the poor terrified animal would go like the wind to.
avoid the strange apparition.

One morning the young farmer was found drowned in a forsaken mine; and
the horse, which had evidently suffered extreme terror, was grazing near
the corpse. Beyond all doubt the white hare, which is known to hunt the
perjured and the false-hearted to death, had terrified the horse to such
a degree, that eventually the rider was thrown into the mine-waste in
which the body was found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hand of a Suicide](prwe219)
