[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe189)  [Next](prwe191) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"WHO ARE THE KNOCKERS ?"

CHARLES KINGSLEY in his "Yeast: a Problem," asks this question--Tregarra
answers,--"They are *the ghosts,* the miners hold, *of the old Jews that
crucjfled our Lord, and were sent for slaves by the Roman emperors to
work the mines:* and we find their old smelting-houses, which we call
*Jews' houses,* and their blocks at the bottom of the great bogs, which
we call *Jews' tin:* and then a town among us too, which we call *Market
Jew,* but the old name was Marazion, that means the bitterness of Zion,
they tell me; and bitter work it was for them, no doubt, poor souls ! We
used to break into old shafts and adits which they had made, and find
flue old stag's-horn pick-axes, that crumbled to pieces when we brought
them to grass. And they say that if a man will listen of a still night
about these shafts, he may hear the ghosts of them at work, knocking and
picking, as clear as if there was a man at work in the next level."

In *Notes and Queries* will be found some learned discussions on the
question of the Jews working the Cornish tin mines, as though it were
merely one of tradition. That the Jews farmed the tin mines of Cornwall
and Devonshire is an historical fact, of which we have evidence in
charters granted by several of our kings, especially by King John. Carew
in his "Survey of Cornwall" gives some account of their mode of dealing
with the tinners. Hence the terms "Jews' houses," given to old and rude
smelting works,--many of which I have seen,--and hence the name of
"Jews' tin," given to the old blocks of tin, specimens of which may be
seen in the *Museum of Practical Geology,* and in the museum of the
*Royal Institution of Cornwall,* at Truro. *"Atall Sarazin"* is another
term applied to some of the old waste-heaps of the ancient tin mines. -

"The Jews," says Whitaker (" Origin of Arianism," p. *334),*
"denominated themselves, and were denominated by the Britons of
Cornwall, *Saracens,* as the genuine progeny of Sarah." Be this as it
may, I have often heard in the mining villages--from twenty to thirty
years since--a man coming from a distant parish, called *"a
foreignerer;"* a man from a distant country, termed *"an outlandish
man;"* and any one not British born, designated as "a

Saracen."

But this has led me away from the knockers, who are in some districts
called also *"the buccas"* Many a time have I been seriously informed by
the miners themselves that these sprites have been heard working away in
the remote parts of a lode, repeating the blows of the miner's pick or
sledge with great precision. Generally speaking, the knockers work upon
productive lodes only; and they have often kindly indicated to the
trusting miners, where they might take good tribute pitches.

To Wesley, Cornwall owes a deep debt. He found the country steeped in
the darkness of superstitious ignorance, and he opened a new light upon
it. Associated with the spread of Wesleyan Methodism, has been the
establishment of schools; and under the influence of religion and
education, many of the superstitions have faded away. We rarely hear of
the knockers now; but the following occurrence will show that the
knockers have not entirely left the land:--

One Saturday night I had retired to rest, having first seen that all the
members of the household had gone to their bedrooms. These were my
daughters, two female servants, and an old woman, named Mary, who was
left, by the proprietor, in charge of the house which I occupied.

I had been some time in bed, when I distinctly heard a bedroom door
open, and footsteps which, after moving about for some time in the
passage or landing, from which the bedrooms opened, slowly and carefully
descended the stairs. I heard a movement in the kitchen below, and the
footsteps again ascended the stairs, and went into one of the bedrooms.
This noise contiued so long, and was so regularly repeated, that I began
to fear lest one of the children were taken suddenly ill. Yet I felt
assured, if it was so, one of the servants would call me. Therefore I
lay still and listened until I fell asleep.

On the Sunday morning, when I descended to the breakfast room, I asked
the eldest of the two servants what had occasioned so much going up and
down stairs in the night. She declared that no one had left their
bedrooms after they had retired to them. I then inquired of the younger
girl, and of each of my daughters as they made their appearance. No one
had left their rooms--they had not heard any noises. My youngest
daughter, who had been, after this inquiry of mine, for some minutes
alone with the youngest servant, came laughing to me,--

"Papa, Nanny says the house is haunted, and that they have often heard
strange noises in it."

So I called Nancy; but all I could learn from her was that noises, like
that of men going up and down stairs,--of threshing corn, and of
"beating the borer" (a mining operation), were not uncommon.

We all laughed over papa's ghost during the breakfast, and by and by old
Mary made her appearance.

"Yes," she said, "it is quite true, as Nanny as a told you. I have often
heard all sorts of strange noises; but I b'lieve they all come from the
lode of tin which runs under the house.

Wherever there is a lode of tin, you are sure to hear strange noises."

"What, Mary I was it the knockers I heard last night ?" "Yes; 'twas the
knackers, down working upon the tin--no doubt of it."

This was followed by a long explanation, and numerous stories of mines
in the Lelant and St Ives district, in which the knockers had been often
heard.

After a little time, Mary, imagining, I suppose, that the your ladies
might not like to sleep in a house beneath which the knockers were at
work, again came with her usual low courtesy into the parlour.

"Beg pardon, sir," says she; "but none of the young ladies need be
afraid. There are no spirits in the house; it is very nearly a new one,
and no one has ever died in the house."

This makes a distinct difference between the ghost of the departed and
those gnomes who are doomed to toil in the earth's dark recesses.\[a\]
The Cornish knocker does not appear to be the *"cobal"* of German
miners. The former are generally kindly, and often serve the industrious
miner; the latter class are always malicious, and, I believe, are never
heard but when mischief is near.

\[a\] "Some are sent, like the spirit Gathon in Cornwall, to work the
will of his master in the mines."--Mrs

Bray's Tradilians of Devonshire.

Who was the spirit Gathon ?

"The miner starts as he hears the mischievous Gathon answering blow for
blow the stroke of his pickaxe, or deluding him with false fires,
noises, and flames."--A

Guide to the Coasts of Devon and Cornwall. Mackenzie Walcott, M.A.

Carne, in his "Tales of the West," alludes to this :-- "The miners have
their full share of the superstitious feelings of the country, and often
hear with alarm the noises, as it were, of other miners at work deep
underground, and at no great distance. The of the barrows, the sound of
the pickaxes, and the fall of the earth and stones, are distinctly heard
through the night,--often, no doubt, the echo of their own labour;
sometimes continued long after that labonr has ceased, and occasionally
voices seem to mingle with them. Gilbert believed that he was peculiarly
exposed to these visitations; he had an instinctive shrinking from the
place where the accident had happened; and, when left alone there, it
was in vain that he plied his toil with desperate energy to divert his
thoughts. Another person appeared to work very near him: he stayed the
lifted pick and listened. The blow of the other fell distinctly, and the
rich ore followed it in a loud rollinng; he checked the loaded barrow
that he was wheeling; still that of the un­known workman went on, and
came nearer and nearer, and then there followed a loud, faint cry, that
thrilled through every nerve of the lonely man, for it seemed like the
voice of his brother. These sounds as ceased on a sudden, and those
which his own toll caused were the only ones heard, till, after an
interval, without any warning, they began again at times more near, and
again passing away to a distance."--The *Tale of the Miner.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Miner's Superstitions](prwe191)
