[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe340)  [Next](prwe342) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE BARGEST, OR SPECTRE-HOUND.

IN the glossary to the Rev. Mr. Carr's "Horae Momenta Carvenae," I find
the following: "*Bargest*, a sprite that haunts towns and populous
places. Belg. *berg*, and *geest*, a ghost." I really am not a little
amused at Mr. Carr's derivation, which is most erroneous. Bargest is not
a town-ghost, nor is it a haunter "of towns and populous places;" for,
on the contrary, it is said in general to frequent small villages and
hills. Hence the derivation may be *berg*, Germ, a hill, and *geest*, a
ghost--i.e., a hill-ghost; but the real derivation appears to me to be
*bär*, Germ, a *bear*, and *geest*, a ghost--i.e., a bear-ghost, from
its appearing in the form of a bear or large dog, as Billy B--'a
narrative shows.

The appearance of the spectre-hound is said to precede a death. Like
other spirits, Bargest is supposed to be unable to cross water; and in
case any of my craven readers should ever chance to meet with his
ghostship, it may he as well to say, that unless they give him the wall,
he will tear them in pieces, or otherwise ill-treat them, as he did John
Lambert, who, refusing to let him have the wall, was so punished for his
want of manners, that he died in a few days.

BILLY B --'S ADVENTURE.

"You see, sir, as how I'd been a clock-dressing at Gurston
(Grassington), and I'd staid rather lat, and may be a li'le sup o'
spirit; but I war far from being drunk, and knowed everything that
passed. It war about eleven o'clock when I left, and it war at back end
o' t' year, and a most admirable (beautiful) neet it war. The moon war
varra breet, and I nivver seed Kylstone-fell plainer in a' my life. Now,
you see, sir, I war passin' down t' mill loine, and I heerd summat come
past me,--brush, brush, brush, wi' chains rattling a' the while, but I
seed nothing; and thowt I to mysel, now this is a most mortal queer
thing. And I then stuid still, and luik'd about me; but I seed nothing
at aw, nobbut the two stane wa's on each o' t' mill loine. Then I heerd
again this brush, brush, brush, wi' the chains; for you see, sir, when I
stuid still it stopped, and then, thowt I, this mun be a Bargest, that
sae much is said about; and I hurried on towards t' wood brig; for they
say as how this Bargest cannot cross a water; but Lord, sir, when I gat
o'er t' brig, I heerd this same thing again; so it mun either hey
crossed t' watter, or *have gane round by t' spring heed!* (about thirty
miles!) And then I becam a vahliant man, for I war a bit freekn'd afore;
and, thinks I, I'll turn and hey a peep at this thing; so I went up
Greet Bank towards Linton, and heerd this brush, brush, brush, wi' the
chains a' the way, but I seed nothing; then it ceased all of a sudden.
So I turned back to go hame; but I'd hardly reached the dour when I
heerd again this brush, brush, brush, and the chains going down towards
t' Holin House; and I followed it, and the moon there shone varra breet,
and *l seed its tail!* Then, thowt I, thou owd thing, I can say Ise seen
thee now; so, I'll away hame. When I gat to t' door, there war a grit
thing like a sheep, but it war larger, ligging across t' threshold of t'
door, and it war woolly like; and says I, 'Git up,' and it wouldn't git
up. Then says I, 'Stir thysel,' and it wouldn't stir itsel! And I grew
valliant, and I raised t' stick to baste it wi'; and then it luik'd at
me and sich oies (eyes), they did glower, and war as big as saucers, and
like a cruelled ball. First there war a red ring, then a blue one, then
a white one; and these rings grew less and less *till they came to a
dot!* Now, I war nane feer'd on it, tho' it grin'd at me fearfully, and
I kept on saying, 'Git up,' and 'Stir thysel,' and t' wife heerd as how
I war at t' door, and she cam to oppen it; and then this thing gat up
and walked off, *for it war mare freet'd o' t' wife than it war o' me*;
and I told the wife, and she said it war Bargest ; but I nivver seed it
since--and that's a true story." \[a\]

\[a\] Hone's "Every-Day Book."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mermaid's Revenge](prwe342)
