[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe179)  [Next](prwe181) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE WITCHES OF THE LOGAN STONE.

WHO that has travelled into Cornwall but has visited the Logan Stone ?
Numerous Logan rocks exist on the granite hills of the county, but that
remarkable mass which is poised on the cubical masses forming its
Cyclopean support, at Trereen, is beyond all others "The Logan Stone."

A more sublime spot could not have been chosen by the Bardic priesthood
for any ordeal connected with their worship; and even admitting that
nature may have disposed the huge mass to. wear away, so as to rest
delicately poised on a pivot, it is highly probable that the, wild
worship of the untrained tribes, who had passed to those islands' from
the shores of the Mediterranean Sea, may have led them to believe that
some' superhuman power belonged to such a strangely-balanced mass of
rock.

Nothing can be more certain than that through all time, passing on from
father to son, there has been a wild reverence of this mass of rock; and
long after the days when the Druid ceased to be there is every reason
for believing that the Christian priests, if the) did not encourage, did
not forbid, the use of this and similar rocks to be used as places of
ordeal by the uneducated and superstitious people around.

Hence the mass of rock on which is poised the Logan Stone has ever been
connected with the supernatural. To the south of the Logan Rock is a
high peak of granite, towering above the other rocks; this is known as
the Castle Peak.

No one can say for how long a period, but most certainly for ages, this
peak has been the midnight rendezvous for witches, Many a man, and woman
too, now sleeping quietly in the church yard of St Levan, would, had
they the power, attest to have seer the witches flying into the Castle
Peak on moonlight nights mounted on the stems of the ragwort *(Senecia
Jacoboea Linn.)* and bringing with them the things necessary to make
their charms potent and strong.

This place was long nøted as the gathering place of the army of witches
who took their departure for Wales, where they would luxuriate at the
most favoured seasons of the year upon the mill of the Welshmen's cows.
From this peak many a struggling ship has been watched by a malignant
crone, while she has been brewing the tempest to destroy it; and many a
rejoicing chorus has been echoed, in horror, by the cliffs around, when
the witches have been croaking their miserable delight over the
perishing crews, as they have watched man, woman, and child drowning
whom they were presently to rob of the treasures they were bringing home
from other lands.

Upon the rocks behind the Logan Rock it would appear that every kind of
mischief which can befall man or beast was once brewed by the St Levan
witches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Madgy Figgy's Chair](prwe181)
