[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe005)  [Next](prwe007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE KEY OF THE GIANT'S CASTLE.

  
THE giant's castle at Treryn, remarkable as a grand example of truly
British Cyclopean architecture, was built by the power of enchantment.
The giant to whom all the rest of his race were indebted for this
stronghold was in every way a remark-able mortal. He was stronger than
any other giant, and he was a mighty necromancer. He sat on the
promontory of Treryn, and by the power of his will he compelled the
castle to rise out of the sea. it is only kept in its present position
by virtue of a magic key. This the giant placed in a holed rock, known
as the Giant's Lock, and whenever this key, a large round stone, can be
taken out of the lock, the promontory of Treryn and its castle will
disappear beneath the waters. There are not many people who obtain even
a sight of this wonderful key. You must pass at low tide along a granite
ledge, scarcely wide enough for a goat to stand on. If you happen to
make a false step, you must be dashed to pieces on the rocks below.
Well, having got over safely, you come to a pointed rock with a hole in
it; this is the castle lock. Put your hand deep into the hole, and you
will find at the bottom a large egg-shaped stone, which is easily moved
in any direction. You will feel certain that you can take it out,--but
try! Try as you may, you will find it will not pass through the hole;
yet no one can doubt but that it once went in.

Lieutenant Goldsmith dissolved one bit of superstition by foolishly
throwing the fatal Logan Stone from off its bearing; but no one has ever
yet succeeded in removing the key of the giant's castle from the hole in
which the necromancer is said to have placed it when he was dying.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Rival Giants](prwe007)
