[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe129)  [Next](prwe131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ST KEA'S BOAT.

ST KEA, a young Irish saint, stood on the southern shores of Ireland and
saw the Christian missionaries departing to carry the blessed Word to
the heathens of Western England. He watched their barks fade beneath the
horizon, and he felt that he was left to a solitude which was not fitted
to one in the full energy of young life, and burning with zeal.

The saint knelt on a boulder of granite lying on the shore, and he
prayed with fervour that Heaven would order it so that he might diffuse
his religious fervour amongst the barbarians of Cornwall, He prayed on
for some time, not observing the rising of the tide. When he had poured
out his full soul, he awoke to the fact, not only that the waves were
washing around the stone on which he knelt, but that the stone was
actually floating on the water. Impressed with the miracle, St Kea
sprang to his feet, and looking towards the setting sun, with his cross
uplifted, he exclaimed, "To Thee, and only to Thee, my God, do I trust
my soul !"

Onward floated the granite, rendered buoyant by supernatural power.
Floated hither and thither by the tides, it swam on; blown sometimes in
one direction, and sometimes in another, by the varying winds, days and
nights were spent upon the waters. The faith of St Kea failed not; three
times a day he knelt in prayer to God. At all other times he stood
gazing on the heavens. At length the faith of the saint being fairly
tried, the moorstone boat floated steadily up the river, and landed at
St Kea, which place he soon Christianised; and there stands to this day
this monument of St Kea's sincere belief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St German's Well](prwe131)
