[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe088)  [Next](prwe090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

GWAVAS LAKE.

   
ON the western side of the Mount's Bay, between the fishing. towns of
Newlyn and Mousehole, is the well-known anchoring-place known by the
above name. It is not a little curious that any part of the ocean should
have been called a lake. Tradition, however, helps us to an explanation.
Between the land on the western side of the bay, and St Michael's Mount
on the eastern side, there, at one time, extended a forest of
beech-trees. Within this forest, on the western side, was a large lake,
and on its banks a hermitage. The saint of the lake was celebrated far
and near for his holiness, and his small oratory was constantly resorted
to by the diseased in body and the afflicted in mind. None ever came in
the true spirit who failed to find relief. The prayers of the saint and
the waters of the lake removed the severest pains from the limbs and the
deepest sorrows from the mind. The young were strengthened and the old
revived by their influences. The great flood, however, which separated
the Islands of Scilly from England, submerged the forest, and destroyed
the lands enclosing this lovely and almost holy lake, burying beneath
the waters church and houses, and destroying alike the people and the
priest. Those who survived this sad catastrophe built a church on the
hill and dedicated it to the saint of the lake--or in Cornish, St Pol --
modernised into St Paul. \[a\]

In support of this tradition, we may see, of a fine summer day, when the
tide is low and the waters clear, the remains of a forest in the line
passing from St Michael's Mount to Gwavas. At, neap-tides the author has
gathered beech-nuts from the sands below Chyandour, and cut the wood
from the trees embedded in the sand. \[b\]

\[a\] Gwavas Lake. It is said that within historic times, tithes, or an
equivalent for them, were collected from the land which surrounded this
lake. I have been informed that the parish books of St Paul record the
collection of tithes from lands which have disappeared. I applied for
information on this point to the rector of the parish, but he has not
yet favoured me with a reply.

\[b\] I have passed in a boat from St Michael's Mount to Penzance on a
summer day, when the waters were very clear, and the tide low, and seen
the black masses of trees in the white sands extending far out into the
bay. On one occasion, while I was at school at Penzance, after a violent
equinactial gale, large trunks of trees were thrown up on the shore,
just beyond Cbyandour, and then with the other boys I went, at the
lowest of the tide, far out over the sands, and saw scores of trees
embedded iu the sands. We gathered nuts--they were beech-nuts--and
leaves in abundance. It is not a little remarksble,--if it be true, as I
am informed it is,--that the trees found in the Pentuan Stream Works,
under some fifty or sixty feet of sand and silt, are beech-trees, and
that they were destroyed when the fruit was upon them. I learn, that not
far from Hull in Yorkshire there exists a submerged forest, where also
the beech-trees evidently perished in the autumn. In Cardigan Bay a
large tract of country in said to have been lost. May not all these
traditions and evidences relate to one great cataclysm? See "A Week at
the Land's End," by J. T. Blight, for an account of the submerged wood
near Lariggan Rocks, between Penzance and Newlyn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The City of Langarrow or Langona](prwe090)
