[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe339)  [Next](prwe341) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

MOSES PITT'S LETTER RESPECTING ANNE JEFFERIES.

"AN account of Anne Jefferies, now living in the county of Cornwall, who
was fed for six months by a small sort of airy people, called fairies;
and of the strange and wonderful cures she performed with salves and
medicines she received from them, for which she never took one penny of
her patients.

\- In a letter from Moses Pitt to the Right Reverend Father in God, Dr.
Edward Fowler, Lord Bishop of Gloucester."

Anne Jefferies, who was afterwards married to one William Warren, was
born in the parish of St Teath in December 1626, "and she is still
living, 1696, being now in the 70th year of her age." From the published
narrative, we learn that Mr Humphrey Martin was requested by Mr Moses
Pitt to see and examine Anne in 1693. Mr Martin writes, "As for Anne
Jefferies, I have been with her the greater part of one day, and did
react to her all that you wrote to me; but site would not own anything
of it, as concerning the fairies, neither of any of the cures that she
did. She answered, that if her own father were now alive, she would not
discover to him those things which did happen then to her. I asked her
the reason why she would not do it; she replied, that if she should
discover it to you, that you would make books or ballads of it; and she
said, that she would not have her name spread about the country in books
or ballads of such things, if she might have five hundred pounds for
it."

Mr Pitt's correspondent goes on to say that Anne was so frightened by
the visitors she had in the arbour "that she fell into a kind of
convulsion fit. But when we found her in this condition we brought her
into the house and put her to bed, and took great care of her. As soon
as she recovered out of her fit, she cried out, 'They are just gone out
of the window--they are just gone out of the window. Do you not see
them?'" Anne recovered, and "as soon as she recovered a little strength,
she constantly went to church." "She took mighty delight in devotion,
and in hearing the Word of God read and preached, although she herself
could not read."

Anne eventually tells some portions of her story, and cures numerous
diseases amongst the people, by the powers site had derived from the
fairy world. "People of all distempers, sicknesses, sores, and ages,
came not only so far off as the Land's End, but also from London, and
were cured by her. Site took no moneys of them, nor any reward that ever
I knew or heard of, yet had she moneys at all times sufficient to supply
her wants. She neither made nor bought any medicines or salves that ever
I saw or heard of, yet wanted them not as she had occasion. *She forsook
eating our victuals, and was fed by these fairies from that harvest time
to the next Christmas day;* upon which day she came to our table and
said, because it was that day, she would eat some roast beef with us,
the which she did--I myself being then at the table."

The fairies constantly attended upon Anne, and they appear to have vied
with each other to win her favour. They feel her, as we have been
already told ; and the writer says that on one occasion site "gave me a
piece of her bread, which I did eat, and I think it was the most
delicious bread that ever I did eat, either before or since." Anne could
render herself invisible at will. The fairies would come and dance with
her in the orchard. She had a silver cup, given at her wish by the
fairies to Mary Martyn, when she was about four years of age.

At last, "one John Tregeagle, Esq., who was steward to John Earl of
Radnor, being a justice of peace in Cornwall, sent his warrant for Anne,
and sent her to Bodmin jail, and there kept her a long time." The
fairies had previously given her notice that she would be apprehended.

"She asked them if she should hide herself. They answered no; she should
fear nothing, but go with the constable. So she went with the constable
to the justice, and he sent her to Bodmin jail, and ordered the prison
keeper that she should be kept without victuals, and she was so kept,
and yet she lived, and that without complaining. But poor Anne lay in
jail for a considerable time after; and also Justice Tregeagle, who was
her great prosecutor, kept her in his house some time as a prisoner, and
that without victuals."

We have a curious example of the fairies quoting Scripture. I am not
aware of another instance of this. Anne, when seated with the family was
called three times. "Of all these three calls of the fairies, none heard
them but Anne. After she had been in her chamber some time, she came to
us again, with a Bible in her hand, and tells us that when she came to
the fairies, they said to her, 'What ! has there been some magistrates
and ministers' with you, and dissuaded you from coming any more to us,
saying, we are evil spirits, and that it was all a delusion of the
devil? Pray, desire them to read that place of Scripture, in the First
Epistle of St. John, chap. iv. ver. I, "Dearly beloved, believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God;" and this
place of Scripture was turned down so in the said Bible. I told your
lordship before, Anne could not read."

Anne was at length liberated from confinement. She lived in service near
Padstow, and in process of time married William Warren.

How honestly and simply does Moses conclude his story!

"And now, my lord, if your lordship expects that I should give you an
account when, and upon what occasion, these fairies forsook our Anne, I
must tell your lordship I am ignorant of that. She herself can best
tell, if she would be prevailed upon to do so; and the history of it,
and the rest of the passages of her life, would be very acceptable and
useful to the most curious and inquisitive part of mankind." \[a\]

\[a\] "An Historical Survey of the County of Cornwall." C. S. Gilbert
1817.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bargest, or Spectre Hound](prwe341)
