[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe023)  [Next](prwe025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NURSING A FAIRY.

  
A THRIFTY housewife lived on one of the hills between Zennor Church-town
and St Ives. One night a gentleman came to her cottage, and told her he
had marked her cleanliness and her care that he had a child whom he
desired to have brought up with much tenderness, and he had fixed on
her. She should be very handsomely rewarded for her trouble, and he
showed her a considerable quantity of golden coin. Well, she agreed, and
away she went with the gentleman to fetch this child. When they came to
the side of Zennor hill, the gentleman told the woman he must bindfold
her, and she, good, easy soul, having heard of such things, fancied this
was some rich man's child, and that the residence of its mother was not
to be known, so she gave herself great credit for cunning in quietly
submitting. They walked on some considerable distance. When they stopped
the handkerchief was taken from her eyes, and she found herself in a
magnificent room, with a table spread with the most expensive luxuries,
in the way of game, fruits, and wines. She was told to eat, and she did
so with some awkwardness, and not a little trembling. She was surprised
that so large a feast should have been spread for so small a
party,--only herself and the master. At last, having enjoyed luxuries
such as she never tasted before or since, a silver bell was rung, and a
troop of servants came in, bearing a cot covered with satin, in which
was sleeping the most beautiful babe that human eyes ever gazed on. She
was told this child was to be committed to her charge; she should not
want for anything; but she was to obey certain laws. She was not to
teach the child the Lord's Prayer; she was not to wash it after sundown
she was to bathe it every morning in water, which she would find in a
white ewer placed in the child's room this was not to be touched by any
one but herself, and she was to be careful not to wash her own face in
this water. - In all other respects she was to treat the child as one of
her own children. The woman was blinded again, and the child having been
placed in her arms, away she trudged, guided by the mysterious father.
When out on the road, the bandage was removed from her eyes, and she
found she had a small baby in- her arms, not remarkably good.. -looking,
with very sharp, piercing eyes, and but ordinarily dressed. However, a
bargain is a bargain; so she resolved to make the best of it, and she
presented the babe to her husband, telling him so much of the story as
she thought it prudent to trust him with. For years the child was with
this couple. They never wanted for anything; meat, and even wines, were
provided,--as most people thought,--by wishing for them; clothes,
ready-made, were on the child's bed when required; and the charmed water
was always in the magic ewer. The little boy grew active and strong. He
was remarkably wild, yet very tractable, and he appeared to have a real
regard for his "big mammy," as he called the woman. Sometimes - she
thought the child was mad. He would run, and leap, and scream, as though
he were playing with scores of boys, when no soul was near him. The
woman had never seen the father since the child had been with them; but
ever and anon, money was conveyed to them in some mysterious manner. One
morning, when washing the boy, this good woman, who had often observed
how bright the water made the face of the child, was tempted to try if
it would improve her own beauty. So directing the boy's attention to
some birds singing on a tree outside the window, she splashed some of
the water up into her face. Most of it went into her eye. She closed it
instinctively, and upon opening it, she saw a number of little people
gathered round her and playing with the boy. She said not a word, though
her fear was great; and she continued to see the world of small - people
surrounding the world of ordinary men and women, being with them, but
not of them. She now knew who the boy's playmates were, and she often
wished to speak to the beautiful creatures of the invisible world who
were his real companions; but she was discreet, and kept silence.

Curious robberies had been from time to time committed in St Ives
Market, and although the most careful watch had been kept, the things
disappeared, and no thief detected. One day our good housewife was at
the market, and to her surprise she saw the father of her nursling.
Without ceremony she ran, up to him,--at a moment when he was putting
some choice fruit by stealth into his pocket,--and spoke to him. "So,
thou seest me, dost thou?" "To be sure I do, and know 'ee too," replied
the woman. "Shut this eye," putting his finger on her left eye. "Canst
see me now?" "Yes, I tell 'ee, and know 'ee too," again said the woman.

" Water for elf; not water for self;  
Yon've lost your eye, your child, and yourself,"

said the gentleman. From that hour she was blind in the right eye. When
she got home the boy was gone. She grieved sadly, but she never saw him
more, and this once happy couple became poor and wretched.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Changelings](prwe025)
