[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe070)  [Next](prwe072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE DANCING STONES, THE HURLERS, &c.

  
IN many parts of Cornwall we find, more or less perfect, circles of
stones, which the learned ascribe to the Druids. Tradition, and the
common people, who have faith in all that their fathers have taught
them, tell us another tale. These stones are everlasting marks of the
Divine displeasure, being maidens or men, who were changed into stone
for some wicked profanation of the Sabbath-day. These monuments of
impiety are scattered over the county; they are to be found, indeed, to
the extremity of Old Cornwall, many of those circles being upon
Dartmoor. It is not necessary to name them all. Every purpose will be
served if the tourist is directed to those which lie more directly in
the route which is usually prescribed. In the parish of Burian are the
"*Dawns Myin*" or Mên--the dancing stones--commonly called "The Merry
Maidens;" and near them are two granite pillars, named the "Pipers." One
Sabbath evening some of the thought. less maidens of the neighbouring
village, instead of attending vespers, strayed into the fields, and two
evil spirits, assuming the guise of pipers, began to play some dance
tunes. The young people yielded to the temptation; and, forgetting the
holy day, commenced dancing. The excitement increased with the exercise,
and soon the music and the dance became extremely wild; when, lo a flash
of lightning from the clear sky transfixed them all, the tempters and
the tempted, and there in stone they stand.

The celebrated circle of nineteen stones,--which is seen on the road to
the Land's End,--known as the "Boscawen un Circle," is another example.
The "Nine Maids," or the "Virgin Sisters," in Stithians, and other "Nine
Maids," or, as called in Cornish, Naw-whoors, in St Colomb-Major parish,
should also be seen, in the hope of impressing the moral lesson they
convey yet more strongly on the mind. \[a\]

The three circles, which are seen on the moors not far from the
Cheesewring, in the parish of St Cleer, are also notable examples of the
punishment of Sabbath-breaking. These are called the Hurlers," and they
preserve the position in which the several parties stood in the full
excitement of the game of hurling, when, for the crime of profaning the
Sabbath, they were changed into stone. \[b\]

\[a\] The following quotations are front Davies Gilbert. It must not be
forgotten that this gentleman was President of the Royal Society, and
therefore a sceptic in local tradutionary story:-- -

"On the south-west part of the parish of Stithians, towards Gwendron,
are still to be seen nine Stones set perpendicularly erect in the earth,
in a direct manner, about ten feet apart, called the Nine Maids,
probably set up there in memory of nine religious sisters or nuns in
that place before the fifth century; not women turned into stone, as the
English name implies, and as the country people thereabout will tell
you"

"The Nine Maids--in Cornish, Naw-voz, *alias* the nine sisters--in
Cornish, Nawwhoors--which very name informs us that they were sepulchral
stones, erected in memory either of suns natural or spiritual Sisters of
some religious house, and not so many maids turned into stones for
dancing on the Sabbath-day, as the country people will tell you. Those
stones are set in order by a line, as is such another monument, also
called the Nine Maids, in Gwendron, by the highway, about twenty-five
feet distance Irons each other."

\[b\] "With respect to the stones called the 'Hurlers' being once men, I
will say with Hals, 'Did hut the ball which these Hurlers used when
flesh and blood appear directly over them, immovably pendant in the air,
one might he apt to credit some little of the tale;' but as this is not
the case, I must add icy belief of their being erected by the

Druids for some purpose or other -- probably a court of justice; bog
subsequent to which erection, however, they may have served as a goal
for hurl-players."--*Topographical and Historical Sketches of the
Boroughs of East and West Love*, by Thomas Bond.

May we not address Mr Bond, "O ye of little faith!" A very small amount
of which would have found the ball, fixed as a boulder of granite, not
as it passed through the air, but as it rolled along the ground.

That an ancient priesthood, endeavouring to reach the minds of an
ignorant people through their sensations, should endeavour to persuade
the old Celtic population that God's vengeance had fallen on the
Sabbath-breaker, is not to be wondered at. Up to a very recent period,
hurling matches usually came off on the Sunday--See "Hurling," in the
chapter on Cornish Customs

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Nine Maids, or Virgin Sisters](prwe072)
