[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe237)  [Next](prwe239) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

SHAM MAYORS.

II.--THE MAYOR OF ST GERMANS.

One of the first objects that attracts attention, on entering the
village of St Germans is the large walnut-tree, at the foot of what is
called Nut-Tree Hill. In the early part of the present century there was
a very ancient dwelling a few yards south-east of this tree, which was
supposed to have been the residence of some ecclesiastic of former
times. Many a gay May-fair has been witnessed by the old tree; in the
morning of the 28th of the month, splendid fat cattle, from some of the
largest and best farms in the county, quietly chewed the cud around its
trunk; in the afternoon the basket-swing dangled from its branches,
filled with merry laughing boys and girls from every part of the parish.
On the following day, the mock mayor, who had been chosen with many
formalities, remarkable only for their rude and rough nature, starting
from some "bush-house," where he had been supping too freely of the fair
ale, was mounted on wain or cart, and drawn around it, to claim his
pretended jurisdiction over the ancient borough, until his successor was
chosen at the following fair. Leaving the old nut-tree, which is a real
ornament to the town, we pass by a stream of water running into a large
trough, in which many a country lad has been drenched for daring to
enter the town on the 29th of May without the leaf or branch of oak in
his hat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mayor of Halgaver Moor](prwe239)
