17c. The Account Of The Appearance Of Cuchulain

Early the next morning Cuchulain came to observe the host and to display
his comely, beautiful form to the matrons and dames and girls and
maidens and poets and men of art, for he did not consider it an honour
nor becoming, the wild, proud shape of magic which had been manifested
to them the night before. It was for that then that he came to exhibit
his comely, beautiful form on that day.

Truly fair was the youth that came there to display his form to the
hosts, Cuchulain, to wit son of Sualtaim. Three heads of hair he wore;
brown at the skin, blood-red in the middle, a golden-yellow crown what
thatched it. Beautiful was the arrangement of the hair, with three coils
of hair wound round the nape of his neck, so that like to a strand of
thread of gold was each thread-like, loose-flowing, deep-golden,
magnificent, long-tressed, splendid, beauteous-hued hair as it fell down
over his shoulders. A hundred bright-purple windings of gold-flaming red
gold at his neck.

A hundred salmon-coloured (?) cords strung with carbuncles as a covering
round his head. Four spots on either of his two cheeks, even a yellow
spot, and a green spot, and a blue spot, and a purple spot. Seven jewels
of the eye's brilliance was either of his kingly eyes. Seven toes to
either of his two feet. Seven fingers to either of his two hands, with
the clutch of hawk's claw, with the grip of hedgehog's talon in every
separate one of them.

He also put on him that day his fair-day dress. To this apparel about
him belonged, namely, a beautiful, well-fitting, purple, fringed,
five-folded mantle. A white brooch of silvered bronze or of white silver
incrusted with burnished gold over his fair white breast, as if it were
a full-fulgent lantern that eyes of men could not behold for its
resplendence and crystal shining. A striped chest-jacket of silk on his
skin, fairly adorned with borders and braidings and trimmings of gold
and silver and silvered bronze; it reached to the upper hem of his dark,
brown-red warlike breeches of royal silk.

A magnificent, brown-purple buckler he bore, with five wheels of gold on
it, with a rim of pure white silver around it. A gold-hilted hammered
sword at his left side. A long grey-edged spear together with a
trenchant bye-spear for defence, with thongs for throwing and with
rivets of whitened bronze, alongside him in the chariot. Nine heads he
bore in one of his hands and ten in the other, and these he brandished
before the hosts in token of his prowess and cunning. Medb hid her face
beneath a shelter of shields lest Cuchulain should cast at her that day.

Then it was that the maidens of Connacht besought the men of Erin to
lift them up on the flat of the shields above the warriors' shoulders,
to behold the aspect of Cuchulain. For they marvelled at the beautiful,
comely appearance he showed them that day compared with the low,
arrogant shape of magic in which they had seen him the night before.
