1\. Here Beginneth The Cualnge Cattle-raid

ONCE of a time, that Ailill and Medb had spread their royal bed in
Cruachan, the stronghold of Connacht, such was the pillow-talk that
befell betwixt them:

Quoth Ailill: "True is the saying, lady, 'She is a well-off woman that
is a rich man's wife.'" "Aye,that she is," answered the wife; "but
wherefore opin'st thou so?" "For this," Ailill replied,"that thou art
this day better off than the day that first I took thee." Then answered
Medb: "As well-off was I before I ever saw thee." "It was a wealth,
forsooth, we never heard nor knew of," Ailill said; "but a woman's
wealth was all thou hadst, and foes from lands next thine were used to
carry off the spoil and booty that they took from thee."

"Not so was I," quoth Medb; "the High King of Erin himself was my sire,
Eocho Fedlech ('the Enduring') son of Finn, by name, who was son of
Findoman, son of Finden, son of Findguin, son of Rogen Ruad ('the Red'),
son of Rigen, son of Blathacht, son of Beothacht, son of Enna Agnech,
son of Oengus Turbech. Of daughters, had he six: Derbriu, Ethne and Ele,
Clothru, Mugain and Medb, myself, that was the noblest and seemliest of
them.

'Twas I was the goodliest of them in bounty and gift-giving, in riches
and treasures. 'Twas I was best of them in battle and strife and combat.
'Twas I that had fifteen hundred royal mercenaries of the sons of aliens
exiled from their own land, and as many more of the sons of freemen of
the land. And there were ten men with every one of these hirelings, and
nine men with every hireling, and eight men with every hireling, and
seven men with every hireling, and six men with every hireling, and five
men with every hireling, and four men with every hireling, and three men
with every hireling, and two men with every hireling, and one hireling
with every hireling. These were as a standing household-guard,"
continued Medb; " hence hath my father bestowed one of the five
provinces of Erin upon me, even the province of Cruachan; wherefore
'Medb of Cruachan ' am I called.

Men came from Finn son of Ross Ruad ('the Red'), king of Leinster, to
seek me for a wife, and I refused him; and from Carbre Niafer ('the
Champion') son of Ross Ruad ('the Red'), king of Temair, to woo me, and
I refused him; and they came from Conchobar son of Fachtna Fathach ('the
Mighty'), king of Ulster, and I refused him in like wise. They came from
Eocho Bec ('the Small'), and I went not; for 'tis I that exacted a
singular bride-gift, such as no woman before me had ever required of a
man of the men of Erin, namely, a husband without avarice, without
jealousy, without fear.

For should he be mean, the man with whom I should live, we were
ill-matched together, inasmuch as I am great in largess and gift-giving,
and it would be a disgrace for my husband if I should be better at
spending than he, and for it to be said that I was superior in wealth
and treasures to trim, while no disgrace would it be were one as great
as the other. Were my husband a coward,'twere as unfit for us to be
mated, for I by myself and alone break battles and fights and combats,
and 'twould be a reproach for my husband should his wife be more full of
life than himself, and no reproach our being equally bold. Should he be
jealous, the husband with whom I should live, that too would not suit
me, for there never was a time that I had not my paramour.

Howbeit, such a husband have I found, namely in thee thyself, Ailill son
of Ross Ruad ('the Red') of Leinster. Thou wast not churlish; thou wast
not jealous; thou wast not a sluggard. It was I plighted thee, and gave
purchase-price to thee, which of right belongs to the bride-- of
clothing, namely, the raiment of twelve men, a chariot worth thrice
seven bondmaids, the breadth of thy face of red gold, the weight of thy
left forearm of silvered bronze. Whoso brings shame and sorrow and
madness upon thee, no claim for compensation nor satisfaction hast thou
therefor that I myself have not, but it is to me the compensation
belongs," said Medb, "for a man dependent upon a woman's maintenance is
what thou art."

"Nay, not such was my state," said Ailill; "but two brothers had I; one
of them over Temair, the other over Leinster; namely, Finn, over
Leinster, and Carbre, over Temair. I left the kingship to them because
they were older but not superior to me in largess and bounty. Nor heard
I of province in Erin under woman's keeping but this province alone. And
for this I came and assumed the kingship here as my mother's successor;
for Mata of Muresc, daughter of Magach of Connacht, was my mother. And
who could there be for me to have as my queen better than thyself,
being, as thou wert, daughter of the High King of Erin?" "Yet so it is,"
pursued Medb, "my fortune is greater than thine." "I marvel at that,"
Ailill made answer, "for there is none that hath greater treasures and
riches and wealth than I: yea, to my knowledge there is not."
