8e. The Killing Of Uala

Early on the morrow the hosts continued their way to Glaiss Cruinn
('Cronn's Stream'). And they attempted the stream and failed to cross
it. And Cluain Carpat ('Chariot-meadow') is the name of the first place
where they reached it. This is why Cluain Carpat is the name of that
place, because of the hundred chariots which the river carried away from
them to the sea.

Medb ordered her people that one of the warriors should go try the
river. And on the morrow there arose a great, stout, wonderful warrior
of the particular people of Medb and Ailill, Uala by name, and he took
on his back a massy rock, to the end that Glaiss Cruinn might not carry
him back. And he went to essay the stream, and the stream threw him back
dead, lifeless, with his stone on his back and so he was drowned. Medb
ordered' that he be lifted out of the river and his grave dug and his
stone raised over his grave, so that it is thence Lia Ualann ('Uala's
Stone') on the road near the stream in the land of Cualnge.

Cuchulain clung close to the hosts that day provoking them to encounter
and combat. And he slew a hundred of their armed, kinglike warriors
around Roen and Roi, the two chroniclers of the TÃ¡in.

Medb called upon her people to go meet Cuchulain in encounter and combat
for the sake of the hosts. "It will not be I," and "It will not be I,"
spake each and every one from his place. "No caitiff is due from my
people. Even though one should be due, it is not I would go to oppose
Cuchulain, for no easy thing is it to do battle with him."

The hosts kept their way along the river, being unable to cross it, till
they reached the place where the river rises out of the mountains, and,
had they wished it, they would have gone between the river and the
mountain, but Medb would not allow it, so they had to dig and hollow out
the mountain before her in order that their trace might remain there
forever and that it might be for a shame and reproach to Ulster. And
Bernais ('the Gap') of the Foray of Cualnge is another name for the
place ever since, for it is through it the drove afterwards passed.

The warriors of the four grand provinces of Erin pitched camp and took
quarters that night at Belat Aileain ('the Island's Crossway'). Belat
Aileain was its name up to then, but Glenn Tail ('Glen of Shedding') is
henceforth its name because of the abundance of curds and of milk and of
new warm milk which the droves of cattle and the flocks yielded there
that night for the men of Erin. And Liasa Liac ('Stone Sheds') is
another name for it to this day, and it is for this it bears that name,
for it is there that the men of Erin raised cattle-stalls and byres for
their herds and droves

The four of the five grand provinces of Erin took up the march until
they reached the Sechair in the west on the morrow. Sechair was the name
of the river hitherto; Glaiss Gatlaig ('Osier-water') is its name
henceforward. Now this is the reason it had that name, for it was in
osiers and ropes that the men of Erin brought their flocks and droves
over across it, and the entire host let the osiers and ropes drift with
the stream after crossing. Hence the name, Glaiss Gatlaig.
