28\. The Battle of The Bulls

As regards Medb, it is related here: She gathered the men of Erin and
led them forth to Cruachan to behold the battle of the bulls. As regards
the Brown Bull of Cualnge, it is now recounted in this place: When he
saw the beautiful, strange land, he sent forth his three bellowing calls
aloud. And Finnbennach Ai ('the Whitehorned of Ai') heard him. Now no
male beast durst send forth a low that was louder than a moo in compare
with him within the four fords of all Ai, Ath Moga and Ath Coltna, Ath
Slissen and Ath Bercha. And he lifted his head and he hastened to
Cruachan to look for the Brown Bull of Cualnge.

It was then the men of Erin debated who would be fitted to witness the
fight of the bulls. They all agreed that it should be Bricriu son of
Carbad that were fitted for that office. For, a year before this tale of
the Cualnge Cattle-raid, Bricriu had gone from the one province into the
other to make a request of Fergus. And Fergus had retained him with him
waiting for his treasures and goods. And a quarrel arose between him and
Fergus at a game of chess. And he spake evil words to Fergus. Fergus
smote him with his fist and with the chessman that was in his hand, so
that he crave the chessman into his head and broke a bone in his head.
Whilst the men of Erin were on the foray of the Tain, all that time
Bricriu was being cured at Cruachan. And the day they returned from the
expedition was the day Bricriu rose. And this is why they selected
Bricriu, for that Bricriu was no fairer to his friend than to his foe.
And he was brought before the men of Erin to a gap whence to view the
bulls.

Each of the bulls sighted the other and there was a pawing and digging
up of the ground in their frenzy there, and they tossed the earth over
them. They threw up the earth over their withers and shoulders, and
their eyes blazed red in their heads like firm balls of fire. Their
cheeks and their nostrils swelled like smith's bellows in a forge. And
each of them gave a resounding, deadly blow to the other. Each of them
began to hole and to gore, to endeavour to slaughter and demolish the
other. Then the Whitehorned of Ai visited his wrath upon the Brown Bull
of Cualnge for the evil of his ways and his doings, and he crave a horn
into his side and visited his angry rage upon him. Then they directed
their headlong course to where Bricriu was, so that the hoofs of the
bulls drove him a man's cubit deep into the ground after his
destruction. Hence, this is the Tragical Death of Bricriu son of Carbad.

Cormac Conlongas son of Conchobar saw that, and he laid hold of a
spearshaft that filled his grasp, and gave three blows to the Brown Bull
of Cualnge from ear to tail, so that it broke on his thick hide from ear
to rump. " No wonderful, lasting treasure was this precious prize for
us," said Cormac, "that cannot defend himself against a stirk of his own
age!" The Brown Bull of Cualnge heard this-- for he had human
understanding-- and he turned upon the Whitehorned. Thereupon he he
rushed at him, so that they continued to strike at each other for a long
while and great space of time, till night fell on the men of Erin. And
when night had fallen, all that the men of Erin could hear was the
bellowing and roaring. That night the bulls coursed over the greater
part of all Erin.
