17b. The Scythed Chariot

Thereupon the charioteer arose and donned his yeoman's suit for
charioteering. Of this yeoman's suit for charioteering, this is what he
put on him: His soft kirtle of skin which was light and airy, which was
smooth and sparkling, which was stitched and of buckskin, so that it
hindered not the movements of his arms outside. Over that he put outside
an over-mantle of raven's feathers, which Simon Magus had made as a gift
for Darius Nero, king of the Romans. Darius bestowed it upon Conchobar;
Conchobar gave it to Cuchulain; Cuchulain presented it to his
charioteer.

The same charioteer took the crested, plated, four-bordered battle-cap
with variety of every colour and every figure, reaching down over the
middle of his shoulders behind. It was an adornment for him and not an
encumbrance. With his hand he placed the red-yellow frontlet-- like one
red-golden strip of glowing gold smelted over the edge of an anvil-- on
his forehead as a token of charioteering, to distinguish him from his
master. He opened the hobbles that fastened his steeds and grasped his
gold-mounted goad in his right hand. In his left hand he seized the
lines, that is, the bridle-reins of his horses for restraining his
steeds before performing his charioteering.

He next threw the iron-sheathed gold-bedecked coats of mail over his
horses, so that they covered them from forehead to forehand. The chariot
was studded with dartlets, lancelets, spearlets, and hardened spits, so
that every portion of the frame bristled with points in that chariot and
every corner and end and point and face of that chariot was a passage of
laceration.

Then cast he a spell of concealment over his horses and over his fellow,
so that they were not visible to any one in the camp, while all in the
camp were visible to them. Well indeed was it that he cast that charm,
for on that day the charioteer had to perform the three gifts of
charioteership, namely leaping over a cleft in the ranks, unerring
driving, and the handling of the goad.

Then arose the champion and battle-warrior and the instrument of Badb's
corpse-fold among the men of the earth, Cuchulain son of Sualtaim, and
he donned his war-dress of battle and fight and combat. To that wardress
of battle and fight and combat which he put about him belonged seven and
twenty waxed, board-like, equally close skin-tunics which were girded by
cords and swathings and ropes on his fair skin, to the end that his wit
and reason might not become deranged when the violence of his nature
came over him.

Over him he put on the outside his battle-girdle of a champion, of
tough, tanned, stout leather cut from the forequarters of seven ox-hides
of yearlings, so that it reached from the slender parts of his waist to
the stout part under his arm-pits. He was used to wear it to keep off
spears and points and irons and lances and arrows. For in like manner
they would bound back from it as if from stone or rock or horn they
rebounded. Then he took his silken, glossy trews with their band of
spotted pale-gold against the soft lower parts of his loins. His brown,
well-sewn kilt of brown leather from the shoulders of four ox-hides of
yearlings with his battle-girdle of cow-skins, he put underneath over
the shining silken trews on the outside.

Then the king-warrior seized his battle-arms of battle and fight and
combat. This is what belonged to those warlike weapons of battle: He
took his eight little swords together with the bright-faced, tusk-hilted
straight-sword; he took his eight little spears besides his five-pronged
spear, he took his eight little darts together with his javelin with its
walrus-tooth ornaments; he took his eight little shafts along with his
play-staff; he took his eight shields for feats together with his
dark-red bent-shield, whereon a show-boar could lie in its hollow boss,
with its very sharp razor-like, keen-cutting, hard iron rim all around
it, so that it would cut a hair against the stream because of its
sharpness and fineness and keenness. When the young warrior would
perform the edge-feat withal, it was the same whether he cut with his
shield or his spear or his sword.

Next he put round his head his crested war-helm of battle and fight and
combat, whereout was uttered the cry of an hundred young warriors with
the long-drawn wail from each of its angles and corners. For this was
the way that the fiends, the goblins and the sprites of the glens and
the demons of the air screamed before and above and around him, what
time he went forth for the shedding of blood of heroes and champions,
exulting in the mighty deeds wrought underneath it.

His veil of concealment was thrown over him then, of raiment from Tir
Tairngirè ('the Land of Promise') which had been brought to him as a
gift by Manannan son of Ler ('the Sea') from the king of Tir na Sorcha
('the Land of Light.')

Then took place the first twisting-fit and rage of the royal hero
Cuchulain, so that he made a terrible, many-shaped, wonderful, unheard
of thing of himself. His flesh trembled about him like a pole against
the torrent or like a bulrush against the stream, every member and every
joint and every point and every knuckle of him from crown to ground. He
made a mad whirling-feat of his body within his hide. His feet and his
shins and his knees slid so that they came behind him. His heels and his
calves and his hams shifted so that they passed to the front. The
muscles of his calves moved so that they came to the front of his shins,
so that each huge knot was the size of a soldier's balled fist. He
stretched the sinews of his head so that they stood out on the nape of
his neck, hill-like lumps, huge, incalculable, vast, immeasurable and as
large as the head of a month-old child.

He next made a ruddy bowl of his face and his countenance. He gulped
down one eye into his head so that it would be hard work if a wild crane
succeeded in drawing it out on to the middle of his cheek from the rear
of his skull. Its mate sprang forth till it came out on his cheek. His
mouth was distorted monstrously. He drew the cheek from the jaw-bone so
that the interior of his throat was to be seen. His lungs and his lights
stood out so that they fluttered in his mouth and his gullet. He struck
a mad lion's blow with the upper jaw on its fellow so that as large as a
wether's fleece of a three year old was each red, fiery flake which his
teeth forced into his mouth from his gullet.

There was heard the loud clap of his heart against his breast like the
yelp of a howling bloodhound or like a lion going among bears. There
were seen the torches of the Badb, and the rain clouds of poison, and
the sparks of glowing-red fire, blazing and flashing in hazes and mists
over his head with the seething of the truly wild wrath that rose up
above him. His hair bristled all over his head like branches of a
redthorn thrust into a gap in a great hedge. Had a king's apple-tree
laden with royal fruit been shaken around him, scarce an apple of them
all would have passed over him to the ground, but rather would an apple
have stayed stuck on each single hair there, for the twisting of the
anger which met it as it rose from his hair above him.

The Lon Laith ('Champion's Light') stood out of his forehead, so that it
was as long and as thick as a warrior's whetstone. As high, as thick, as
strong, as steady, as long as the sail-tree of some huge prime ship was
the straight spout of dark blood which arose right on high from the very
ridge-pole of his crown, so that a black fog of witchery was made
thereof like to the smoke from a king's hostel what time the king comes
to be ministered to at nightfall of a winter's day.

When now this contortion had been completed in Cuchulain, then it was
that the hero of valour sprang into his scythed war-chariot, with its
iron sickles, its thin blades, its hooks and its hard spikes, with its
hero's fore-prongs, with its opening fixtures, with its stinging nails
that were fastened to the poles and thongs and bows and lines of the
chariot.

It was then he delivered over his chariot the thunder-feat of a hundred
and the thunder-feat of two hundred and the thunder-feat of three
hundred and the thunder-feat of four hundred, and he ceased at the
thunder-feat of five hundred. For he did not deem it too much that such
a great number should fall by his hand at his first onset and first
battle-assault on four of the five grand provinces of Erin. In such wise
fared he forth for to seek his foes, and he drove his chariot in a wide
circuit round about the hosts of the four grand provinces of Erin. And
he led his chariot a heavy way.

The chariot's iron wheels sank into the ground so that the earth dug up
by the iron wheels might have served for a dûn and a fortress, so did
the chariot's iron wheels cut into the ground. For in like manner the
clods and boulders and rocks and the clumps and the shingle of the earth
arose up outside on a height with the iron wheels. It was for this cause
he made this circling hedge of the Badb round about the hosts of four of
the five grand provinces of Erin, that they might not escape him nor get
away before he would come on them to press a reprisal for the boys. And
he went into the midst of the ranks and mowed down huge walls of the
corpses of his foes and enemies and opponents in a great circle round
about the host.

And he made the onslaught of a foe amongst foes upon them, so that they
fell sole to sole, neck to neck, such was the closeness of their bodies.
Thrice again in this manner he circled them round, so that he left them
in beds of six in a great ring around them, even the soles of three to
the backs of three men in a circle around the camp. Hence Sessrech
Bresligè ('Great sixfold Slaughter') is the name of this event on the
Tain, and it is one of the three unreckonable events of the Tain, which
were, to wit, Sessrech Bresligè, Immsligè Glennamnach ('the Mutual
Slaying at Glennamain') and the battle of Garech and Ilgarech; only that
here, hound and horse and man were one to him.

What others say is that Lug son of Ethliu fought on Cuchulain's side at
the Sessrech Bresligè.

Their number is not known and it cannot be reckoned how many fell there
of the rabble rout, but only their chiefs have been counted. Here below
are their names to wit:

The two Crnad, two Calad, two Cir, two Ciar, two Ecell, three Cromm,
three Cur, three Combirgè, four Feochar four Furachar, four Cassè, four
Fota, five Caur, five Cerman, five Coblach, six Saxan, six Duach, six
Darè, \[six Dunchadh, six Daimiach,\] seven Rochad, seven Ronan, seven
Rurthech, eight Rochlad, eight Rochtad, eight Rindach, eight Corprè,
eight Malach, nine Daigith, nine Darè, nine Damach, ten Fiach, ten
Fiacach, ten Fedlimid.

Ten and six-score kings, leaders and men of the land, Cuchulain laid low
in the great slaughter on the Plain of Murthemne, besides a countless
horde of dogs and horses and women and boys and children and common
folk; for there escaped not a third man of the men of Erin without a
lump or without having half his skull or an eye hurt, or without an
enduring mark for the course of his life.
