7b. (The Taking Of Arms By Cuchulain And) The Slaying Of The Three Sons
Of Necht Scen√® Is Now Told Here

"The little lad performed a third deed in the following year," said
Fiachu son of Firaba." What deed performed he?" asked Ailill.

"Cathba the druid was with his son, namely Conchobar son of Ness,
imparting learning to his pupils in the north-east of Emain, and eight
eager pupils in the class of druidic cunning were with him. That is the
number that Cathba instructed. One of them questioned his teacher, what
fortune and presage might there be for the day they were in, whether it
was good or whether it was ill. Then spake Cathba: "The little boy that
takes arms-- this day shall be splendid and renowned for deeds of arms
above the youths of Erin land the tales of his high deeds shall be told
forever, but he shall be short-lived and fleeting."

Cuchulain overheard what he said, though far off at his play-feats
south-west of Emain; and he threw away all his play-things and hastened
to Conchobar's sleep-room to ask for arms. "All good attend thee, O king
of the Fene!" cried the little lad. "This greeting is the speech of one
soliciting something of some one. What wouldst thou, lad?" said
Conchobar. "To take arms," the lad made answer. "Who hath advised thee,
little boy?" asked Conchobar. "Cathba the druid," said the lad. "He
would not deceive thee, little boy," said Conchobar.

Conchobar gave him two spears and a sword and a shield. The little boy
shook and brandished the arms in the middle of the house so that he made
small pieces and fragments of them. Conchobar gave him two other spears
and a shield and a sword. He shook and brandished, flourished and poised
them, so that he shivered them into small pieces and fragments. There
where were the fourteen a suits of arms which Conchobar had in Emain, in
reserve in case of breaking of weapons or for equipping the youths and
the boys-- to the end that whatever boy assumed arms, it might be
Conchobar that gave him the equipment of battle, and the victory of
cunning would be his thenceforward-- even so, this little boy made
splinters and fragments of them all.

"Truly these arms here are not good, O Conchobar my master," the
stripling cried. "Herefrom cometh not what is worthy of me." Conchobar
gave him his own two spears and his shield and his sword. He shook and
he brandished, he bent and he poised them so that tip touched butt, and
he broke not the arms and they bore up against him, and he saluted the
king whose arms they were. "Truly, these arms are good," said the little
boy; "they are suited to me. Hail to the king whose arms and equipment
these are. Hail to the land whereout he is come!''

"Then Cathba the druid chanced to come into the tent, and what he said
was, "Hath he yonder taken arms?" Cathba asked. "Aye, then, it must be,"
Conchobar answered. "Not by his mother's son would I wish them to be
taken this day," said Cathba. "How so? Was it not thyself advised him?"
Conchobar asked. "Not I, in faith," replied Cathba. "What mean'st thou,
bewitched elf-man?" cried Conchobar to Cuchulain. "Is it a lie thou hast
told us?" "But be not wroth thereat, O my master Conchobar," said the
little boy. "No lie have I told; for yet is it he that advised me, when
he taught his other pupils this morning. For his pupil asked him what
luck might lie in the day, and he said: The youth that took arms on this
day would be illustrious and famous, except that he would be fleeting
and short-lived." "That I avow to be true," spake Cathba. "Good indeed
is the day, glorious and renowned shalt thou be, the one that taketh
arms, yet passing and short lived!" "Noble the gift! " cried Cuchulain."
Little it recks me, though I should be but one day and one night in the
world, if only the fame of me and of my deeds live after me!"

"Another day one of them asked of the druids for what that day would be
propitious. "The one that mounts a chariot to-day," Cathba answered,"
his name will be renowned over Erin for ever."

"He mounted the chariot. He put his hands between the two poles of the
chariot, and the first chariot he mounted withal he shook and tossed
about him till he reduced it to splinters and fragments. He mounted the
second chariot, so that he made small pieces and fragments of it in like
manner. Further he made pieces of the third chariot. There where were
the seventeen a chariots which Conchobar kept for the boy-troop and
youths in Emain, the lad made small pieces and fragments of them and
they did not withstand him. "These chariots here are not good, O my
master Conchobar," said the little boy; "my merit cometh not from them."

"Where is Ibar son of Riangabair?" asked Conchobar. "Here, in sooth, am
I," Ibar answered." Take with thee mine own two steeds for him yonder,
and yoke my chariot." Thereupon the charioteer took the horses and yoked
the chariot. Then the little boy mounted the chariot. He shook the
chariot about him, and it withstood him, and he broke it not. "Truly
this chariot is good," cried the lad, "and this chariot is suited to
me."

"Prithee, little boy," said Ibar, "come out of the chariot now and let
the horses out on their pasture." "It is yet too soon, O Ibar," the lad
answered. "Only let us go on a circuit of Emain to-day and thou shalt
have a reward therefor, to-day being my first day of taking arms, to the
end that it be a victory of cunning for me."

"Thrice they made the circuit of Emain. "Leave the horses now to their
grazing, O little boy," said Ibar. "It is yet too soon, O Ibar," the
little lad answered; "let us keep on, that the boys may give me a
blessing to-day the first day of my taking arms." They kept their course
to the place where the boys were. "Is it arms he yonder has taken?" each
one asked. "Of a truth, are they." "May it be for victory, for first
wounding and triumph. But we deem it too soon for thee to take arms,
because thou departest from us at the game-feats." "By no means will I
leave ye, but for luck I took arms this day."

"Now, little boy, leave the horses to their grazing," said Ibar. "It is
still too soon for that, O Ibar," the lad answered. "And this great road
winding by us, what way leads it?" the lad asked." What is that to
thee?" Ibar answered. "But thou art a pleasant wight, I bow, little
lad," quoth Ibar. "I wish, fellow, to inquire about the high-road of the
province, what stretch it goes?" "To Ath na Foraire ('the Ford of
Watching') in Sliab Fuait it goes," Ibar answered. "Wherefore is it
called 'the Ford of Watching,' knowest thou?"

"Yea, I know it well," Ibar made answer. "A stout warrior of Ulster is
on watch and on guard there every day, so that there come no strange
youths into Ulster to challenge them to battle, and he is a champion to
give battle in behalf of the whole province. Likewise if men of song
leave the Ulstermen and the province in dudgeon, he is there to soothe
them by proffering treasures and valuables, and so to save the honour of
the province. Again, if men of song enter the land, he is the man that
is their surety that they win the favour of Conchobar, so that songs and
lays made for him will be the first to be sung after their arrival in
Emain." "Knowest thou who is at the ford to-day?" "Yea, I know," Ibar
answered; " Conall Cernach (' the Triumphant'), the heroic, warlike son
of Amargin, royal champion of Erin," Ibar answered." Thither guide us,
fellow, that so we reach the ford."

"Onwards they drove into sight of the ford where was Conall. "Are those
arms he yonder has taken?" asked Conall. "Of a truth, are they," Ibar
made answer. "May it be for victory and for triumph and first wounding,"
said Conall; "but we think it too soon for thee to take arms, because
thou art not yet capable of deeds. Were it surety he needed, he that
should come hither," he continued, "so wouldst thou furnish a perfect
warrant amongst the Ulstermen, and the nobles of the province would rise
up to support thee in the contest." "What cost thou here, O Conall my
master?" asked the lad. "Watch and ward of the province, lad, I keep
here," Conall made answer.

"Do thou go home now, O master Conall," said the lad, "and leave me the
watch and guard of the province to keep here." "Say not so, little son,"
replied Conall; "thou art not yet able to cope with a goodly warrior."
"Then, will I keep on to the south," said the little boy, "to Fertas
('the Bank') of Loch Echtrann for a while; champions are wont to take
stand there; perchance I may redden my hands on friend or on foe this
day." "I will go, little boy," said Conall, "to save thee, that thou go
not alone into peril on the border." "Not so," said the lad. "But I will
go," said Conall; "for the men of Ulster will blame me for leaving thee
to go alone on the border."

"Conall's horses were caught for him and his chariot was yoked and he
set out to protect the little boy. When Conall came up abreast of him,
Cuchulain felt certain that, even though a chance came to him, Conall
would not permit him to use it. He picked up a hand-stone from the
ground which was the full of his grasp. He hurled it from him from his
sling the length of a stone-shot at the yoke of Conall's chariot, so
that he broke the chariot-collar in two and thereby Conall fell to the
ground, so that the nape of his neck went out from his shoulder." What
have we here, boy?" asked Conall; "why threwest thou the stone?" "It is
I threw it to see if my cast be straight, or how I cast at all, or if I
have the stuff of a warrior in me." "A bane on thy cast and a bane on
thyself as well. E'en though thou leavest thy head this time with thine
enemies, I will go no further to protect thee." "'Twas what I craved of
thee," answered he; "for it is geis amongst you men of Ulster to
proceed, after a mishap has befallen your chariots." Conall turned back
northwards again to the Ford of Watching.

"As for the little boy, he fared southwards to Fertas Locha Echtrann. He
remained there till the end of the day and they found no one there
before them. "If we dared tell thee, little boy," spoke Ibar, "it were
time for us to return to Emain now; for dealing and carving and
dispensing of food is long since begun in Emain, and there is a place
assigned for thee there. Every day it is appointed thee to sit between
Conchobar's feet, while for me there is naught but to tarry among the
hostlers and tumblers of Conchobar's household. For that reason,
methinks it is time to have a scramble a among them." "Fetch then the
horses for us."

The charioteer fetched the horses and the lad mounted the chariot. "But,
O Ibar, what hill is that there now, the hill to the north?" the lad
asked." Now, that is Sliab Moduirn," Ibar answered. "Let us go and get
there," siad Cuchulain. Then they go on till they reach it. When they
reached the mountain, Cuchulain asked, "And what is that white cairn
yonder on the height of the mountain?" "And that is Finncharn ('the
White Cairn') of Sliab Moduirn," Ibar answered. "But yonder cairn is
beautiful," exclaimed the lad. "It surely is beautiful," Ibar answered.
"Lead on, fellow, till we reach yonder cairn." "Well, but thou art both
a pleasant and tedious inquisitor, I see," exclaimed Ibar; " but this is
my first journey and my first time with thee. It shall be my last time
till the very day of doom, if once I get back to Emain."

"Howbeit they went to the top of the hill. "It is pleasant here, O
Ibar," the little boy exclaimed. "Point out to me Ulster on every side,
for I am no wise acquainted with the land of my master Conchobar." The
horseman pointed him out Ulster all around him. He pointed him out the
hills and the fields and the mounts of the province on every side. He
pointed him out the plains and the d√ªns and the strongholds of the
province. "'Tis a goodly sight, O Ibar," exclaimed the little lad. "What
is that indented, angular, bordered and glenny plain to the south of
us?" "Mag Breg," replied Ibar. "Tell thou to me the buildings and forts
of that plain." The gilla taught him the name of every chief d√ªn between
Temair and Cenannas, Temair and Taltiu, Cletech and Cnogba and Brug
('the Fort') of Mac Oc. He pointed out to him then the d√ªn of the three
sons of Necht Scen√® ('the Fierce'):

Foill and Fandall and Tuachall, their names; Fer Ulli son of Lugaid was
their father, and Necht from the mouth of the Scen√® was their mother.
Now the Ulstermen had slain their father; it was for that reason they
were at war with Ulster."

But are those not Necht's sons, that boast that not more of the
Ulstermen are alive than have fallen at their hands?" "The same, in
sooth," answered the gilla. "On with us to the d√ªn of the macNechta,"
cried the little boy. "Alas, in truth, that thou sayest so," quoth Ibar;
"'tis a peril for us." "Truly, not to avoid it do we go," answered
Cuchulain." We know it is an act of great folly for us to say so, but
whoever may go," said Ibar," it will not be myself." "Living or dead, go
there thou shalt," the little boy cried. "'Tis alive I shall go to the
south," answered Ibar," and dead I shall be left at the d√ªn, I know,
even at the d√ªn of the macNechta."

"They push on to the d√ªn. And the little boy sprang out of the chariot
onto the green. Thus was the green of the d√ªn, with a pillar-stone upon
it and an iron band around that, and a band for prowess it was, and
there was a writing in ogam at its joint, and this is the writing it
bore: 'Whoever should come to the green, if he be a champion, it is geis
for him to depart from the green without giving challenge to single
combat.' The lad deciphered the writing and put his two arms around the
pillar-stone. Just as the pillar-stone was with its ring, he flung it
with a cast of his hand into the moat, so that a wave passed over it.

"Methinks," spake Ibar, "it is no better now than to be where it was.
And we know thou shalt now get on this green the thing thou desires",
even the token of death, yea, of doom and destruction!" "Good, O Ibar,
spread the chariot-coverings and its skins for me that I may snatch a
little sleep." "Woe is me, that thou sayest so," answered the gilla;
"for a foeman's land is this and not a green for diversion." The gilla
arranged the chariot-coverings and its skins under Cuchulain, and the
lad fell asleep on the green.

"Then came one of the macNechta onto the fair-green, to wit, Foill son
of Necht. "Unyoke not the horses, gilla," cried Foill." I am not fain
to, at all," answered Ibar; "the reins and the lines are still in my
hand." "Whose horses are those, then?" Foill asked. "Two of Conchobar's
horses," answered the gilla; "the two of the dappled heads." "That is
the knowledge I have of them. And what hath brought these steeds here to
the borders?" "A tender youth that has assumed arms amongst us to-day
for luck and good omen," the horseboy answered, "is come to the edges of
the marshes to display his comeliness." "May it not be for victory nor
for triumph, his first-taking of arms," exclaimed Foill. "If I knew he
was fit for deeds, it is dead he should go back northwards to Emain and
not alive!" "In good sooth, he is not fit for deeds," Ibar answered; "it
is by no means right to say it of him; it is the seventh year since he
was taken from the crib. "

"The little lad raised his face from the ground and drew his hand over
his face, and he became as one crimson wheelball from his crown to the
ground. "Aye, but I am fit for deeds!" the lad cried. "That pleaseth me
well," said the champion; "but more like than what thou sayest,
meseemeth, thou art not fit for deeds." "Thou wilt know that better if
we go to the ford. But, go fetch thy weapons, for I see it is in the
guise of a churl thou art come, and I slay nor charioteers nor grooms
nor folk without arms."

The man went apace after his arms. "Now thou shouldst have a care for us
against yonder man that comes to meet thee, little lad," said Ibar. "And
why so?" asked the lad. "Foill son of Necht is the man thou seest.
Neither points nor edges of weapons can harm him." "Not before me
shouldst thou say that, O Ibar," quoth the lad. "I will put my hand to
the lath-trick for him, namely, to the apple of twice-melted iron, and
it will light upon the disc of his shield and on the flat of his
forehead, and it will carry away the size of an apple of his brain out
through the back of his head, so that it will make a sieve-hole outside
of his head, till the light of the sky will be visible through his
head."

"Foill son of Necht came forth. Cuchulain took the lath-trick in hand
for him and threw it from him the length of his cast, so that it lighted
on the flat of his shield and on the front of his forehead and carried
away the bulk of an apple of his brain out through the back of his head,
so that it made a sieve-hole thereof outside of his head, till the light
of the sky might be seen through his head. He went to him then and
struck off the head from the trunk. Thereafter he bore away his spoils
and his head with him.

"Then came the second son out on the green, his name Tuachall ('the
Cunning') son of Necht. "Aha, I see thou wouldst boast of this deed,"
quoth Tuachall. "In the first place I deem it no cause to boast for
slaying one champion," said Cuchulain; "thou shalt not boast of it this
time, for thou shalt fall by my hand." "Off with thee for thine arms,
then, for 'tis not as a warrior thou art come." The man rushed after his
arms. "Thou shouldst have a care for us against yon man, lad," said
Ibar. "How so?" the lad asked. "Tuachall son of Necht is the man thou
beholdest. And he is nowise misnamed, for he falls not by arms at all.
Unless thou worstest him with the first blow or with the first shot or
with the first touch, thou wilt not worst him ever, because of his
craftiness and the skill wherewith he plays round the points of the
weapons."

"That should not be said before me, O Ibar," cried the lad. "I will put
my hand on Conchobar's well-tempered lance, on the Craisech Neme ('the
Venomous Lance'). It will light on the shield over his belly, and it
will crush through his ribs on the farther side after piercing his heart
in his breast. That would be the smiting cast of an enemy and not the
friendliness of a fellow countryman! From me he shall not get
sick-nursing or care till the brink of doom."

"Tuachall son of Necht came forth on the green, and the lad laid his
hand on Conchobar's lance against him, and it struck the shield above
his belly and broke through the ribs on the farther side after piercing
his heart within his breast. He struck off his head or ever it reached
the ground.

"Then came the youngest of the sons forth on the green, namely, Fandall
son of Necht. "Fools were the folk who fought with thee here," cried
Fandall. "How, now!" cried the lad. "Come down to the pool, where thy
foot findeth not bottom." Fandall rushed on to the pool. "Thou shouldst
be wary for us of him, little boy," said Ibar. "Why should I then?"
asked the lad. "Fandall son of Necht is the man whom thou seest. For
this he bears the name Fandall ('the Swallow'): like a swallow or weasel
he courseth the sea; the swimmers of the world cannot reach him."

"Thou shouldst not speak thus before me, O Ibar," said the lad. "Thou
knowest the river that is in our land, in Emain, the Callann. When the
boys frequent it with their games of sport and when the water is not
beneath them, if the surface is not reached by them all, I do carry a
boy over it on either of my palms and a boy on either of my shoulders,
and I myself do not even wet my ankles under the weight of them."

"They met upon the water and they engaged in wrestling upon it, and the
little boy closed his arms over Fandall, so that the sea came up even
with him, and he gave him a deft blow with Conchobar's sword and chopped
off his head from the trunk, and left the body to go down with the
stream, and he carried off the head and the spoils with him.

"Thereupon Cuchulain went into the d√ªn and pillaged the place and burned
it so that its buildings were no higher than its walls. And they turned
on the way to Sliab Fuait and carried the three heads of Necht's sons
with them.

"When they came to Sliab Fuait they espied a herd of wild deer before
them. "What are those many cattle, O Ibar, those nimble ones yonder?"
asked the lad; "are they tame or are they other deer?" "They are real
wild deer, indeed," Ibar answered; "herds of wild deer that haunt the
wastes of Sliab Fuait." "Ply the goad for us on the horses into the bog,
to see can we take some of them." The charioteer drove a goad into the
horses. It was beyond the power of the king's overfat steeds to keep up
with the deer. The lad got down from the chariot and as the fruit of his
run and his race, in the morass which was around him, he caught two of
the swift, stout deer. He fastened them to the back poles and the bows
and the thongs of the chariot.

"They continued their way to the mound-seat of Emain, where they saw
flocks of white swans flying by them. "What are those birds there, O
Ibar?" the lad asked; "are yonder birds tame or are they other birds?"
"Indeed, they are real wild birds," Ibar answered; "flocks of swans are
they that come from the rocks and crags and islands of the great sea
without, to feed on the plains and smooth spots of Erin." "Which would
be stranger to the Ulstermen, O Ibar, for them to be fetched alive to
Emain or dead?" asked the lad." Stranger far, alive," Ibar answered "for
not every one succeeds in taking the birds alive, while they are many
that take them dead." Then did the lad perform one of his lesser feats
upon them: he put a small stone in his sling, so that he brought down
eight of the birds; and then he performed a greater feat: he threw a
large stone at them and he brought down sixteen of their number. With
his return stroke all that was done. He fastened them to the hind poles
and the bows and the thongs and the ropes and the traces of the chariot.

"Take the birds along with thee, O Ibar," cried the lad to his
charioteer. "I am in sore straits," answered Ibar; "I find it not easy
to go." "What may it be?" asked the lad. "Great cause have I. The horses
have become wild, so that I cannot go by them. If I stir at all from
where I am, the chariot's iron wheels will cut me down because of their
sharpness and because of the strength and the power and the might of the
career of the horses. If I make any move, the horns of the deer will
pierce and gore me.

"Ah, no true champion art thou any longer, O Ibar," said the lad;
"because of the look I shall give at the horses they will not depart
from the straight way; at the look I shall give at the deer they will
bend their heads in fear and awe of me; they will not dare move, and it
will be safe for thee e'en though thou goest in front of their horns."

"Thereupon they went on till they reached the fair plain of Emain. It
was then Lebarcham, the watch in Emain Macha, came forth and discerned
them, she, the daughter of Aue ('Ear') and of Adarc ('Horn.') "A single
chariot-fighter is here, coming towards Emain Macha," cried Lebarcham,
"and his coming is fearful. The heads of his foes all red in his chariot
with him. Beautiful, all-white birds he has hovering around in the
chariot. With him are wild, untamed deer, bound and fettered, shackled
and pinioned. And I give my word, if he be not attended to this night,
brood will flow over Conchobar's province by him and the youths of
Ulster will fall by his hand." "We know him, that chariot-fighter,"
spake Conchobar; "belike it is the little gilla, my sister's son, who
went to the edge of the marches at the beginning of the day, who has
reddened his hands and is still unsated of combat, and unless he be
attended to, all the youths of Emain will fall by his hand."

"And this was the counsel they agreed to follow: to let out the
womenfolk to meet the youth, namely, thrice fifty women, even ten and
seven-score bold, stark-naked women, at one and the same time, and their
chieftainess, Scannlach ('the Wanton') before them, to discover their
persons and their shame to him." Thereupon the young women all arose and
marched out, and they discovered their nakedness and all their shame to
him. The lad hid his face from them and turned his gaze on the chariot,
that he might not see the nakedness or the shame of the women.

Then the lad was lifted out of the chariot. He was placed in three vats
of cold water to extinguish his wrath; and the first vat into which he
was put burst its staves and its hoops like the cracking of nuts around
him. The next vat into which he went boiled with bubbles as big as fists
therefrom. The third vat into which he went, some men might endure it
and others might not. Then the boy's wrath went down. "Thereupon he came
out, and his festive garments were put on him.

His comeliness appeared on him and he made a crimson wheel-ball of
himself from his crown to the ground. Seven toes he had to each of his
two feet, and seven fingers to each of his two hands, and seven pupils
to each of his two kingly eyes, and seven gems of the brilliance of the
eye was each separate pupil. Four spots of down on either of his two
cheeks: a blue spot, a purple spot, a green spot, a yellow spot. Fifty
strands of bright-yellow hair from one ear to the other, like to a comb
of birch twigs or like to a brooch of pale gold in the face of the sun.
A clear, white, shorn spot was upon him, as if a cow had licked it. A
fair, laced green mantle about him; a silver pin therein over his white
breast. A hooded tunic of thread of gold about him. And the lad was
seated between the two feet of Conchobar, and that was his couch ever
after, and the king began to stroke his close-shorn hair.

"A mere lad accomplished these deeds at the end of seven years after his
birth," continued Fiachu son of Fiarba; "for he overcame heroes and
battle-champions at whose hands two-thirds of the men of Ulster had
fallen, and these had not got the revenge on them until that scion rose
up for them. No need then is there of wonder or of surprise, though he
came to the border, though he slew one man or two men or three men or
four men when now are fulfilled his seventeen years at the time of the
T√°in B√≥ C√∫alnge."

Albeit gladness, joy and happiness was the part of the men of Ulster for
that, sorrow, grief and unhappiness was the part of the men of Erin, for
they knew that the little lad that had done those deeds in the time of
his boyhood, it would be no wonder if he should do great deeds of valour
in the time of his manhood.

These, accordingly, are some of the youthful exploits of Cuchulain on
the Raid for the Kine of Cualnge, and the Prologue of the Tale, and the
Names of the Roads and the March of the Host up to this Point.

The Story proper is this which follows now.
