2\. The Occaision of the Táin

Then were brought to them the least precious of their possessions, that
they might know which of them had the more treasures, riches and wealth.
Their pails and their cauldrons and their iron-wrought vessels, their
jugs and their keeves and their eared pitchers were fetched to them.

Likewise, their rings and their bracelets and their thumbrings and their
golden treasures were fetched to them, and their apparel, both purple
and blue and black and green, yellow, vari-coloured and gray, dun,
mottled and brindled.

Their numerous flocks of sheep were led in from fields and meeds and
plains. These were counted and compared, and found to be equal, of like
size, of like number; however, there was an uncommonly fine ram over
Medb's sheep, and he was equal in worth to a bondmaid, but a
corresponding ram was over the ewes of Ailill.

Their horses and steeds and studs were brought from pastures and
paddocks. There was a noteworthy horse in Medb's herd and he was of the
value of a bondmaid; a horse to match was found among Ailill's.

Then were their numerous droves of swine driven from woods and shelving
glens and wolds. These were numbered and counted and claimed. There was
a noteworthy boar with Medb, and yet another with Ailill.

Next they brought before them their droves of cattle and their herds and
their roaming flocks from the brakes and wastes of the province.

These were counted and numbered and claimed, and were the same for both,
equal in size, equal in number, except only there was an especial bull
of the bawn of Ailill, and he was a calf of one of Medb's cows, and
Finnbennach ('the Whitehorned') was his name. But he, deeming it no
honour to be in a woman's possession, had left and gone over to the kine
of the king. And it was the same to Medb as if she owned not a
pennyworth, forasmuch as she had not a bull of his size amongst her
cattle.

Then it was that macRoth the messenger was summoned to Medb, and Medb
strictly bade macRoth to learn where there might be found a bull of that
likeness in any of the provinces of Erin. "Verily," said macRoth, "I
know where the bull is that is best and better again, in the province of
Ulster, in the hundred of Cualnge, in the house of Darè son of Fiachna;
even Donn Cualnge ('the Brown Bull of Cualnge') he is called."

"Go thou to him, macRoth, and ask for me of Darè the loan for a year of
the Brown Bull of Cualnge, and at the year's end he shall have the meed
of the loan, to wit, fifty heifers and the Donn Cualnge himself. And
bear thou a further boon with thee, macRoth. Should the borderfolk and
those of the country grudge the loan of that rare jewel that is the
Brown Bull of Cualnge, let Darè himself come with his bull, and he shall
get a measure equalling his own land of the smooth Plain of Ai and a
chariot of the worth of thrice seven bondmaids and he shall enjoy my own
close friendship."

Thereupon the messengers fared forth to the house of Darè son of
Fiachna. This was the number wherewith macRoth went, namely, nine
couriers. Anon welcome was lavished on macRoth in Darè's house-- fitting
welcome it was-- chief messenger of all was macRoth. Darè asked of
macRoth what had brought him upon the journey and why he was come.

The messenger announced the cause for which he was come and related the
contention between Medb and Ailill. "And it is to beg the loan of the
Brown Bull of Cualnge to match the Whitehorned that I am come," said he;
"and thou shalt receive the hire of his loan, even fifty heifers and the
Brown of Cualnge himself. And yet more I may add: Come thyself with thy
bull and thou shalt have of the land of the smooth soil of Mag Ai as
much as thou ownest here, and a chariot of the worth of thrice seven
bondmaids and enjoy Medb's friendship to boot."

At these words Darè was well pleased, and he leaped for joy so that the
seams of his flock-bed rent in twain beneath him. "By the truth of our
conscience," said he; "however the Ulstermen take it, whether ill or
well, this time this jewel shall be delivered to Ailill and to Medb, the
Brown of Cualnge to wit, into the land of Connacht." Well pleased was
macRoth at the words of the son of Fiachna.

Thereupon they were served, and straw and fresh rushes were spread under
them. The choicest of food was brought to them and a feast was served to
them and soon they were noisy and drunken. And a discourse took place
between two of the messengers." 'Tis true what I say," spoke the one;
"good is the man in whose house we are." "Of a truth, he is good." "Nay,
is there one among all the men of Ulster better than he?" persisted the
first. "In sooth, there is," answered the second messenger. "Better is
Conchobar whose man he is, Conchobar who holds the kingship of the
province. And though all the Ulstermen gathered around him, it were no
shame for them. Yet is it passing good of Darè, that what had been a
task for the four mighty provinces of Erin to bear away from the land of
Ulster, even the Brown Bull of Cualnge, is surrendered so freely to us
nine footmen."

Hereupon a third runner had his say: " What is this ye dispute about?"
he asked. "Yon runner says, 'A good man is the man in whose house we
are.'" "Yea, he is good," saith the other. "Is there among all the
Ulstermen any that is better than he?" demanded the first runner
further. "Aye, there is," answered the second runner; "better is
Conchobar whose man he is; and though all the Ulstermen gathered around
him, it were no shame for them. Yet, truly good it is of Darè, that what
had been a task for four of the grand provinces of Erin to bear away out
of the borders of Ulster is handed over even unto us nine footmen." "I
would not grudge to see a retch of blood and gore in the mouth whereout
that was said; for, were the bull not given willingly, yet should he be
taken by force!"

At that moment it was that Darè macFiachna's chief steward came into the
house and with him a man with drink and another with food, and he heard
the foolish words of the runners; and anger came upon him, and he set
down their food and drink for them and he neither said to them, "Eat,"
nor did he say, "Eat not."

Straightway he went into the house where was Darè macFiachna and said:
"Was it thou that hast given that notable jewel to the messengers, the
Brown Bull of Cualnge?" "Yea, it was I," Darè made answer. "Verily, it
was not the part of a king to give him. For it is true what they say:
Unless thou hadst bestowed him of thine own free will, so wouldst thou
yield him in despite of thee by the host of Ailill and Medb and by the
great cunning of Fergus macRoig." "I swear by the gods whom I worship,"
spoke Darè, " they shall in no wise take by foul means what they cannot
take by fair!"

There they abide till morning. Betimes on the morrow the runners arise
and proceed to the house where is Darè. "Acquaint us, lord, how we may
reach the place where the Brown Bull of Cualnge is kept." "Nay then,"
saith Darè; "but were it my wont to deal foully with messengers or with
travelling folk or with them that go by the road, not one of you would
depart alive!" "How sayest thou?" quoth macRoth. "Great cause there is,"
replied Darè; "ye said, unless I yielded in good sort, I should yield to
the might of Ailill's host and Medb's and the great cunning of Fergus."

"Even so," said macRoth, "whatever the runners drunken with thine ale
and thy viands have said, 'tis not for thee to heed nor mind, nor yet to
be charged on Ailill and on Medb." "For all that, macRoth, this time I
will not give my bull, if ever I can help it!"

Back then the messengers go till they arrive at Cruachan, the stronghold
of Connacht. Medb asks their tidings, and macRoth makes known the same:
that they had not brought his bull from Darè. "And the reason?" demanded
Medb. MacRoth recounts to her how the dispute arose. "There is no need
to polish knots over such affairs as that, macRoth; for it was known,"
said Medb, "if the Brown Bull of Cualnge would not be given with their
will, he would be taken in their despite, and taken he shall be!"
