[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mcb06)  [Next](mcb08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

# Appendices

### V.

### Transmigration

DOES Buddhism teach transmigration? If it does, how does it work? Does
the soul really transmigrate?

Such questions are frequently asked, and I will try briefly to answer
them here.

### I

The idea of transmigration is this: After death, the soul migrates from
one body to another, celestial, human, animal, or vegetative.

In Buddhism, as it is popularly understood, what regulates
transmigration is ethical retribution. Those who behave properly go to
heaven, or to heavens, as there are many heavens according to Buddhist
cosmology. Some may be reborn among their own races. Those, however, who
have not conducted themselves according to moral precepts will be
consigned after death to the underground worlds called Naraka.

There are some destined to be reborn as a dog or a cat or a hog or a cow
or some other animal, according to deeds which can be characterized as
pre-eminently in correspondence with those natures generally ascribed to
those particular animals. For instance, the hog is popularly thought to
be

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

greedy and filthy. Thus those of us who are especially inclined to be
that way will be hogs in their next lives. Others who are rather smart
or cunning or somewhat mischievous may be born as rats or monkeys or
foxes. This reminds us of Swedenborg's doctrine of correspondence,
according to which things on earth have corresponding things in heaven
or hell.

Sometimes we are said to be born as plants or even rocks.

The interesting thing about this idea of transmigration as sometimes
told by Buddhists is that we do not stay in heaven or hell forever. When
our karma is exhausted, we come out of hell or come down from heaven.
Even when we turn into cats or dogs, we do not repeat this kind of life
all the time. We may be reborn as human beings again if we do something
good while living as a lower animal, though it is highly doubtful that,
for instance, the cat can be taught not to steal fish from the
neighbors--which is what she does quite frequently in Japan--however
well she, may be fed at home.

But so far nobody has advanced the method of calculating mathematically
the strength of karma according to the character of each deed.
Therefore, we can never tell how long our life in heaven or hell will
be. In any case, we know this much: there is a time when we have to
leave heaven or hell.

Buddhists are more concerned--which is natural--with Naraka (hells) than
heavens. After death we generally go to Yama, who rules the spirits of
the dead. He is known as Emma-sama in Japanese. He has a bright mirror
before him. When we appear before him, we see ourselves reflected in it.
It illuminates our entire being, and we cannot hide anything from it.
Good and bad, all is reflected in it as it is. Emma-sama looks at it and
knows at once what kind of person each of us was while living in the
world. Besides this, he has a book

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

before him in which everything we did is minutely recorded. We are
therefore before the Lord of Death exactly what we were, and there is no
deceiving him. His judgment goes straight to the core of our
personality. It never errs. His penetrating eye reads not only our
consciousness but also our unconscious. He is naturally legalistic, but
he is not devoid of kindheartedness, for he is always ready to discover
in the unconscious something which may help the criminal to save
himself.

### II

The idea of transmigration has a certain appeal to the imaginative mind
if one is not too critical or scientific--the idea that each motive,
consciously conceived or unconsciously prompted, has its ethical value
and is punishable or rewardable accordingly, and that the Lord of Death
ruling the underworld makes no mistake in assigning us to places where
we each belong. His mirror of judgment and his records never err in this
respect. These ideas correspond to our sense of justice and
compensation. Instead of all sinners being summarily consigned to
everlasting fire when the Day of judgment comes, it is certainly more in
accord with common sense and justice that each sin, judiciously weighed
and evaluated, be given its particular due. This evaluation and
consignment, when demonstrated in the doctrine of transmigration, takes
on a poetic coloring.

Suppose I did something wrong or something not so very bad and were made
to be reborn as a cat. I would live in this animal form for a while,
perhaps eight or ten years, for the cat does not live very long. My sin
is expiated, for probably I behaved properly as a cat from the human
point of view. As

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

a reward, I am born again as a human being. Now, if I remembered this
experience as a cat, would it not be highly interesting for me as a
former cat to observe all that the mother cat now in my house does,
playing with her kittens, sometimes bringing a lizard and even a little
snake from the yard for the little ones to play with?

When not only the cat but all the other animals, and also plants and
rocks, are looked upon from this point of view, that is, as possible
forms of our reincarnation in the future as well as in the past, would
not our interest in all those objects existing about us take quite a new
turn and perhaps become a source of spiritual inspiration in some way?

For one thing, those forms surrounding us cease to be things altogether
foreign to us. They are not strangers; they are not something hostile.
On the contrary, they share our nature. We are ready to transform
ourselves into their forms of existence, and they too can someday take
human form when they are so conditioned. There is a mutual interest
between us and them. There is a bond of sympathy and mutual
understanding between human beings and the rest of the world.

Besides these considerations, the doctrine of transmigration affords us
the chance of pilgrimaging throughout the whole universe, from the
thirty-three heavens to the nineteen hells, including the other realms
such as the *tiryagyona* (animal), *preta* (hungry ghost), and *asura*
(fighting devils). While it is not at all pleasant to be fighting all
the time, to be tortured in various ways, or to be eternally hungry, it
is in accord with human nature to experience vicissitudes of existence
and thereby to learn to read the meaning of life.

Nobody likes to be in hell and tortured. But because of this experience,
we know how to appreciate heavenly pleasures

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

and how to be sympathetic with our fellow beings who happen to be in not
so pleasant an environment.

### III

Transmigration pictures us traveling through an infinite number of
Kalpas as we go on individually experiencing life in its possible
varieties. Evolution, however, delineates human existence as a whole as
having gone through all these stages. This is the difference between
science and religion: science deals with abstractions, whereas religion
is individualistic and personal. So far, evolution has not taken account
of ethical implications. It has treated the subject from the point of
view of biology and psychology. In the rising development of the human
race, the scientists have not given much significance to the ethical and
spiritual factors; they have been primarily concerned with the way man
has made use of his intelligence more than anything else in his
so-called upward course of development.

Transmigration reviews man's existence entirely from the point of view
of ethics and religion; it is hardly concerned with his intelligence.
And this is the very point where transmigration interests us. The idea
may not have anything deserving scientific investigation. But in spite
of this, it perpetually attracts the attention of religious minded
people.

### IV

Theoretically speaking, the idea of incarnation must have come first,
then reincarnation, and finally transmigration. Something took the
flesh, God or the word or the devil or the first principle or anything
else, which had to express itself in a tangible and visible form so that
we can talk of it as

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

something. Being made of the senses and intellect, we individualize,
which means incarnation.

When incarnation is established, reincarnation is easy to follow; and
when reincarnation is morally evaluated, we have transmigration.
Transmigration then comes to be connected with the idea of punishment
and reward.

There is another implication of transmigration, which is the idea of the
moral perfectibility of human nature. Before Buddha attained Buddhahood
he went through many an incarnation, and in each reincarnation he is
said to have practiced the six or ten virtues of *pāramitā*, whereby in
his last incarnation as a human being he became a perfect man, that is,
Buddha.

As long as we have the idea of an infinite possibility of perfecting
ourselves morally, we must find some way of carrying this idea through.
Inasmuch as we cannot forever continue our individual existence as such,
there must be another way of solving the problem, which is what we may
call the eternally progressive conception of transmigration.

### V

Besides this interpretation of the transmigration idea in its moral and
punitive aspects, there is an enjoyable phase of it when we make it a
matter of experience during our lifetime. When we scrutinize our daily
experiences, we realize that we have here everything we could experience
by going through an indefinitely long period of transmigration. Every
shade of feeling we have while on earth finds its counterpart somewhere
in the heavens or in the hells or in some intermediate realms of the
*preta*, or *asura* or *tiryagyona*. For instance, when we, are angry,
we are with the *asura*; when we are pleased, we

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

are transported into the heaven of joy, *nirmanarataya*; when we are
restless, we have turned into the monkey; when we can imagine ourselves
free from guilt, we bloom as the lotus or as the morning glory in the
early summer dawn, and so on. The whole universe depicts itself in human
consciousness. That is to say, our daily life is an epitome of an
indefinitely long career of transmigration.

### VI

As far as I can see, the doctrine of transmigration does not seem to
enjoy any scientific support. The first question we encounter is, "What
is it that transmigrates?" We may answer, "It is the soul." "What, then,
is the soul?" The soul cannot be conceived as an entity or an object
like any other objects we see about us. It cannot be anything tangible
or visible. If so, how does it manage to enter into a body? How does it
get out of one body when this body decomposes and pass into another
body? Where is this "other body" waiting for the liberated soul to
enter? The body without the soul is inconceivable; we cannot imagine a
soulless body in existence somewhere to receive the soul newly detached.
If the soul can maintain itself without embodying itself, why do we not
find bodyless souls wandering somewhere? Can a soul subsist without a
body?

If the doctrine of transmigration is to be tenable, we must say that
there is something that transmigrates; if there is something, what is
it? If we cannot affirm it as an entity, what can it be? Can the
questions enumerated above be satisfactorily answered? There are still
other questions which must be answered before we can establish
transmigration.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

### VII

We can think of the soul not as an entity but as a principle. We can
conceive of the soul as not entering into a body already in existence
and ready to receive the soul, but as creating a body suitable for its
own habitation. Instead of form or structure determining function, we
can take function as determining form. In this case, the soul comes
first and the body is constructed by it. This is really the Buddhist
conception of transmigration.

Buddhist philosophy considers *tṛiṣṇā* or *taṇhā*, or "thirst," the
first principle of making things come into existence. In the beginning
there is *tṛiṣṇā*. It wills to have a form in order to express itself,
which means to assert itself. In other words, when it asserts itself it
takes form. As *tṛiṣṇā* is inexhaustible, the forms it takes are
infinitely varied. *Tṛiṣṇā* wants to see and we have eyes; it wants to
hear and we have ears; it wants to jump and we have the deer, the
rabbit, and other animals of this order; it wants to fly and we have
birds of all kinds; it wants to swim and we have fish wherever there are
waters; it wants to bloom and we have flowers; it wants to shine and we
have stars; it wants to have a realm of heavenly bodies and we have
astronomy; and so on. *Tṛiṣṇā* is the creator of the universe.

Being the creator, *tṛiṣṇā* is the principle of individuation. It
creates a world of infinite diversities. It will never exhaust itself.
We as its highest and richest expression can have an insight into the
nature of *tṛiṣṇā* and its working. When we really see into ourselves,
*tṛiṣṇā* will bare itself before itself in us. As it is not an
individualized object, self-inspection is the only way to approach it
and make it reveal all its secrets. And

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

when we know them, perhaps we may also understand what transmigration
really means.

When we see the lilies of the field and observe that they are more
gloriously arrayed than Solomon in his day, is this not because in our
*tṛiṣṇā* there is something participating in the *tṛiṣṇā* of the flower?
Otherwise, we could never appreciate them. When we follow the fowls of
the air and think of their being utterly free from care or worry, is
this not because the pulse of our *tṛiṣṇā* beats in unison with the
*tṛiṣṇā* of the fowls? If this were not the case, how could we ever come
to the understanding of those creatures? Even when Nature is regarded as
hostile, there must be something in it which calls out this feeling in
us-which is to say, Nature partakes of (human) *tṛiṣṇā*.

The atom may be considered nothing but a cluster of electrically charged
particles and having nothing in common with human *tṛiṣṇā*. But does it
not respond to the appliances contrived by human minds and human hands?
And is it not because of this response that we can read into the nature
of the atom and even devise a weapon most destructive to us human
beings? The atom certainly has its *tṛiṣṇā*, and it is this *tṛiṣṇā*
that enables man to express it in a mathematical formula.

### VIII

When I was discussing this subject the other day, one of the great
thinkers now in America remarked, "Does this mean that there are in our
consciousness all these *tṛiṣṇā* as its constituent elements?" This is
perhaps the way most of our readers would like to interpret my
presentation of *tṛiṣṇā* when I make it the basis of mutual
understanding, as it were, between ourselves and Nature generally. But I
must say that that is not

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

the way I conceive *tṛiṣṇā*. *Tṛiṣṇā* lies in us not as one of the
factors constituting our consciousness, but it is our being itself. It
is I; it is you; it is the cat; it is the tree; it is the rock; it is
the snow; it is the atom.

### IX

Some may like to compare *tṛiṣṇā* with Schopenhauer's Will to live, but
my idea of *tṛiṣṇā* is deeper than his Will. For the Will as he
conceives it is already differentiated as the Will striving to live
against death, against destruction. The Will implies a dualism. But
*tṛiṣṇā* remains still dormant, as it were, as in the mind of God, for
God has not yet moved to his work of creation. This moving is *tṛiṣṇā*.
It is *tṛiṣṇā* that moves. It is *tṛiṣṇā* that made God give out his
fiat, Let there be light." *Tṛiṣṇā* is what lies at the back of
Schopenhauer's Will. *Tṛiṣṇā* is a more fundamental conception than the
Will.

For Schopenhauer, the Will is blind; but *tṛiṣṇā* is neither blind nor
not blind, for neither of them can yet be predicated of *tṛiṣṇā*.
*Tṛiṣṇā* is not yet a what. It can be called the pure will In early
Buddhism, *tṛiṣṇā* forms one of the links in the chain of "Dependent
Origination," and it is demanded of us to get rid of it in order that we
may be freed from grief and fear. But early Buddhists were not logical
enough to push the idea of *tṛiṣṇā* far enough to its very source. Their
effort to deliver themselves from *tṛiṣṇā*'s so-called leading to grief,
fear, and so on, was also the working of *tṛiṣṇā* itself. As long as we
are human beings, we can never do away with *tṛiṣṇā*, or, as they say,
destroy it. The destruction of *tṛiṣṇā* will surely mean the
annihilation of ourselves, leaving no one who will be the enjoyer of the
outcome. *Tṛiṣṇā* is indeed the basis of all existence. *Tṛiṣṇā* is
existence. *Tṛiṣṇā* is even before existence.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

Later Buddhists realized this truth and made *tṛiṣṇā* the foundation of
their new system of teaching with its doctrines of the Bodhisattva,
universal salvation, Amitābha's "vow" (*praṇidhāna*), the *pariṇāmanā*
("turning over of merit"), and so on. These are all the outgrowth of
*tṛiṣṇā*. When a Zen master was asked, "How could one get away with
*tṛiṣṇā*?" he answered, "What is the use of getting away with it?" He
further said, "Buddha is Buddha because of it," or, "Buddha is
*tṛiṣṇā*." In fact, the whole life of *Śākyamuni* illustrates this.

### X

Coming back to the transmigration phase of the *tṛiṣṇā* doctrine, I
should like to assert again that this *tṛiṣṇā* as it expresses itself is
essentially the same in any form it may take. (We cannot think of it in
any other way.) The human *tṛiṣṇā* as we feel it inwardly must be that
of the cat, or the dog, or the crow, or the snake. When a cat runs after
a rat, when a snake devours a frog, when a dog jumps up furiously
barking at a squirrel in the tree, when a pig goes around groveling in
the mud, when the fish swims about contentedly in the pond, when the
waves rage angrily on a stormy ocean, do we not feel here our own
*tṛiṣṇā* expressing some of its infinitely variable modes? The stars are
shining brightly, wistfully twinkling in a clear autumnal night; the
lotus flowers bloom in the early summer morning even before the sun
rises; when the spring comes, all the dead trees vie with one another to
shoot out their fresh green leaves, waking up from a long winter
sleep-do we not see here also some of our human *tṛiṣṇā* asserting
itself?

I do not know whether ultimate reality is one or two or three or many
more, but I feel that one *tṛiṣṇā*, infinitely diversified

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

and diversifiable, expresses itself making up this world of ours. As
*tṛiṣṇā* is subject to infinite diversifications, it can take infinitely
variable forms. It is *tṛiṣṇā*, therefore, that determines form and
structure. This is what is given to our consciousness, and our
consciousness is the last word, we cannot go any further.

Viewing the idea of transmigration from this standpoint, is it not
interesting to realize that we are practicing this transmigration in
every moment of our lives, instead of going through it after death and
waiting for many a Kalpa to elapse?

I do not know whether transmigration can be proved or maintained on the
scientific level, but I know that it is an inspiring theory and full of
poetic suggestions, and I am satisfied with this interpretation and do
not seem to have any desire to go beyond it. To me, the idea of
transmigration has a personal appeal, and as to its scientific and
philosophical implications, I leave it to the study of the reader.

### XI

It may not be amiss here to add a word regarding the difference of
attitude between the earlier and the later Buddhists toward the doctrine
of transmigration and *tṛiṣṇā*. As we have already seen, the earlier
Buddhist treatment of the subject is always negative, for it tends to
emphasize the aspect of liberation or emancipation. The later Buddhists,
however, have turned against this and strongly insist on *tṛiṣṇā* as
being most fundamental and primary and needed for the general welfare
not only of mankind but of all other beings making up the entire world.
They would declare that *tṛiṣṇā* works in the wrong way when it chooses
bad associates; that is, when it combines itself with the relative or
psychological self, relying on the latter

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

as the ultimate reality and as the controlling principle of life.
*Tṛiṣṇā* then turns into the most ungovernable and insatiable upholder
of power. What the earlier Buddhists wanted to conquer was this kind of
*tṛiṣṇā*, swerved from its primal nature and becoming the thrall. of
egotistic impulses. Indeed, they wished, instead of conquering it, to
escape from this state of thralldom. This made them negativists and
escapists.

The later Buddhists realized that *tṛiṣṇā* was what constituted human
nature--in fact, everything and anything that at all comes into
existence--and that to deny *tṛiṣṇā* was committing suicide; to escape
from *tṛiṣṇā* was the height of contradiction or a deed of absolute
impossibility; and that the very thing that makes us wish to deny or to
escape from *tṛiṣṇā* was *tṛiṣṇā* itself. Therefore, all that we could
do for ourselves, or rather all that *tṛiṣṇā* could do for itself, was
to make it turn to itself, to purify itself from all its encumbrances
and defilements, by means of transcendental knowledge (*prajñā*). The
later Buddhists then let *tṛiṣṇā* work on in its own way without being
impeded by anything else. *Tṛiṣṇā* or "thirst" or "craving" then comes
to be known as *mahākaruṇā*, or "absolute compassion," which they
consider the essence of Buddhahood and Bodhisattvahood.

This *tṛiṣṇā* emancipated from all its encumbrances incarnates itself in
every possible form in order to achieve a universal salvation of all
beings, both sentient and non-sentient. Therefore, when Buddha declares
that he is "all-conquering, all-knowing" he means that he has *tṛiṣṇā*
in its purity. For when *tṛiṣṇā* comes back to itself, it is
all-conqueror and all-knower, and also all-loving. It is this love or
*karuṇā* or *maitrī* that makes the Buddha or Bodhisattva abandon his
eternally entering into a state of emptiness (*śūnyatā*) and subjects
himself

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

to transmigrate through the triple world. But in this case it is better
not to call it transmigration but incarnation. For he assumes all kinds
of form on his own account, that is, voluntarily, in order to achieve a
universal salvation. He is then not any more a passive sufferer of
karmic causation. He is the "tent-designer" (*gahakāraka*)
himself. <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[128:1](mcb07.htm#fr_118) *The Dhammapada*,
verses 151-2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Crucifixion and Enlightenment](mcb08)
