[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lly09)  [Next](lly11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE VALLEY

Once inside the Valley, enclosed by its mighty, temple-walls, when its
heaven-reaching cliffs have thrown their mile long shadows over us, when
the marvelous combination of beauty and grandeur, of noble cliff and
waving flower, of leaping waterfall and tinkling brook, of magnificent
tree and soft green grass, of light and shade and color, has made its
first vivid impression we feel as though we were entering the joint
abode of all the titans and fairies. And as the silvery thread of the
river glistens down the long vistas that open before us, as the grand
panorama ever-changing keeps us in an ecstasy of wonder and delight; as
at every step some new beauty presents itself, as crystal streams, whose
mossy banks are fringed with flowers that are always blooming, and
grasses that are ever green, gurgle and ripple across our path, as one
looks up between the towering pines and spreading oaks to the unyielding
cliffs that rise in such noble outline against the blue vault of heaven,
or watches the ever-changing lights and shadows that follow in such
rapid succession across the sun-bathed face of El Capitan, or the gusty
torrent of Yosemite Fall as it leaps the cloud-draped

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

summit of the cliff to be dashed into dazzling spray on the immovable
granite below, we are prone to acknowledge the truth of the statement,
"Yosemite has not a rival on this earth."

And, when the gaze has roamed around the rim of the Valley, when
Cathedral Rocks, Cathedral Spires, Sentinel Rock, Glacier Point, Half
Dome, Clouds Rest, Mount Watkins, Basket Dome, North Dome, Washington
Column, Royal Arches, The Three Brothers, and a score of other
impressive points, have brought to us their age old message, and the
myriad of beauties of a myriad of nooks and corners have insinuated
themselves into our consciousness, this impression is vivified.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cathedral Rocks](lly11.md)
