[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lly25)  [Next](lly27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE LEGEND OF TU-TOK-A-NU-LA AND TIS-SA-ACK

Unnumbered snows have come and gone since The Great Spirit led a band of
his favorite children into the mountains, and bade them rest in this
beautiful Valley of Ah-wah-nee. They were weary and footsore, and were
glad to rest after their long journey. Here they found food in
abundance. The streams held swarms of fish, meadows were knee-deep in
sweet clover, great herds of deer roamed the forests in the Valley, and
on the high mountains, oak trees were bending under the weight of their
acorns, grass seeds and wild fruits and berries grew in bountiful
profusion. Here they stayed and built their villages. They were happy,
and multiplied, and prospered and became a great nation.

To their chief came a little son to gladden his heart. They wanted this
son to become a great chief, capable of the leadership of a great
people. He was made to sleep in the robes of the skins of the beaver and
the coyote, that he might grow wise in building and keen of scent. As he
grew older he was fed the meat of the fish, that he might become a
strong swimmer, and the flesh of the deer, that he might be light and
swift of foot. He was made to eat the eggs of the great crane, that he
might be keen of sight. He was wrapped in the skin of the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

 

<span id="img_07000"></span> [![YO-SEM-I-TE FALLS (CHO-LACK) AND LOST
ARROW (HUMMO)&lt;BR&gt; &lt;I&gt;Photo A. C.
Pillsbury&lt;/I&gt;](tn/07000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07000.jpg.md)  
YO-SEM-I-TE FALLS (CHO-LACK) AND LOST ARROW (HUMMO)  
*Photo A. C. Pillsbury*  

 

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

monarch of the forest, the grizzly bear, that he might grow up fearless
and strong in combat.

And, when he grew to manhood, he was a great chief and beloved of all
the people. His people prepared for him a lofty throne on the crown of
the great rock which guards The Gateway of the Valley, and he was called
Tu-tok-a-nu-la, after the great cranes that lived in the meadow near the
top. The people of Ah-wah-nee were happy, for Tu-tok-a-nu-la was a wise
and a good ruler. From his high rocky throne he kept watch over the
Valley and the people whom he loved. He called on The Great Spirit who
sent timely rains, so that the acorns grew in abundance, the hunters
returned from the forests with game, and the fishermen from the streams
with fish. There was peace and plenty throughout the Valley of
Ah-wah-nee, and when Tu-tok-a-nu-la held speech with his people from his
high throne his voice was deep and strong like the deep sound of the
waterfall.

One day as Tu-tok-a-nu-la sat gazing into the glowing colors of the
west, he saw approaching his valley a strange people, led by a maiden of
wondrous loveliness. He called to them and the maiden answered him,
saying, "It is I, Tis-sa-ack. We have come from the land of my people in
the far south to visit with you. We have heard of the great and good
chief, Tu-tok-a-nu-la, of his great people and his wonderful valley. We
bring presents of baskets and beads and skins. After we have rested we
will return to my people in the far south." Tu-tok-a-nu-la welcomed the
fair visitor from the land to the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

south and had prepared for her and her people a home on the summit of
the great dome at the eastern end of the Valley. There she stayed and
taught the women of Ah-wah-nee the arts of her people. Tu-tok-a-nu-la
visited her often in her mountain home. He was charmed by her wonderful
beauty and sweetness, and begged her to stay and become his wife, but
she denied him, saying: "No, I must soon return with my people to their
home in the far south." And, when Tu-tok-a-nu-la grew importunate in his
wooing, she left her home in the night and was never seen again.

When the great chief knew that she was gone, a terrible loneliness and
sorrow came to him, and he wandered away through the forests in search
of her, forgetting his people in Ah-wah-nee. So strong was his love for
her, and so deep his sorrow, that he forgot to call upon The Great
Spirit to send the timely rains. So great was his neglect that the
streams grew smaller and smaller and finally became dry. The crops
failed. The hunters came back from the forests without meat, and the
fishermen returned from the streams empty-handed. The leaves and the
green acorns fell from the trees, and the bright flowers and green
grasses became dry and brown.

The Great Spirit became very angry with Tu-tok-a-nu-la. The earth
trembled with his wrath so that the rocks fell down into the Valley from
the surrounding cliffs. The sky and the mountains belched forth smoke
and flame. The great dome that had been the home of

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

Tis-sa-ack, was rent asunder and half of it fell into the Valley. The
melting snows from the high mountains came down into the Valley in a
flood and drowned hundreds of the people. But the wrath of The Great
Spirit was quickly spent, and the heavens again grew quiet. The floods
receded, the sun shone, and once more peace and calm reigned over
Ah-wah-nee. The life-giving moisture from the renewed streams crept into
the parched soil. The oak trees put on new leaves and acorns. The
grasses again became fresh and green, the flowers lifted their drooping
heads and took on their old gay colors. The fish came back to the
streams, and the game to the forests.

And, when the Valley was once again clothed in beauty and plenty, there
appeared on the rent face of the dome which had been her home, the
beautiful face of Tis-sa-ack, where it can still be seen to this day.
And the dome was named Tis-sa-ack, in memory of the fair visitor who had
been loved by all the people of Ah-wah-nee. At the same time, that all
might hold his memory in their hearts, there appeared on the face of the
great rock supporting his throne, the majestic figure of the great
chief, dressed in a flowing robe and pointing a finger to where he had
gone, to El-o-win, the happy land beyond the setting sun.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend of the Lost Arrow](lly27.md)
