[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lly26)  [Next](lly28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE LEGEND OF THE LOST ARROW

Kos-su-kah, a young chief of the Ah-wah-nee-chees, smiled upon a maiden,
Tee-hee-nay. Kos-su-kah was tall and strong and brave. Among all the
sons of Ah-wah-nee

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

there was none so keen of sight, so swift of foot, or so skilled in the
use of the bow and the arts of the chase. Tee-hee-nay was the fairest
and most beautiful of all the fair daughters of Ah-wah-nee. She was tall
and slender as the fir, and as graceful and supple as the stem of the
azalea. Her hands and feet were small and beautifully shaped, her silken
hair was black as a moonless night and fell in a cloud to her knees. Her
eyes were luminous pools of light, and her voice was liquid in its
sweetness. Her laugh was like the musical tinkling of the brook, and she
was good as she was beautiful.

Tee-hee-nay smiled upon the handsome Kos-su-kah, thereby confessing her
love for him, and nothing remained but the formal presentation, by
Kos-su-kah, of suitable gifts to her parents, and the preparation of a
feast to celebrate their wedding. Kos-su-kah's suit was approved by the
parents of Tee-hee-nay and the lovers were filled with joy. They began
preparations immediately for a royal wedding feast. To do this
Tee-hee-nay, assisted by the maidens of the tribe, would gather acorns
and prepare the acorn bread and mush, collect grass seeds, wild fruits
and edible roots; while Kos-su-kah should gather about him the best
hunters of his tribe and participate in a big., hunt on the high
mountains that there might be an abundance of meat for the feast, to
which the entire tribe would be invited.

Before saying their good-byes it was agreed between them that at sunset
Kos-su-kah should go to the column of rock which stands just to the east
of Cho-lak

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (Yosemite Fall), and from there launch from his
strong bow into the Valley an arrow, bearing on its shaft grouse
feathers corresponding in number to the deer that had fallen before the
skill of himself and his companions. That she might mark the flight of
the arrow and the spot of its falling, and thus be the first to carry
news of the success of the hunt to her tribe, Tee-hee-nay was to go at
sunset to the base of the cliff and there watch for the signal.

After a most successful hunt, while his companions were making camp for
the night, and preparing their game for transportation down to the
Valley, Kos-su-kah made his way to the point agreed upon, prepared the
signal arrow, and was just ready to send it on its mission into the
Valley, when the cliff's edge on which he was standing, gave way,
carrying him with it and hurling him to his death on the rocks below.

After the seemingly endless day of waiting, Tee-hee-nay made her way to
the appointed spot, and as the sun went down behind the cliffs, stood
straining her eyes up to the heights, hoping to catch a glimpse of the
manly form of her lover. But when night had settled his dusky mantle
over the Valley, Kos-su-kah had failed to appear, and no signal arrow
had winged its way down from the cliff above. Thinking that the chase
had led him farther afield than they had anticipated, that he had been
unable to reach the cliff before darkness, and, knowing that his signal
arrow would not be seen, he was, even now, making his way down the
boulder strewn trail of Indian Canyon to deliver in person his message,
she bounded

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

 

<span id="img_07600"></span> [![HALF DOME (TIS-SA-ACK) NEVADA AND VERNAL
FALLS.&lt;BR&gt; &lt;I&gt;Photo A. C.
Pillsbury&lt;/I&gt;](tn/07600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07600.jpg.md)  
HALF DOME (TIS-SA-ACK) NEVADA AND VERNAL FALLS.  
*Photo A. C. Pillsbury*  

 

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

up the trail hoping to meet him. Over rocks and fallen trees from ledge
to ledge, over precipices where a misstep meant certain death she
hurried until at last she gained the foot of the cliff at a point from
which, should he come, she could not miss him. There, through the long
hours of the night, she waited and listened, longing for the welcome
sound of his footsteps or his dear voice, and sending winging through
the dark void of the night sobbing, passionate prayers to The Great
Spirit for the safety of her loved one.

But when the first rosy fingers of dawn lit up the eastern sky and
brought no sight of her lover, she sprang like a deer up the steep trail
to the top of the cliff, and hurried to the spot from which the signal
was to have been given. She called to Kos-su-kah, but only the echo of
her voice came back in answer to her yearning cry. Reaching at last the
edge of the cliff she came to the point from which a large portion had
but recently fallen away. With sobbing breath and a heart numb with an
awful certainty, she forced herself to look over the edge, and saw lying
far below, the blood-stained lifeless body of her lover.

Stunned by the terrible grief of her loss Tee-hee-nay built, on the top
of the cliff, a signal fire and summoned help from the tribe below. The
heavy, lagging hours of waiting dragged away, and at last the asked for
help arrived. Preparations were at once made for the recovery of the
lifeless body of Kos-su-kah. A rope was fashioned from the trunks of
young tamaracks by lashing them

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

together with the thongs of the deer that were to have furnished the
meat for the wedding feast. When this was finished a young chief
prepared to descend, but Tee-hee-nay pushed him aside. She herself must
be the first to reach her lover, her hands the ones to perform this sad
service. The sympathetic braves lowered her gently down the cliff until
she stood beside Kos-su-kah's battered body. After gently kissing his
cold, unresponsive lips she unwound from around her waist the thongs of
deerskin and bound his body firmly to the rope, then watched in loving
anxiety while the braves gently raised him to the cliff top. The rope
was again lowered and Tee-hee-nay was drawn up to the side of her dead
lover. Then she, who up to this time had been so brave, gave way to a
passionate storm of grief. Throwing herself across the body of her loved
one she entreated him to speak to her, sobbing prayers to The Great
Spirit for the return of her dead. After a while her cries ceased and
she grew quiet. When gentle hands stooped to lift her she fell back
lifeless. She had died of a broken heart and her gentle spirit had
winged its way to join her lover's in El-o-win, the spirit land beyond
the setting sun.

Reverent hands brought the two bodies of the lovers, now reunited in
death, down into the Valley, placed them side by side upon the funeral
pyre, and scattered their loved. The signal arrow was never found,
having been spirited away by the reunited lovers to El-o-win as a
memento of their unfaltering love. And in memory of

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

the beautiful maiden and the noble chief, the slender spire of granite,
still standing there near the spot where Kos-su-kah's body was found,
has ever since been known to the sons and daughters of Ah-wah-nee, as
Hum-mo, or the lost arrow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend Of Tis-sa-ack](lly28.md)
