[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lly19)  [Next](lly21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MIRROR LAKE

Mirror Lake, lying at the base of Half Dome and in the mouth of Te-na-ya
Canyon, is one of the real show

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

places of the Valley. A trip there is one of the most satisfying and
wholly delightful of the entire itinerary of Yosemite. To see the lake
at its best, when the reflections are clearest and the mirror upon its
quiet bosom is most nearly perfect, this trip should be made before
sunrise. At first sight the lake, owing to its small size, is slightly
disappointing, but this is soon lost sight of and forgotten in
admiration for the intrinsic loveliness of its setting. To have
witnessed a sunrise at Mirror Lake is to have seen one of the most
incomparably lovely sights the world has to offer. In the distance on
the right stands Clouds Rest, its top scraping the blue six thousand
feet above the lake, while close at hand, towering up nearly five:
thousand feet, the lofty over-shadowing wall of Half Dome rears its
imposing bulk, and casts its mile long reflection in the mirror. On the
other hand Mount Watkins throws its four thousand foot image, presenting
thus eight thousand feet of grandeur to our gaze.

Contrary to the general belief the reflections in Mirror Lake are not
due to any great depth of water, the lake in reality being very shallow,
nor to its black sand bottom, but are caused by the shadows thrown
across the lake by the surrounding cliffs. And so perfectly does the
water mirror its surroundings that it is difficult at times to tell
where mountain stops and water line begins. Another reason for making
Mirror Lake the object of an early morning visit is that a breeze
usually springs up during the middle of the day, ruffling the surface of
the water, and rendering the reflections indistinct or invisible.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

The lake is slowly being filled by the silt and decomposed granite
washed down by the waters of Te-na-ya Creek, and probably in the course
of fifty or seventy-five years, unless some preventive measures are
taken, will be completely filled. However, here is a spot of unequalled
charm, without a counterpart on earth yet seen by man, and to have
visited Yosemite without having seen at least one sunrise in this
beautiful little lake, which the Indians of the region have so
picturesquely named Ah-wei-ya, meaning "quiet water," is to have missed
the real soul of Yosemite.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Clouds Rest](lly21)
