[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lly23)  [Next](lly25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

# INTRODUCTION TO MYTHS AND LEGENDS

COUNTLESS ages back, lost in the seas of antiquity, thousands of years
before the Christian Era, the Indian people began--no one knows how. Did
they spring from the soil, or migrate, by some aimless wandering, across
the Bering Strait from ancient Mongolia, or did they actually descend
from Noah, after the Flood? Their many centuries of known history is
full of wonderful happenings.

California was a mythical land of romance long before the white man
discovered it. Somehow the tales of a country rich in sunshine, fruits
and gold crept out to the ears of explorers, although the tale-bearers
were unknown. California is still a land of romance. Its history runs
back through periods of civilization whose traditions are picturesquely
fascinating. Our thoughts of early days are so tinted with tales of the
Dons and the Missions that we don't always realize that before the Don
the redskin ruled, and that our whole state, once upon a time, was an
Indian hunting ground. The Indians who fought and hunted throughout the
length and breadth of the state tried, even as we do now, to account for
things. Where we use science they used imagination, and

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

out of this effort were developed a myriad of myths and legends.

These were all, or nearly all, of more or less religious significance,
for the Indian universally acknowledged the existence of a supreme
power, who held their fortune in his hands, who answered prayers and
punished wrong doing. So while from border to border, the length of our
coast, the smoke curled upward from ten thousand lodge-poles, the Indian
roamed, and hunted and fished, unafraid, o'er a thousand plains and
hills, and the wild fox dug his hole unscared, from many a dusky breast
went up a grateful prayer to The Great Spirit.

Of these myths or legends the Yo-sem-i-tes had their share. Ethnologists
have found the gathering of authentic information on this subject a
matter of the greatest difficulty. The Indians as a rule regard their
legends as sacred and are opposed to speaking of them to the white man.
Due partly to this reluctance, and in part to the fact that the present
day Indian himself is but poorly informed on the subject, it is almost
impossible to secure any reliable information as to the origin or
meaning of many of them. While it is true that a great many of the myths
or legends attributed to the Yo-sem-i-tes have some foundation in that
they are, or have been, vouched for by some apparently reputable
Indians, and have been repeatedly recounted with but little variation,
it is equally true that a number of those told, or published are
patently but the bedtime stories of the mothers of another age,
designed, as are our own of today, to point a

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

moral to the younger generation, or the product of a vivid imagination
belonging to some later-day Indian, possessing also a sense of humor and
a penchant for having some fun at the expense of his questioner. The
late Galen Clark says in his book, "Indians of the Yosemite" . . . "I
have known of cases where 'legends' would be manufactured on the spur of
the moment by some young Indian to satisfy an importunate and credulous
questioner, to the keen but suppressed amusement of other Indians
present."

Many of these legends, even those accepted as authentic by leading
ethnologists, have no doubt been more or less embellished in
translation, and garbled by countless repetitions. Some of them are
conflicting and contradictory to a degree. All of them, however, are
interesting, more or less poetic, and serve the purpose of an added
fascination in the objects or localities with which they are connected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend Of Tu-tok-a-na](lly25.md)
