[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lly24)  [Next](lly26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

# CHAPTER V

## INDIAN MYTHS AND LEGENDS

### THE LEGEND OF TU-TOK-A-NA

MANY, many moons ago, two little bear cubs slipped away from their
mother and went swimming in the river that winds its way through the
Valley of Ahwah-nee. When they had finished their swim they lay down on
a rock to dry themselves in the sun. After a while they fell asleep, and
as they slept the rock on which they lay began to grow, but they did not
wake up, and the rock grew and grew, and lifted them up until they
reached the sky.

When the old mother bear missed her cubs she was frantic with grief, and
all of the animals assembled at the base of the rock to try and rescue
the little brothers and bring them down again to the Valley. One after
another the animals tried, by springing up the face of the rock, to
reach the little brothers, but even the mighty monarch of the forests,
the grizzly bear, with all of his tremendous strength, and the cougar,
with all of his leaping power, fell far short of the top.

When all attempts had failed, and the animals had given up in despair,
along came the little tu-tok-a-na, the measuring worm, the most humble
of all the forest creatures, and started up the side of the rock. Inch
by inch he drew himself up until he had passed the highest jump of the
animals, up and up until he had passed from sight. He crawled day and
night until at last he reached

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

the top, and brought the little bear brothers down in safety to the
Valley. And in honor of the little measuring worm the rock has ever
since been known to the sons and daughters of Ah-wah-nee as
Tu-tok-a-nu-la.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend Of Tu-tok-a-nu-la And Tis-sa-ack](lly26)
