[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lly21)  [Next](lly23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span id="img_05400"></span> [![NEVADA FALLS&lt;BR&gt; &lt;I&gt;Photo H.
C. Tibbitts&lt;/I&gt;](tn/05400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05400.jpg)  
NEVADA FALLS  
*Photo H. C. Tibbitts*  

# CHAPTER III

### SUNSET IN THE YOSEMITE

THERE are times, and they do not come often, when the cup of our life is
full to the brim, and one added drop would be too much; when the heart
swings to the deepest throb, when speech is forgotten in divine

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

communion, and the soul mounts to the heights of the infinite. How long
this lasts we never afterwards can say. Such an interval as this is a
sunset in Yosemite.

All sense of time is lost in the golden enchantment, the overpowering
sense of sublimity, of awful majesty, of sheer, brutal strength and
power, of softness and light and warmth, of intrinsic beauty, fantastic
loveliness, and charm beyond compare. Fairyland itself must be somewhere
out there in the golden glow of the sunset. Rolling stretches of
flower-strewn meadows, broad seas of green grass rippling away in
emerald waves, row after row of tall, magnificent trees quivering in a
shower of sunlight. Rising from the river in gray gossamer shapes the
mist goes curling, smoky, diaphanous, mysterious, as though graves
beneath the water are giving up their ghosts.

From high overhead a bird bursts into rhapsody, singing a
[paean](errata.htm#0) of praise to the glory that is Yosemite; another,
and another, until their songs merge into one, and the passionate,
poignant sweetness of one of Schubert's serenades seems to drip from the
[eerie](errata.htm#1) heights to linger vibrantly upon the mellow air
and melt reluctantly at last into throbbing silence.

Embattled 'round the rim of the Valley, too rosy and golden, and purple
and blue, for anything but the towers and turrets, and palaces, of some
enchanted land, the majestic mountains rear their hoary snow-crowned
heads. While bands of rose and saffron, and bloody reds, and lurid
purples, are melting into liquid gold and gilding all the forest with
their radiance, the molten sun, swimming

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

in a haze of glory, turns red before slipping from sight, staying the
receding fingers of its luminous hand as if hesitant to depart. Five
thousand feet above the Valley floor, the majestic bulk of Half Dome is
burnished by the last golden rays reflected from the snow-capped peaks
above. Twilight creeps into the Valley, an advancing army robed in royal
purple. Stars stud the heavens, a pale moon appears on the horizon; in
an instant the day has vanished and murky dusk has come,

Night falls like a soft concealing curtain about you, crickets and
katydids sing a dreamy chorus, out in the gloomy dusk a coyote raises
his nose to the moon and voices the age-old protest of his race against
the loneliness and sorrow of their lot, the breezes bring a faint
perfume from flower-spangled fields, the trees softly shed their
blighted leaves and sigh together over the folly of the world. Night and
the stars and dusky isolation; a wild longing to turn back the years, to
wipe out the ugly, blundering stains of mistakes and follies, to begin
again and to build grandly, surely, relentlessly, with wanton
prodigality of strength and material. And, though blinded, groping hands
reach ever for a mirage, though years in their cycle of flight leave
arms clasping only pallid mocking ghosts of disillusion, the spell that
is Yosemite is proof against all disillusionment, and though you may
never visit the Valley again, the bond her beauty has woven into your
very soul will never be broken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Big Trees of the Mariposa Grove](lly23)
