[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lly47)  [Next](lly49.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BASKETS

Basket weaving was the chief occupation of the squaws during the time
not devoted to the collection and preparation of food, or other
household duties. Baskets were made in many forms and sizes to suit the
purpose for which they were intended. The principal woods used in the
weaving of these useful and decorative articles were the withes of the
willow and sour-berry bush, the red-bud, and the black fern root, the
latter two furnishing the natural red and black which were the
dominating colors of the designs, and which are woven into the baskets
even now. Many of the designs on the baskets no doubt have some
symbolical meaning which the Indians of today themselves do not know.
With the exception of those on the hood of the baby basket where zigzag
or diagonal stripes indicate a boy, and diamonds a girl baby, few, if
any, of them are known.

There being no clay in the Valley from which to make cooking utensils,
baskets were also used for this purpose. To make a good cooking basket
fourteen inches in diameter and twelve inches deep requires about six
months. The material must all be gathered in the proper season, dried,
split and cured. The fern root and red-bud must

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

then be soaked in water until it becomes pliant before the weaving may
begin. When finished these baskets are entirely waterproof. The manner
of their use in the preparation of food has already been described.
Since the introduction by the white man of the metal implements of
civilization, and the adoption by the Indians of a more modern style of
cooking, the demand for baskets has practically ceased, and the industry
of weaving them is rapidly dying out. A few old squaws, however, who
cling to the old ways, still make such as they require for their own
use, and a few others for sale. The comparatively high prices of the
latter are accounted for by the long hours of tedious toil involved in
the making, as compared with the money that could be earned during the
same length of time in some less tiresome and more profitable
occupation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Weapons](lly49.md)
