[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lly40)  [Next](lly42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FISH

The streams were rich in fish. Several methods were employed in their
capture. One of these was to construct a trap such as is sometimes
employed by white men today. This was done by building wing dams
diagonally down toward the middle of the stream until the two ends
almost met, and placing in the narrow outlet a long basket made of
willow withes woven loosely together and closed at the lower end, which
was raised above the surface of the water below the dam. The fish were
then

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

driven down stream and into the trap by the Indians wading and flailing
the water with sticks. Upon striking the basket the fish were thrown
into the lower end and out of the water, where they were easily caught
and killed.

Another and by far the most effective method was the use of the
soap-root. Several baskets of the bulbous root of this plant, which is
found in plenty in the meadows and along the streams in the higher
elevations, were lathered and carried to a stream, where they were
beaten into a pulp which was thrown into the water, or rubbed on stones
in the stream, where it formed a lather much after the manner of soap.
This lather had a sort of paralyzing effect on the fish, causing them to
rise to the surface where they could easily be scooped up into baskets.
In this manner large quantities of fish could be taken and it was the
method most often employed.

Fish were also taken by the use of hooks made of bone and lines
fashioned from the bark of the milkweed, with spears made of small poles
and pointed with bone, or by snaring. The latter was done by forming a
noose of a deerskin thong, or milkweed line, slipping it into the water
and over the fish, and giving a quick upward jerk which tightened the
noose about the fish and threw him from the water. This method required
considerable patience and skill, and was usually resorted to only as a
sport, or when no other method was available. The fish were cooked by
roasting on hot rocks or over a bed of coals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deer](lly42)
