[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lly41)  [Next](lly43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### DEER

The deer, great herds of which roamed the forests of the Valley region,
were an important item in the food supply. These were hunted by the
braves and killed with the bow and arrow. After the thorough cleansing
in the sweat-house, which was intended to free the hunter of all bodily
odors and which preceded all hunts, the braves went out and secreted
themselves on the windward side of the trails along which the deer
passed on their way to water, and shot them from ambush. Still-hunting,
or stalking, was also a method much in vogue among the more skillful
hunters. In this the brave often resorted to the use of a headgear made
from the headskin and horns of a deer as a means of deceiving the game
and enabling him to approach to the close range necessary for killing
with the bow and arrow. As a substitute for the somewhat heavy horns of
the deer the light branches of the dead manzanita were often used. When
a quantity of meat was desired the drive method was employed. This was
done by the turn-out of a number of hunters who formed in a wide circle
and closed in to a central point driving the game before them. In this
manner they were often successful in killing a large number. The meat
was cooked by roasting on hot rocks or in the coals of the fire. That
not needed for immediate use was cut into strips and made into jerky by
drying it in the sun. This was stored for winter use by hanging it on
strings inside the o-chum. A young brave never ate the meat of the

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

first deer he killed, it being their belief that if he did he would
never be successful in killing another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Small Game, Mushrooms, Worms, and Beetles](lly43)
