[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lly54)  [Next](lly56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DANCES

Dances were all symbolical in character, of more or less religious
significance, and were never indulged in simply for pleasure. Both men
and women took part in all of them, the women standing around shuffling
their

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

 

<span id="img_11400"></span> [![FROM ARTIST'S POINT&lt;BR&gt;
&lt;I&gt;Photo--H. C. Tibbitts&lt;/I&gt;](tn/11400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11400.jpg)  
FROM ARTIST'S POINT  
*Photo--H. C. Tibbitts*  

 

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

feet, swaying their bodies and chanting a song, while the men, led by
the chiefs and the medicine men, circled around the campfire stamping
their feet, whirling about, making wild gestures with their arms, or
with their bows and arrows which they sometimes carried, and grunting or
joining in the chant with the women.

The war dance which was held just prior to taking the field against an
enemy, was by far the most important of their dances. The Indian donned
for this occasion his finest and most elaborate regalia, which was then
worn into battle. This regalia was reserved for these occasions alone
and was never brought out for any other purpose. They sometimes painted
their faces hideously with a paint made from a kind of clay found along
the river below the Valley. This was done to make them look ferocious
and with the hope of terrifying the enemy, in fact the purpose of the
war dance seems to have been to work the brave into a sort of religious
frenzy, in which state he was expected to go forth and perform
prodigious deeds of valor and strength. These dances were kept up for
long periods, as soon as one dancer becoming exhausted another taking
his place. It is doubtful if any white man has ever seen a real
Yo-sem-i-te war dance, the exhibitions put up by the Indians in later
years from purely mercenary motives being the merest shams, very little
resembling the real article. In fact the Indians are universally opposed
to telling the white man anything at all about their old customs and
beliefs, no matter of how little importance they may seem, and if
pressed for

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

information on any subject, or even for corroboration of information
received from another source, will usually lie most unmercifully,
calling on a vivid imagination to concoct the most weird and impossible
stories for the benefit of their questioner. The Indians of later years
especially derive a great deal of quiet amusement from this baiting of
the whites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hand Game](lly56)
