[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lly57)  [Next](lly59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

### MARRIAGE

Springtime, or when the flowers were blooming in the mountains, was the
Indian's time for wooing. Polygamy was common among them, a man being
allowed to take as many wives as he chose, or could pay for. This
privilege, however, did not extend to the woman. Young women were
regarded as the personal property of their parents, were usually sold to
the highest eligible bidder, and the payment of their price comprised
the wedding ceremony, although the medicine man was sometimes asked to
be present. A smile was all that was necessary to let the young brave
know that his suit was favored and the Indian maid had therefore to be
rather sparing of her smiles. After the brave had settled his choice on
some particular maiden he opened negotiations for her hand by presenting
her father with gifts of skins, robes, and other goods. When these had
been offered in sufficient quantity the father gave his consent and
henceforth they were considered man and wife. If the match for any
reason should be broken off all preliminary payments were returned to
the giver. If successful in his married life the braves have been known
to continue this presentation of gifts to their bride's father long
after their marriage. After marriage the wife was the property of the
man, to be dealt with as he chose. She might be sold or gambled away,
although this privilege was seldom if ever exercised. Instances of
unfaithfulness on the part of the woman were very rare. The punishment
for this

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

was death. Wife beating, such as is frequently indulged in by the
so-called civilized man, was never known. Death was a much more
preferable punishment, whipping being considered most humiliating and
disgraceful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Widows](lly59)
