[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lly63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

# CHAPTER X

## GEOLOGY OF THE YOSEMITE VALLEY

IT is known that since the beginning of time the surface of the earth
has undergone various changes brought about by its cooling and shrinking
and by internal eruptions and disturbances.

During one of these disturbances the region between the Pacific Ocean
and the Rocky Mountains was affected. Here the surface of the earth was
broken into great blocks and one of these, four hundred miles long and
eighty miles wide, was pushed up at its eastern edge, separating it from
the depressed region to the east, leaving a steep scarp, and pulled down
at its western edge giving it a gentle slope to the sea.

The streams which flowed in diverse directions before the uplift of this
block now were given a definite course flowing down the slope to the
west and forming broad shallow valleys. One of these streams was the
Merced River which now flows through the Yosemite Valley.

After a great period of time there occurred a second upward thrust which
raised the eastern edge of the block to an elevation of several thousand
feet making a distinct mountain range, later known as the Sierra Nevada.
This second uplift gave to the western side a greater incline so that
the Merced River was given enough velocity to enable it, through the
millions of years elapsing before a third series of uplifts, to cut a
narrower valley within its old broad valley.

The tributary streams which flowed parallel to the range and at right
angles to the Merced River were not benefited by the tilting of the
block, hence the deeper the main river cut the higher the side streams
were left above it. With the broadening and leveling of its bed the
Merced lost its cutting power and flowed lazily over the valley floor.

The third and last uplift, greater than any preceding it, which raised
the crest of the range to an elevation of over seven thousand feet in
the north and about fourteen thousand feet in the southern part, gave to
the Merced River such rapidity and power that it cut in its old valley a
deep narrow canyon. The deepening of the river bed again left all of the
side streams high in their hanging valleys to cascade down steep
V-shaped walls to join the master stream; except Tenaya Creek with its
southwesterly course, and Bridal Veil

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Creek, with its northwesterly course, both of
which benefited by the tilting of the Sierra Block and also flowed over
a less resistant bed of granite. These two tributaries were able to cut
down to the level of the Merced River a depth two-thirds as deep as the
present depth of the valley. The brink of the Bridal Veil Falls today
marks the level at which the Merced River flowed just prior to the
advent of the Ice Age.

The climate which, heretofore, had been of a semi-tropical nature
gradually became frigid and snows piled up to a depth of thousands of
feet in the higher mountains. The underlying snow became compact by the
enormous weight into granular ice forming glaciers which moved clown the
old stream beds of Tenaya and Illilouette Creeks and the Merced River.
These three glaciers joined at the upper end of the valley into one
mighty glacier several thousand feet thick, filling the canyon to the
rim and extending down to about the present site of El Portal.

Through the hundreds of centuries that this glacier existed moving
slowly forward with tremendous weight and irresistible force it deepened
the canyon over a third and transformed it from a V-shaped canyon to a
broad U-shaped valley, seven miles long, a mile in width and
approximately thirty-five hundred feet deep. The cutting back of the
V-shaped canyon walls to vertical cliffs caused the cascading tributary
streams now to drop sheer from their hanging valleys and today produce
Yosemite's beautiful waterfalls.

Gradually the climate became warmer causing the glacier to retreat back
to the summit of the range and the Merced River resumed its old course
through the valley for thousands of years, until the climate again grew
colder causing the glacier to advance. This time the dominion of the ice
was much shorter than before so that the glacier reached a depth of only
a thousand feet and did little more than to add to the clift sculpturing
started by the first glacier and to leave a moraine spanning the valley
below El Capitan, where the ablation of summer balanced its forward
movement. When the climate again became warmer causing the glacier to
recede, this moraine acted as a dam, holding back the water from the
melting ice forming a lake on the valley floor five and a half miles
long.

During the twenty thousand years since the retreat of the ice the Merced
River carrying sand and gravel has filled the, lake completely, a depth
of about three hundred feet, bringing the valley floor to its present
level. Remnants of this last ice field still exist at the base of some
of the highest peaks in Yosemite National Park.

The granite in this region is made up of irregular blocks forming joints
or cracks except those huge masses that stand out as Yosemite's

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

most prominent features, El Capitan, Cathedral Rocks and Half Dome.
These, on account of their solidity, resisted the erosion of the
glacier. The rounding of the domes is due to the expansion and
contraction of the heat and cold which caused the rocks to shale off in
layers like those of an onion.

On account of the compactness of the underlying rock in the Little
Yosemite, upper Merced Canyon, the Merced Glacier was unable to quarry
down to the depth of the Tenaya Canyon, which is two thousand feet
lower, as the rock here, being closely jointed, facilitated the work of
the glacier.

The floor of the Little Yosemite found in the upper Merced Canyon is the
first of two giant steps made by the glacier in its descent and over
which the river now flows forming Nevada and Vernal Falls.

Today great quantities of rock are to be found at the base of the cliffs
forming talus slopes. This is caused by the weathering of the cliffs and
also by intermittent earthquakes which have shaken down the rock from
the valley walls. One of these earthquakes caused the rock to be thrown
down from the cliff at the base of North Dome across Tenaya Canyon
holding back the water of Tenaya Creek and forming Mirror Lake. The same
fate is befalling Mirror Lake as that of Lake Yosemite, as Tenaya Creek
increased in volume by the melting of the snow in the Spring heavily
laden with sand, is extending its delta farther and farther into the
lake. Eventually it will be filled and replaced by a meadow or a forest
of pines.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Thus has God fashioned a Cathedral with the granite cliffs for the
walls, the canopy of the heavens for the roof, and as the artist adds
the last subtle touch to his masterpiece so has the Creator caused the
forces of nature to deposit seeds of trees and beautiful plants to adorn
the mighty cliffs and the valley floor.
