[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lly59)  [Next](lly61.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHILDREN

The life of the Indian wife was one of menial labor and childbearing.
The latter, however, fell lightly on the mothers of the tribe. The time
for delivery arriving, she sought some quiet place by the side of a
stream, sometimes accompanied by a female friend, but most frequently
alone. The moment the child was born she bathed herself and her baby in
the stream, covered it with strips of soft skins, strapped it in a baby
basket, and carried it off on her back. The babies were kept in these
baskets for about a year in order to make them grow straight, and to
keep them out of mischief. Whipping children as a punishment for
disobedience was never practised, the mother preferring to rule by
kindness and patience. The pre-natal maternal influence and kind
treatment during babyhood made the Indian child naturally patient and
obedient to parental control. Also, due to the fact that the home was
not cluttered with the bric-a-brac of civilization, the baby was not
continually running afoul of some forbidden article or pleasure, but was
allowed to roam at will about the villages and camps as would the cub of
some forest creature.

Their instruction began at an early age, the girls being taught the
methods of collecting and preparing food, the weaving of baskets, and
other duties of the woman, while the boys were instructed in the methods
of hunting, fishing, the making of bows and arrows, and other arts in
which the men were expected to excel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Disposal of Their Dead](lly61.md)
