[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc005)  [Next](dc007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6. Revelation to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, Harmony, Pennsylvania, April 1829. * History of the Church* 1:32-35.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:1">6:1</span></span> A great and
marvelous work is about to come forth unto the children of men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:2">6:2</span></span> Behold, I am
God; give heed unto my word, which is quick and powerful, sharper than a
two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of both joints and marrow;
therefore give heed unto my words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:3">6:3</span></span> Behold, the
field is white already to harvest; therefore, whoso desireth to reap,
let him thrust in his sickle with his might, and reap while the day
lasts, that he may treasure up for his soul everlasting salvation in the
kingdom of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:4">6:4</span></span> Yea,
whosoever will thrust in his sickle and reap, the same is called of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:5">6:5</span></span> Therefore, if
you will ask of me you shall receive; if you will knock it shall be
opened unto you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:6">6:6</span></span> Now, as you
have asked, behold, I say unto you, keep my commandments, and seek to
bring forth and establish the cause of Zion;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:7">6:7</span></span> Seek not for
riches but for wisdom, and behold, the mysteries of God shall be
unfolded unto you, and then shall you be made rich. Behold, he that hath
eternal life is rich.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:8">6:8</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you, even as you desire of me so it shall be unto
you; and if you desire, you shall be the means of doing much good in
this generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:9">6:9</span></span> Say nothing
but repentance unto this generation; keep my commandments, and assist to
bring forth my work, according to my commandments, and you shall be
blessed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:10">6:10</span></span> Behold thou
hast a gift, and blessed art thou because of thy gift. Remember it is
sacred and cometh from above—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:11">6:11</span></span> And if thou
wilt inquire, thou shalt know mysteries which are great and marvelous;
therefore thou shalt exercise thy gift, that thou mayest find out
mysteries, that thou mayest bring many to the knowledge of the truth,
yea, convince them of the error of their ways.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:12">6:12</span></span> Make not
thy gift known unto any save it be those who are of thy faith. Trifle
not with sacred things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:13">6:13</span></span> If thou
wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved
in the kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God;
for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:14">6:14</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto thee, blessed art thou for what thou hast done; for
thou hast inquired of me, and behold, as often as thou hast inquired
thou hast received instruction of my Spirit. If it had not been so, thou
wouldst not have come to the place where thou art at this time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:15">6:15</span></span> Behold,
thou knowest that thou hast inquired of me and I did enlighten thy mind;
and now I tell thee these things that thou mayest know that thou hast
been enlightened by the Spirit of truth;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:16">6:16</span></span> Yea, I tell
thee, that thou mayest know that there is none else save God that
knowest thy thoughts and the intents of thy heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:17">6:17</span></span> I tell thee
these things as a witness unto thee—that the words or the work which
thou hast been writing are true.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:18">6:18</span></span> Therefore
be diligent; stand by my servant Joseph, faithfully, in whatsoever
difficult circumstances he may be for the word's sake.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:19">6:19</span></span> Admonish
him in his faults, and also receive admonition of him. Be patient; be
sober; be temperate; have patience, faith, hope and charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:20">6:20</span></span> Behold,
thou art Oliver, and I have spoken unto thee because of thy desires;
therefore treasure up these words in thy heart. Be faithful and diligent
in keeping the commandments of God, and I will encircle thee in the arms
of my love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:21">6:21</span></span> Behold, I
am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I am the same that came unto mine own,
and mine own received me not. I am the light which shineth in darkness,
and the darkness comprehendeth it not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:22">6:22</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you, if you desire a further witness, cast your mind
upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know
concerning the truth of these things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:23">6:23</span></span> Did I not
speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can
you have than from God?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:24">6:24</span></span> And now,
behold, you have received a witness; for if I have told you things which
no man knoweth have you not received a witness?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:25">6:25</span></span> And,
behold, I grant unto you a gift, if you desire of me, to translate, even
as my servant Joseph.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:26">6:26</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you, that there are records which contain much of my
gospel, which have been kept back because of the wickedness of the
people;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:27">6:27</span></span> And now I
command you, that if you have good desires—a desire to lay up treasures
for yourself in heaven—then shall you assist in bringing to light, with
your gift, those parts of my scriptures which have been hidden because
of iniquity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:28">6:28</span></span> And now,
behold, I give unto you, and also unto my servant Joseph, the keys of
this gift, which shall bring to light this ministry; and in the mouth of
two or three witnesses shall every word be established.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:29">6:29</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you, if they reject my words, and this part of my
gospel and ministry, blessed are ye, for they can do no more unto you
than unto me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:30">6:30</span></span> And even if
they do unto you even as they have done unto me, blessed are ye, for you
shall dwell with me in glory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:31">6:31</span></span> But if they
reject not my words, which shall be established by the testimony which
shall be given, blessed are they, and then shall ye have joy in the
fruit of your labors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:32">6:32</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you, as I said unto my disciples, where two or three
are gathered together in my name, as touching one thing, behold, there
will I be in the midst of them—even so am I in the midst of you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:33">6:33</span></span> Fear not to
do good, my sons, for whatsoever ye sow, that shall ye also reap;
therefore, if ye sow good ye shall also reap good for your reward.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:34">6:34</span></span> Therefore,
fear not, little flock; do good; let earth and hell combine against you,
for if ye are built upon my rock, they cannot prevail.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:35">6:35</span></span> Behold, I
do not condemn you; go your ways and sin no more; perform with soberness
the work which I have commanded you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:36">6:36</span></span> Look unto
me in every thought; doubt not, fear not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:37">6:37</span></span> Behold the
wounds which pierced my side, and also the prints of the nails in my
hands and feet; be faithful, keep my commandments, and ye shall inherit
the kingdom of heaven. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. Revelation to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, Harmony,
Pennsylvania, April 1829.](dc007)
