[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc017)  [Next](dc019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 18. Revelation to Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer, Fayette, New York, June 1829. * History of the Church* 1:60-64.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:1">18:1</span></span> Now,
behold, because of the thing which you, my servant Oliver Cowdery, have
desired to know of me, I give unto you these words:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:2">18:2</span></span> Behold, I
have manifested unto you, by my Spirit in many instances, that the
things which you have written are true; wherefore you know that they are
true.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:3">18:3</span></span> And if you
know that they are true, behold, I give unto you a commandment, that you
rely upon the things which are written;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:4">18:4</span></span> For in them
are all things written concerning the foundation of my church, my
gospel, and my rock.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:5">18:5</span></span> Wherefore,
if you shall build up my church, upon the foundation of my gospel and my
rock, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:6">18:6</span></span> Behold, the
world is ripening in iniquity; and it must needs be that the children of
men are stirred up unto repentance, both the Gentiles and also the house
of Israel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:7">18:7</span></span> Wherefore,
as thou hast been baptized by the hands of my servant Joseph Smith,
Jun., according to that which I have commanded him, he hath fulfilled
the thing which I commanded him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:8">18:8</span></span> And now,
marvel not that I have called him unto mine own purpose, which purpose
is known in me; wherefore, if he shall be diligent in keeping my
commandments he shall be blessed unto eternal life; and his name is
Joseph.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:9">18:9</span></span> And now,
Oliver Cowdery, I speak unto you, and also unto David Whitmer, by the
way of commandment; for, behold, I command all men everywhere to repent,
and I speak unto you, even as unto Paul mine apostle, for you are called
even with that same calling with which he was called.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:10">18:10</span></span> Remember
the worth of souls is great in the sight of God;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:11">18:11</span></span> For,
behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he
suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto
him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:12">18:12</span></span> And he
hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto him, on
conditions of repentance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:13">18:13</span></span> And how
great is his joy in the soul that repenteth!

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:14">18:14</span></span>
Wherefore, you are called to cry repentance unto this people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:15">18:15</span></span> And if it
so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this
people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your
joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:16">18:16</span></span> And now,
if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me
into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should
bring many souls unto me!

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:17">18:17</span></span> Behold,
you have my gospel before you, and my rock, and my salvation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:18">18:18</span></span> Ask the
Father in my name, in faith believing that you shall receive, and you
shall have the Holy Ghost, which manifesteth all things which are
expedient unto the children of men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:19">18:19</span></span> And if
you have not faith, hope, and charity, you can do nothing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:20">18:20</span></span> Contend
against no church, save it be the church of the devil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:21">18:21</span></span> Take upon
you the name of Christ, and speak the truth in soberness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:22">18:22</span></span> And as
many as repent and are baptized in my name, which is Jesus Christ, and
endure to the end, the same shall be saved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:23">18:23</span></span> Behold,
Jesus Christ is the name which is given of the Father, and there is none
other name given whereby man can be saved;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:24">18:24</span></span>
Wherefore, all men must take upon them the name which is given of the
Father, for in that name shall they be called at the last day;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:25">18:25</span></span>
Wherefore, if they know not the name by which they are called, they
cannot have place in the kingdom of my Father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:26">18:26</span></span> And now,
behold, there are others who are called to declare my gospel, both unto
Gentile and unto Jew;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:27">18:27</span></span> Yea, even
twelve; and the Twelve shall be my disciples, and they shall take upon
them my name; and the Twelve are they who shall desire to take upon them
my name with full purpose of heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:28">18:28</span></span> And if
they desire to take upon them my name with full purpose of heart, they
are called to go into all the world to preach my gospel unto every
creature.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:29">18:29</span></span> And they
are they who are ordained of me to baptize in my name, according to that
which is written;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:30">18:30</span></span> And you
have that which is written before you; wherefore, you must perform it
according to the words which are written.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:31">18:31</span></span> And now I
speak unto you, the Twelve—Behold, my grace is sufficient for you; you
must walk uprightly before me and sin not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:32">18:32</span></span> And,
behold, you are they who are ordained of me to ordain priests and
teachers; to declare my gospel, according to the power of the Holy Ghost
which is in you, and according to the callings and gifts of God unto
men;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:33">18:33</span></span> And I,
Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, have spoken it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:34">18:34</span></span> These
words are not of men nor of man, but of me; wherefore, you shall testify
they are of me and not of man;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:35">18:35</span></span> For it is
my voice which speaketh them unto you; for they are given by my Spirit
unto you, and by my power you can read them one to another; and save it
were by my power you could not have them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:36">18:36</span></span>
Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my
words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:37">18:37</span></span> And now,
behold, I give unto you, Oliver Cowdery, and also unto David Whitmer,
that you shall search out the Twelve, who shall have the desires of
which I have spoken;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:38">18:38</span></span> And by
their desires and their works you shall know them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:39">18:39</span></span> And when
you have found them you shall show these things unto them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:40">18:40</span></span> And you
shall fall down and worship the Father in my name.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:41">18:41</span></span> And you
must preach unto the world, saying: You must repent and be baptized, in
the name of Jesus Christ;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:42">18:42</span></span> For all
men must repent and be baptized, and not only men, but women, and
children who have arrived at the years of accountability.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:43">18:43</span></span> And now,
after that you have received this, you must keep my commandments in all
things;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:44">18:44</span></span> And by
your hands I will work a marvelous work among the children of men, unto
the convincing of many of their sins, that they may come unto
repentance, and that they may come unto the kingdom of my Father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:45">18:45</span></span>
Wherefore, the blessings which I give unto you are above all things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:46">18:46</span></span> And after
that you have received this, if you keep not my commandments you cannot
be saved in the kingdom of my Father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:47">18:47</span></span> Behold,
I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, and your Redeemer, by the power
of my Spirit have spoken it. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. Revelation through Joseph Smith to Martin Harris, Manchester,
New York, March 1830.](dc019)
