[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc023)  [Next](dc025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 24. Revelation to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, Harmony, Pennsylvania, July 1830. * History of the Church* 1:101-3.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:1">24:1</span></span> Behold,
thou wast called and chosen to write the Book of Mormon, and to my
ministry; and I have lifted thee up out of thine afflictions, and have
counseled thee, that thou hast been delivered from all thine enemies,
and thou hast been delivered from the powers of Satan and from darkness!

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:2">24:2</span></span>
Nevertheless, thou art not excusable in thy transgressions;
nevertheless, go thy way and sin no more.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:3">24:3</span></span> Magnify
thine office; and after thou hast sowed thy fields and secured them, go
speedily unto the church which is in Colesville, Fayette, and
Manchester, and they shall support thee; and I will bless them both
spiritually and temporally;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:4">24:4</span></span> But if they
receive thee not, I will send upon them a cursing instead of a blessing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:5">24:5</span></span> And thou
shalt continue in calling upon God in my name, and writing the things
which shall be given thee by the Comforter, and expounding all
scriptures unto the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:6">24:6</span></span> And it
shall be given thee in the very moment what thou shalt speak and write,
and they shall hear it, or I will send unto them a cursing instead of a
blessing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:7">24:7</span></span> For thou
shalt devote all thy service in Zion; and in this thou shalt have
strength.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:8">24:8</span></span> Be patient
in afflictions, for thou shalt have many; but endure them, for, lo, I am
with thee, even unto the end of thy days.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:9">24:9</span></span> And in
temporal labors thou shalt not have strength, for this is not thy
calling. Attend to thy calling and thou shalt have wherewith to magnify
thine office, and to expound all scriptures, and continue in laying on
of the hands and confirming the churches.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:10">24:10</span></span> And thy
brother Oliver shall continue in bearing my name before the world, and
also to the church. And he shall not suppose that he can say enough in
my cause; and lo, I am with him to the end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:11">24:11</span></span> In me he
shall have glory, and not of himself, whether in weakness or in
strength, whether in bonds or free;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:12">24:12</span></span> And at
all times, and in all places, he shall open his mouth and declare my
gospel as with the voice of a trump, both day and night. And I will give
unto him strength such as is not known among men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:13">24:13</span></span> Require
not miracles, except I shall command you, except casting out devils,
healing the sick, and against poisonous serpents, and against deadly
poisons;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:14">24:14</span></span> And these
things ye shall not do, except it be required of you by them who desire
it, that the scriptures might be fulfilled; for ye shall do according to
that which is written.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:15">24:15</span></span> And in
whatsoever place ye shall enter, and they receive you not in my name, ye
shall leave a cursing instead of a blessing, by casting off the dust of
your feet against them as a testimony, and cleansing your feet by the
wayside.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:16">24:16</span></span> And it
shall come to pass that whosoever shall lay their hands upon you by
violence, ye shall command to be smitten in my name; and, behold, I will
smite them according to your words, in mine own due time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:17">24:17</span></span> And
whosoever shall go to law with thee shall be cursed by the law.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:18">24:18</span></span> And thou
shalt take no purse nor scrip, neither staves, neither two coats, for
the church shall give unto thee in the very hour what thou needest for
food and for raiment, and for shoes and for money, and for scrip.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:19">24:19</span></span> For thou
art called to prune my vineyard with a mighty pruning, yea, even for the
last time; yea, and also all those whom thou hast ordained, and they
shall do even according to this pattern. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Harmony, Pennsylvania, July
1830. See](dc025)
