[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc019)  [Next](dc021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 20. Revelation through Joseph Smith, April 1830. * History of the Church* 1:64-70.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:1">20:1</span></span> The rise of
the Church of Christ in these last days, being one thousand eight
hundred and thirty years since the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ in the flesh, it being regularly organized and established
agreeable to the laws of our country, by the will and commandments of
God, in the fourth month, and on the sixth day of the month which is
called April—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:2">20:2</span></span> Which
commandments were given to Joseph Smith, Jun., who was called of God,
and ordained an apostle of Jesus Christ, to be the first elder of this
church;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:3">20:3</span></span> And to
Oliver Cowdery, who was also called of God, an apostle of Jesus Christ,
to be the second elder of this church, and ordained under his hand;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:4">20:4</span></span> And this
according to the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom be
all glory, both now and forever. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:5">20:5</span></span> After it
was truly manifested unto this first elder that he had received a
remission of his sins, he was entangled again in the vanities of the
world;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:6">20:6</span></span> But after
repenting, and humbling himself sincerely, through faith, God ministered
unto him by an holy angel, whose countenance was as lightning, and whose
garments were pure and white above all other whiteness;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:7">20:7</span></span> And gave
unto him commandments which inspired him;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:8">20:8</span></span> And gave
him power from on high, by the means which were before prepared, to
translate the Book of Mormon;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:9">20:9</span></span> Which
contains a record of a fallen people, and the fulness of the gospel of
Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:10">20:10</span></span> Which was
given by inspiration, and is confirmed to others by the ministering of
angels, and is declared unto the world by them—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:11">20:11</span></span> Proving
to the world that the holy scriptures are true, and that God does
inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation,
as well as in generations of old;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:12">20:12</span></span> Thereby
showing that he is the same God yesterday, today, and forever. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:13">20:13</span></span>
Therefore, having so great witnesses, by them shall the world be judged,
even as many as shall hereafter come to a knowledge of this work.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:14">20:14</span></span> And those
who receive it in faith, and work righteousness, shall receive a crown
of eternal life;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:15">20:15</span></span> But those
who harden their hearts in unbelief, and reject it, it shall turn to
their own condemnation—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:16">20:16</span></span> For the
Lord God has spoken it; and we, the elders of the church, have heard and
bear witness to the words of the glorious Majesty on high, to whom be
glory forever and ever. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:17">20:17</span></span> By these
things we know that there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and
eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God, the
framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:18">20:18</span></span> And that
he created man, male and female, after his own image and in his own
likeness, created he them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:19">20:19</span></span> And gave
unto them commandments that they should love and serve him, the only
living and true God, and that he should be the only being whom they
should worship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:20">20:20</span></span> But by
the transgression of these holy laws man became sensual and devilish,
and became fallen man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:21">20:21</span></span>
Wherefore, the Almighty God gave his Only Begotten Son, as it is written
in those scriptures which have been given of him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:22">20:22</span></span> He
suffered temptations but gave no heed unto them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:23">20:23</span></span> He was
crucified, died, and rose again the third day;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:24">20:24</span></span> And
ascended into heaven, to sit down on the right hand of the Father, to
reign with almighty power according to the will of the Father;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:25">20:25</span></span> That as
many as would believe and be baptized in his holy name, and endure in
faith to the end, should be saved—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:26">20:26</span></span> Not only
those who believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the flesh,
but all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came,
who believed in the words of the holy prophets, who spake as they were
inspired by the gift of the Holy Ghost, who truly testified of him in
all things, should have eternal life,

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:27">20:27</span></span> As well
as those who should come after, who should believe in the gifts and
callings of God by the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father
and of the Son;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:28">20:28</span></span> Which
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God, infinite and eternal, without
end. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:29">20:29</span></span> And we
know that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus Christ,
and worship the Father in his name, and endure in faith on his name to
the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:30">20:30</span></span> And we
know that justification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ is just and true;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:31">20:31</span></span> And we
know also, that sanctification through the grace of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ is just and true, to all those who love and serve God with
all their mights, minds, and strength.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:32">20:32</span></span> But there
is a possibility that man may fall from grace and depart from the living
God;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:33">20:33</span></span> Therefore
let the church take heed and pray always, lest they fall into
temptation;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:34">20:34</span></span> Yea, and
even let those who are sanctified take heed also.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:35">20:35</span></span> And we
know that these things are true and according to the revelations of
John, neither adding to, nor diminishing from the prophecy of his book,
the holy scriptures, or the revelations of God which shall come
hereafter by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, the voice of God, or
the ministering of angels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:36">20:36</span></span> And the
Lord God has spoken it; and honor, power and glory be rendered to his
holy name, both now and ever. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:37">20:37</span></span> *And
again, by way of commandment to the church concerning the manner of
baptism*—All those who humble themselves before God, and desire to be
baptized, and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and
witness before the church that they have truly repented of all their
sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having
a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their
works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission
of their sins, shall be received by baptism into his church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:38">20:38</span></span> *The*
*duty of the elders, priests, teachers, deacons, and members of the
church of Christ*—An apostle is an elder, and it is his calling to
baptize;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:39">20:39</span></span> And to
ordain other elders, priests, teachers, and deacons;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:40">20:40</span></span> And to
administer bread and wine—the emblems of the flesh and blood of Christ—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:41">20:41</span></span> And to
confirm those who are baptized into the church, by the laying on of
hands for the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, according to the
scriptures;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:42">20:42</span></span> And to
teach, expound, exhort, baptize, and watch over the church;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:43">20:43</span></span> And to
confirm the church by the laying on of the hands, and the giving of the
Holy Ghost;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:44">20:44</span></span> And to
take the lead of all meetings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:45">20:45</span></span> The
elders are to conduct the meetings as they are led by the Holy Ghost,
according to the commandments and revelations of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:46">20:46</span></span> The
priest's duty is to preach, teach, expound, exhort, and baptize, and
administer the sacrament,

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:47">20:47</span></span> And visit
the house of each member, and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret
and attend to all family duties.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:48">20:48</span></span> And he
may also ordain other priests, teachers, and deacons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:49">20:49</span></span> And he is
to take the lead of meetings when there is no elder present;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:50">20:50</span></span> But when
there is an elder present, he is only to preach, teach, expound, exhort,
and baptize,

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:51">20:51</span></span> And visit
the house of each member, exhorting them to pray vocally and in secret
and attend to all family duties.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:52">20:52</span></span> In all
these duties the priest is to assist the elder if occasion requires.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:53">20:53</span></span> The
teacher's duty is to watch over the church always, and be with and
strengthen them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:54">20:54</span></span> And see
that there is no iniquity in the church, neither hardness with each
other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:55">20:55</span></span> And see
that the church meet together often, and also see that all the members
do their duty.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:56">20:56</span></span> And he is
to take the lead of meetings in the absence of the elder or priest—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:57">20:57</span></span> And is to
be assisted always, in all his duties in the church, by the deacons, if
occasion requires.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:58">20:58</span></span> But
neither teachers nor deacons have authority to baptize, administer the
sacrament, or lay on hands;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:59">20:59</span></span> They are,
however, to warn, expound, exhort, and teach, and invite all to come
unto Christ.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:60">20:60</span></span> Every
elder, priest, teacher, or deacon is to be ordained according to the
gifts and callings of God unto him; and he is to be ordained by the
power of the Holy Ghost, which is in the one who ordains him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:61">20:61</span></span> The
several elders composing this church of Christ are to meet in conference
once in three months, or from time to time as said conferences shall
direct or appoint;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:62">20:62</span></span> And said
conferences are to do whatever church business is necessary to be done
at the time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:63">20:63</span></span> The
elders are to receive their licenses from other elders, by vote of the
church to which they belong, or from the conferences.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:64">20:64</span></span> Each
priest, teacher, or deacon, who is ordained by a priest, may take a
certificate from him at the time, which certificate, when presented to
an elder, shall entitle him to a license, which shall authorize him to
perform the duties of his calling, or he may receive it from a
conference.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:65">20:65</span></span> No person
is to be ordained to any office in this church, where there is a
regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote of that church;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:66">20:66</span></span> But the
presiding elders, traveling bishops, high councilors, high priests, and
elders, may have the privilege of ordaining, where there is no branch of
the church that a vote may be called.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:67">20:67</span></span> Every
president of the high priesthood (or presiding elder), bishop, high
councilor, and high priest, is to be ordained by the direction of a high
council or general conference.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:68">20:68</span></span> *The*
*duty of the members after they are received by* *baptism.*—The elders
or priests are to have a sufficient time to expound all things
concerning the church of Christ to their understanding, previous to
their partaking of the sacrament and being confirmed by the laying on of
the hands of the elders, so that all things may be done in order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:69">20:69</span></span> And the
members shall manifest before the church, and also before the elders, by
a godly walk and conversation, that they are worthy of it, that there
may be works and faith agreeable to the holy scriptures—walking in
holiness before the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:70">20:70</span></span> Every
member of the church of Christ having children is to bring them unto the
elders before the church, who are to lay their hands upon them in the
name of Jesus Christ, and bless them in his name.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:71">20:71</span></span> No one
can be received into the church of Christ unless he has arrived unto the
years of accountability before God, and is capable of repentance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:72">20:72</span></span> Baptism
is to be administered in the following manner unto all those who repent—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:73">20:73</span></span> The
person who is called of God and has authority from Jesus Christ to
baptize, shall go down into the water with the person who has presented
himself or herself for baptism, and shall say, calling him or her by
name: Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:74">20:74</span></span> Then
shall he immerse him or her in the water, and come forth again out of
the water.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:75">20:75</span></span> It is
expedient that the church meet together often to partake of bread and
wine in the remembrance of the Lord Jesus;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:76">20:76</span></span> And the
elder or priest shall administer it; and after this manner shall he
administer it—he shall kneel with the church and call upon the Father in
solemn prayer, saying:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:77">20:77</span></span> O God,
the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to
bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of
it, that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness
unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon
them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his
commandments which he has given them; that they may always have his
Spirit to be with them. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:78">20:78</span></span> The
manner of administering the wine—he shall take the cup also, and say:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:79">20:79</span></span> O God,
the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to
bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of all those who drink of it,
that they may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy Son, which was
shed for them; that they may witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal
Father, that they do always remember him, that they may have his Spirit
to be with them. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:80">20:80</span></span> Any
member of the church of Christ transgressing, or being overtaken in a
fault, shall be dealt with as the scriptures direct.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:81">20:81</span></span> It shall
be the duty of the several churches, composing the church of Christ, to
send one or more of their teachers to attend the several conferences
held by the elders of the church,

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:82">20:82</span></span> With a
list of the names of the several members uniting themselves with the
church since the last conference; or send by the hand of some priest; so
that a regular list of all the names of the whole church may be kept in
a book by one of the elders, whomsoever the other elders shall appoint
from time to time;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:83">20:83</span></span> And also,
if any have been expelled from the church, so that their names may be
blotted out of the general church record of names.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20:84">20:84</span></span> All
members removing from the church where they reside, if going to a church
where they are not known, may take a letter certifying that they are
regular members and in good standing, which certificate may be signed by
any elder or priest if the member receiving the letter is personally
acquainted with the elder or priest, or it may be signed by the teachers
or deacons of the church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21. Revelation to Joseph Smith, Fayette, New York, April 6,
1830.](dc021)
