[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc034)  [Next](dc036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 35. Revelation to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, at or near Fayette, New York, December 1830. * History of the Church* 1:128-31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:1">35:1</span></span> Listen to
the voice of the Lord your God, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end, whose course is one eternal round, the same today as yesterday,
and forever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:2">35:2</span></span> I am Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, who was crucified for the sins of the world,
even as many as will believe on my name, that they may become the sons
of God, even one in me as I am one in the Father, as the Father is one
in me, that we may be one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:3">35:3</span></span> Behold,
verily, verily, I say unto my servant Sidney, I have looked upon thee
and thy works. I have heard thy prayers, and prepared thee for a greater
work.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:4">35:4</span></span> Thou art
blessed, for thou shalt do great things. Behold thou wast sent forth,
even as John, to prepare the way before me, and before Elijah which
should come, and thou knewest it not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:5">35:5</span></span> Thou didst
baptize by water unto repentance, but they received not the Holy Ghost;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:6">35:6</span></span> But now I
give unto thee a commandment, that thou shalt baptize by water, and they
shall receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, even as the
apostles of old.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:7">35:7</span></span> And it
shall come to pass that there shall be a great work in the land, even
among the Gentiles, for their folly and their abominations shall be made
manifest in the eyes of all people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:8">35:8</span></span> For I am
God, and mine arm is not shortened; and I will show miracles, signs, and
wonders, unto all those who believe on my name.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:9">35:9</span></span> And whoso
shall ask it in my name in faith, they shall cast out devils; they shall
heal the sick; they shall cause the blind to receive their sight, and
the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, and the lame to walk.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:10">35:10</span></span> And the
time speedily cometh that great things are to be shown forth unto the
children of men;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:11">35:11</span></span> But
without faith shall not anything be shown forth except desolations upon
Babylon, the same which has made all nations drink of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:12">35:12</span></span> And there
are none that doeth good except those who are ready to receive the
fulness of my gospel, which I have sent forth unto this generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:13">35:13</span></span>
Wherefore, I call upon the weak things of the world, those who are
unlearned and despised, to thrash the nations by the power of my Spirit;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:14">35:14</span></span> And their
arm shall be my arm, and I will be their shield and their buckler; and I
will gird up their loins, and they shall fight manfully for me; and
their enemies shall be under their feet; and I will let fall the sword
in their behalf, and by the fire of mine indignation will I preserve
them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:15">35:15</span></span> And the
poor and the meek shall have the gospel preached unto them, and they
shall be looking forth for the time of my coming, for it is nigh at
hand—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:16">35:16</span></span> And they
shall learn the parable of the fig-tree, for even now already summer is
nigh.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:17">35:17</span></span> And I
have sent forth the fulness of my gospel by the hand of my servant
Joseph; and in weakness have I blessed him;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:18">35:18</span></span> And I
have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which have
been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world,
and the things which shall come from this time until the time of my
coming, if he abide in me, and if not, another will I plant in his
stead.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:19">35:19</span></span>
Wherefore, watch over him that his faith fail not, and it shall be given
by the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, that knoweth all things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:20">35:20</span></span> And a
commandment I give unto thee—that thou shalt write for him; and the
scriptures shall be given, even as they are in mine own bosom, to the
salvation of mine own elect;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:21">35:21</span></span> For they
will hear my voice, and shall see me, and shall not be asleep, and shall
abide the day of my coming; for they shall be purified, even as I am
pure.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:22">35:22</span></span> And now I
say unto you, tarry with him, and he shall journey with you; forsake him
not, and surely these things shall be fulfilled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:23">35:23</span></span> And
inasmuch as ye do not write, behold, it shall be given unto him to
prophesy; and thou shalt preach my gospel and call on the holy prophets
to prove his words, as they shall be given him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:24">35:24</span></span> Keep all
the commandments and covenants by which ye are bound; and I will cause
the heavens to shake for your good, and Satan shall tremble and Zion
shall rejoice upon the hills and flourish;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:25">35:25</span></span> And
Israel shall be saved in mine own due time; and by the keys which I have
given shall they be led, and no more be confounded at all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:26">35:26</span></span> Lift up
your hearts and be glad, your redemption draweth nigh.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_35:27">35:27</span></span> Fear not,
little flock, the kingdom is yours until I come. Behold, I come quickly.
Even so. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 36. Revelation through Joseph Smith to Edward Partridge, near
Fayette, New York, December 1830.](dc036)
