[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc041)  [Next](dc043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 42. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, February 9, 1831. * History of the Church* 1:148-54.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:1">42:1</span></span> Hearken, O
ye elders of my church, who have assembled yourselves together in my
name, even Jesus Christ the Son of the living God, the Savior of the
world; inasmuch as ye believe on my name and keep my commandments.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:2">42:2</span></span> Again I say
unto you, hearken and hear and obey the law which I shall give unto you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:3">42:3</span></span> For verily
I say, as ye have assembled yourselves together according to the
commandment wherewith I commanded you, and are agreed as touching this
one thing, and have asked the Father in my name, even so ye shall
receive.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:4">42:4</span></span> Behold,
verily I say unto you, I give unto you this first commandment, that ye
shall go forth in my name, every one of you, excepting my servants
Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:5">42:5</span></span> And I give
unto them a commandment that they shall go forth for a little season,
and it shall be given by the power of the Spirit when they shall return.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:6">42:6</span></span> And ye
shall go forth in the power of my Spirit, preaching my gospel, two by
two, in my name, lifting up your voices as with the sound of a trump,
declaring my word like unto angels of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:7">42:7</span></span> And ye
shall go forth baptizing with water, saying: Repent ye, repent ye, for
the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:8">42:8</span></span> And from
this place ye shall go forth into the regions westward; and inasmuch as
ye shall find them that will receive you ye shall build up my church in
every region—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:9">42:9</span></span> Until the
time shall come when it shall be revealed unto you from on high, when
the city of the New Jerusalem shall be prepared, that ye may be gathered
in one, that ye may be my people and I will be your God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:10">42:10</span></span> And
again, I say unto you, that my servant Edward Partridge shall stand in
the office whereunto I have appointed him. And it shall come to pass,
that if he transgress another shall be appointed in his stead. Even so.
Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:11">42:11</span></span> Again I
say unto you, that it shall not be given to any one to go forth to
preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by
some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has
authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:12">42:12</span></span> And
again, the elders, priests and teachers of this church shall teach the
principles of my gospel, which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon,
in the which is the fulness of the gospel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:13">42:13</span></span> And they
shall observe the covenants and church articles to do them, and these
shall be their teachings, as they shall be directed by the Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:14">42:14</span></span> And the
Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith; and if ye receive
not the Spirit ye shall not teach.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:15">42:15</span></span> And all
this ye shall observe to do as I have commanded concerning your
teaching, until the fulness of my scriptures is given.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:16">42:16</span></span> And as ye
shall lift up your voices by the Comforter, ye shall speak and prophesy
as seemeth me good;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:17">42:17</span></span> For,
behold, the Comforter knoweth all things, and beareth record of the
Father and of the Son.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:18">42:18</span></span> And now,
behold, I speak unto the church. Thou shalt not kill; and he that kills
shall not have forgiveness in this world, nor in the world to come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:19">42:19</span></span> And
again, I say, thou shalt not kill; but he that killeth shall die.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:20">42:20</span></span> Thou
shalt not steal; and he that stealeth and will not repent shall be cast
out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:21">42:21</span></span> Thou
shalt not lie; he that lieth and will not repent shall be cast out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:22">42:22</span></span> Thou
shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and
none else.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:23">42:23</span></span> And he
that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith, and
shall not have the Spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:24">42:24</span></span> Thou
shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery, and
repenteth not, shall be cast out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:25">42:25</span></span> But he
that has committed adultery and repents with all his heart, and
forsaketh it, and doeth it no more, thou shalt forgive;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:26">42:26</span></span> But if he
doeth it again, he shall not be forgiven, but shall be cast out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:27">42:27</span></span> Thou
shalt not speak evil of thy neighbor, nor do him any harm.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:28">42:28</span></span> Thou
knowest my laws concerning these things are given in my scriptures; he
that sinneth and repenteth not shall be cast out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:29">42:29</span></span> If thou
lovest me thou shalt serve me and keep all my commandments.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:30">42:30</span></span> And
behold, thou wilt remember the poor, and consecrate of thy properties
for their support that which thou hast to impart unto them, with a
covenant and a deed which cannot be broken.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:31">42:31</span></span> And
inasmuch as ye impart of your substance unto the poor, ye will do it
unto me; and they shall be laid before the bishop of my church and his
counselors, two of the elders, or high priests, such as he shall appoint
or has appointed and set apart for that purpose.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:32">42:32</span></span> And it
shall come to pass, that after they are laid before the bishop of my
church, and after that he has received these testimonies concerning the
consecration of the properties of my church, that they cannot be taken
from the church, agreeable to my commandments, every man shall be made
accountable unto me, a steward over his own property, or that which he
has received by consecration, as much as is sufficient for himself and
family.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:33">42:33</span></span> And
again, if there shall be properties in the hands of the church, or any
individuals of it, more than is necessary for their support after this
first consecration, which is a residue to be consecrated unto the
bishop, it shall be kept to administer to those who have not, from time
to time, that every man who has need may be amply supplied and receive
according to his wants.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:34">42:34</span></span>
Therefore, the residue shall be kept in my storehouse, to administer to
the poor and the needy, as shall be appointed by the high council of the
church, and the bishop and his council;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:35">42:35</span></span> And for
the purpose of purchasing lands for the public benefit of the church,
and building houses of worship, and building up of the New Jerusalem
which is hereafter to be revealed—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:36">42:36</span></span> That my
covenant people may be gathered in one in that day when I shall come to
my temple. And this I do for the salvation of my people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:37">42:37</span></span> And it
shall come to pass, that he that sinneth and repenteth not shall be cast
out of the church, and shall not receive again that which he has
consecrated unto the poor and the needy of my church, or in other words,
unto me—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:38">42:38</span></span> For
inasmuch as ye do it unto the least of these, ye do it unto me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:39">42:39</span></span> For it
shall come to pass, that which I spake by the mouths of my prophets
shall be fulfilled; for I will consecrate of the riches of those who
embrace my gospel among the Gentiles unto the poor of my people who are
of the house of Israel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:40">42:40</span></span> And
again, thou shalt not be proud in thy heart; let all thy garments be
plain, and their beauty the beauty of the work of thine own hands;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:41">42:41</span></span> And let
all things be done in cleanliness before me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:42">42:42</span></span> Thou
shalt not be idle; for he that is idle shall not eat the bread nor wear
the garments of the laborer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:43">42:43</span></span> And
whosoever among you are sick, and have not faith to be healed, but
believe, shall be nourished with all tenderness, with herbs and mild
food, and that not by the hand of an enemy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:44">42:44</span></span> And the
elders of the church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for
and lay their hands upon them in my name; and if they die they shall die
unto me, and if they live they shall live unto me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:45">42:45</span></span> Thou
shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss
of them that die, and more especially for those that have not hope of a
glorious resurrection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:46">42:46</span></span> And it
shall come to pass that those that die in me shall not taste of death,
for it shall be sweet unto them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:47">42:47</span></span> And they
that die not in me, wo unto them, for their death is bitter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:48">42:48</span></span> And
again, it shall come to pass that he that hath faith in me to be healed,
and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:49">42:49</span></span> He who
hath faith to see shall see.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:50">42:50</span></span> He who
hath faith to hear shall hear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:51">42:51</span></span> The lame
who hath faith to leap shall leap.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:52">42:52</span></span> And they
who have not faith to do these things, but believe in me, have power to
become my sons; and inasmuch as they break not my laws thou shalt bear
their infirmities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:53">42:53</span></span> Thou
shalt stand in the place of thy stewardship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:54">42:54</span></span> Thou
shalt not take thy brother's garment; thou shalt pay for that which thou
shalt receive of thy brother.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:55">42:55</span></span> And if
thou obtainest more than that which would be for thy support, thou shalt
give it into my storehouse, that all things may be done according to
that which I have said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:56">42:56</span></span> Thou
shalt ask, and my scriptures shall be given as I have appointed, and
they shall be preserved in safety;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:57">42:57</span></span> And it is
expedient that thou shouldst hold thy peace concerning them, and not
teach them until ye have received them in full.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:58">42:58</span></span> And I
give unto you a commandment that then ye shall teach them unto all men;
for they shall be taught unto all nations, kindreds, tongues and people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:59">42:59</span></span> Thou
shalt take the things which thou hast received, which have been given
unto thee in my scriptures for a law, to be my law to govern my church;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:60">42:60</span></span> And he
that doeth according to these things shall be saved, and he that doeth
them not shall be damned if he so continue.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:61">42:61</span></span> If thou
shalt ask, thou shalt receive revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon
knowledge, that thou mayest know the mysteries and peaceable things—that
which bringeth joy, that which bringeth life eternal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:62">42:62</span></span> Thou
shalt ask, and it shall be revealed unto you in mine own due time where
the New Jerusalem shall be built.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:63">42:63</span></span> And
behold, it shall come to pass that my servants shall be sent forth to
the east and to the west, to the north and to the south.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:64">42:64</span></span> And even
now, let him that goeth to the east teach them that shall be converted
to flee to the west, and this in consequence of that which is coming on
the earth, and of secret combinations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:65">42:65</span></span> Behold,
thou shalt observe all these things, and great shall be thy reward; for
unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom, but unto the
world it is not given to know them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:66">42:66</span></span> Ye shall
observe the laws which ye have received and be faithful.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:67">42:67</span></span> And ye
shall hereafter receive church covenants, such as shall be sufficient to
establish you, both here and in the New Jerusalem.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:68">42:68</span></span>
Therefore, he that lacketh wisdom, let him ask of me, and I will give
him liberally and upbraid him not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:69">42:69</span></span> Lift up
your hearts and rejoice, for unto you the kingdom, or in other words,
the keys of the church have been given. Even so. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:70">42:70</span></span> The
priests and teachers shall have their stewardships, even as the members.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:71">42:71</span></span> And the
elders or high priests who are appointed to assist the bishop as
counselors in all things, are to have their families supported out of
the property which is consecrated to the bishop, for the good of the
poor, and for other purposes, as before mentioned;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:72">42:72</span></span> Or they
are to receive a just remuneration for all their services, either a
stewardship or otherwise, as may be thought best or decided by the
counselors and bishop.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:73">42:73</span></span> And the
bishop, also, shall receive his support, or a just remuneration for all
his services in the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:74">42:74</span></span> Behold,
verily I say unto you, that whatever persons among you, having put away
their companions for the cause of fornication, or in other words, if
they shall testify before you in all lowliness of heart that this is the
case, ye shall not cast them out from among you;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:75">42:75</span></span> But if ye
shall find that any persons have left their companions for the sake of
adultery, and they themselves are the offenders, and their companions
are living, they shall be cast out from among you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:76">42:76</span></span> And
again, I say unto you, that ye shall be watchful and careful, with all
inquiry, that ye receive none such among you if they are married;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:77">42:77</span></span> And if
they are not married, they shall repent of all their sins or ye shall
not receive them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:78">42:78</span></span> And
again, every person who belongeth to this church of Christ, shall
observe to keep all the commandments and covenants of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:79">42:79</span></span> And it
shall come to pass, that if any persons among you shall kill they shall
be delivered up and dealt with according to the laws of the land; for
remember that he hath no forgiveness; and it shall be proved according
to the laws of the land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:80">42:80</span></span> And if
any man or woman shall commit adultery, he or she shall be tried before
two elders of the church, or more, and every word shall be established
against him or her by two witnesses of the church, and not of the enemy;
but if there are more than two witnesses it is better.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:81">42:81</span></span> But he or
she shall be condemned by the mouth of two witnesses; and the elders
shall lay the case before the church, and the church shall lift up their
hands against him or her, that they may be dealt with according to the
law of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:82">42:82</span></span> And if it
can be, it is necessary that the bishop be present also.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:83">42:83</span></span> And thus
ye shall do in all cases which shall come before you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:84">42:84</span></span> And if a
man or woman shall rob, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of
the land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:85">42:85</span></span> And if he
or she shall steal, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of the
land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:86">42:86</span></span> And if he
or she shall lie, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of the
land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:87">42:87</span></span> And if he
or she do any manner of iniquity, he or she shall be delivered up unto
the law, even that of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:88">42:88</span></span> And if
thy brother or sister offend thee, thou shalt take him or her between
him or her and thee alone; and if he or she confess thou shalt be
reconciled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:89">42:89</span></span> And if he
or she confess not thou shalt deliver him or her up unto the church, not
to the members, but to the elders. And it shall be done in a meeting,
and that not before the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:90">42:90</span></span> And if
thy brother or sister offend many, he or she shall be chastened before
many.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:91">42:91</span></span> And if
any one offend openly, he or she shall be rebuked openly, that he or she
may be ashamed. And if he or she confess not, he or she shall be
delivered up unto the law of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:92">42:92</span></span> If any
shall offend in secret, he or she shall be rebuked in secret, that he or
she may have opportunity to confess in secret to him or her whom he or
she has offended, and to God, that the church may not speak
reproachfully of him or her.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_42:93">42:93</span></span> And thus
shall ye conduct in all things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 43. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, February
1831.](dc043)
