[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc056)  [Next](dc058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 57. Revelation through Joseph Smith, in Zion, Jackson County, Missouri, July 20, 1831. * History of the Church* 1:189-90.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:1">57:1</span></span> Hearken, O
ye elders of my church, saith the Lord your God, who have assembled
yourselves together, according to my commandments, in this land, which
is the land of Missouri, which is the land which I have appointed and
consecrated for the gathering of the saints.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:2">57:2</span></span> Wherefore,
this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:3">57:3</span></span> And thus
saith the Lord your God, if you will receive wisdom here is wisdom.
Behold, the place which is now called Independence is the center place;
and a spot for the temple is lying westward, upon a lot which is not far
from the courthouse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:4">57:4</span></span> Wherefore,
it is wisdom that the land should be purchased by the saints, and also
every tract lying westward, even unto the line running directly between
Jew and Gentile;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:5">57:5</span></span> And also
every tract bordering by the prairies, inasmuch as my disciples are
enabled to buy lands. Behold, this is wisdom, that they may obtain it
for an everlasting inheritance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:6">57:6</span></span> And let my
servant Sidney Gilbert stand in the office to which I have appointed
him, to receive moneys, to be an agent unto the church, to buy land in
all the regions round about, inasmuch as can be done in righteousness,
and as wisdom shall direct.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:7">57:7</span></span> And let my
servant Edward Partridge stand in the office to which I have appointed
him, and divide unto the saints their inheritance, even as I have
commanded; and also those whom he has appointed to assist him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:8">57:8</span></span> And again,
verily I say unto you, let my servant Sidney Gilbert plant himself in
this place, and establish a store, that he may sell goods without fraud,
that he may obtain money to buy lands for the good of the saints, and
that he may obtain whatsoever things the disciples may need to plant
them in their inheritance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:9">57:9</span></span> And also
let my servant Sidney Gilbert obtain a license—behold here is wisdom,
and whoso readeth let him understand—that he may send goods also unto
the people, even by whom he will as clerks employed in his service;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:10">57:10</span></span> And thus
provide for my saints, that my gospel may be preached unto those who sit
in darkness and in the region and shadow of death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:11">57:11</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, let my servant William W. Phelps be
planted in this place, and be established as a printer unto the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:12">57:12</span></span> And lo,
if the world receive his writings—behold here is wisdom—let him obtain
whatsoever he can obtain in righteousness, for the good of the saints.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:13">57:13</span></span> And let
my servant Oliver Cowdery assist him, even as I have commanded, in
whatsoever place I shall appoint unto him, to copy, and to correct, and
select, that all things may be right before me, as it shall be proved by
the Spirit through him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:14">57:14</span></span> And thus
let those of whom I have spoken be planted in the land of Zion, as
speedily as can be, with their families, to do those things even as I
have spoken.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:15">57:15</span></span> And now
concerning the gathering—Let the bishop and the agent make preparations
for those families which have been commanded to come to this land, as
soon as possible, and plant them in their inheritance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57:16">57:16</span></span> And unto
the residue of both elders and members further directions shall be given
hereafter. Even so. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 58. Revelation through Joseph Smith, in Zion, Jackson County,
Missouri, August 1, 1831.](dc058)
