[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc083)  [Next](dc085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 84. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, September 22 and 23, 1832. * History of the Church* 1:286-95.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:1">84:1</span></span> A
revelation of Jesus Christ unto his servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and six
elders, as they united their hearts and lifted their voices on high.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:2">84:2</span></span> Yea, the
word of the Lord concerning his church, established in the last days for
the restoration of his people, as he has spoken by the mouth of his
prophets, and for the gathering of his saints to stand upon Mount Zion,
which shall be the city of New Jerusalem.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:3">84:3</span></span> Which city
shall be built, beginning at the temple lot, which is appointed by the
finger of the Lord, in the western boundaries of the State of Missouri,
and dedicated by the hand of Joseph Smith, Jun., and others with whom
the Lord was well pleased.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:4">84:4</span></span> Verily this
is the word of the Lord, that the city New Jerusalem shall be built by
the gathering of the saints, beginning at this place, even the place of
the temple, which temple shall be reared in this generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:5">84:5</span></span> For verily
this generation shall not all pass away until an house shall be built
unto the Lord, and a cloud shall rest upon it, which cloud shall be even
the glory of the Lord, which shall fill the house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:6">84:6</span></span> And the
sons of Moses, according to the Holy Priesthood which he received under
the hand of his father-in-law, Jethro;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:7">84:7</span></span> And Jethro
received it under the hand of Caleb;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:8">84:8</span></span> And Caleb
received it under the hand of Elihu;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:9">84:9</span></span> And Elihu
under the hand of Jeremy;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:10">84:10</span></span> And
Jeremy under the hand of Gad;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:11">84:11</span></span> And Gad
under the hand of Esaias;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:12">84:12</span></span> And
Esaias received it under the hand of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:13">84:13</span></span> Esaias
also lived in the days of Abraham, and was blessed of him—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:14">84:14</span></span> Which
Abraham received the priesthood from Melchizedek, who received it
through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:15">84:15</span></span> And from
Noah till Enoch, through the lineage of their fathers;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:16">84:16</span></span> And from
Enoch to Abel, who was slain by the conspiracy of his brother, who
received the priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his
father Adam, who was the first man—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:17">84:17</span></span> Which
priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations, and is
without beginning of days or end of years.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:18">84:18</span></span> And the
Lord confirmed a priesthood also upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all
their generations, which priesthood also continueth and abideth forever
with the priesthood which is after the holiest order of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:19">84:19</span></span> And this
greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the
mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:20">84:20</span></span>
Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is
manifest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:21">84:21</span></span> And
without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the
power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:22">84:22</span></span> For
without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:23">84:23</span></span> Now this
Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and
sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face
of God;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:24">84:24</span></span> But they
hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the
Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that
they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest
is the fulness of his glory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:25">84:25</span></span>
Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood
also;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:26">84:26</span></span> And the
lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the
ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:27">84:27</span></span> Which
gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of
sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath
caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel
until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from
his mother's womb.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:28">84:28</span></span> For he
was baptized while he was yet in his childhood, and was ordained by the
angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power, to
overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the
Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of
the Lord, in whose hand is given all power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:29">84:29</span></span> And
again, the offices of elder and bishop are necessary appendages
belonging unto the high priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:30">84:30</span></span> And
again, the offices of teacher and deacon are necessary appendages
belonging to the lesser priesthood, which priesthood was confirmed upon
Aaron and his sons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:31">84:31</span></span>
Therefore, as I said concerning the sons of Moses—for the sons of Moses
and also the sons of Aaron shall offer an acceptable offering and
sacrifice in the house of the Lord, which house shall be built unto the
Lord in this generation, upon the consecrated spot as I have appointed—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:32">84:32</span></span> And the
sons of Moses and of Aaron shall be filled with the glory of the Lord,
upon Mount Zion in the Lord's house, whose sons are ye; and also many
whom I have called and sent forth to build up my church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:33">84:33</span></span> For whoso
is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have
spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit
unto the renewing of their bodies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:34">84:34</span></span> They
become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the
church and kingdom, and the elect of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:35">84:35</span></span> And also
all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:36">84:36</span></span> For he
that receiveth my servants receiveth me;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:37">84:37</span></span> And he
that receiveth me receiveth my Father;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:38">84:38</span></span> And he
that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all
that my Father hath shall be given unto him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:39">84:39</span></span> And this
is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:40">84:40</span></span>
Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and
covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:41">84:41</span></span> But whoso
breaketh this covenant after he hath received it, and altogether turneth
therefrom, shall not have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the
world to come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:42">84:42</span></span> And wo
unto all those who come not unto this priesthood which ye have received,
which I now confirm upon you who are present this day, by mine own voice
out of the heavens; and even I have given the heavenly hosts and mine
angels charge concerning you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:43">84:43</span></span> And I now
give unto you a commandment to beware concerning yourselves, to give
diligent heed to the words of eternal life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:44">84:44</span></span> For you
shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:45">84:45</span></span> For the
word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and
whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:46">84:46</span></span> And the
Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the
Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the
voice of the Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:47">84:47</span></span> And every
one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the
Father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:48">84:48</span></span> And the
Father teacheth him of the covenant which he has renewed and confirmed
upon you, which is confirmed upon you for your sakes, and not for your
sakes only, but for the sake of the whole world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:49">84:49</span></span> And the
whole world lieth in sin, and groaneth under darkness and under the
bondage of sin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:50">84:50</span></span> And by
this you may know they are under the bondage of sin, because they come
not unto me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:51">84:51</span></span> For whoso
cometh not unto me is under the bondage of sin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:52">84:52</span></span> And whoso
receiveth not my voice is not acquainted with my voice, and is not of
me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:53">84:53</span></span> And by
this you may know the righteous from the wicked, and that the whole
world groaneth under sin and darkness even now.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:54">84:54</span></span> And your
minds in times past have been darkened because of unbelief, and because
you have treated lightly the things you have received—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:55">84:55</span></span> Which
vanity and unbelief have brought the whole church under condemnation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:56">84:56</span></span> And this
condemnation resteth upon the children of Zion, even all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:57">84:57</span></span> And they
shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and remember the
new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments which
I have given them, not only to say, but to do according to that which I
have written—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:58">84:58</span></span> That they
may bring forth fruit meet for their Father's kingdom; otherwise there
remaineth a scourge and judgment to be poured out upon the children of
Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:59">84:59</span></span> For shall
the children of the kingdom pollute my holy land? Verily, I say unto
you, Nay.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:60">84:60</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you who now hear my words, which are my voice,
blessed are ye inasmuch as you receive these things;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:61">84:61</span></span> For I
will forgive you of your sins with this commandment—that you remain
steadfast in your minds in solemnity and the spirit of prayer, in
bearing testimony to all the world of those things which are
communicated unto you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:62">84:62</span></span>
Therefore, go ye into all the world; and unto whatsoever place ye cannot
go ye shall send, that the testimony may go from you into all the world
unto every creature.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:63">84:63</span></span> And as I
said unto mine apostles, even so I say unto you, for you are mine
apostles, even God's high priests; ye are they whom my Father hath given
me; ye are my friends;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:64">84:64</span></span>
Therefore, as I said unto mine apostles I say unto you again, that every
soul who believeth on your words, and is baptized by water for the
remission of sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:65">84:65</span></span> And these
signs shall follow them that believe—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:66">84:66</span></span> In my
name they shall do many wonderful works;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:67">84:67</span></span> In my
name they shall cast out devils;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:68">84:68</span></span> In my
name they shall heal the sick;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:69">84:69</span></span> In my
name they shall open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the ears of the
deaf;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:70">84:70</span></span> And the
tongue of the dumb shall speak;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:71">84:71</span></span> And if
any man shall administer poison unto them it shall not hurt them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:72">84:72</span></span> And the
poison of a serpent shall not have power to harm them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:73">84:73</span></span> But a
commandment I give unto them, that they shall not boast themselves of
these things, neither speak them before the world; for these things are
given unto you for your profit and for salvation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:74">84:74</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you, they who believe not on your words, and are not
baptized in water in my name, for the remission of their sins, that they
may receive the Holy Ghost, shall be damned, and shall not come into my
Father's kingdom where my Father and I am.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:75">84:75</span></span> And this
revelation unto you, and commandment, is in force from this very hour
upon all the world, and the gospel is unto all who have not received it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:76">84:76</span></span> But,
verily I say unto all those to whom the kingdom has been given—from you
it must be preached unto them, that they shall repent of their former
evil works; for they are to be upbraided for their evil hearts of
unbelief, and your brethren in Zion for their rebellion against you at
the time I sent you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:77">84:77</span></span> And again
I say unto you, my friends, for from henceforth I shall call you
friends, it is expedient that I give unto you this commandment, that ye
become even as my friends in days when I was with them, traveling to
preach the gospel in my power;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:78">84:78</span></span> For I
suffered them not to have purse or scrip, neither two coats.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:79">84:79</span></span> Behold, I
send you out to prove the world, and the laborer is worthy of his hire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:80">84:80</span></span> And any
man that shall go and preach this gospel of the kingdom, and fail not to
continue faithful in all things, shall not be weary in mind, neither
darkened, neither in body, limb, nor joint; and a hair of his head shall
not fall to the ground unnoticed. And they shall not go hungry, neither
athirst.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:81">84:81</span></span>
Therefore, take ye no thought for the morrow, for what ye shall eat, or
what ye shall drink, or wherewithal ye shall be clothed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:82">84:82</span></span> For,
consider the lilies of the field, how they grow, they toil not, neither
do they spin; and the kingdoms of the world, in all their glory, are not
arrayed like one of these.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:83">84:83</span></span> For your
Father, who is in heaven, knoweth that you have need of all these
things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:84">84:84</span></span>
Therefore, let the morrow take thought for the things of itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:85">84:85</span></span> Neither
take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say; but treasure up in your
minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the
very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:86">84:86</span></span>
Therefore, let no man among you, for this commandment is unto all the
faithful who are called of God in the church unto the ministry, from
this hour take purse or scrip, that goeth forth to proclaim this gospel
of the kingdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:87">84:87</span></span> Behold, I
send you out to reprove the world of all their unrighteous deeds, and to
teach them of a judgment which is to come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:88">84:88</span></span> And whoso
receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I
will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in
your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:89">84:89</span></span> Whoso
receiveth you receiveth me; and the same will feed you, and clothe you,
and give you money.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:90">84:90</span></span> And he
who feeds you, or clothes you, or gives you money, shall in nowise lose
his reward.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:91">84:91</span></span> And he
that doeth not these things is not my disciple; by this you may know my
disciples.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:92">84:92</span></span> He that
receiveth you not, go away from him alone by yourselves, and cleanse
your feet even with water, pure water, whether in heat or in cold, and
bear testimony of it unto your Father which is in heaven, and return not
again unto that man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:93">84:93</span></span> And in
whatsoever village or city ye enter, do likewise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:94">84:94</span></span>
Nevertheless, search diligently and spare not; and wo unto that house,
or that village or city that rejecteth you, or your words, or your
testimony concerning me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:95">84:95</span></span> Wo, I say
again, unto that house, or that village or city that rejecteth you, or
your words, or your testimony of me;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:96">84:96</span></span> For I,
the Almighty, have laid my hands upon the nations, to scourge them for
their wickedness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:97">84:97</span></span> And
plagues shall go forth, and they shall not be taken from the earth until
I have completed my work, which shall be cut short in righteousness—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:98">84:98</span></span> Until all
shall know me, who remain, even from the least unto the greatest, and
shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, and shall see eye to
eye, and shall lift up their voice, and with the voice together sing
this new song, saying:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:99">84:99</span></span> The Lord
hath brought again Zion; The Lord hath redeemed his people, Israel,
According to the election of grace, Which was brought to pass by the
faith And covenant of their fathers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:100">84:100</span></span> The
Lord hath redeemed his people; And Satan is bound and time is no longer.
The Lord hath gathered all things in one. The Lord hath brought down
Zion from above. The Lord hath brought up Zion from beneath.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:101">84:101</span></span> The
earth hath travailed and brought forth her strength; And truth is
established in her bowels; And the heavens have smiled upon her; And she
is clothed with the glory of her God; For he stands in the midst of his
people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:102">84:102</span></span> Glory,
and honor, and power, and might, Be ascribed to our God; for he is full
of mercy, Justice, grace and truth, and peace, Forever and ever, Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:103">84:103</span></span> And
again, verily, verily, I say unto you, it is expedient that every man
who goes forth to proclaim mine everlasting gospel, that inasmuch as
they have families, and receive money by gift, that they should send it
unto them or make use of it for their benefit, as the Lord shall direct
them, for thus it seemeth me good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:104">84:104</span></span> And let
all those who have not families, who receive money, send it up unto the
bishop in Zion, or unto the bishop in Ohio, that it may be consecrated
for the bringing forth of the revelations and the printing thereof, and
for establishing Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:105">84:105</span></span> And if
any man shall give unto any of you a coat, or a suit, take the old and
cast it unto the poor, and go on your way rejoicing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:106">84:106</span></span> And if
any man among you be strong in the Spirit, let him take with him him
that is weak, that he may be edified in all meekness, that he may become
strong also.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:107">84:107</span></span>
Therefore, take with you those who are ordained unto the lesser
priesthood, and send them before you to make appointments, and to
prepare the way, and to fill appointments that you yourselves are not
able to fill.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:108">84:108</span></span> Behold,
this is the way that mine apostles, in ancient days, built up my church
unto me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:109">84:109</span></span>
Therefore, let every man stand in his own office, and labor in his own
calling; and let not the head say unto the feet it hath no need of the
feet; for without the feet how shall the body be able to stand?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:110">84:110</span></span> Also
the body hath need of every member, that all may be edified together,
that the system may be kept perfect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:111">84:111</span></span> And
behold, the high priests should travel, and also the elders, and also
the lesser priests; but the deacons and teachers should be appointed to
watch over the church, to be standing ministers unto the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:112">84:112</span></span> And the
bishop, Newel K. Whitney, also should travel round about and among all
the churches, searching after the poor to administer to their wants by
humbling the rich and the proud.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:113">84:113</span></span> He
should also employ an agent to take charge and to do his secular
business as he shall direct.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:114">84:114</span></span>
Nevertheless, let the bishop go unto the city of New York, also to the
city of Albany, and also to the city of Boston, and warn the people of
those cities with the sound of the gospel, with a loud voice, of the
desolation and utter abolishment which await them if they do reject
these things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:115">84:115</span></span> For if
they do reject these things the hour of their judgment is nigh, and
their house shall be left unto them desolate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:116">84:116</span></span> Let him
trust in me and he shall not be confounded; and a hair of his head shall
not fall to the ground unnoticed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:117">84:117</span></span> And
verily I say unto you, the rest of my servants, go ye forth as your
circumstances shall permit, in your several callings, unto the great and
notable cities and villages, reproving the world in righteousness of all
their unrighteous and ungodly deeds, setting forth clearly and
understandingly the desolation of abomination in the last days.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:118">84:118</span></span> For,
with you saith the Lord Almighty, I will rend their kingdoms; I will not
only shake the earth, but the starry heavens shall tremble.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:119">84:119</span></span> For I,
the Lord, have put forth my hand to exert the powers of heaven; ye
cannot see it now, yet a little while and ye shall see it, and know that
I am, and that I will come and reign with my people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_84:120">84:120</span></span> I am
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 85. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, November 27,
1832.](dc085)
