[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc084)  [Next](dc086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 85. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, November 27, 1832. * History of the Church* 1:298-99.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_85:1">85:1</span></span> It is the
duty of the Lord's clerk, whom he has appointed, to keep a history, and
a general church record of all things that transpire in Zion, and of all
those who consecrate properties, and receive inheritances legally from
the bishop;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_85:2">85:2</span></span> And also
their manner of life, their faith, and works; and also of the apostates
who apostatize after receiving their inheritances.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_85:3">85:3</span></span> It is
contrary to the will and commandment of God that those who receive not
their inheritance by consecration, agreeable to his law, which he has
given, that he may tithe his people, to prepare them against the day of
vengeance and burning, should have their names enrolled with the people
of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_85:4">85:4</span></span> Neither is
their genealogy to be kept, or to be had where it may be found on any of
the records or history of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_85:5">85:5</span></span> Their names
shall not be found, neither the names of the fathers, nor the names of
the children written in the book of the law of God, saith the Lord of
Hosts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_85:6">85:6</span></span> Yea, thus
saith the still small voice, which whispereth through and pierceth all
things, and often times it maketh my bones to quake while it maketh
manifest, saying:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_85:7">85:7</span></span> And it
shall come to pass that I, the Lord God, will send one mighty and
strong, holding the scepter of power in his hand, clothed with light for
a covering, whose mouth shall utter words, eternal words; while his
bowels shall be a fountain of truth, to set in order the house of God,
and to arrange by lot the inheritances of the saints whose names are
found, and the names of their fathers, and of their children, enrolled
in the book of the law of God;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_85:8">85:8</span></span> While that
man, who was called of God and appointed, that putteth forth his hand to
steady the ark of God, shall fall by the shaft of death, like as a tree
that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_85:9">85:9</span></span> And all
they who are not found written in the book of remembrance shall find
none inheritance in that day, but they shall be cut asunder, and their
portion shall be appointed them among unbelievers, where are wailing and
gnashing of teeth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_85:10">85:10</span></span> These
things I say not of myself; therefore, as the Lord speaketh, he will
also fulfil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_85:11">85:11</span></span> And they
who are of the High Priesthood, whose names are not found written in the
book of the law, or that are found to have apostatized, or to have been
cut off from the church, as well as the lesser priesthood, or the
members, in that day shall not find an inheritance among the saints of
the Most High;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_85:12">85:12</span></span>
Therefore, it shall be done unto them as unto the children of the
priest, as will be found recorded in the second chapter and sixty-first
and second verses of Ezra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 86. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, December 6,
1832.](dc086)
