[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc089)  [Next](dc091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 90. Revelation to Joseph Smith, given Kirtland, Ohio, March 8, 1833. * History of the Church* 1:329-31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:1">90:1</span></span> Thus saith
the Lord, verily, verily I say unto you my son, thy sins are forgiven
thee, according to thy petition, for thy prayers and the prayers of thy
brethren have come up into my ears.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:2">90:2</span></span> Therefore,
thou art blessed from henceforth that bear the keys of the kingdom given
unto you; which kingdom is coming forth for the last time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:3">90:3</span></span> Verily I
say unto you, the keys of this kingdom shall never be taken from you,
while thou art in the world, neither in the world to come;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:4">90:4</span></span>
Nevertheless, through you shall the oracles be given to another, yea,
even unto the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:5">90:5</span></span> And all
they who receive the oracles of God, let them beware how they hold them
lest they are accounted as a light thing, and are brought under
condemnation thereby, and stumble and fall when the storms descend, and
the winds blow, and the rains descend, and beat upon their house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:6">90:6</span></span> And again,
verily I say unto thy brethren, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams,
their sins are forgiven them also, and they are accounted as equal with
thee in holding the keys of this last kingdom;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:7">90:7</span></span> As also
through your administration the keys of the school of the prophets,
which I have commanded to be organized;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:8">90:8</span></span> That
thereby they may be perfected in their ministry for the salvation of
Zion, and of the nations of Israel, and of the Gentiles, as many as will
believe;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:9">90:9</span></span> That
through your administration they may receive the word, and through their
administration the word may go forth unto the ends of the earth, unto
the Gentiles first, and then, behold, and lo, they shall turn unto the
Jews.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:10">90:10</span></span> And then
cometh the day when the arm of the Lord shall be revealed in power in
convincing the nations, the heathen nations, the house of Joseph, of the
gospel of their salvation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:11">90:11</span></span> For it
shall come to pass in that day, that every man shall hear the fulness of
the gospel in his own tongue, and in his own language, through those who
are ordained unto this power, by the administration of the Comforter,
shed forth upon them for the revelation of Jesus Christ.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:12">90:12</span></span> And now,
verily I say unto you, I give unto you a commandment that you continue
in the ministry and presidency.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:13">90:13</span></span> And when
you have finished the translation of the prophets, you shall from
thenceforth preside over the affairs of the church and the school;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:14">90:14</span></span> And from
time to time, as shall be manifested by the Comforter, receive
revelations to unfold the mysteries of the kingdom;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:15">90:15</span></span> And set
in order the churches, and study and learn, and become acquainted with
all good books, and with languages, tongues, and people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:16">90:16</span></span> And this
shall be your business and mission in all your lives, to preside in
council, and set in order all the affairs of this church and kingdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:17">90:17</span></span> Be not
ashamed, neither confounded; but be admonished in all your
high-mindedness and pride, for it bringeth a snare upon your souls.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:18">90:18</span></span> Set in
order your houses; keep slothfulness and uncleanness far from you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:19">90:19</span></span> Now,
verily I say unto you, let there be a place provided, as soon as it is
possible, for the family of thy counselor and scribe, even Frederick G.
Williams.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:20">90:20</span></span> And let
mine aged servant, Joseph Smith, Sen., continue with his family upon the
place where he now lives; and let it not be sold until the mouth of the
Lord shall name.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:21">90:21</span></span> And let
my counselor, even Sidney Rigdon, remain where he now resides until the
mouth of the Lord shall name.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:22">90:22</span></span> And let
the bishop search diligently to obtain an agent, and let him be a man
who has got riches in store—a man of God, and of strong faith—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:23">90:23</span></span> That
thereby he may be enabled to discharge every debt; that the storehouse
of the Lord may not be brought into disrepute before the eyes of the
people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:24">90:24</span></span> Search
diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work
together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenant
wherewith ye have covenanted one with another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:25">90:25</span></span> Let your
families be small, especially mine aged servant Joseph Smith's, Sen., as
pertaining to those who do not belong to your families;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:26">90:26</span></span> That
those things that are provided for you, to bring to pass my work, be not
taken from you and given to those that are not worthy—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:27">90:27</span></span> And
thereby you be hindered in accomplishing those things which I have
commanded you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:28">90:28</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, it is my will that my handmaid Vienna
Jaques should receive money to bear her expenses, and go up unto the
land of Zion;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:29">90:29</span></span> And the
residue of the money may be consecrated unto me, and she be rewarded in
mine own due time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:30">90:30</span></span> Verily I
say unto you, that it is meet in mine eyes that she should go up unto
the land of Zion, and receive an inheritance from the hand of the
bishop;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:31">90:31</span></span> That she
may settle down in peace inasmuch as she is faithful, and not be idle in
her days from thenceforth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:32">90:32</span></span> And
behold, verily I say unto you, that ye shall write this commandment, and
say unto your brethren in Zion, in love greeting, that I have called you
also to preside over Zion in mine own due time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:33">90:33</span></span>
Therefore, let them cease wearying me concerning this matter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:34">90:34</span></span> Behold, I
say unto you that your brethren in Zion begin to repent, and the angels
rejoice over them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:35">90:35</span></span>
Nevertheless, I am not well pleased with many things; and I am not well
pleased with my servant William E. McLellin, neither with my servant
Sidney Gilbert; and the bishop also, and others have many things to
repent of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:36">90:36</span></span> But
verily I say unto you, that I, the Lord, will contend with Zion, and
plead with her strong ones, and chasten her until she overcomes and is
clean before me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_90:37">90:37</span></span> For she
shall not be removed out of her place. I, the Lord, have spoken it.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 91. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, March 9,
1833.](dc091)
