[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc104)  [Next](dc106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 105. Revelation through Joseph Smith, on Fishing River, Missouri, June 22, 1834. * History of the Church* 2:108-11.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:1">105:1</span></span> Verily I
say unto you who have assembled yourselves together that you may learn
my will concerning the redemption of mine afflicted people—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:2">105:2</span></span> Behold, I
say unto you, were it not for the transgressions of my people, speaking
concerning the church and not individuals, they might have been redeemed
even now.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:3">105:3</span></span> But
behold, they have not learned to be obedient to the things which I
required at their hands, but are full of all manner of evil, and do not
impart of their substance, as becometh saints, to the poor and afflicted
among them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:4">105:4</span></span> And are
not united according to the union required by the law of the celestial
kingdom;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:5">105:5</span></span> And Zion
cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the
celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:6">105:6</span></span> And my
people must needs be chastened until they learn obedience, if it must
needs be, by the things which they suffer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:7">105:7</span></span> I speak
not concerning those who are appointed to lead my people, who are the
first elders of my church, for they are not all under this condemnation;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:8">105:8</span></span> But I
speak concerning my churches abroad—there are many who will say: Where
is their God? Behold, he will deliver them in time of trouble, otherwise
we will not go up unto Zion, and will keep our moneys.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:9">105:9</span></span>
Therefore, in consequence of the transgressions of my people, it is
expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a little season for the
redemption of Zion—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:10">105:10</span></span> That
they themselves may be prepared, and that my people may be taught more
perfectly, and have experience, and know more perfectly concerning their
duty, and the things which I require at their hands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:11">105:11</span></span> And
this cannot be brought to pass until mine elders are endowed with power
from on high.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:12">105:12</span></span> For
behold, I have prepared a great endowment and blessing to be poured out
upon them, inasmuch as they are faithful and continue in humility before
me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:13">105:13</span></span>
Therefore it is expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a
little season, for the redemption of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:14">105:14</span></span> For
behold, I do not require at their hands to fight the battles of Zion;
for, as I said in a former commandment, even so will I fulfil—I will
fight your battles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:15">105:15</span></span> Behold,
the destroyer I have sent forth to destroy and lay waste mine enemies;
and not many years hence they shall not be left to pollute mine
heritage, and to blaspheme my name upon the lands which I have
consecrated for the gathering together of my saints.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:16">105:16</span></span> Behold,
I have commanded my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., to say unto the strength
of my house, even my warriors, my young men, and middle-aged, to gather
together for the redemption of my people, and throw down the towers of
mine enemies, and scatter their watchmen;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:17">105:17</span></span> But the
strength of mine house have not hearkened unto my words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:18">105:18</span></span> But
inasmuch as there are those who have hearkened unto my words, I have
prepared a blessing and an endowment for them, if they continue
faithful.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:19">105:19</span></span> I have
heard their prayers, and will accept their offering; and it is expedient
in me that they should be brought thus far for a trial of their faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:20">105:20</span></span> And
now, verily I say unto you, a commandment I give unto you, that as many
as have come up hither, that can stay in the region round about, let
them stay;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:21">105:21</span></span> And
those that cannot stay, who have families in the east, let them tarry
for a little season, inasmuch as my servant Joseph shall appoint unto
them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:22">105:22</span></span> For I
will counsel him concerning this matter, and all things whatsoever he
shall appoint unto them shall be fulfilled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:23">105:23</span></span> And let
all my people who dwell in the regions round about be very faithful, and
prayerful, and humble before me, and reveal not the things which I have
revealed unto them, until it is wisdom in me that they should be
revealed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:24">105:24</span></span> Talk
not of judgments, neither boast of faith nor of mighty works, but
carefully gather together, as much in one region as can be, consistently
with the feelings of the people;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:25">105:25</span></span> And
behold, I will give unto you favor and grace in their eyes, that you may
rest in peace and safety, while you are saying unto the people: Execute
judgment and justice for us according to law, and redress us of our
wrongs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:26">105:26</span></span> Now,
behold, I say unto you, my friends, in this way you may find favor in
the eyes of the people, until the army of Israel becomes very great.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:27">105:27</span></span> And I
will soften the hearts of the people, as I did the heart of Pharaoh,
from time to time, until my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and mine elders,
whom I have appointed, shall have time to gather up the strength of my
house,

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:28">105:28</span></span> And to
have sent wise men, to fulfil that which I have commanded concerning the
purchasing of all the lands in Jackson county that can be purchased, and
in the adjoining counties round about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:29">105:29</span></span> For it
is my will that these lands should be purchased; and after they are
purchased that my saints should possess them according to the laws of
consecration which I have given.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:30">105:30</span></span> And
after these lands are purchased, I will hold the armies of Israel
guiltless in taking possession of their own lands, which they have
previously purchased with their moneys, and of throwing down the towers
of mine enemies that may be upon them, and scattering their watchmen,
and avenging me of mine enemies unto the third and fourth generation of
them that hate me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:31">105:31</span></span> But
first let my army become very great, and let it be sanctified before me,
that it may become fair as the sun, and clear as the moon, and that her
banners may be terrible unto all nations;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:32">105:32</span></span> That
the kingdoms of this world may be constrained to acknowledge that the
kingdom of Zion is in very deed the kingdom of our God and his Christ;
therefore, let us become subject unto her laws.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:33">105:33</span></span> Verily
I say unto you, it is expedient in me that the first elders of my church
should receive their endowment from on high in my house, which I have
commanded to be built unto my name in the land of Kirtland.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:34">105:34</span></span> And let
those commandments which I have given concerning Zion and her law be
executed and fulfilled, after her redemption.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:35">105:35</span></span> There
has been a day of calling, but the time has come for a day of choosing;
and let those be chosen that are worthy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:36">105:36</span></span> And it
shall be manifest unto my servant, by the voice of the Spirit, those
that are chosen; and they shall be sanctified;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:37">105:37</span></span> And
inasmuch as they follow the counsel which they receive, they shall have
power after many days to accomplish all things pertaining to Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:38">105:38</span></span> And
again I say unto you, sue for peace, not only to the people that have
smitten you, but also to all people;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:39">105:39</span></span> And
lift up an ensign of peace, and make a proclamation of peace unto the
ends of the earth;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:40">105:40</span></span> And
make proposals for peace unto those who have smitten you, according to
the voice of the Spirit which is in you, and all things shall work
together for your good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105:41">105:41</span></span>
Therefore, be faithful; and behold, and lo, I am with you even unto the
end. Even so. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 106. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, November
25, 1834.](dc106)
