[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc122)  [Next](dc124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 123. The duty of the Saints toward their persecutors as set forth by Joseph Smith while a prisoner in the jail at Liberty, Missouri, March 1839. * History of the Church* 3:302-3.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:1">123:1</span></span> And
again, we would suggest for your consideration the propriety of all the
saints gathering up a knowledge of all the facts, and sufferings and
abuses put upon them by the people of this State;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:2">123:2</span></span> And also
of all the property and amount of damages which they have sustained,
both of character and personal injuries, as well as real property;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:3">123:3</span></span> And also
the names of all persons that have had a hand in their oppressions, as
far as they can get hold of them and find them out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:4">123:4</span></span> And
perhaps a committee can be appointed to find out these things, and to
take statements and affidavits; and also to gather up the libelous
publications that are afloat;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:5">123:5</span></span> And all
that are in the magazines, and in the encyclopedias, and all the
libelous histories that are published, and are writing, and by whom, and
present the whole concatenation of diabolical rascality and nefarious
and murderous impositions that have been practised upon this people—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:6">123:6</span></span> That we
may not only publish to all the world, but present them to the heads of
government in all their dark and hellish hue, as the last effort which
is enjoined on us by our Heavenly Father, before we can fully and
completely claim that promise which shall call him forth from his hiding
place; and also that the whole nation may be left without excuse before
he can send forth the power of his mighty arm.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:7">123:7</span></span> It is an
imperative duty that we owe to God, to angels, with whom we shall be
brought to stand, and also to ourselves, to our wives and children, who
have been made to bow down with grief, sorrow, and care, under the most
damning hand of murder, tyranny, and oppression, supported and urged on
and upheld by the influence of that spirit which hath so strongly
riveted the creeds of the fathers, who have inherited lies, upon the
hearts of the children, and filled the world with confusion, and has
been growing stronger and stronger, and is now the very mainspring of
all corruption, and the whole earth groans under the weight of its
iniquity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:8">123:8</span></span> It is an
iron yoke, it is a strong band; they are the very handcuffs, and chains,
and shackles, and fetters of hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:9">123:9</span></span> Therefore
it is an imperative duty that we owe, not only to our own wives and
children, but to the widows and fatherless, whose husbands and fathers
have been murdered under its iron hand;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:10">123:10</span></span> Which
dark and blackening deeds are enough to make hell itself shudder, and to
stand aghast and pale, and the hands of the very devil to tremble and
palsy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:11">123:11</span></span> And
also it is an imperative duty that we owe to all the rising generation,
and to all the pure in heart—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:12">123:12</span></span> For
there are many yet on the earth among all sects, parties, and
denominations, who are blinded by the subtle craftiness of men, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive, and who are only kept from the truth
because they know not where to find it—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:13">123:13</span></span>
Therefore, that we should waste and wear out our lives in bringing to
light all the hidden things of darkness, wherein we know them; and they
are truly manifest from heaven—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:14">123:14</span></span> These
should then be attended to with great earnestness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:15">123:15</span></span> Let no
man count them as small things; for there is much which lieth in
futurity, pertaining to the saints, which depends upon these things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:16">123:16</span></span> You
know, brethren, that a very large ship is benefited very much by a very
small helm in the time of a storm, by being kept workways with the wind
and the waves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123:17">123:17</span></span>
Therefore, dearly beloved brethren, let us cheerfully do all things that
lie in our power; and then may we stand still, with the utmost
assurance, to see the salvation of God, and for his arm to be revealed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 124. Revelation to Joseph Smith, Nauvoo, Illinois, January 19,
1841.](dc124)
