[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](had20)  [Next](had22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

# CHAPTER XVIII

### PILGRIMAGE

### (HAJJ AND 'UMRAH)

1\. "Surely the first House appointed for men is the one at Makkah,
blessed and a guidance for the nations.....And pilgrimage to the House
is incumbent upon men for the sake of Allāh, upon every one who is able
to undertake the journey to it" (3:95, 96).

2\. "The pilgrimage is performed in the well-known months; so whoever
determines the performance of the pilgrimage therein. there shall be no
amorous speech, nor abusing, nor disputing in the pilgrimage and make
provision" (2:197).

The word hajj means literally *qasd* (*betaking oneself to a person or a
place*), and technically it means *betaking oneself at a particular time
to Makkah to perform certain devotional acts* required by Islām.
*'Umrah*, from *'amara* meaning he paid a visit to a place, means a
visit to Makkah at any time of the year, and consists of some of the
devotional acts of hajj. The Sacred House, called the Ka'bah a
rectangular building 40 ft. by 35 ft., and the *Haram*, including Makkah
and some adjacent territory, form the centre of the devotional acts of
hajj and 'umrah.

The Ka'bah is called the first House of Divine worship on earth, and a
pilgrimage to it is made incumbent upon every Muslim who has the means
to undertake the journey to it (v. 1). Pilgrimage is spoken of as one of
the basic institutions of Islām (H. ii:6), and its performance once in a
lifetime is obligatory (h. 1). If a person is unable to perform it
personally, he can do it through a substitute (h. 2). One must provide
oneself beforehand with what is required for the journey (h. 3). Hajj
can be performed only at a fixed time (h. 4) 'umrah may be performed at
any time. *Ihrām* is the condition in which the pilgrim puts himself;
what is to be done or not done in this state is described in hh. 5-8.
There are particular places on the different routes to Makkah, where the
pilgrim must enter into the state of ihrām (h. 9). The particular dhikr
of hajj is the utterance of *labbaika* in a loud voice (h. 10). Making
circumambulations of the Ka'bah, or tawāf, is the first devotional act
of hajj or 'umrah (h. 11); it is performed by men and women together (h.
12). and may be made while riding (h. 13). The tawāf is commenced at the
corner where the

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

Black Stone is fixed, which is kissed at the start by making a sign with
something (h 13). In kissing it there is no idea of paying Divine honour
to it; the other corners were also kissed (bb. 14, 15). The tawāf, as a
devotional act, is likened to prayer, and therefore a menstruating woman
should postpone it (hh. 16-17). In the tawāf the first three circuits
are made running and the last four walking (h. 18). Running between the
Safā and the Marwah, known as sa'y, is the next devotional act of hajj
and 'umrah, and with this the 'umrah ends (h. 18) The hajj proper begins
on the 8th Dhu-l-Hijjah, which is called the *yaum al-tarwiyah* when the
pilgrims proceed to Minā, and here they say their Zuhr and 'Asr prayers
(hh. 19, 20), On the 9th Dhu-l-Hijjah, called *yaum al-'arafah*, the
pilgrims proceed from Minā to 'Arafāt where they say the Zuhr and 'Asr
prayers, and the imām delivers the Khutbah (h. 21.) 'Arafāt is left
after sunset, and the Maghrib and 'Ishā' prayers on that day and the
Fajr prayer on the following day, are said at Muzdalifah (hh. 22, 23),
which is left before sunrise for Minā where the animals are sacrificed
at about breakfast time. Then the *tawāf al-ifādzah* is performed and
after this the pilgrim gets out of the state of ihrām (h. 24). The flesh
of the animals sacrificed may be eaten, stored or distributed. and their
skins must be given in charity (h. 25, 26). The head is shaven or the
hair is clipped as a sign of getting out of the state of ihrām (h. 27).
The 10th Dhu-l-Hijjah and the following two or three days, called the
*ayyām al-tashrīq*, are spent in Minā. During these days the pilgrims
may occasionally visit the Ka'bah (h. 28). Stones are thrown at three
places known as the Jamrah and the pilgrim prays to God to keep the Evil
one away from him (h. 29). The final act of hajj is the *tawāf
al-wadā'*, the circumambulation of the Ka'bah when leaving Makkah (h.
30). The pilgrim is allowed to do any business before or after the hajj
(h. 31).

**1** Ibn 'Abbās reported,

Al-Aqra' asked the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, O
Messenger of Allāh! Is the pilgrimage to be performed every year or only
once? He. said: "Only once; and whoever does it more than once, it is
supererogatory."

(AD. 11:l.)

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

**2** Ibn 'Abbās said,

Fadzl was riding behind the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of
Allāh be on him, when a woman of (the tribe of) Khath'am came........and
she said, O Messenger of Allāh! The ordinance regarding pilgrimage made
obligatory by Allāh for His servants found my father a very old man
unable to sit firmly on a riding camel, shall I perform a pilgrimage on
his behalf? He said, "Yes". And this happened in the Farewell
Pilgrimage.

(B. 25:l.)

**3** Ibn 'Abbās said,

The people of Yaman used to go to pilgrimage while they had no
provisions with them and they said, We are those who trust (in Allāh).
But

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

when they came to Makkah they begged of people, so Allāh revealed: "And
make provision, for the benefit of provision is the guarding oneself."

(B. 25:6.)

**4** Ibn 'Umar said,

The months of hajj are Shawwāl and Dhul-l-Qa'dah and (the first) ten
days of Dhu-l-Hijjah. And Ibn 'Abbās said, It is the Sunnah that a man
shall not enter the state of ihrām1 except in the months of pilgrimage.

(B. 25:34.)

**5** Ibn 'Umar reported about the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh
be on him,

A man asked him, What should a man wear in the state of ihrām? He said:

1\. *Ihrām*, (from *haram*, a forbidden thing) signifies entering upon a
state that causes what is avowed before to be forbidden or unlawful, and
it is technically used to indicate the condition in which the pilgrim is
required to put himself. What acts or things become forbidden in the
state of ihrām is explained here and in the three hadīth that follow.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

"He shall not wear shirt, nor turban, nor trousers, nor head-gear, nor
any cloth dyed with *wars* or saffron; and if he does not find shoes,
let him wear leather stockings, and he should cut them off so that they
may be lower than the ankles."3

(B. 3:51)

**6** Ibn 'Abbās said,

One in a state of ihrām may smell sweet-smelling plants, and look in the
looking-glass, and use medicines out of what he eats, (such as) olive
oil and butter; and 'Atā' said, He can wear

2\. This hadīth explains what the pilgrim should not wear when he enters
upon a state of ihrām. Men wore only two seamless sheets, a sheet
reaching from the navel to below the knees. (*izār*) and a sheet which
covers the upper part of the body (*ridā'*), while women wore their
ordinary simple garments. *Wars* is a plant with which clothes are dyed.
Clothes dyed red or yellow are thus forbidden.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

a ring and carry a purse; and Ibn 'Umar made circuits, while he was in a
state of ihrām, and he had girdled his belly with a cloth; and
'Ā'ishah's opinion was that there was no harm in wearing
knickerbockers.3

(B. 25:18.)

**7** Ibn 'Umar reported,

He heard the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him,
forbidding women in a state of ihrām wearing gloves, and veil, and
garments dyed with wars and saffron, and (saying) that they might wear
besides this what they liked of garments coloured with safflower, or
made of silk (or silk and wool), or

3\. Bukhārī explains that 'Ā'ishah allowed knickerbockers only for those
who drove her riding camel. Trousers are allowed when an *izār* cannot
be had (B. & M-Msh. 11:11).

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

ornaments, or trousers, or shirt.4

(AD. 11:29.)

**8** Abū Allāh said,

'I heard the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him,
uttering *labbaika* with glued hair.5

(B. 25:19.)

**9** Ibn 'Abbās said, The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on
him, appointed for the people of Madīnah Dhu-l-Hulaifah as the place
where they should enter into the state of ihrām; for the people of
Syria, Juhfah; for the people of Najd, Qarn al-Manāzil , and for the
people of Yaman, Yalamlam. These are for them

4\. The veil was worn in Arabia as a mark of rank: and it was,
therefore, disallowed when a woman was in a state of ihrām, as
pilgrimage required the obliteration of all differences of rank.
Forbidding a veil in pilgrimage is further a conclusive proof that the
Holy Qur'ān did not enjoin the wearing of veil, as in that case the
prohibition here stated would be a contradiction of the Holy Qur'ān.
Gloves are not allowed because like the veil they are a mark of rank.
Ornaments are allowed because they are not a mark of rank. and are worn
by even ordinary people and labouring classes.

5\. *Talbīd* is the putting upon one's head gum or something glutinous,
in order that the hair might become compact. This is allowed in the
state of ihrām, lest the hair should become dishevelled or dusty.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

and for those who come upon them from other places, of those who have
determined the performance of the hajj and 'umrah; and for him who is on
the nearer side (of Makkah), the appointed place is from where he
starts, so that for the people of Makkah it is Makkah.6

(B. 25:7.)

**10** Ibn 'Umar reported,

The uttering of *labbaika*7 by the Messenger of Allāh, peace and
blessings of Allāh be on him, was thus:

"I am at Thy service, O Allāh! I am at Thy service.

"I am at Thy service; Thou hast no associate, I am at Thy service.

6\. When the pilgrims reach the places mentioned or places opposite them
in the sea, they enter into the state of ihrām. Such a place is called
*miqāt*, *an appointed place*, or *muhill*, *the place of raising voices
with labbaika*.

7\. *Labbaika* (from *labb-un*, *obeying* or *serving*) means, *I am at
thy service* or *wait intent upon obedience to thee*, or *I am in
attendance upon thee*, or *I am in thy presence, time after time* (LL.)
These are the oft-repeated words of the pilgrim when he enters upon a
state of ihrām.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

"Thine is the praise and Thine the favour and Thine the kingdom, Thou
hast no associate."

(B. 25:26.)

**11** Urwah said,

'Ā'ishah informed me that when the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh
be on him, entered (Makkah on pilgrimage), the first thing that he did
was that he performed ablutions, then he made circuits (round the
Ka'bah),8 and there was no 'umrah.

(B. 25:62.)

**12** Ibn Juraij reported,

When Ibn Hishām forbade women making circuits along with men, 'Atā'
said, How dost thou forbid them while the wives of the Prophet,

8\. This is called *tawāf al-qudūm*. *Tawāf* (from *tafa*, *he went
round*) is technically *going round the Ka'bah*. The tawāf Consists of
seven circuits (h. 18).

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, made circuits along with men? I
said, Was it after the (verses relating to) curtain (were revealed) or
before (it)? He said, By my life! I found this after the curtain
(orders). I said, How did men mix with them? He said, They did not mix
with them; 'Ā'ishah used to make circuits remaining aside from the men,
not mixing with them; ... but when they intended to go into the (Sacred)
House, they stopped before entering (it) till the men were turned out.9

(B. 25: 61)

9\. This hadīth shows that men and women performed the different acts of
devotion together; only the women did not mix with men, just as in
prayer in mosques they formed separate ranks. It further shows that a
change was already coming over the simplicity of the Holy Prophet's
time, and already men were thinking of enforcing stricter measures for
the seclusion of women. and restraining their freedom. In fact, this was
a necessary outcome of the ease which Muslims began to enjoy on account
of their conquests.

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

**13** Ibn 'Abbās said,

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, made circuits of
the House riding on a camel, and every time that he came to the Corner,
he made a sign with something which he had with him and said, Allāhu
Akbar.10

(B. 25:61.)

**14** Ibn 'Umar reported,

'Umar said, speaking of the Corner (the Black Stone), I call Allāh to
witness that I know that thou art a stone-thou canst not harm or profit;
and if I had not seen the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of
Allāh be on him, kissing thee, I would not have kissed thee, then he
kissed it.

(B. 25:56)

10\. The Ka'bah has four comers (*arkān*, sing. *rukn*): the Black Stone
called here al-Rukn, the Corner, but generally known as *al-hajar
al-aswad* or the Black Stone, and the corners on the Yaman side are
known as the Yamānī corners; the other two being the Shāmī (on the side
of Syria) and the 'Irāqī (on the side of Mesopotamia). The circuit is
commenced at the Black Stone which is the corner stone of the Ka'bah--it
is often called *al-Rukn* or *the Corner*. The other corners may also be
kissed, but the kissing of the Black Stone, the cornerstone of the
Ka'bah, is one of the chief features of pilgrimage. Jesus Christ was
referring to this very stone when he said, "The stone which the builders
rejected, the same is become the head of the corner" (Matt. 21:42). It
is, in fact, an emblem, a token, that part of the progeny of Abraham,
Ishmael and <span id="page_243">p. 243</span> his descendants, which was
rejected by the Israelites. was to become the cornerstone of the Kingdom
of God. That there is no idea at all of Divine honour being paid to the
Black Stone in kissing it, is shown by the next two hadīth. See also B.
25: 58.

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

**15** Ibn 'Umar said,

I have not given up the kissing of these two corners11, in difficulty
and in ease, since I saw the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of
Allāh be on him, kissing them both.

(B. 25:56.)

**16** Ibn 'Abbās reported,

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said: "The making
of circumambulations round the House is like prayer except that you talk
in it; and whoever talks in it, let him not talk anything but good,"12

(Tr.-Msh. 11:3.)

11\. The Shāmī and the 'Irāqī corners. This shows that all four corners
were kissed.

12\. Tawāf is compared to prayer to show that the mind must be entirely
engrossed with the idea of Divine presence. This comparison further
draws attention to the fact that outward purity is as necessary in tawāf
as in prayer.

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

**17** 'Ā'ishah said,

'We went out with nothing in view but hajj, and when we reached Sarif, I
menstruated. The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on
him, entered upon me and I was weeping. He said, "What is the matter
with thee? Hast thou menstruated?" I said, Yes. He said:

"This is a matter that Allāh has ordained for the daughters of Adam, so
do what the pilgrims do, except that thou shalt not make circuits round
the House."

(B. 6:l.)

**18** Ibn 'Umar reported,

When the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him,
made circuits in the hajj and the 'umrah, on first coming (to Makkah),
he started with three circuits at a fast pace, and made four circuits

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

walking; then he said two rak'as of prayer; then he ran between the Safā
and the Marwah.13

(B. 25:62 )

**19** Jābir said,

We came with the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, we
were not in a state of ihrām till the day of *tarwiyah*, and with Makkah
to our back we uttered *labbaika* for the hajj.14

(B. 25:81.)

**20** Abd al-'Azīz said,

I asked Anas, Inform me about something which thou hast known about the
Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, where did he say the
Zuhr and the 'Asr prayers on the day of *tarwiyah*? He said, At Minā.

(B. 25:82.)

13\. Safā and Marwah are two little hills near Makkah. This devotional
act of Hajj is called *sa'y*. The running between Safā and Marwah, is
performed seven times (B. 25:79.) The limits are indicated by two
minarets. In the case of 'umrah, the pilgrim gets out of the state of
ihrām with the sa'y.

14\. *Tarwiyah* means *watering* or *satisfying the thirst*, and the 8th
of Dhu-l-Hijjah is so called because on that day the pilgrims provide
themselves with water for the following days which are to be spent in
Minā and 'Arafāt. The hajj proper <span id="page_246">p. 246</span> thus
begins on the 8th Dhu-l-Hijjah and pilgrims who get out of the state of
ihrām on performing the 'umrah, enter into ihrām for hajj on this date.

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

**21** Sālim reported,

Hajjāj ibn Yūsuf, in the year in which he attacked Ibn al-Zubair, asked
'Abd Allāh, How dost thou do in the halting-place on the day of
'Arafah?15 Sālim said, If thou wilt follow the Sunnah, say the prayer at
an early hour on the day of 'Arafah. Then 'Abd Allāh ibn 'Umar said, He
is right; they used to combine the Zuhr and 'Asr prayers according to
Sunnah.16 (B. 25:88.)

15\. The 'Arafah is the ninth day of Dhu-l-Hijjah. The pilgrims remain
in Minā on the 8th, and on the ninth they proceed to 'Arafāt about nine
miles from Makkah. 'Arafah is derived from *'arf* which means knowledge.

The halting at 'Arafāt is called *wuqūf*. It lasts only for a few hours,
from afternoon till sunset, but it is the most important of the
devotional acts of hajj so much so that there is no hajj without it. A
sermon is here delivered by the imām on the mount known as the *Jabal
al-Rahmah* (The Mountain of Mercy).

In the pre-Islām days, the Quraish did not go to 'Arafāt, as they
considered themselves superior to the other tribes. Islām obliterated
this distinction. (2:197; B. 25:91).

16\. Minā is left at noon on the 9th, and the Zuhr and 'Asr prayers are
combined in 'Arafāt where the pilgrims stay till sunset.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

**22** Ibn 'Umar said,

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, combined the
Maghrib and 'Ishā' prayers at Muzdalifah-the iqāma was called out for
each one of them; and he did not say any supererogatory prayer between
them, nor after any one of them.17

(B. 25:96.)

**23** 'Amr ibn Maimūn said,

I was present with 'Umar; he said the morning prayer at Muzdalifah.

(B. 25:100.)

**24** Ibn 'Umar said,

In the Farewell pilgrimage the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings
of Allāh be on him, profited by combining the 'umrah

17\. After returning from 'Arafāt, the night is passed at Muzdalifah
which is also called Jam'. Here the Maghrib and 'Ishā' prayers are
combined, and then the morning prayer is said at a very early hour. The
sunnah or supererogatory part is dropped when the prayers arc combined.

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

with the hajj ................. So he performed the tawāf when he came
to Makkah; and the first thing that he did was that he kissed the
Corner, then he ran in the first three circumambulations and walked in
four; then when he had finished the tawāf of the House, he said two
rak'ahs of prayer near the Standing-place (of Abraham), then he uttered
taslīm; and when he had done this, he came to the Safā, and made tawāf
of the Safā and the Marwah seven times; then nothing that was forbidden
to him (in ihrām) became lawful to him until he completed his hajj, and
sacrificed the animal on the day of Sacrifice,18 and he returned and
performed the tawāf of the House;19 then everything that was forbidden
to him (in

18\. The day of Sacrifice is the 10th Dhu-l-Hijjah. Animals are
sacrificed at about breakfast time.

19\. This is called the *tawāf al-ifādzah*, *i.e.*, the tawāf after
*returning* from 'Arafāt.

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

ihrām) became lawful for him.

(B. 25:104.)

**25** 'Alī said.

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, appointed me, so I
superintended the sacrifice of camels; and he ordered me so I
distributed their flesh; then he ordered me and i distributed their
coverings and their skins.20

(B. 25:120.)

**26** Jābir said,

We used not to eat of the flesh of our sacrifices beyond the three days
of Minā; then the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, gave
us permission and said: "Eat and take it as a provision (for the
journey)." So we ate and took it as a provision.21

(B. 25:124.)

20\. The same rule should be followed in relation to the 'Īd sacrifices.
Organized properly, the institution would be a source of immense
strength financially.

21\. Thus the flesh of the sacrificed animals may even be dried and kept
for use when one likes.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

**27** 'Abd Allāh said,

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, and a party of his
companions, had their heads shaven, and some of them had their hair
clipped.22

(B. 25:127.)

**28** Ibn 'Abbās reported,

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, used to visit the
House in the days of Minā.23

(B. 25:129.)

**29** Jābir reported,

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, threw stones in the
forenoon on the day of Sacrifice, and after this he threw stones in the
afternoon.24

(B. 25:134.)

**30** Anas reported,

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said the Zuhr and
the 'Asr and the Maghrib

22\. The shaving of heads or the clipping of hair is a sign that the
state of ihrām is over.

23\. The days of Minā are the tenth of Dhu-l-Hijjah and the following
two or three days, the latter being called *ayyām al-tashriq*.

24\. The throwing of stones is described in detail in B. 25:142. It was
a reminder of the spiritual fight which a man must be prepared to wage
against evil. The throwing of stones teaches the lesson that man must
learn to hate evil, and that he should try to keep the Devil at a
stone's throw.

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

and the 'Ishā' prayers, then slept a little at Muhassab; then he rode to
the House and performed tawāf.25

(B. 25:144.)

**31** Ibn 'Abbās reported,

Dhu-l-Majāz and 'Ukāz were markets for trade (during the pilgrimage) in
the days of Ignorance. When Islām came, they (the Muslims) disliked this
until it was revealed: "There is no blame on you if you seek bounty from
your Lord", (that is to Say), at the time of pilgrimage.26

(B. 25:150.)

25\. Muhassab is in Minā. The tawāf spoken of here is called the *tawāf
al-wadā'* or the tawāf of departure from Makkah.

20\. Material advantages may thus be combined with the great spiritual
lesson learned in hajj.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX: Jihād](had22)
