[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0103)  [Next](t0105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001DDYEI2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*The Babylonian Talmud, Book 1: Tract Sabbath*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1903\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.

THE translator of the Talmud, who has now reached the thirteenth volume
of his task, covering twenty-one tracts of this great work, certainly
cannot point with any great pride to the fact that this is the second
edition of his translation which first appeared in 1896, for he believes
that the opening and bringing to light of a book so long withheld from
the gaze of the curious, and even the learned, should have attracted
more attention and deserved greater consideration than it has received.
However, he is glad to see that thousands of readers have at last taken
advantage of the opportunity of looking into the "sealed book," and to
such an extent that second editions have become necessary, both of this
volume and of the Tract Rosh Hashana of the fourth volume, which he has
reëdited and enlarged upon, adding many historical facts and legends, so
that they now appear as practically new works.

This is certainly an encouragement to him to continue his work, with the
hope that in time it will gain the proper recognition and proper
attention which he thinks this great work of the sixth century should
receive at the hands of all scholars and even laymen.

In revising this volume the translator had in mind the many criticisms
which have been passed upon his effort and which have appeared in
various papers throughout different countries, but he gave his attention
to those only which were not prompted by animosity and jealousy. He begs
to call the attention of all critics to the dictum of the Talmud, "Kal
Hat'haloth Kashoth" (all beginnings are difficult); for, bearing this in
mind, they would no doubt have been more moderate.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

The translator will be very grateful to critics who will call his
attention to any mistakes made in the translation of the original text.
However, he will positively ignore criticisms of the kind described
above.

The translator further hopes that this and the succeeding volumes will
meet with the favor and approval of the public, which will be sufficient
reward to repay him for his efforts.

M. L. R.

NEW YORK, June, 1901.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Editor's Preface](t0105)
