[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0104)  [Next](t0106.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001DDYEI2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Babylonian Talmud, Book 1: Tract Sabbath*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1903\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# EDITOR'S PREFACE.

\[*To the first edition*.\]

THE Hebrew edition of Rosh Hashana contains an elaborate introduction in
three chapters, the translation of which does not appear as yet. Its
contents include many important rules which we have followed in the
entire work, but we do not feel called upon at this time to engross the
time of the English reader by reciting them. We, however, deem it a duty
to say a few words, so that the reader may understand our position and
the reason why we have undertaken a work which will probably be
productive of much adverse criticism in certain quarters.

The fate of the Talmud has been the fate of the Jews. As soon as the
Hebrew was born <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) he was surrounded by
enemies. His whole history has been one of struggle against persecution
and attack. Defamation and deformation have been his lot. So too, has it
been with the Talmud. At the beginning of its formative period, viz.,
the development of the Mishna, it was beset by such enemies as the
Sadducees, the Boëthusians, and other sects, not to mention the Roman
Government. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) When its canon was fixed,
the Karaites tried to destroy or belittle its influence, and since that
time it has been subjected to an experience of unvarying difficulty.
Yet, with remarkable truth, the words of Isaiah \[xliii. 2\] may be
applied to both: "When thou passest through the waters, I will be with
thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou
walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the
flame kindle upon thee." There is, however, one point concerning which
this simile is not true. The Jew has advanced; the Talmud has remained
stationary.

Since the time of Moses Mendelssohn the Jew has made vast strides
forward. There is to-day no branch of human activity in

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

which his influence is not felt. Interesting himself in the affairs of
the world, he has been enabled to bring a degree of intelligence and
industry to bear upon modern life that has challenged the admiration of
the world. But with the Talmud it is not so. That vast encyclopædia of
Jewish lore remains as it was. No improvement has been possible; no
progress has been made with it. Issue after issue has appeared, but it
has always been called the Talmud Babli, as chaotic as it was when its
canon was originally appointed. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md)
Commentary upon commentary has appeared; every issue of the Talmud
contains new glosses from prominent scholars, proposing textual changes,
yet the text of the Talmud has not received that heroic treatment that
will alone enable us to say that the Talmud has been improved. Few books
have ever received more attention than this vast storehouse of Jewish
knowledge. Friends and enemies it has had. Attack after attack has been
made upon it, and defence after defence made for it; yet whether its
enemies or its defenders have done it more harm it would be hard to
tell. Not, forsooth, that we do not willingly recognize that there have
been many learned and earnest spirits who have labored faithfully in its
behalf; but for the most part, if the Talmud could speak, it would say,
"God save me from my friends!" For the friends have, generally, defended
without due knowledge of that stupendous monument of rabbinical lore;
and the enemies have usually attacked it by using single phrases or
epigrams disconnected from their context, by which method anything could
be proven. In both cases ignorance has been fatal. For, how many have
read the whole Talmud through and are thus competent to judge of its
merits? Is it right to attack or defend without sufficient information?
Is it not a proof of ignorance and unfairness to find fault with that of
which we are not able to give proper testimony?

Let us take the case of those persons in particular who attacked the
Talmud and made it the object of their venomous vituperation. Is it
possible that they could have believed it a work capable of teaching the
monstrous doctrines so frequently attributed to it, when that work says,
among other things, "When one asks for food, no questions shall be asked
as to who he is, but he must immediately be given either food or money"?
Could a work be accused of frivolity and pettiness that defines
wickedness to be

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "the action of a
rich man who, hearing that a poor man is about to buy a piece of
property, secretly overbids him"? (Qiddushin, 59*a*.) Could there be a
higher sense of true charity than that conveyed by the following
incident? Mar Uqba used to support a poor man by sending him on the eve
of each Day of Atonement four hundred zuz. When the rabbi's son took the
money on one occasion he heard the poor man's wife say, "Which wine
shall I put on the table? Which perfume shall I sprinkle around the
room?" The son, on hearing these remarks, returned with the money to his
father and told him of what he had heard. Said Mar Uqba: "Was that poor
man raised so daintily that he requires such luxuries? Go back to him
and give him double the sum?" (Ketuboth, 7*a*.) This is not recorded by
the Talmud as an exception; but it is the Talmudical estimate of
charity. The Talmud is free from the narrowness and bigotry with which
it is usually charged, and if phrases used out of their context, and in
a sense the very reverse from that which their author intended, are
quoted against it, we may be sure that those phrases never existed in
the original Talmud, but are the later additions of its enemies and such
as never studied it. When it is remembered that before the canon of the
Talmud was finished, in the sixth century, <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) it had been growing for more than six
hundred years, and that afterward it existed in fragmentary manuscripts
for eight centuries until the first printed edition appeared; that
during the whole of that time it was beset by ignorant, unrelenting, and
bitter foes; that marginal notes were easily added and in after years
easily embodied in the text by unintelligent copyists and printers, such
a theory as here advanced seems not at all improbable.

The attacks on the Talmud have not been made by the enemies of the Jews
alone. Large numbers of Jews themselves repudiate it, denying that they
are Talmud Jews, or that they have any sympathy with it. Yet there are
only the few Karaites in Russia and Austria, and the still fewer
Samaritans in Palestine, who are really not Talmud Jews. Radical and
Reform, Conservative and Orthodox, not only find their exact
counterparts in the Talmud, but also follow in many important
particulars the practices instituted through the Talmud, *e.g.*, New
Year's Day, Pentecost (so far as its date and significance are
concerned), the QADDISH, etc. The modern Jew is the product of the
Talmud,

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

which we shall find is a work of the greatest sympathies, the most
liberal impulses, and the widest humanitarianism. Even the Jewish
defenders have played into the enemy's hands by their weak defences, of
which such expressions as "Remember the age in which it was written," or
"Christians are not meant by 'gentiles,' but only the Romans, or the
people of Asia Minor," etc., may be taken as a type.

Amid its bitter enemies and weak friends the Talmud has suffered a
martyrdom. Its eventful history is too well known to require detailing
here. We feel that every attack on it is an attack upon the Jew. We feel
that defence by the mere citation of phrases is useless and at the best
weak. To answer the attacks made upon it through ludicrous and garbled
quotations were idle. There is only one defence that can be made in
behalf of the Talmud. Let it plead its own cause in a modern language!

What is this Talmud of which we have said so much? What is that work on
which so many essays and sketches, articles and books, have been
written? The best reply will be an answer in negative form. The Talmud
is not a commentary on the Bible; nor should the vein of satire or humor
that runs through it be taken for sober earnestness. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) Nor is the Talmud a legal code, for it
clearly states that one must not derive a law for practical application
from any halakhic statement, nor even from a precedent, unless in either
case it be expressly said that the law or statement is intended as a
practical rule \[Baba Bathra, 130*b*\]. Further: R. Issi asked of R.
Jo'hanan: "What shall we do if you pronounce a law to be a Halakha?" to
which R. Jo'hanan replied: "Do not act in accordance with it until you
have heard from me, 'Go and practice.'" Neither is the Talmud a
compilation of fixed regulations, although the Shul'han Arukh would make
it appear so. Yet, even when the Shul'han Arukh will be forgotten, the
Talmud will receive the respect and honor of all who love liberty, both
mental and religious. It lives and will live, because of its
adaptability to the necessities of every age, and if any proof were
needed to show that it is not dead, the attacks that are with remarkable
frequency made on it in Germany might be given as the strongest
evidence. In its day the Talmud received, not the decisions, but the
debates of the leaders of the people. It was an independent critic, as
it were, adapting itself to the spirit of the times; adding where
necessary to the teachings of former

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

days, and abrogating also what had become valueless in its day. In other
words, the Talmud was the embodiment of the spirit of the people,
recording its words and thoughts, its hopes and aims, and its opinions
on every branch of thought and action. Religion and Ethics, Education,
Law, History, Geography, Medicine, Mathematics, etc., were all
discussed. It dealt with living issues in the liveliest manner, and,
therefore, it is living, and in reading it we live over again the lives
of its characters.

Nothing could be more unfair, nothing more unfortunate than to adopt the
prevailing false notions about this ancient encyclopædia. Do not imagine
it is the bigoted, immoral, narrow work that its enemies have portrayed
it to be. On the very contrary; in its statements it is as free as the
wind. It permits no shackles, no fetters to be placed upon it. It knows
no authority but conscience and reason. It is the bitterest enemy of all
superstition and all fanaticism.

But why speak for it? Let it open its mouth and speak in its own
defence! How can it be done? The Talmud must be translated into the
modern tongues and urge its own plea. All that we have said for it would
become apparent, if it were only read. Translation! that is the sole
secret of defence! In translating it, however, we find our path
bristling with difficulties. To reproduce it as it is in the original is
in our judgment an impossible task. Men like Pinner and Rawicz have
tried to do so with single tracts, and have only succeeded in, at the
best, giving translations to the world which are not only not correct
but also not readable. If it were translated from the original text one
would not see the forest through the trees. For, as we have said above,
throughout the ages there have been added to the text marginal notes,
explanatory words, and whole phrases and sentences inserted in malice or
ignorance, by its enemies and its friends. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) As it stands in the original it is,
therefore, a tangled mass defying reproduction in a modern tongue. It
has consequently occurred to us that, in order to enable the Talmud to
open its mouth, the text must be carefully edited. A modern book,
constructed on a supposed scientific plan, we cannot make of it, for
that would not be the Talmud; but a readable, intelligible work, it can
be made. We have, therefore, carefully punctuated the Hebrew text with
modern punctuation marks, and have reëdited it by omitting all such
irrelevant matter as interrupted

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

the clear and orderly arrangement of the various arguments. We have also
omitted repetitions; for frequently the same thing is found repeated in
many tracts; while in this translation each statement is to be found
only once, and in the proper place for it. In this way there disappear
those unnecessary debates within debates, which only serve to confuse
and never to enlighten on the question debated. Thus consecutiveness has
been gained, but never at the expense of the Talmud, for in no case have
we omitted one single statement that was necessary or of any importance.
In other words, we have merely removed from the text those accretions
that were added from outside sources, which have proven so fruitful a
source of misunderstanding and misrepresentation.

We continue our labors in the full and certain hope that "he who comes
to purify receives divine help," and that in our task of removing the
additions made by the enemies of the Talmud we shall be purifying it
from the most fruitful source of the attacks made on it, and thereunto
we hope for the help of Heaven. As we have already said, we feel that
this work will not be received everywhere with equal favor. We could not
expect that it would. Jewish works of importance have most usually been
given amid "lightning and thunder," and this is not likely to prove an
exception.

We are always ready to accept criticism, so long as it is objective, and
we shall gladly avail ourselves of suggestions given to us, but we shall
continue to disregard all *personal* criticism directed not against our
work but against its author. This may serve as a reply to a so-called
review that appeared in *one* of our Western weeklies.

At the same time we deem it our duty to render to *Dr. Isaac H. Wise*,
the venerable President of the Hebrew Union College of Cincinnati, our
heartfelt thanks for the several evenings spent in revising this volume,
and for many courtesies extended to us in general.

THE EDITOR.

CINCINNATI, May, 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[ix:1](t0105.htm#fr_0.md) *Vide* Genesis, xliii. 32.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[ix:2](t0105.htm#fr_1.md) In our forthcoming
"History of the Talmud" the reader will find all details of the
persecution, until the present time, in twenty chapters.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[x:1](t0105.htm#fr_2.md) *Vide* Brief Introduction.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xi:1](t0105.htm#fr_3.md) According to others, in
the eighth century. See our "History of the Talmud."

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xii:1](t0105.htm#fr_4.md) See our article, "What is
the Talmud?" in the prospectus.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xiii:1](t0105.htm#fr_5.md) In others of our works
we have named some of these interpolators.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Brief General Introduction to the Babylonian Talmud](t0106.md)
