[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0110)  [Next](t0112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001DDYEI2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*The Babylonian Talmud, Book 1: Tract Sabbath*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1903\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

# CHAPTER III.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING STOVES, HEARTHS, AND OVENS.

MISHNA *I*.: Cooked victuals may be put on a stove that was heated with
straw or stubble. If the stove was heated with the pulp of poppy seed
(*i.e.*, poppy seed from which the oil was pressed out) or with wood,
(cooked victuals) may not be put upon it, unless the (live) coals were
taken out or covered with ashes. Beth Shamai says: (The latter instance)
is permissible only in the case of victuals that are to be kept warm,
but not of such as are improved by continued cooking. Beth Hillel says:
Both alike are permitted. Beth Shamai says: (Victuals) may be taken off
the stove, but not put back upon it; Beth Hillel permits it.

GEMARA: The schoolmen propounded a question: "As for the expression
'shall not be put,' does it (referring to a pot that has been taken off
the stove) mean 'one shall not put it back,' but if it has not been
taken off, it may be left there, even if the live coals were not cleared
away or covered with ashes? Or does it mean that the pot should not be
left there (even if it was standing there before) unless the live coals
have been cleared out or damped, so much the more should it not be put
there if it was once taken off?" Come and hear. There being two parts in
our Mishna, if the point of controversy is the leaving (of the victuals
on the stove, if they were there before), the Mishna is to be explained
thus: On the stove that was heated with straw or with stubble the
victuals may be left; on a stove that was heated with pressed poppy seed
or with wood, the victuals may be left only if the live coals were taken
out or covered with ashes. What kind of victuals may be left there?
According to Beth Shamai such as are to be kept warm, but not such as
improve by cooking. And according to Beth Hillel both. Thus the point of
controversy is the leaving of the victuals (that had been on the stove
before). And as the (two schools) differ in this matter, so do they also
differ in their opinions concerning putting them back upon the stove if
they were once taken off. But if you interpret the Mishna to make the

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

returning of the victuals to the stove the point of their
differing--viz., what kind of victuals should be returned (to the
stove), according to the former such as are to be kept warm, but not
such as improve by cooking, and according to the latter, both. (If you
put such a construction upon the text of the Mishna,) to what purpose is
it repeated? "Beth Shamai says," etc. It may be said even that they
differ concerning putting back, and nevertheless there is no difficulty,
as the Mishna is not complete, and should read thus: "If the stove was
heated . . . but if they stood there before, they may be left there,
even if the live coals are not taken out or covered with ashes." And
what may be left? Beth Shamai says only such as are to be kept warm, and
Beth Hillel says even victuals requiring cooking; but even in the case
of returning (the victuals to the stove, if they have been removed)
there is still a difference of opinion between the two schools, for
according to the former they may be only taken off, and according to the
latter they may be returned also.

Come <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76) and hear. R. Helbo in the name
of R. Hama b. Gorion, quoting Rabh, said: "The Mishna speaks only about
putting the victuals upon the stove, but as to putting them into the
stove it is surely prohibited." Now, if thou sayest the dispute is about
returning (the pot to the stove), this remark is correct, for there is a
difference to what place it is returned, whether into the stove or upon
it; but if the question were about keeping it on the stove while it is
there, what difference would it make?

Do you think R. Helbo's report refers to the first part of the Mishna?
It refers to the second part, in which Beth Hillel allows it to be
returned; and to this he says, even in this case, upon the stove it is
permissible, but not into the stove.

The schoolmen propounded a question: "May (a pot with victuals) be
placed so as to touch the side of the stove? Does the prohibition which
holds good for putting it into or upon the stove apply also here, or is
touching its side a different case?" Come and hear. "A stove that was
heated with pressed poppy seed or wood may (be used) to put a pot
alongside of, but not on, unless the live coals were taken out or
covered with ashes." If the coals get dim or fine hurds were put upon
them, they are considered as if their fire was damped with ashes. R.
Itz'hak

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

b\. Na'hmani in the name of R. Oshia says: If the fire was damped and
still it got a-glowing, victuals that are sufficiently warm, and cooked
meats that require no more cooking, may be left standing upon it.

Is it to be inferred from this that, if victuals are improved by
shrivelling (upon the fire), they may be left there? This is a different
case, for the fire was damped. If such is the case, what came R. Itz'hak
to teach? "Lest one say that if the fire got to glowing again, it is to
be considered as a fire originally started?" R. Itz'hak lets us know
that, when once a fire has been damped, we need have no further scruples
about letting the victuals remain on it.

R. Shesheth said in the name of R. Johanan: Victuals that require
additional warming or additional cooking may be left upon a stove that
was heated with pressed poppy seed or with wood; but if they were once
removed, they shall not be replaced unless the live coals were taken out
or covered with ashes. He was of the opinion that our Mishna (treats) of
replacing (a removed pot), but allows (a pot that was not removed) to be
left on the stove, even if the live coals are not taken out or covered
with ashes. Said Rabha: "Were not both (propositions) expounded in the
Boraithoth (that were cited)?" Aye, but R. Shesheth merely, wishes to
exhibit his construction of the text of the Mishna.

R. Samuel b. Jehudah in the name of R. Johanan said: Upon a stove that
was heated with pressed poppy seed or wood, victuals may be left
standing, if they are sufficiently warmed and sufficiently cooked, even
if shrivelling improves them. Said one of the schoolmen to him: "Did not
Rabh and Samuel both say that if shrivelling improves them, it is not
allowed? And he answered: "I said this in the name of R. Johanan and not
in the name of the above mentioned, as I am aware of it." R. Uqba of
Mishan said to R. Ashi: "You, who cherish the teachings of Rabh and
Samuel, may follow their regulation, but we will follow the regulation
of R. Johanan."

Abayi questioned R. Joseph: May victuals be left (on the stove)? And he
answered: Did not R. Jehudah leave (victuals on the stove), and eat them
afterward? Rejoined Abayi: The case of R. Jehudah cannot be taken into
consideration. He was stricken with a dangerous disease, and for him
even (the cooking of victuals) on the Sabbath was permitted; but I ask
about (healthy men like) you and me. R. Joseph answered: "In

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sura they do
leave. As R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak, who was exemplary in following
religious ordinances, was wont to leave and to eat."

R. Ashi said: "I was standing before R. Huna and observed that fried
fish was kept (warm) for him and he ate it; but I know not whether (he
did it) because he thought that victuals which improve by shrivelling
are allowed, or whether he thought that, because there was flour on his
fish, continuous warming did not improve it.

R. Na'hman said: (Victuals) that improve by shrivelling must not (be
left on the stove); such as deteriorate may. The rule is that all
victuals which contain flour deteriorate by continuous warming.

R. Hyya b. Ahba was questioned: "If one forgot his pot and left it upon
the stove, and the victuals were thus cooked on the Sabbath, may he eat
them or not?" The master gave no answer. The next time he lectured:
Victuals cooked on the Sabbath unintentionally may be eaten;
intentionally not, but (as regards the pot that is forgotten on the
stove) it makes no difference.

What does (the phrase) "it makes no difference" mean? Rabba and R.
Joseph both say that the phrase implies that it may be eaten, for one
who cooks acts intentionally; but when forgotten there was no act, and
therefore he may eat it. But R. Na'hman b. Isaac says the above phrase
of "it makes no difference" implies a prohibition. In the case of
cooking there is no fear of craft; therefore if he has done it
unintentionally, he is not fined; but in the case of forgetting (the pot
in the fire) craft may be feared (it means that he may put it in
intentionally saying that he forgot), and therefore even if he actually
forgets he is not allowed to eat the victuals.

The schoolmen propounded a question: "What about one who had
intentionally left (his victuals upon the stove)? Do the rabbis fine him
or not?" Come and hear. Samuel b. Nathan in the name of R. Hanina said:
"When R. Jose went to Ziporis, he found warm meats that had been left
upon the stove, and he did not prohibit their use, but shrivelled eggs
that had been left upon the stove he prohibited. Shall we not assume
that he forbade their use even on that Sabbath as a fine? Nay, he
forbade their use for the following Sabbath."

From this is to be inferred that shrivelled eggs improve by continuous
heating. As R. Hama b. Hanina said: "Rabbi and

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I were once
stopping at a certain place. We were treated with eggs shrivelled like
wild pears, and we ate many of them."

"*It may also be put back*." R. Shesheth said: The Tana who holds that
the pot may also be put back (upon the stove) allows this (to be done)
even on the Sabbath. R. Oshia is also of the same opinion, for thus he
said: "We were once standing before R. Hyya the Great; we served him
with a bowl of warm (soup), which was brought from the lower floor (of
the house), and we mixed a cup of wine for him, and (afterward) we
returned it (the bowl) to its place, and he said nothing." And R. Hyya
in the name of R. Johanan said: Even if (the warm pot taken off from the
stove) was put upon the ground, it may (still be put back on the stove).
Said Hyskiyah in the name of Abayi: "According to them who hold that if
he puts it on the floor it may not be returned, it is said only when it
was not his intention to return it. But if it was, he may. And from this
it is to be inferred that if it was still in his hand, although his
intention was not to place it again, he may do so on reconsideration."

MISHNA *II*.: (Victuals) shall not be put either inside or on top of an
oven that was heated with straw or with stubble; a firing-pot that was
heated with straw or with stubble is (considered by the law) as a stone,
but if it was heated with pressed poppy seed or with wood it is
considered as an oven.

GEMARA: A Boraitha teaches: If an oven was heated with straw or with
stubble, (a pot with victuals) shall not be put close to it (so that it
touch the oven), the less so upon it, and still less so into it; so much
the less shall (a pot) be put (alongside of an oven) that was heated
with poppy-seed pulp or with wood. If a firing-pot was heated with straw
or with stubble, (a pot) may be put close to it, but not upon it; with
poppy-seed pulp or with wood it must not be put close to it. Said R. Aha
b. Rabha to R. Ashi: "How shall the firing-pot be considered? If it is
like a stove, even if heated with poppy-seed pulp or with wood (a pot
shall be allowed to be put close to it); and if it is like an oven it
should not, even if it is heated with stubble or straw?" Answered he: It
contains more heat than a stove and less heat than an oven.

What is a firing-pot and what is a stove? Said R. Jose b. Hanina: "A
firing-pot has an opening on the top upon which only one pot can be set;
a stove has openings upon which two pots can be set at a time."

MISHNA *III*.: An egg shall not be put close to a boiler to

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

get it settled, nor must it be wrapped in a hot cloth. R. Jose permits
it; also it must not be put into hot sand or in the (hot) dust of the
road that it be roasted (by the heat of the sun). It once happened that
the inhabitants of Tiberias had laid a pipe of cold water through the
arm of their hot springs. But the sages explained to them that on the
Sabbath this water is considered like any other warmed on the Sabbath,
and must not be used either for washing or drinking; and should this be
done on a feast day, it is like water heated by fire, which may be used
for drinking only, but not for washing.

GEMARA: The schoolmen questioned: How is it if one has done so with an
egg? Said R. Joseph: He is liable for a sin-offering. Said Mar b.
Rabhina: This is to be understood also from the following Boraitha:
Everything that was in hot water before the Sabbath may be soaked in hot
water on the Sabbath; things that were not in hot water before the
Sabbath may only be rinsed in it, excepting old herrings and Spanish
(salted) fish, because with these, rinsing completes their preparation.
(The same is the case with an egg; the settling completes.)

"*Nor shall it be wrapped*," etc. Now, the Mishna which states: "Cooked
victuals may be put into a pit for preservation; drinking water into
cold bad water to cool; cold victuals in the sun to warm." Shall we
assume that it is in accordance with R. Jose and not with the sages?
Said R. Na'hman: As to the heat of the sun, all agree that it is
allowed; the outcome of heating by fire, all agree that it is
prohibited. The point of their differing is the outcome of sun-heating.
The one master holds that the use of such heat is prohibited for fear
lest one use also the heat that is generated by fire; the other master
does not impose such a precautionary measure.

"*It happened that the inhabitants of Tiberias*," etc. R. Hisda said:
With the prohibition by the rabbis of the act of the Tiberians they have
also abolished the permission to heat on Friday, even when it is yet
day, in such places as increase heat. Said Ulla: "The Halakha prevails
according to the Tiberians." Rejoined R. Na'hman: "The Tiberians
themselves have already destroyed their pipes." "Washing with warm
water," how is this to be understood? The whole body? Is this prohibited
only with water that was warmed on Sabbath? Is it not the same even when
it was warmed on the eve of Sabbath? As the following Boraitha states:
"With water which was warmed on the

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

eve of Sabbath, on the morrow one may wash his face, hands, and feet,
but not the whole body. And if it means the face, etc., how is the
latter part to be understood? If it was warmed on a feast day," etc.

Shall we then assume that our Mishna states in accordance with Beth
Shamai, as they so state plainly elsewhere, to which the Beth Hillel
opposed and permitted? Said R. Iyqa b. Hanina: Our Mishna treats of
washing the entire body, and it is in accordance with the Tana of the
following Boraitha: "One shall not rinse his entire body (on the
Sabbath) either with warm or with cold water." So is the decree of R.
Mair, but R. Simeon permits this. R. Hisda says their dispute concerns
only (water that is) in the ground; but water contained in a vessel is
strictly prohibited.

Rabba b. b. Hana in the name of R. Johanan said: "The Halakha prevails
according to R. Jehudah." Said R. Joseph to him: "Didst thou hear this
explicitly, or dost thou derive it by inference (from a similar
teaching)?" "I have heard it explicitly," he answered.

It was taught: If water was warmed on Friday, Rabh said one may wash his
entire body in it on the next day, every member separately (*i.e.*, not
plunge into it at once). Samuel, however, said: It was not allowed but
of the face, hands, and feet. And the following Boraitha supports
Samuel: "If water was warmed on Friday, one may wash his face, hands,
and feet with it on the following day, but not his entire body, even
member by member; and so much less with water warmed on a feast day."

Said R. Joseph to Abayi: "Did Rabba not act according to the decisions
of Rabh?" "I know not," he answered.

The rabbis taught: A bath-house, the openings of which were stopped up
on Friday (so that the heat should not escape), may be used for bathing
immediately after the Sabbath is over. If its openings were stopped up
on the eve of a feast day, one may, on the next day, enter it to have a
sweat, but he must leave it and rinse his hands in an adjoining room. R.
Jehudah said: It happened in a bath-house of the city of B'nai Beraq,
that its openings were stopped up on the eve of a feast day. The next
day R. Eliezer b. Azariah and R. Aqiba entered it and took a sweat; then
they left it and rinsed their bodies in the adjoining room; but the warm
water in it had been covered with boards. When the report of this
reached the masters they

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

said, even if the warm water had not been covered with boards, they were
also allowed (to do so). However, since transgressing began to increase,
they began to prohibit. In bath-houses of large cities one may walk
about without fear of people's saying that he went to take a sweat.

What does the expression "transgressing" mean? As R. Simeon b. Pazi in
the name of R. Joshua b. Levi, quoting bar Qapara, said: In former times
the people were accustomed to bathe (on the Sabbath) in water that was
warmed on Friday. The bath-keepers then began to warm the water on the
Sabbath, and to tell the people that it had been warmed on Friday.
Hereupon they prohibited bathing in warm water, but still they placed no
restriction upon taking a sweating (in the bath-room). The people then
would come and bathe, but pretend to merely take a sweating. Then
sweating was also prohibited, but washing in the hot spring water of
Tiberias was still allowed. The people, however, would come and wash
themselves in water that was warmed by the fire and say that they washed
in the hot spring water. Subsequently warm water was prohibited for
bathing altogether, but bathing in cold water was allowed. Seeing that
people could not stand the last prohibition, it was therefore revoked,
and bathing in the hot spring water of Tiberias was allowed. The
prohibition of the sweating bath, however, remained. The rabbis taught:
One may warm himself by a hearth-fire and afterwards rinse himself with
cold water, but not bathe first in cold water and then warm himself by a
hearth-fire, because he warms the water that is on him.

The rabbis taught: One may warm a sponging-cloth and put it upon his
bowels (on the Sabbath), but he must not do so with a boiling hot
vessel, for this is dangerous even on week days.

The rabbis taught: One may put a pitcher of water before a blazing fire,
not to warm it, but to temper the coldness of the water. R. Judah said:
A woman may put an oil flask before a blazing fire, not to boil it, but
merely to temper it. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel says: A woman may
unhesitatingly put oil on her hand, warm it before the fire, and anoint
her little son with it without any fear.

Said R. Judah in the name of Samuel: Whether it be oil or water, if the
hand is spontaneously withdrawn from it (feeling the scald) it is
prohibited, but not otherwise. And what extent of heat is meant by it?
Said Rabba: If the belly of a child is scalded by it.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

R. Itz'hak b. Abhdimi said: "I once followed Rabbi into the bath-house
(on the Sabbath). I wanted to put a bottle of oil for him into the tank
(that contained hot spring water). Said he unto me: "Take out some warm
water from the tank and put it into another vessel (to warm the oil in).
From this we have inferred three things--viz.: First, that oil improves
by warming, and it is a prohibited act; second, that if anything is put
into a second vessel (not directly into the boiling vessel) it is not
considered cooking; third, that the mere tempering of oil is analogous
to cooking it.

Said Rabhina: From this story it may be inferred that if one cooks in
the hot spring water of Tiberias on the Sabbath he is culpable, for the
case happened after the rabbis had imposed the precautionary measure,
and yet Rabbi would not allow him (R. Itz'hak) to put the oil directly
into the tank. Is that so? Did not R. Hisda say that he who has cooked
in the hot spring water of Tiberias is not culpable? The *culpability*
to be inferred (from the case of Rabbi) extends only as far as blows of
correction <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77) are concerned.

R. Zera said: "I have seen R. Abuhu swimming in a tank, and I know not
whether he raised (his feet from the ground) or not. Is it not
self-evident that he did not raise them, as there is a Boraitha: One
shall not swim about in a pond, even if (that pond) is stationed in a
yard. This presents no difficulty. In a pond it is prohibited, because
it is similar to a river, while in a tank it is allowed, because it is
similar to a vessel. <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78)

R. Zera once found R. Jehudah in the bath. He (R. Jehudah) ordered his
servant (in the Hebrew Aramaic tongue): "Bring me the comb; hand me the
soap; open your mouths, and exhale the warm air from within you; drink
of the (warm) water of the bath." Said R. Zera: "If I had not come but
to hear *this*, it were enough for me."

It is correct that he ordered things in the Hebrew language, as private
affairs may be said in the same language. The same is with the second
order, for Samuel said that heat (from without) drives out heat (from
within). But what good is in the order, "Drink of the water of the
bath"? It is also correct, as we have learned in the following Boraitha:
"If one washed

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

himself with warm water and did not drink of it, he is like an oven that
was heated from without but not from within."

MISHNA *IV*.: The hot water contained in a "Muliar" (caldron), the live
coals of which have been cleared away before the Sabbath set in, may be
used on the Sabbath; but the hot water contained in an "Antikhi"
(another kind of kettle), even if cleared of live coals, is not to be
used on the Sabbath.

GEMARA: What is a Muliar? A Boraitha states: "It is a vessel provided
with an attachment for live coals, used for keeping water"; as for an
Antikhi, Rabba says it is a Bekiri (a vessel similar to a Muliar, but of
heavier construction and continually in use). R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak
says: It is a Bedude (a large kettle with an attachment underneath for
live coals). There is a Boraitha in support of the opinion of R.
Na'hman: "The hot water in an Antikhi, even if the coals thereof are
cleared away or damped, is not permitted to be used, for the heavy
bottom keeps the heat."

MISHNA *V*.: Into a kettle, the hot water of which has been spilt out
and which has been removed from the fire, cold water is not permitted to
be poured, for the purpose of heating; but it is permitted to pour water
into the kettle, or into a cup, for the purpose of making such water
lukewarm.

GEMARA: How is this to be understood? Said Abayi: It means thus: "Into a
kettle, the fire of which has been removed, which still contains hot
water, a small quantity of cold water may not be poured, for the purpose
of warming; but a large quantity, to make the hot water lukewarm is,
however, permitted. Into a kettle, the hot water of which has been
entirely removed, no cold water at all may be poured, because it tempers
the vessel. And it is in accordance with R. Jehudah, who holds that an
act which pleases one, if done even unintentionally, is prohibited.

Said Rabh: "Even the above-mentioned large quantity is allowed only to
make the water lukewarm; but not such a quantity as will entirely
neutralize the hot water and tend to temper the vessel." Samuel,
however, permits any quantity.

Shall we assume that Samuel is in accordance with R. Simeon (who opposes
the above theory of R. Jehudah), but did he not say that it is permitted
to extinguish live dross on public ground (to prevent injury), but not
charcoal? And if he agrees with R. Simeon, this also should be
permitted? As regards labor tending to the accomplishment of a work
(prohibited on the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

Sabbath), he holds with R. Simeon; but as to the performance of labor,
not for its own sake, he sides with R. Jehudah. Said Rabina: "Since it
is permitted to perform labor (prohibited by rabbinical law), in order
to prevent injury, it is also permitted to remove thorns from public
ground, little by little, in distances of less than four ells at a time
(in order to prevent injury); but upon unclaimed ground it may be done
in greater distances."

"*But it is permitted*," etc. The rabbis taught: One may pour hot water
upon cold, but not cold upon hot water, so is the decree of Beth Shamai;
Beth Hillel, however, allows both ways, provided a cup is used; but in a
bathing-tub hot water upon cold is permitted, but cold water upon warm
is not. But R. Simeon b. Menassiah forbids it. And Na'hman said that so
the Halakha prevails. R. Joseph was about to say that a bucket is under
the same ruling as a bathing-tub. Said Abayi to him: "So taught R. Hyya,
that a bucket is not in this category."

Said R. Huna b. R. Joshua: "I observed that Rabha was not scrupulous
with regard to the use of vessels, because R. Hyya taught, one may put a
pitcher of water into a bucket of water; it makes no difference whether
it be hot water into cold o r *vice versa*." Said R. Huna to R. Ashi:
"Perhaps this was a different case altogether, it being that there was a
vessel within a vessel!" But the latter retorted: "It says: 'To empty';
as it was taught: It is permitted to empty out a pitcher of water into a
bucket of water, be it either warm water into cold or *vice versa*."

MISHNA *VI*.: In a saucepan or a pot that was removed from the fire, no
spices shall be put after dusk (on Friday); but spices may be put into a
plate or a bowl. R. Jehudah is of the opinion that spices may be put in
all vessels or cooking utensils except in such as contain vinegar or
fish brine.

GEMARA: The schoolmen propounded the following question: Does R. Jehudah
refer to the first part of the Mishna, which is lenient, or does he
refer to the latter part, which is rigorous? Come and hear. We have
learned in a Boraitha that R. Jehudah says: "One may put (spices) into
all saucepans and cooking-pots, except such as contain vinegar and fish
brine."

R. Joseph was about to say that salt comes under the same ruling as
spices, because in his opinion salt becomes cooked in a

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

first vessel (*i.e.*, the vessel used for cooking), but not in a second
vessel. Said Abayi to him: R. Hyya distinctly taught that salt does not
come under the ruling applicable to spices, because it does *not* become
cooked, even in a first vessel. This is corroborated by R. Na'hman, who
said: There is a saying that the dissolving of salt requires thorough
boiling, the same as beef.

MISHNA *VII*.: It is not permitted to place a vessel under a lamp so
that the oil of the lamp drip into it. If a vessel was placed under a
lamp before the Sabbath set in, it may remain there; but the use of such
oil on the same Sabbath is not permitted, as it was not previously
prepared.

GEMARA: Said R. Hisda: "Although it was said that the placing of a
vessel under a hen (laying on sloping ground) to receive the egg is
forbidden, yet to cover the egg so as to prevent it from being crushed
is permitted."

Said Rabba: The reason of R. Hisda is because he holds that hens being
in the habit of laying eggs on level ground, in order to prevent the egg
from being stepped upon, it is permitted to cover it with a vessel; but
as liens are not in the habit of laying eggs on *sloping* ground, the
placing of a vessel under the hen to receive the egg was not allowed.

Abayi objected to this, stating: "Were we not taught in the Mishna that
it is permitted to place a vessel under a lamp in order to take up the
(dropping) sparks?" (This seldom occurs and therefore it is permitted.)
He was told that the dropping of sparks by a lamp is also of frequent
occurrence.

R. Joseph, commenting on the statement of R. Hisda, gave another
reason--viz.: That the vessel (placed under a hen to receive an egg) is
made useless for that same Sabbath.

Abayi raised the same objection, (intending to) prove by it that the
vessel placed under a lamp is also made useless on that same Sabbath,
and R. Huna b. R. Joshua answered: "Sparks have nothing substantial
about them (therefore the vessel containing them is not made useless on
the same Sabbath)."

R. Itz'hak said: In the same manner as it is not permitted to place a
vessel under a laying hen, so is it also not permitted to cover the egg
laid; for the reason that a vessel must not be handled on the Sabbath
except for the use of such things as are themselves permitted to be
handled on the Sabbath.

All the objections of Abayi being raised against R. Itz'hak's
statements, he answered: "In that case there was a lack of space." (If
the space occupied by a vessel is needed, that vessel

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

may be removed, and while being removed may be used for any purpose.)

Come and hear (another objection). An egg laid on the Sabbath or a
festival, to prevent it from being (accidentally) cracked, may be
covered with a vessel? Here the case is, also, when the space where the
vessel is placed is needed.

Said R. Shesheth (to his disciples): Go ye and tell R. Itz'hak that the
above doctrine has already been interpreted by R. Huna in Babylon as
follows: It is permitted to make a partition on the Sabbath, to
(isolate) a corpse for the sake of the living, but it is not permitted
to make a partition for the sake of the corpse. How is the latter clause
to be understood? R. Samuel b. Jehudah and also Shila Mari taught: In
the case of a corpse lying in the sun (on the Sabbath), (to prevent the
corpse from decomposing) two persons are brought to sit on the floor,
each on one side (in order to bring about the making of a screen). When
the ground underneath them becomes hot, each of them is to bring a cot
bed to sit upon, and when the heat above them becomes excessive, they
are to bring a sheet and spread it over their heads (leaving part of the
sheet loose); both now raise their cots (which take up the loose part of
the sheet) and move to their former positions; thus a screen (canopy) is
formed of itself.

It was taught: "A corpse lying in the sun." R. Jehudah in the name of
Samuel says: The same must be turned over from one bed into another,
until it arrives at a shady place. R. Hinna b. Shalmi in the name of
Rabh said: A loaf of bread or an infant should be put on the corpse and
then the corpse may be moved. There is no difference of opinion as to
the removal of a corpse (on the Sabbath), which is permitted when a loaf
or an infant is put upon it; they differ only where there is none. One
holds that indirect transportation must be considered transportation,
and the other opines that indirect transportation is not transportation
(and therefore permitted).

Shall we assume that on this point the following Tanaim differ? "It is
not permitted to save a corpse from a fire." R. Jehudah b. Lakish,
however, says: "I have heard that it may be done." How is the case if
there was a loaf of bread or an infant? Why should the first Tana
prohibit it? And if there was none, what is the reason of Lakish's
decision? Do they not differ in the point of transportation stated
above? Nay; all agree that such a transportation is considered; the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

reason, however, of Ben Lakish is that usually one is concerned about
his dead, and if it would not be permitted to remove it, he will
extinguish the fire. Said R. Jehudah b. Shilah in the name of R. Ashi,
quoting R. Johanan: The Halakha prevails according to Ben Lakish
concerning a corpse.

MISHNA *VIII*.: A new lamp maybe handled on the Sabbath, but not an old
one; R. Simeon, however, says all lamps are permitted to be handled
except such as are still burning.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: A new lamp may be handled, but not an old
one; such is the decree of R. Jehudah.

R. Mair, however, says that all lamps may be moved, except a lamp which
was lit for the Sabbath (though the light is extinguished); but R.
Simeon says, except a lamp which is still burning. If extinguished, it
may be moved; but a goblet, bowl, or lantern (used as lamps, must not be
removed from their respective places). R. Eliezer b. R. Simeon, says: It
is permitted to make use of an extinguished lamp and of the oil
dripping, from it, even while the lamp is burning.

Said Abayi: R. Eliezer b. Simeon holds in one case to the opinion of his
father, but differs with him in the other. He holds with his father in
disregarding Muktza (designation), <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79)
and differs with him in the other case, for his father is of the opinion
that when a lamp is extinguished it may be moved, but not while it is
burning; but he is of the opinion that even a burning lamp may be moved.
"But a goblet, bowl, or lantern must not." Wherein do these things
differ from the others? Said Mar Zutra: R. Simeon allows a small lamp
(to be handled), because one will wait until it is extinguished (and
then it may be used for another purpose); but these are large, and not
apt to become extinguished for some time. R. Zera said: All the
schoolmen agree on prohibiting the handling of a candelabrum which had
been lit up on Sabbath, but the handling of the candelabrum which was
not lit up on the Sabbath is unanimously permitted.

R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh said: "It is not permitted to handle a
bed that has been designated as a place to put money in, if the money
had already previously been placed upon it (on Friday during twilight
even if on the Sabbath *no money* 

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

was on the bed). If the money, however, had not previously been
deposited on the bed, the handling is permitted. If a bed was not
designated for the keeping of money, but contained money, it must not be
handled. If it contained no money, it may (providing no money was
deposited on the bed during twilight of the preceding Friday). And Rabh
says this because he holds with R. Jehudah concerning Muktza.

And it seems that so is the case, as Rabh said one may place a lamp upon
a palm tree at any time while it is yet day on Friday, in order that it
may burn on the Sabbath; but one may not put a lamp upon the same on a
biblical feast day. (It is permitted to place a lamp on a palm tree on
the Sabbath because there is no fear of the tree, which is Muktza
\[designated\], being used; but on a biblical feast day it is prohibited
for fear that one while depositing or removing the lamp will also use
the palm tree; and that is prohibited.)

And this is correct only in accordance with the theory of R. Jehudah;
but should Rabh hold with R. Simeon, why does he make a distinction
between the Sabbath and a biblical feast day? The law of Muktza does not
exist at all according to R. Simeon.

Is that so? Did not Rabh decide, when he was questioned whether one may
remove an extinguished 'Hanukah light on the Sabbath for fear of the
Magi (this has already been mentioned in a previous connection), that it
may be done? The time of danger is different. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80) R. Kahana and R. Assi then questioned him:
"Does the Halakha so prevail?" and he answered: "R. Simeon is worthy to
be relied upon in times of danger."

Resh Lakish questioned R. Johanan: "May wheat that has been sown but
that has not yet sprouted, or eggs that are still under the hen, be
eaten on the Sabbath? Does he (R. Simeon) disregard the law of Muktza
only in such cases where the objects were put aside with no intention of
ever being used again, or does he disregard Muktza under all
circumstances?" He (R. Johanan) replied: "There is no Muktza in his
theory but the oil in a burning lamp, because if poured in a lamp for
the purpose of keeping the Sabbath-light commandment it is designated
for that express function, and as it is not permitted to extinguish that
light, the intention not to use the oil for any other purpose is
self-evident. But does not R. Simeon hold that the

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

same is the case with other things which were designated for their
religious purposes? Is it not a fact that the ornaments of the
tabernacle on that festival must not be used, even in accordance with R.
Simeon's theory? As R. Hyya b. R. Joseph taught in the presence of R.
Johanan: "One must not remove wood from a booth on any biblical feast
day, but he may remove it from any place near by? R. Simeon, however,
permits this to be done. Still, they *all* agree that wood must not be
removed from a booth built expressly for that feast, on all the seven
feast days. However, if there was a stipulation it may be done
accordingly" (because the wood is set aside for the ritual purpose).
Hence even according to him the designation for ritual purposes must not
be used. Why, then, is this different from the oil in question? The
Boraitha is to be understood thus: All the ornaments of the booth in
question are prohibited so far as all things bearing similitude to the
oil in the burning lamp are concerned. And so also it was taught by R.
Hyya b. Ahba in the name of R. Johanan, that there is no Muktza in the
theory of R. Simeon, but in cases which are similar to the oil of the
lamp while burning, being designated for the ritual purpose, they are
also designated not to be used. Said R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel:
"In the opinion of R. Simeon no law of Muktza exists except in the case
of raisins and dates which were placed on the roof to be dried." (In
such a case there certainly was no intention to use them on the same
Sabbath.) Said Rabba b. b. Hana in the name of R. Johanan: "It was said
the law remains in accordance with R. Simeon. When R. Itz'hak b. R.
Joseph, however, came from Palestine, he said in the name of R. Johanan
that the law (of Muktza) according to R. Jehudah prevails, and R.
Jehoshua b. Levi said the law prevails with R. Simeon. Said R. Joseph:
Now is understood what Rabba b. b. Hana said in name of R. Johanan, it
was said that the Halakha. prevails according to R. Simeon, which means
that R. Johanan himself did not agree with their decision. Said Abayi to
R. Joseph: "Didst thou not know before this that R. Johanan holds with
the opinion of R. Jehudah? Is it not a fact that when R. Abba and R.
Assi met in the house of R. Abba of the city of Heifa, and a candelabrum
fell upon the coat of R. Assi, he (R. Assi) did not remove it? Was it
not because he was a disciple of R. Johanan and acted according to the
opinion of his master?" Answered R. Joseph: "Thou art speaking of a
candelabrum. A candelabrum is a

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

different matter altogether, for R. Ahai b. Hanina in the name of R.
Assi said: Resh Lakish has decided in Zidon, a candelabrum which can be
removed with one hand may be handled, but if it has to be removed with
both hands it may not; and R. Johanan said: We only hold with R. Simeon
in the matter of a lamp; but as for a candelabrum, whether it can be
removed with one or both hands, it is prohibited. And why so? Both Rabba
and R. Joseph said: Because a separate place must be designated for it.

Said Abayi to R. Joseph: "Have we not observed the case of a baldaquin
prepared for a bride and groom, for which a place must be designated?
And yet Samuel said in the name of R. Hyya that such may be put up and
taken apart on the Sabbath." Said Abayi: The prohibition to handle the
candelabrum holds good only in a case where the same is made of several
parts. If this be the case, what reason has R. Simeon b. Lakish for
allowing this? Say: Not a candelabrum *made* of various parts, but if it
looks *like* a candelabrum of various parts. Therefore a candelabrum
made of several parts, be it large or small, must not be handled. The
handling of a large candelabrum, even if not made of several parts, is
also prohibited on account of its marked lines, for fear one may handle
such as *are* made of several parts. And the point of their differing
is: With a small candelabrum which looks as if made of several parts,
one takes the precautionary measure lest one handle that which is really
made of several parts, while the other does not care for such a
precaution.

R. Malkia chanced to be in the house of R. Simlai and handled a
candlestick, the light in which had been extinguished, and R. Simlai
became angry on that account. R. Jose the Galilean happened to be in the
town of R. Jose b. Hanina and did the same, whereupon R. Jose b. Hanina
became angry. R. Abuhu, however, when he happened to be in the place of
R. Jehoshua b. Levi, handled, but when he came to the place of R.
Johanan he did not handle a candlestick in question out of respect to R.
Johanan. R. Jehudah said: A lamp which has been filled with oil may be
handled after the light has been extinguished (because it emits no bad
odor), but one which contained naphtha may not be handled (on account of
its bad odor). Both Rabba and R. Joseph also permit this.

R. Avia once came to the house of Rabha with muddy shoes and sat on the
bed in the presence of the latter. This made

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rabha angry, and
he tried to disconcert R. Avia with questions. Said he (Rabha): "Can you
tell me why Rabba and R. Joseph both said that a lamp filled with
naphtha may be handled?" Answered R. Avia: "The reason of their decision
is because the lamp is fit to cover a vessel with after being
extinguished." And he rejoined: "If this is so, one may also handle
shavings scattered in the yard, because they also can be used to cover a
vessel with." Answered R. Avia: "A lamp, being a vessel itself, can be
used to cover other things with, but shavings are not vessels in
themselves and therefore cannot be used singly as covers" (and brought a
Boraitha which states that nose jewels, rings, etc., are considered
among the vessels which may be handled on Sabbath, and Ulla explained
the reason why, because they are considered as vessels). Said R. Na'hman
b. Itz'hak: "Praised be the Lord that Rabha did not put R. Avia to
shame."

Abayi pointed out to R. Joseph the following contradiction: "Did R.
Simeon say that a light may be handled only when extinguished, but if
burning it must not be handled? For what reason? Because there is a
chance of extinguishing it while it is being handled?" Have we not
learned that R. Simeon said: "An act which is committed unintentionally
is permissible." Such is the decision of R. Simeon? (This presents no
difficulty.) One must not take chances with an act which, if done
intentionally, would cause a violation of a biblical ordinance; but if
the violation would be only that of a rabbinical ordinance, chances may
be taken.

Objected Rabha: "We have learned: Dealers in clothing may sell clothes
made of wool and cotton mixed. They are permitted to try on such clothes
or to carry them (temporarily) on their shoulders, provided the
intention to use them as a protection against the sun and rain does not
exist. Now, the wearing of a mixture of wool and cotton is biblically
prohibited, still R. Simeon permits it to be done temporarily. Therefore
said Rabha: "Discard the case of the lamp, oil, and wick; there is
another reason entirely--viz., because one becomes a basis of a thing
the handling of [which](errata.htm#5) is in itself prohibited (*i.e.*,
the light in itself cannot be handled)."

Said R. Zera in the name of R. Assi, quoting R. Johanan, who said in the
name of R. Hanina that he was told by R. Romnas: "Rabbi permitted me to
handle a pan containing glowing ashes."

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

And R. Zera himself was deliberating: Did indeed R. Johanan say so? Have
we not heard that Rabba b. b. Hana said in his (R. Johanan's) name,
referring to our Mishna, which states that a man may handle a box
containing a stone: "He may do so providing the box also contains
fruit." "How, then, could R. Johanan permit a pan with glowing ashes to
be handled?" R. Assi was astounded for some time, but finally answered:
"The pan referred to still contained some grains of incense."

But Rabha said: While we were in R. Na'hman's house we handled a
fire-pot on account of its ashes (the ashes were needed for some
purpose, therefore the pot was allowed to be handled), although there
were some broken sticks of wood upon it.

The schoolmen raised the following objection: R. Simeon and R. Jehudah
agree that if there are broken pieces of wick in a lamp, it is
prohibited to handle the lamp. Said Abayi: "This was taught in Galilea"
(Galilea is a state where linen cloth is scarce, for which reason the
broken pieces of wick are valuable, and the lamp, being the receptacle
of prohibited valuables, is not permitted to be handled on the Sabbath).

Levi, the son of Samuel, met R. Abba and R. Huna the son of Hyya
standing at the entrance of R. Huna's house; and Levi questioned: "Is it
allowed to fold the beds of travelling coppersmiths on a Sabbath?" They
answered: "Yea." In allowing this the two rabbis held with (the opinion
of R. Simeon b. Gamaliel in a) following Boraitha: It is not permitted
to put together a bed which has been taken apart; but if one did so, he
is not culpable. One must not fasten the bed with pegs, but if he did so
he only lays himself liable to bring a sin-offering. R. Simeon b.
Gamaliel, however, said: "If the bed was loose it may be fastened."

R. Hama had a folding-bed in his house. He put it together on a biblical
feast day, and one of the young rabbis questioned Rabha: "What reason is
to be found for this act? Is it because of indirect building; granted
that there is no biblical prohibition to this effect, there surely is a
rabbinical?" Answered Rabha: "I think that the reason is the decision of
R. Simeon b. Gamaliel (with whom I agree) that it is permissible to put
a bed together if the bed is loose."

MISHNA *IX*.: One may put a vessel underneath a lamp for the purpose of
receiving the sparks falling from the lamp, but he shall not put water
into the vessel, because thereby the sparks would become extinguished.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

GEMARA: Would this act not render the vessel useless? Said R. Huna the
son of R. Jehoshua: "The vessel is not made useless, because sparks do
not amount to anything."

"*He shall not put any water into it*," etc. Shall we assume that this
anonymous Mishna is in accordance with R. Jose, who said that it is
prohibited even to cause light to be extinguished? How can you explain
this in this way? R. Jose spoke of the Sabbath itself; have you heard
him saying so about the eve of Sabbath? And should you say that here is
also meant on Sabbath itself, there is a Boraitha which states plainly:
A vessel may be put under the lamp to receive sparks on Sabbath, and so
much the more on the eve of Sabbath; but water must not be put in, even
on the eve of Sabbath, and much less on the Sabbath itself. Therefore
said R. Ashi: "It may be said that it is in accordance even with the
rabbis, who do not mind the causing of light to be extinguished through
indirect means on the Sabbath. In this case, however, the sparks are
extinguished (through direct means, *i.e.*) by placing water underneath
the lamp."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[64:1](t0111.htm#fr_76) Here the disciple who
advanced the later construction of the Mishna turns the tables on his
interlocutor and brings forward an argument in favor of his suggestion,
introducing it with the same words as the previous speaker in his
argument.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[71:1](t0111.htm#fr_77) "Blows of correction"
were inflicted by the rabbis not for an actual sin, but for disobedience
to the laws enacted.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[71:2](t0111.htm#fr_78) We have translated in
accordance with Rashi's second view, as it seems to us to be correct.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[76:1](t0111.htm#fr_79) Muktza (designation)
refers to such objects as are set aside and designated for non-use on
the Sabbath. Thus, all materials that are used in the performance of
manual labor (prohibited on the Sabbath) are called Muktza. R. Simeon,
however, holds there is no such thing as Muktza.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[77:1](t0111.htm#fr_80) The Talmud here refers
to Persian festivals, when the burning of lights was prohibited except
in sacred shrines.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Regulations Concerning Victuals, Where They May or
May Not Be Deposited to Retain Their Heat for the Sabbath](t0112)
