[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0128)  [Next](t0130.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001DDYEI2/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Babylonian Talmud, Book 1: Tract Sabbath*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1903\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

# CHAPTER XVII.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE HANDLING OF UTENSILS AND FURNITURE ON THE
SABBATH.

MISHNA: All utensils (and furniture) which may be handled on the
Sabbath, their doors (lids) may be handled with them, even when their
lids had been removed; for such lids cannot be considered as
house-doors, which are not intended to be removed. One may take a hammer
on the Sabbath for the purpose of cracking nuts, an axe to chop
fig-cake, a hand-saw to saw cheese, a shovel to gather up dried figs, a
fan and a fork to place a thing (food) before a child, a spindle and a
shuttle to pick fruit, a sewing-needle to remove a splinter (from the
flesh), and a packing needle to open a door.

GEMARA: "*All utensils which may be handled on the Sabbath, their doors
(lids) may be handled with them, even when their lids had been
removed*." *Removed* when, on Sabbath? and if removed on a week-day they
certainly may be handled? Why, on the contrary. On Sabbath the lids
being attached to the utensils, they were intended for use with the
utensils; but if removed on week-days, they did not form part of the
utensils on the Sabbath, hence not intended for simultaneous use, and
should not be handled! Said Abayi: The Mishna means to say, that the
lids may be handled with the utensils on the Sabbath *even* if the lids
had been removed *on a week-day*.

The rabbis taught: "The doors (lids) of a drawer, chest, or cage, may be
taken down on the Sabbath, but not replaced. The (door of a chicken-coop
(which is built in the ground) must not be removed nor replaced on the
Sabbath." It may be right to prohibit the removing or replacing of the
door of a chicken-coop (built in the ground), because removing it would
constitute the act of tearing down, and replacing it would constitute
building, but as for the doors of a drawer, chest, or cage, what is the
opinion of the rabbis? Do they hold that the acts of building and
tearing down apply also to utensils? If so, why do they permit the
removing of the doors (lids); and if not, why do they

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

prohibit replacing them? Said Rabha: "The act of building does not apply
to utensils, but replacing is prohibited more as a precautionary
measure, lest one drive the door in with a stick (and this would
constitute the act of hammering)."

"*One may take a hammer*," etc. Said R. Jehudah: This refers to a hammer
intended only for nut-cracking, and such a hammer may be used to crack
nuts, but a smith's hammer must not be used for that purpose; \[for R.
Jehudah holds, that a thing which is intended only for an act prohibited
on the Sabbath, must not be used even for a permissible act\]. Rabba,
however, says, that a smith's hammer may be used to crack nuts \[for he
holds that a thing which is intended only for a prohibited act, *may* be
used for a permissible act\].

It was taught: R. Hyya bar Aba in the name of R. Johanan said: "We have
learned, that a hammer which is intended for hammering gold may also be
used for cracking nuts." R. Shoman bar Aba said: "We have learned, that
the hammer referred to is intended to be used for spices."

The one who teaches that a spice-hammer may be used certainly permits a
gold-hammer; but the one permitting a gold-hammer to be used, does not
allow a spice-hammer, because a spice-hammer must be kept perfectly
clean, and is laid away for non-use during the Sabbath.

"*A spindle and a shuttle to pick fruit*," etc. The rabbis taught: A
date which was not quite ripe, and was put in straw which was intended
for use in clay-making, might be taken out. providing it was, not
completely covered by, the straw, but enough to take hold of was left
uncovered. The same applies to a cake which was taken out of the oven
not quite done, and was put in glowing cinders to be cooked; but R.
Eliezer ben Tadai said, that both the date and the cake might be taken
out even when completely covered, providing this is done with a prong,
and then the straw or the ashes respectively fall off of themselves.
Said R. Na'hman: "The Halakha prevails according to R. Eliezer ben
Tadai."

From this we see that R. Na'hman holds, that handling in an unusual
manner is not considered handling at all; but did not R. Na'hman say,
that if a radish is deposited in earth with its roots downwards and its
head upwards and protruding from the earth, it may be taken out; but if
deposited head downwards, it must not be taken out (and thus we see that
R. Na'hman regards handling in an unusual manner the same as handling

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

proper)? The answer is, that R. Na'hman afterward retracted his decision
concerning the radish.

"*A sewing-needle to remove a splinter*." Rabha the son of Rabba sent a
request to R. Joseph: "Let the master teach us the law regarding a
needle, the eyelet or the point of which had been broken off." R. Joseph
answered: "We have learned this in our Mishna: 'A sewing-needle to
remove a splinter.' What difference would it make to the splinter
whether the needle has an eyelet or not?" Rabha objected: "We have
learned, that a needle, the eye or the point of which had been broken
off, is not subject to defilement." Said Abayi: "Thou confusest Sabbath
with defilement? As for defilement, a vessel must be complete in order
to be subject to defilement; but for Sabbath use, anything which can be
used is in itself sufficient, and with this needle I can remove a
splinter."

R. Na'hman forbids the straightening of the limbs of a child at birth on
the Sabbath, and R. Shesheth permits it.

MISHNA: The hollow olive-cane is subject to defilement if it has a knot;
if not, it is not subject to defilement. In any event, it may be handled
on the Sabbath.

R. Jose <span id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_154.md) saith: "Any utensil may be
handled on the Sabbath, with the exception of the large wood-saw and the
plough-share."

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: Previously only three utensils were permitted
to be handled on the Sabbath, and they were: a knife to chop pressed
dates, a skimmer, and a small table-knife. Subsequently more was
allowed, and then still more, and then more again, until finally any
utensil was allowed with the exception of the wood-saw and the
ploughshare.

What is meant by "subsequently more was allowed, and then still more,"
etc.? Said Rabha: They allowed a thing which was intended for use in a
permissible act, whether it was needed for another purpose, or whether
the room it occupied was needed; then still more was allowed, namely: to
shift a thing out of the sunshine to a shady place; then more *again*
was allowed, namely: a thing that was intended for use in a prohibited
act (*e.g.*, a smith's hammer) was permitted to be used for another
purpose or when its room was needed; but it was not permitted to be
moved from the sunshine into the shade, and all this was

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

allowed to be done by only one person, but not by two, until finally all
utensils might be handled even by two persons.

Abayi raised an objection to this: "We have learned, that a mortar which
contained garlic may be handled, but if it did not contain garlic it
must not be handled." The answer was this: It is meant, to remove from
the sunshine to the shade. R. Hanina said: This Mishna was taught in the
times of R. Nehemiah ben Hahalyah, as it is written \[Nehemiah xiii.
15\]: "In those days I saw in Judah some treading wine-presses on the
Sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, etc." (and because in those times
there was great laxity in keeping the Sabbath, strict laws were made as
a precaution, and even a mortar was not allowed to be handled unless it
contained some eatables). Said R. Elazar: The Mishnas relating to the
pieces of wood for the showbreads in Tract Menahoth, the sticks used by
the priests for the Passover sacrifice in the Tract Pesachim, the bolts
in the Tract Kelim, and the above Mishna relating to the mortar (all of
which prohibit the handling of such things on Sabbath) were all taught
*before* it was allowed to handle all vessels.

MISHNA: The utensils may also be handled with intent to use them or
without such intent. R. Nehemiah saith: "They may be handled only if
intended for use."

GEMARA: What is meant by "with intent to use them," etc.? Said Rabha:
"'With intent to use them' means to use a thing which was intended for
use in a permissible act, whether it was needed for its intended use, or
whether the room it occupied was needed; and 'without such intent' means
even to shift a thing from the sunshine into the shade, and a thing that
was intended for use in a prohibited act was permitted to be used for
its intended use or when its room was needed, but it was not permitted
to move it from the sunshine into the shade. Now R. Nehemiah comes to
say, that even if a thing was intended for a permissible act, it may be
used only for its intended use and if the room occupied by it were
needed, but it was *not* permitted to shift it from the sunshine into
the shade.

R. Sapa, R. Aha b. Huna, and R. Huna bar Hanina were sitting together.
The latter asked R. Sapa, according to Rabba, who explains Nehemiah's
teaching (that even a permissible thing must not be removed for the
purpose of occupying its place): "How can we remove dishes after
eating?" Said R. Sapa: "It is equal to a dirty thing (standing on a
clean place), which may be removed at any time."

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

R. Mari bar Rahel had several leather bolsters that lay in the sun (on a
Sabbath). He came to Rabha and asked him if he might move them. Rabha
told him it was allowed. Said R. Mari again: "I have other bolsters
besides these." Answered Rabha: "This makes no difference. Thou mightst
need those too if guests should call." Said R. Mari again: "I have
sufficient for guests also." Said Rabha to him: "This proves to me,
then, that thou art of the opinion of Rabba, who prohibits the moving of
things from the sunshine into the shade on Sabbath. Hence everybody else
may do this, but thou must not."

Said R. Aba in the name of R. Hyya bar Ashi, quoting Rabh: Whisks may be
handled on the Sabbath to sweep the tables, but the brooms made of
date-palms (which are only intended for floor-sweeping) must not be used
for sweeping the tables. This was also stated by R. Elazar.

MISHNA: Of all utensils which may be handled on the Sabbath, fragments
may also be handled, but it must be with a purpose, viz.: the pieces of
a kneading-trough to cover the bunghole of a cask, the pieces of a glass
to cover the mouth of a pitcher. R. Jehudah says: "They must be fit for
the same use (as the whole utensil), viz.: the parts of a
kneading-trough to hold a brew, and the pieces of a glass to hold oil."

GEMARA: Said R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel: "The first Tana of the
Mishna and R. Jehudah differ only as to fragments which were broken off
on the Sabbath; for the former holds that the fragment is part and
parcel of the utensil, and fit for the same use, while R. Jehudah holds,
that the fragment is a newly created thing; but if the fragments were
broken off before the Sabbath set in, all agree that they may be handled
because they were prepared for use while it was yet (week) day."

We have learned, in one Boraitha, that fire maybe made with utensils,
but not with fragments; and in another Boraitha we have learned, that as
we may make fire with utensils, so we may also use fragments for the
same purpose. In a third Boraitha, however, we were taught, that we must
not make fire with either utensils or fragments. We must say, then, that
the first Boraitha is in accordance with the opinion of R. Jehudah (who
holds, to the theory of "Muktza" and Noled (a newly
[created](errata.htm#13) thing.md), the second Boraitha is in accordance
with the opinion of R. Simeon (who holds to neither of the two
theories), and the third Boraitha is in accordance with R. Nehemiah (who
holds that

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

every utensil must be used for its particular purpose and not for other
purposes).

R. Na'hman said: "Bricks left over from a building may be handled,
because they can be used as seats; but if the bricks were piled up one
on top of the other, they were evidently designated for building, and
must not be handled." R. Na'hman said in the name of Samuel: A fragment
of a piece of pottery may be handled in private ground, but not in
unclaimed ground (because in private ground other vessels can generally
be found and the fragment may be used as a lid or cover, but in
unclaimed ground there are no other vessels and the fragment cannot be
used in that manner); but R. Na'hman himself declares, that the fragment
may be handled in unclaimed ground also (because in unclaimed ground
there may also be. some things which can be covered), but not in public
ground; and Rabha, however, says, it may be handled even in public
ground (because having been once regarded as a utensil in private ground
it remains such everywhere).

This theory of Rabha's is borne out by his action; for it happened that
he was walking on the street Ritka in the city of Mehuzza on a Sabbath,
when his shoe became soiled with dirt. His servant came and cleaned it
off with a fragment of a piece of pottery. The rabbis who went behind
him scolded his servant for this act, whereupon he (Rabha) remarked: "It
is not enough that they have not learned (what is permissible and what
is not), but they also want to teach others. If this fragment were in
private ground, it would have been a useful article because a vessel
could be covered with it, and here in public ground it is useful to me."

R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel said: "The bung-head of a broken barrel
may be handled on Sabbath." We have also learned this in the following
Boraitha: "The bung-head and the pieces of a broken barrel may be
handled on Sabbath, but it is not allowed to break off a piece of the
fragments and cover a vessel with it or put it under the legs of a
bedstead." If the bung-head and pieces, however, were thrown away among
the garbage before the Sabbath, they must not be handled at all.

R. Hamdura said in the name of Samuel: "The waste of a mat may be used
on the Sabbath." Why so? For what purpose can it be used? Said Rabha:
"Bar Hamdura explained this to me as follows: What is a mat used for? To
prevent the dust from settling upon an object, and the waste can also be
used

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

for covering up dirt." R. Zera said in the name of Rabh: "Remnants of
silken togas must not be handled on the Sabbath." Said Abayi: "This is
said of remnants that measure less than three fingers square and are of
no value to either rich or poor."

The rabbis taught: Fragments of an old oven are equal to any other
vessels that may be handled on Sabbath. So said R. Meir; but R. Jehudah
said they may not be handled. R. Jose testified in the name of R.
Eliezer ben. Jacob, that fragments of an oven may be handled on the
Sabbath and the covers of in oven may be handled even if their handles
are broken off. Said Rabhina: "According to whose opinion do we handle
to-day the covers of the ovens used in the city of Mahassia, which have
no handles? It must be according to the opinion of R. Eliezer ben
Jacob."

MISHNA: One may dip water with a hollow pumpkin to which a stone is
fastened, providing the stone will not fall off; otherwise, one must not
dip water with it. One may dip water with a jug to which a vine branch
is fastened.

"For a window-blind," says R. Eliezer, "a thing may only then be put up,
if it be fastened and hang down; otherwise, it must not." The sages say
it may be put up in any manner.

GEMARA: We have learned in another Mishna: "If a stone lie at the
opening of a barrel, the barrel may be bent over, so that the stone fall
down." Said Rabba in the name of R. Ami, quoting R. Johanan: "The case
applies only when the stone lying at the opening of the barrel was left
there unintentionally; but if placed there on purpose, the barrel
becomes a base for a prohibited thing (and must not be moved)." R.
Joseph in the name of R. Assi, quoting R. Johanan, said, on the
contrary: "If the stone was left there unintentionally the barrel must
be bent over, so that the stone fall down; but if placed there
intentionally, it serves as a lid to the barrel, and may be removed." On
what points do R. Ami and R. Assi differ? One holds, that an act must be
accomplished in order to be an act, while the other holds the intention
to be equivalent to the deed, and their respective theories are borne
out by their opinions which follow:

For when R. Dimi, and according to others R. Zera, came from Palestine,
he related in the name of R. Hanina: It happened that Rabbi once went to
a certain place on a Friday, and finding a pile of stones said to his
disciples: "Go and have it in your minds that we intend to sit on these
tomorrow." Thus

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rabbi did not
order them to act, but merely to think. R. Johanan, however, said, that
Rabbi ordered his disciples to act. And what, according to R. Johanan's
opinion, were the disciples to do? R. Ami said, that Rabbi ordered them
to place the stones in position for them to sit on, but R. Assi said,
that Rabbi ordered them not only to place the stones in position, but
also to clean them (because, in the latter's opinion, changing the
position of an object does not constitute an actual deed).

It was taught: R. Jose b. Saul said it was not stones but a pile of
building wood. R. Johanan b. Saul, however, said it was not building
wood but poles with which the depth of the water is sounded.

"*One may dip water with a hollow pumpkin to which a vine-branch is
fastened*." If it is fastened one may, and if not, one may not. Shall we
assume that our Mishna is not in accordance with the opinion of R.
Simeon ben Gamaliel? as we have learned in a Boraitha: Branches of a
tree which were intended for kindling, if subsequently used for sitting
purposes, must be tied together, but R. Simeon ben Gamaliel said, they
need not be tied together. <span id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_155.md) Said R.
Ashi: It may be said, that this Mishna is not at variance with the
opinion of R. Simeon ben Gamaliel, but is merely a precautionary
measure, for fear that a branch, being brittle, might be broken by the
man if not tied together.

"*For a window-blind*," etc. Rabba bar bar Hana in the name of R.
Johanan said: All agree that it is not permitted to put up even a
temporary tent <span id="fr_156"></span>[2](#fn_156.md) to begin with on a
biblical festival, and decidedly not on the Sabbath, but as for adding
(that is, if part of the blind was already up) a blind to a temporary
tent that had already been put up, R. Eliezer said, that it is not
permissible on a festival and much less so on the Sabbath, and the sages
declare, that it is permitted on the Sabbath and so much the more oil a
festival.

"*The sages say it may be up in any manner*." What is meant by "in any
manner"? Said R. Aba in the name of R. Kahana: "By that is meant, that
it makes no difference whether the blind was fastened or not, providing
it was prepared for its purpose since the day before." Said R. Jeremiah
to him:

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Why wouldst thou
assume that the sages would be more lenient in this matter? Say rather
that they meant to state, that it made no difference whether the blind
hung down or not, providing it had been previously fastened." R. Aba
answered: "Because I hold with the Tana of the following Tosephta: A
stick, prepared by the master of a house for the opening and locking of
a door, may be used on Sabbath, providing it was fastened and hung to
the door; otherwise, it must not be used. R. Simeon ben Gamaliel,
however, declared, that as long as it was prepared for that purpose, it
was of no consequence whether it was fastened and hung to the door."
(Thus it may be seen that R. Aba held with R. Simeon ben Gamaliel.)

R. Jehudah bar Silas in the name of R. Assi, quoting R. Johanan, said:
"The Halakha according to R. Simeon ben Gamaliel prevails." Did R.
Johanan say this in reality? Have we not learned in a Mishna, that all
covers of vessels having handles attached may be handled on Sabbath?
Referring to this, R. Jehudah b. Shila in the name of R. Assi, quoting
R. Johanan, said, that such would be the case only if the covers could
be made use of as independent vessels. (How, then, can R. Johanan hold
with R. Simeon ben Gamaliel, who says, that the stick which was not
fastened to the door may be used on Sabbath, surely it is not an
independent vessel?) Shall we assume, that R. Johanan holds with R.
Simeon ben Gamaliel only in the case where the stick could also be used
for other purposes and thus could be called an independent vessel? Then
how can it be said that R. Johanan holds with R. Simeon ben Gamaliel,
for the latter does not require the stick to be an independent vessel,
as we have learned above in the matter of the branches (see page
[273](#page_273).md), where R. Simeon ben Gamaliel declares, that they need
not be tied together? R. Johanan is in accordance with him only in the
matter of the stick being prepared for its particular purpose without
being fastened to the door, but disagrees with him as regards an
independent vessel.

R. Itz'hak of Naph'ha <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157.md) proclaimed
at the door of the Exilarch's house, that the Halakha according to R.
Eliezer prevailed. R. Amram raised an objection: "We have learned in the
last Mishna of this Tract as follows: 'Thence we learn that it is
permitted to put up a window-blind, to measure and to tie on the
Sabbath.'" (How, then, could R. Itz'hak say, that the

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Halakha according
to R. Eliezer prevailed?) Said Abayi to him: Upon what is thy objection
concerning R. Itz'hak based? The Mishna just mentioned gives the opinion
of the sages only, who are at variance with R. Eliezer in our Mishna,
and thou mightst say, that because no contention is mentioned, the
Halakha according to the sages prevails; then thou knowest of another
Mishna (in Erubin), concerning the hinge of a cupboard door, no name is
mentioned, and still the Mishna appears to be in accordance with the
opinion of R. Eliezer only (thus R. Itz'hak can accept R. Eliezer's
opinion). Saith the Gemara: (Although Abayi justified R. Itz'hak) an
*act* of the sages (as is related in the last-mentioned Mishna) is
sufficiently decisive to establish the Halakha.

MISHNA: All lids of utensils may be removed (on the Sabbath), provided
they have handles. Said R. Jose: What does this apply to? To lids of
vessels fastened in the ground, but lids of vessels in general may be
removed at all events.

GEMARA: Said R. Jehudah bar Shila in the name of R. Assi, quoting R.
Johanan: "The lids of utensils may be handled only if they can be made
use of for other purposes as independent vessels." Saith the Gemara:
"All agree, that covers of utensils (fixtures) fixed in the ground must
be handled only if they have handles attached, and lids of other
utensils not fixed in the ground may be handled even if they have no
handles, but the point of the divergent opinions is as regards the
covers of ovens, the one side contending, that ovens must be regarded as
fixtures in the ground and the other side contending that they are
ordinary utensils."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[268:1](t0129.htm#fr_154.md) In the Mishna of Yost
and De Sola and Raphall, R. Jehudah was credited with the saying, but in
our original R. Jose is named, as is proven in Erubhin 35 a.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[273:1](t0129.htm#fr_155.md) Compare page
[90](t0112.htm#page_90.md), in this tract.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[273:2](t0129.htm#fr_156.md) By a temporary tent,
says Rashi, is meant principally a sheet put up on four poles to serve
as a roof, but screens on the sides are not considered a tent. The
putting up of a window-blind in a building, however, is regarded by R.
Eliezer as an addition to the building.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[274:1](t0129.htm#fr_157.md) See note to page
[96](t0113.htm#page_96.md), in this tract.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII: Regulations Regarding the Clearing Off of Required
Space, the Assistance To Be Given Cattle When Giving Birth To Their
Young and To Women About To Be Confined](t0130.md)
