[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0127)  [Next](t0129) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001DDYEI2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*The Babylonian Talmud, Book 1: Tract Sabbath*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1903\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

# CHAPTER XVI.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING ARTICLES WHICH MAY BE SAVED FROM A CONFLAGRATION
ON SABBATH.

MISHNA: All sacred scriptures may be saved from a conflagration (on the
Sabbath); be such scriptures allowed or not allowed to be read on
Sabbath. The Scriptures written in any language whatsoever must be
considered sacred, and brought to a safe place, even on a week-day. Why
are some (sacred scriptures) not allowed to be read (on Sabbath)? In
order that one might not miss the sermons at the school-house. One may
save the case of the book with the book, the case of the Tephillin with
the Tephillin, even if money is contained therein. Where must such
things be taken (for safety)? In a closed space surrounded by walks. Ben
Bathyra says: "Even in a space that has one side open."

GEMARA: It was taught: If the Scriptures wore written in Aramaic
(Targum), or in any other language, they need not be saved from a
conflagration. So says R. Huna. But R. Hisda says: "They must be saved."
According to the Tana who holds, that all of the scriptures may be read
on Sabbath, there is no difference of opinion between R. Huna and R.
Hisda, for the Scriptures must be saved. But, according to the Tana who
holds, that some scriptures may and others may not be read on the
Sabbath, R. Huna says, that the latter need not be saved, while R. Hisda
says they must, in order not to disgrace the Scriptures. An objection
was made: "Our Mishna says, that all scriptures, whether allowed to be
read on the Sabbath or not, or even if written in whatever language,
must be saved. We must assume, that the readable part of the Scriptures
is the Prophets and the non-readable part is the Hagiographa, and if
written in other languages, which are naturally non-readable, they must
nevertheless be saved. How, then, can R. Huna say, that the non-readable
need not be saved?" R. Huna might say: How can this explanation of the
Mishna correspond with the further ordinance that they "should be
brought to a safe

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

place"? If it says that they must be saved from the conflagration, it is
self-evident that they must be brought to a safe place? What is the
correct interpretation of the Mishna? R. Huna interprets it according to
his understanding thus: "The readable part of the Scriptures is the
Prophets, the non-readable part is the Hagiographa, providing they are
written in the holy language (Hebrew), but if written in other languages
they need *not* be saved; but although they need not be saved on the
Sabbath, if they lie in an unfit place even on week-days, they must be
brought into a safe place." R. Hisda interprets the Mishna according to
his understanding thus: "The readable part is the Prophets, the
non-readable part is the Hagiographa, and although written in other
languages they must also be saved, and the term 'should be brought to a
safe place' refers even to torn pieces of such Scriptures although
written in other languages."

Another objection was made: We have learned in a Boraitha: "If they (the
Scriptures) are written in Aramaic or any other language, they must be
saved from a conflagration? Is this not contradictory to R. Huna's
opinion? Nay; R. Huna may say that the Tana of the Boraitha holds the
Scriptures written in other languages to be readable. Come and hear:
Scriptures written in Coptic, Median, old Hebrew, Elamite or Greek,
although not permitted to be read, must be saved from a conflagration."
This is surely a contradiction to R. Huna? R. Huna might say: There is a
difference of opinion among the different Tanaim, as we have learned in
the following Tosephta: If the Scriptures are written in Aramaic or in
any other language, they must be saved from a conflagration, but R. Jose
says, that they must not. Said R. Jose: It happened that Aba 'Halafta
went to R. Gamaliel the Great in Tiberias, who sat at the table of
Johanan the Nazuph (also called Ben Nazuph), and held in his hand the
book of job in Aramaic, which he was reading. Said Aba 'Halafta to R.
Gamaliel: "I remember having at one time come to thy grandfather R.
Gamaliel, who stood on the steps of the corridor of the Temple when a
Book of Job in Aramaic was brought to him. He told the mason to take the
book and immure it underneath the stairway." Whereupon the later R.
Gamaliel also ordered the book he was reading to be immured.

The rabbis taught: The benedictions, which are written in Hebrew, or
amulets although containing letters of the Holy Name and many passages
of the Scriptures, must not be saved

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

from a conflagration, but may be burned up together with such letters
and passages. From this it was said, that one who writes benedictions
commits an act equal to burning up the Scriptures, as it happened in
Zidon: One wrote benedictions, and it was told to R. Ishmael. R. Ishmael
set forth to investigate the matter. As soon as the man saw R. Ishmael
approach, he threw the writings into a bowl of water. Said R. Ishmael to
him the following words: "The punishment thou wilt receive for this
latter deed will be greater than that for writing the benedictions."

The Exilarch asked of Rabba bar R. Huna: If the Scriptures were written
with paint or with dyes and in the holy language, may they be saved from
a conflagration or not? I ask thee, taking in consideration the
differences of opinion existing between the different Tanaim, for those
who hold that Scriptures written in Aramaic or any other language must
not be saved, what is their opinion regarding such as are written in the
holy language and not with ink? Whereas those who hold that the
Scriptures in any language must be saved, do they not refer to such as
are written in ink only, but those written with paint or dye, even if
written in Hebrew, should also not be saved? Answered Rabba bar R. Huna:
"No, they must not be saved." Rejoined the Exilarch: "R. Hamnuna taught,
in a Boraitha, that they may?--Answered Rabba: "If such was taught in a
Boraitha, it must be so!"

The rabbis taught: Before the passage \[Numb. x. 35\]: "And it came to
pass when the ark set forward, that Moses said, etc.," and at the close
of the next verse, the Holy One, blessed be He, made signs (the inverted
letter Nun, which must be inserted in the Scroll) in order to signify
that this is not the proper place for the two passages; but Rabbi says,
that this is out of the question, and that the two verses form a
valuable book in themselves. We have heard from R. Samuel ben Na'hmeni
in the name of R. Jonathan, that we have not a Pentateuch but a
Septateuch <span id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_144) (*i.e.*, we have not
five books of Moses, but seven). Would this imply that R. Samuel holds
with Rabbi and declares that there are seven (because the two verses,
which form a book in themselves, divide Numbers into two books)? Who is
the Tana, however, that differs with Rabbi? He is R. Simeon ben
Gamaliel, for we have learned in a Boraitha:

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Simeon ben
Gamaliel says, that these two passages will in the future be removed and
put in their proper place. Why were they put here, then? In order to
make a separation between the two scourges that befell the Israelites.
Which was the second scourge? The one that follows immediately
afterwards \[Numb. xi. 1\]: "And it came to pass, that, as the people
complained in a manner displeasing to the Lord," etc., etc. And which
was the first? The first was as it is written \[ibid. x. 33\]: "And they
set forward from the mount of the Lord, which, according to R. Hama b.
Hanina, means "and they departed from the ways of the Lord." Which is
the proper place for the two passages? Said R. Ashi: In Numbers ii.
(where it is decreed how every man should walk in the wilderness, and
the end of the chapter stating that every, man did as he was commanded,
should be followed by those two verses).

The schoolmen asked: May the blank pieces of the Scroll of Laws which
had become detached from the Scroll be saved from a conflagration on
Sabbath or not? Come and hear: The Gilyonim (blank pieces of the Scroll)
and the Sadducean books need not be saved from the conflagration. They,
together with the holy names contained in them. Does not the word
Gilyonim have reference to the blank pieces of the Scroll? Nay; the
blank pages of the Sadducean books. How can it mean the blank pages of
the Sadducean books. Why, it is not even allowed to save the Sadducean
books themselves? Perhaps the Boraitha means, that the Sadducean books
are considered as blank pages, and hence must not be saved.

The text of the Boraitha says further: The Gilyonim and the Sadducean
books must not be saved from a conflagration; R. Jose says, that on
week-days the Holy Name must be torn out wherever it appears and
preserved, and the remainder must be burned; but R. Tarphon says: May I
bury my children, if I would not burn such books together with the Holy
Name, whenever they reached my hands; for when a man is pursued by
murderers or by a snake, it were better for him to seek refuge in the
temple of an idol than to enter the houses of such people; for the
idolaters serve their idols because they know not God, but the others
know God and deny him; they (the latter) are referred to by the verse
\[Isaiah lvii. 8\]: "And behind the doors and the doorposts hast thou
placed thy remembrance" (implying that they remember the Lord very well,
but nevertheless place their memory behind the doors and doorposts).

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

Said R. Ishmael: In the Scriptures it is even allowed to erase with
bitter water the Holy Name of God, which was written in a holy cause in
order to bring about peace between man and wife, *a fortiori* it should
be allowed in the case of those people who cause discord and enmity
between Israel and the Heavenly Father. To them David had reference \[in
Psalms cxxxix. 21, 22\]: "Behold those that hate thee, I ever hate, O
Lord! and for those that rise up against thee do I feel loathing. With
the utmost hatred do I hate them: enemies are they become unto me." So,
as they must not be saved from a conflagration, they must also not be
saved from the waters, or anything that might destroy them.

Joseph bar Hanin asked of R. Abuha: "May the books of Be Abhidon be
saved?" Answered R. Abuha: Yea, nay, I really cannot tell. Rabh never
went to the Be Abhidon, and all the more not to the Be Nitzrephe. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_145) Samuel, however, never went to the Be
Nitzrephe, but did go to the Be Abhidon. Mar bar Joseph said: "I am of
their society and do not fear them." Still it happened at one time that
he was in danger on their account.

Ema Shalom, the wife of R. Eliezer, who was also a sister of R. Gamaliel
the Second, encountered a philosopher in her neighborhood who was a
judge, and had the reputation of being inaccessible to bribery. R.
Gamaliel and his sister wished to ridicule him and prove that he *was*
accessible to bribery. Ema Shalom brought him a golden candle. He asked
her what she wanted, so she answered: "My father is dead, and I wish to
inherit some of his possessions." The judge said: "Go, I will order that
you be given your share." Said she: "Thou canst not order it so, because
our law decrees, that wherever there is a son a daughter cannot
inherit." Answered the judge: "Since you Israelites are in exile, your
law given you by Moses has been revoked, and a new law was given you by
which daughters may inherit equally with sons." On the morrow came R.
Gamaliel and brought him a Libyan ass, and told him that he did not wish
to let his sister inherit. Said the judge: "After thy sister left I
consulted the law again, and found that the new law said: 'I did not
come to abolish the Mosaic law, neither to increase nor

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

to diminish it.' Hence it must remain as in the old law, that where a
son is left a sister must not inherit." Said Ema Shalom to the judge:
"May God make thy light as bright as a candle." Said R. Gamaliel to her
(in the presence of the judge): "An ass came along and extinguished thy
candle."

"*Why are some (sacred Scriptures) not allowed to be read (on the
Sabbath)*?" etc. Said Rabh: "It is not allowed to read such Scriptures
only during the time of the sermons at the school-house, but at any
other they may be read." Samuel, however, said, that even at any other
time they must not be read, because he holds with R. Nehemiah as we have
learned in the following Boraitha: "Although it was said that the
Hagiographa should not be read, still they may be discussed and lectured
upon, and when a quotation must be made, the book maybe referred to and
the quotation read." Said R. Nehemiah: "Why was it prohibited to read
the Hagiographa on the Sabbath? In order that it might be said: As it is
forbidden to read the Hagiographa, it is all the more so forbidden to
read ordinary papers."

"*In a closed space surrounded by walls*." What is to be understood by
the term "closed space"? Said R. Hisda: "This refers to a lane
surrounded on three sides by walls and having on the fourth side two
beams. If the lane have three walls and two beams it is a closed space,
if it have only one beam on the fourth side it is an open place, and the
Tana of the Mishna as well as Ben Bathyra hold in accordance with the
opinion of R. Eliezer, who decided to that effect elsewhere." Said Rabba
to R. Hisda: "Dost thou call a space surrounded by three walls and one
beam an open place? If this be so, according to the sages, why cannot
victuals and beverages also be brought there, not alone Scriptures? In
*my* opinion, two walls and two beams, one on each side, form a closed
space, and two walls with only one beam constitute an open space. And
the two Tanaim of the Mishna are not in accord with R. Eliezer, but with
R. Jehudah, who opposes him (in Tract Erubin)."

Said Abayi to Rabba: "And why should not, according to thy explanation,
victuals and beverages be brought there (for safety) in conformity with
the opinion of the sages?" Said R. Ashi, however, "The two Tanaim of the
Mishna are of the opinion of R. Eliezer, and a closed place is formed by
three walls and one beam, while an open place is made by three walls
without any beam at all; and even according to R. Eliezer, who

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

requires two beams, it is only for the bringing thither of victuals; but
for the safe keeping of the Scriptures, R. Eliezer holds even one beam
to be sufficient."

MISHNA: One may save enough victuals to last for three meals (on the
Sabbath in the event of a conflagration). Such food as is fit for human
beings may be saved for the use of human beings, and such as is fit for
cattle may be saved for cattle. How so? If a conflagration happen on the
eve of Sabbath, one may save enough victuals for three meals. If it
occur in the forenoon of Sabbath, one may save enough for two meals, and
if it occur in the afternoon of Sabbath one may only save enough for one
meal. R. Jose, however, says: "One may at all times save enough for
three meals."

GEMARA: Let us see! Why should it only be allowed to save three meals,
or two, or one? (It says, further on, that the victuals for the meals
are to be brought into such a place as is covered by an Erub. In such a
place things may be carried, and the things themselves may also be
handled, then why should one not be allowed to save more than enough for
three meals?) Said Rabha: Because a man is anxious for his possessions,
he might, if allowed to save as much as possible, forget about the
Sabbath and extinguish the fire altogether. Said Abayi to him: "We have
learned previously, that a man upon whose roof a barrel filled with
victuals becomes broken, may bring another vessel and put it underneath
the barrel in order that the contents of the barrel fall into the
vessel, but may not bring another barrel and transfer the contents of
the broken one into the new, nor may he place a new barrel alongside of
the other and remove the contents of the broken one into the new one by
keeling over the former and letting its contents drop into the latter.
Why should he not be allowed to do this? (He is on private ground, and
the barrel with its contents may be handled?) If it is prohibited as a
precautionary measure in the manner of the previous case, where does the
precaution arise?" This latter case is also a precautionary measure; for
were he allowed to remove the contents from one barrel into another,
there is fear of his carrying it through public ground. The text of the
Boraitha, how ever, teaches further, that if the man had guests in his
house, he may remove the contents of the broken barrel into a new one,
etc. But he may not first remove the contents and then call guests, but
first call guests and then remove the things; nor may he pretend (to
call guests), but must actually desire their

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

company. In the name of R. Jose bar R. Jehudah it was said, that even
calling guests as a pretext is also allowed.

The rabbis taught: If one had saved (from the fire) fine bread, he must
not return and save coarse bread, but if he first saved the coarse he
may return and save the fine. One may also save enough on the Day of
Atonement in the event of a fire (when that day is succeeded by Sabbath)
to last him through the Sabbath also, but on a Sabbath it is not
permitted to save enough for the Day of Atonement (if the Sabbath falls
on the day before), and all the more so is it not allowed if the Sabbath
precedes a feast-day; nor is it allowed to save on one Sabbath for the
following Sabbath.

The rabbis taught: If one forgets bread in an oven, and in the meantime
the Sabbath sets in, it is allowed to save enough bread to last for
three meals; and one may say to bystanders, "Come and take out as much
as ye need"; and when taking out the bread it should not be done with a
baker's shovel, hut with some other utensil. R. Hisda said: A man should
see that everything should be prepared on Friday for the Sabbath as
early as possible, as it is written \[Exodus xvi. 5\]: "And it shall
come to pass, on the sixth day, when they prepare what they shall have
brought in," etc., and this means, that as soon as the sixth day sets
in, preparations for the Sabbath should be begun.

R. Aba said: "A man must pronounce the benediction over two loaves on
the Sabbath," for it is written \[ibid. xvi. 5\]: "Double bread." Said
R. Ashi: "I noticed the manner in which R. Kahana did this: He would
hold two loaves, but would cut only one, because it is written \[ibid.
xvi. 18\]: 'Every man according to his eating had he gathered.'" R. Zera
used to cut off the loaf sufficient to last him for the entire meal.
Asked Rabhina of R. Ashi: "Does this not seem gluttonous, to hold so
large a piece in one's hand?" Answered R. Ashi: "Because on week-days
such was not his wont, it does not appear gluttonous on Sabbath, and R.
Zera did this only in honor of the day." R. Ami and R. Assi, if
happening to have the same bread used in making an Erub, for use on
Sabbath, would pronounce the benediction over the bread, for they said
that because one religious duty had been fulfilled with that bread, it
should be used to fulfil another religious duty."

"*How so: If a conflagration*," etc. The rabbis taught: How many meals
should a man eat on the Sabbath? Three. R. 'Hidka said four. Said R.
Johanan: Both the rabbis and R.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Hidka adduced
their opinions from the same passage, as follows \[Exodus xvi. 25\]:
"And Moses said, Eat it to-day; for a Sabbath is this day unto the Lord:
to-day ye will not find it in the field." R. 'Hidka holds that, day
being mentioned three times, three meals should be eaten during the day
and one at night, and the rabbis hold that the day includes the night
and only *three* meals are required. Our Mishna, however, which decrees
that only enough for three meals should be saved, does therefore not
agree with R. 'Hidka. According to whose opinion, however, will the
following Mishna be? (Tract Peah): "If a poor man have sufficient for
two meals, he must not apply for another at the public kitchen (where
food is distributed), but he may apply to the general charity fund. If
he have, however, sufficient for fourteen meals (for the week) he must
not even apply to the general charity fund!" If the Mishna were of the
opinion of R. 'Hidka, he should have had sufficient for sixteen meals,
so as to afford him four meals on the Sabbath, and, according to the
rabbis, for fifteen meals in order to have three meals on the Sabbath?
It is therefore neither in accord with R. 'Hidka nor with the rabbis.
Nay; it is in accord with the rabbis, and the poor man should eat his
Sabbath-night meal on the Sabbath day, so with his Friday-night meal it
will make three meals on the Sabbath. It may also be said that the
Mishna holds with R. 'Hidka, and that the poor man should leave his
Friday meal for the Sabbath. Shall we make the poor man then fast on
Friday? It would therefore be better to hold the Mishna's opinion to be
in accord with R. Aqiba, who says, that the poor man should make Sabbath
equal to a weekday in order not to be forced to rely upon charity. Thus
fourteen meals are sufficient, and he may eat only two on Sabbath.

But according to whose opinion is the Mishna (Tract Peah): "If a
wandering mendicant come to a town, he must be given a loaf which can be
bought for a Pundian (one forty-eighth of a Sela) when the price of
flour is one Sela for four Saahs (and the sages calculated that such a
loaf is sufficient for two meals). If he remain over night he must be
given lodging, and if he remain over Sabbath he must be given three
meals for Sabbath." Shall we assume, that this Mishna holds with the
rabbis and not with R. 'Hidka? It might also be in accord with R. 'Hidka
if the mendicant happen to have one meal with him, he is told to eat the
one he has and is given three more. Should the mendicant then depart
empty-handed? Nay; he is also given a meal

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

to take along on the way. What must he be given for lodging? Said R.
Papa: Enough to hire a bed and a pillow.

The rabbis taught: The dishes used on the eve of Sabbath may be cleansed
for the Sabbath-morning meal. The dishes used in the morning may be
cleansed for the mid-day meal, and those of the mid-day meal for the
afternoon; but those of the afternoon must not be cleansed until the
Sabbath is over. All this is said concerning dishes; but glasses, cups,
and all drinking utensils may be cleansed at any time, because there are
no fixed times for drinking.

R. Simeon ben Pazi in the name of R. Jehoshua ben Levi, quoting Bar
Qapara, said: One who keeps the commandment to eat three times on the
Sabbath will be rid of three punishments, viz.: "The tribulations (at
the time) of Messiah; the punishment of Gehenna, and the war of Gog and
Magog." From the tribulations of Messiah, because the Sabbath is always
mentioned as the day, and it is written \[Malachi iii. 23\]: "Behold, I
send unto you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the day of the
Lord, the great and the dreadful." From the punishment of Gehenna,
because it is written \[Zephaniah i. 15\]: "A day of wrath is that day,"
etc., meaning the Gehenna. From the war of Gog and Magog, because it is
written \[Ezekiel xxxviii. 18\]: "On the day of Gog's coming."

R. Johanan said in the name of R. Jose: One who makes the Sabbath
pleasant will be rewarded with a boundless inheritance, as it is written
\[in Isaiah lviii. 14\]: "Then shalt thou find delight in the Lord; and
I will cause thee to tread upon the high places of the earth, and I will
cause thee to enjoy the inheritance of Jacob thy father; for the mouth
of the Lord hath spoken it." Not the inheritance of Abraham, concerning
whom it is written \[Genesis xiii. 17\]: "Arise, walk through the land
in the length of it and in the breadth of it," etc., and not as in the
case of Isaac, as it is written \[ibid. xxvi. 4\]: "And I will give unto
thy seed all these countries," but as it is written of Jacob \[ibid.
xxviii. 14\]: "And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou
shalt spread abroad to the west and to the east, and to the north and to
the south."

R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak said: (The man who makes the Sabbath pleasant)
will also be saved the pain of exile, because it is written \[Isaiah
lviii. 14\]: "And I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the
earth," and \[Deut. xxxiii. 29\]: "And thou shalt tread upon their high
places." Said R. Jehudah in the

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

name of Rabh, "He who makes the Sabbath pleasant is given everything his
heart desires," because it is written \[Psalms xxxvii. 4\]: "And delight
thyself in the Lord, and he will give thee the wishes of thy heart."
What is meant by "delight"? From the passage \[Isaiah lviii. 13\]: "If
thou call the Sabbath a delight," we can adduce that the delight means
Sabbath.

Wherewith should the Sabbath be made pleasant? Said R. Jehudah, the son
of R. Samuel bar Shilath, in the name of Rabh: "With a mess of beets,
large fish, and garlic-heads." But R. Hyya bar Ashi said in the name of
Rabh: "Even with any dish whatever prepared especially for the Sabbath."
What does "any dish whatever" mean? Said R. Papa: "Even small fish fried
in oil."

R. Jehudah said in the name of Rabh: "If the Israelites had kept the
first Sabbath (after the commandments were given) properly, no nation or
race on earth could have harmed them. For it is written \[Exodus xvi.
27\]: 'And it came to pass on the seventh day that there went out some
of the people to gather; but they found nothing.' And not long
afterwards Amalek attacked the Israelites."

R. Johanan said in the name of R. Simeon ben Jochai: "If the Israelites
were to keep two Sabbaths in succession as they should, they would
immediately be released from exile, for it is written \[Isaiah lvi. 6\]:
'Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves unto the Lord, to
serve him, and to love the name of the Lord, to be unto him as servants,
every one that keepeth the Sabbath by not violating it, and those who
take hold of my covenant,' and immediately afterwards it is written
\[ibid. ibid. 7\]: 'Even these will I bring to my holy mountain.'

R. Jose said: "May my share in the world to come be with those who eat
three meals on the Sabbath." Again he said: "May my share in the world
to come be with those who recite Hallel <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146) every day." This is not so. The Master
says, that he who recites Hallel every day is a blasphemer. Nay; R. Jose
does not mean Hallel, but Hallelujah.

R. Jose said again: "May my share in the world to come be with those who
perform their morning devotion as soon as the sun begins to rise." Again
said he: "May my share be with those who die of abdominal disease, for
the Master said, that most of the righteous die of bowel troubles." He
also said:

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "May my share be
with those who die when about to fulfil a commandment; also with those
who receive the Sabbath in Tiberias and see it out in Zipporias
(Tiberias was in a valley and Zipporias on a hill); also with those who
remain in the houses of learning, and not with those who attempt to draw
scholars away from their studies; also with those who solicit alms but
not with those who dispense alms; also with those who are suspected but
are not guilty." Said R. Papa: "I have been suspected but was not
guilty." Said R. Jose: "I have gone in unto my wife five times and have
planted five cedars in Israel." Who are they? R. Ishmael, R. Eliezer, R.
'Halafta, R. Aftiles, and R. Mena'hem, all sons of R. Jose. But he also
had a son called Vradimos? Nay; Vradimos is the same as R. Mena'hem, and
the reason he was called Vradimos was because his face was as beautiful
as a rose (Vrad is Aramaic for rose).

Said R. Jose again: "In all my days the ceiling of my house never saw
the seam of my undershirt." Again said be: "I never acted contrary to
the advice of my colleagues. I know well that I am not a descendant of
priests, but when my colleagues asked me to pronounce a benediction
usually said by priests, I did so." Again he said: "I never said a thing
that I afterwards repented having said."

R. Na'hman said: "May it be accounted to me (for my reward), that I have
observed the three meals (in honor of the) Sabbath." R. Jehudah said:
"May it be accounted to me, that I have given my prayers preliminary
consideration." <span id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147) R. Huna, the son
of R. Jehoshua, said: "May it be accounted to me, that I have never
walked four ells with uncovered head." R. Shesheth said: "May it be
accounted to me, that I have observed the commandment of Tephillin," and
R. Na'hman said again: "May it be accounted to me, that I have observed
the commandment of Tzitzith (showthreads)."

Said R. Joseph to R. Joseph the son of Rabha: "Canst thou tell me which
commandment thy father observed most punctually?" The answer was: "The
commandment of Tzitzith. For it happened one day that my father was
ascending the stairway, and a thread of his Tzitzith becoming torn off,
he would not leave his place until a new thread had been brought to him
and the Tzitzith were mended."

Said Abayi: "May it be accounted to me, that whenever I

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

noticed a young scholar (of my college) had finished a Tract of the
Talmud, I gave a feast to all the sages of the day." Said Rabha: "May it
be accounted to me, that whenever a young scholar and another man came
before me for judgment, I did not put my head on the pillow (rest) until
I exhausted every to find the scholar's words prove the justice of his
claim." Said Mar, the son of R. Ashi: "I am unfit to judge a young
scholar because I love him as well as I do myself, and no man call see
himself unjust."

R. Hanina used to wrap himself in a cloak on the eve of Sabbath and say:
"Come with me, and let us go toward Sabbath the queen." R. Yanai used to
clothe himself in his holiday clothes on the eve of Sabbath and say:
"Come, bride; come, bride."

Rabba, the son of R. Huna, came as a guest to the house of Rabba the son
of R. Na'hman. At the table three cakes steeped in the fat of the ram
(which were only served on special occasions) were placed before him.
Said he to his host: "Didst thou know that I would come to visit thee?"
Answered the host: "Art thou then better than the Sabbath? (We prepare
it usually for every Sabbath, as it is written: 'And thou shalt call the
Sabbath a pleasure.')"

R. Aba used to buy on the eve of every Sabbath thirteen Isteris' (six
and a half Dinars) worth of meat from thirteen different butchers, and
would hand them the money immediately upon their entering his door <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148) and delivering the meat, saying to them:
"Make haste, make haste and deliver your orders to others." R. Abuha
used to sit on an ivory stool and make fire in honor of the Sabbath. R.
Anan used to don a black apron in order to show that this day (the eve
of the Sabbath) was a day of preparation, and that work had to be
performed for the Sabbath. R. Safra used to singe a cow's head himself
for the Sabbath, and Rabha would salt fish himself. R. Huna would light
candles himself. R. Papa would prepare the wicks for the lamps. R. Hisda
would cut herbs himself. Rabba and R. Joseph would chop wood for
Sabbath. R. Zera would light the kindling wood. R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak
would shoulder all burdens

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

to be carried in and out of the house himself on the eve of Sabbath,
saying: "If R. Ami or R. Assi would come to visit me, would I not do the
same for them?" Others say that R. Ami and Assi did this on the eve of
every Sabbath, saying: "If it should happen that R. Johanan were to
visit us, would we not do the same for him?"

Joseph, who honored the Sabbath, had a rich Gentile for a neighbor. The
astrologers told the Gentile that all his goods and possessions would
eventually be eaten up by Joseph, his neighbor. He went and sold out all
his goods, and with the proceeds bought a precious pearl. This pearl he
had set in his turban. While crossing a lake one day, the wind blew off
his turban and it fell into the water. A fish swallowed it. Subsequently
the fish was caught by fishermen late on the eve of Sabbath. Said the
fishermen: "Who will buy this so late in the evening?" They were told by
some people to go to Joseph, who honored the Sabbath, and that he
usually bought such things. They carried it to Joseph, who bought it,
and upon opening the fish he found the pearl, which he sold for
thirteen <span id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_149) boxes of golden Dinars. A
certain old man met this Joseph, and said to him: He who lends to the
Sabbath is repaid by the Sabbath itself.

Rabbi (Jehudah Hanassi) asked of R. Ishmael the son of R. Jose: "By what
acts did the rich men of Palestine, so wealthy, merit their wealth?"

He answered: "Because they gave tithes, as it is written \[Deut. xiv.
22\]: 'Thou shalt truly give tithes.'" <span
id="fr_150"></span>[2](#fn_150) "By what acts did the rich men of
Babylon merit their wealth?" asked Rabbi again. "Because they keep the
law honorably," was the reply. "And what about the rich men of other
lands?" "Because *they* honor the Sabbath," as R. Hyya bar Aba related:
"It happened that I was a guest in the house of a man in the city of
Ludkai and a golden table was brought for me, which required sixteen men
to carry, and sixteen silver chains were fastened to it, and bowls,
pitchers, goblets, and glasses were hung on those chains, and on the
table were all kinds of food and

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

beverages and spices, and when the table was set down they said: 'Unto
the Lord belongeth the earth, with what filleth it' \[Psalms xxiv. 1\],
and when the table was taken away, they said: 'The heavens are the
heavens of the Lord; but the earth hath he given unto the children of
men.' \[Psalms xcv. 16.\] I said to my host, 'My son, how didst thou
merit all this?' Said he, 'I used to be a butcher, and whenever I came
across a good animal, I would keep it for Sabbath.' Said I to him: 'Well
is unto thee, that thou hast merited this, and praise be to God, who
hath rewarded thee.'"

Said the Exilarch to R. Hamnuna: "It is written \[Isaiah lviii. 13\]:
'The holy day of the Lord, honorable.' What does this 'honorable'
signify?" R. Hamnuna answered: "It means the Day of Atonement, on which
day there is no eating and no drinking, and hence the Thora says, thou
shalt honor it with clean clothes." Further, it says \[ibid.\]: "Thou
shalt honor it" (this evidently does not refer to the Day of Atonement,
which is called honorable, but must again refer to the Sabbath; how,
then, should it be honored?) Said Rabh: "Thou shalt make the usual time
of thy meals earlier," and Samuel said, "Thou shalt postpone the
ordinary meal-hour." The children of R. Papa bar Aba asked R. Papa: "How
shall we, who have meat and wine every day, distinguish the Sabbath
day?" He answered: "If ye usually have your meals at a late hour, have
them earlier, and if at an early hour, have them later."

R. Shesheth (who was blind) in the summer used to seat his pupils, who
came to hear him lecture on Sabbath, in a place where the sun shone
earliest, in order that they might become warm and leave, and in the
winter used to seat them where the sun could not reach them, that they
might become cold and leave the sooner.

R. Zera, when seeing his pupils standing in pairs and discussing the
Thora on the Sabbath, used to say to them: "I pray ye, go home, eat,
drink, and be merry. Do not violate the Sabbath! (It is made for
pleasure and not for learning.)"

Rabha, according to others R. Jehoshua ben Levi, said: "Even a man who
prays singly on the Sabbath eve must recite the prayer commencing with
'Thus were finished,' etc. \[Genesis ii. 1-3\]; for R. Hamnuna said,
that he who prays on the Sabbath eve and recites that prayer is
considered by the verse as being a collaborator in the creation of the
world."

R. Eliezer said: "Whence do we know that speaking is

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

equal to acting, as it is written \[Psalms xxxiii. 6\]: 'By the word of
the Lord were the heavens made.'"

R. Hisda in the name of Mar Uqba said: "He who on the Sabbath recites
the prayer commencing with, 'Thus were finished,' etc., has the hands of
the two angels who accompany each man laid on his head, and they say to
him \[Isaiah vi. 7\]: 'And thy iniquity is departed and thy sin is
forgiven.'"

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Jose bar Jehudah said: "Two angels
accompany a man on the Sabbath eve on his way home from the house of
prayer; one is a good angel and the other an evil one; and when the man
comes home and finds the candles lit, the table set, and his bed made
up, the good angel says: 'May it be the will of God that the next
Sabbath shall be the same,' and the evil angel answers 'Amen'
involuntarily. If, however, the man does not find everything in order,
the evil angel says: 'Mayst thou find it so on the next Sabbath also,'
and the good angel answers against his own will: 'Amen.'"

R. Elazar said: "A man should set his table on the Sabbath eve, although
he may not be hungry and can eat not more than the size of an olive." R.
Hanina said: "A man should set his table on the eve following the
Sabbath, though he may not be hungry and can eat but the size of one
olive. (This is also in honor of the. Sabbath and is like the
accompanying of a king at his departure.) Warm water at the close of the
Sabbath day is wholesome. Warm bread at that time is also wholesome."

R. Abuha used to have a calf which was the third calf of its mother (and
hence the best) killed for him at the close of the Sabbath day, and he
ate only one of the entrails of the calf. When his son Abhimi grew up,
he (Abhimi) said, "Why kill a whole calf for the sake of one of its
entrails? Let us leave one of the entrails of the calf killed for the
Sabbath for father, that he may eat it at the close of the Sabbath."
This was done, but a lion came and killed the calf that was spared.

R. Jehoshua ben Levi said: "He who answers 'Amen. The Name of the
Eternal be blessed,' with all his heart, has any ill fate which has been
predestined for him nullified in heaven, as it is written \[Judges v.
2\]: 'When depravity had broken out in Israel, then did the people offer
themselves willingly; (therefore) praise ye the Lord.' Why had depravity
broken out in Israel? Because they had not praised the Lord." R. Hyya
bar Abba in the name of R. Johanan said: "Even if

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

that man have amongst his sins aught of idolatry, he is also forgiven."

Said Resh Lakish: "He who answers 'Amen,' etc., with all his might has
the gates of Paradise opened for him, as it is written \[Isaiah xxvi.
2\]: 'Open ye the gates, that there may enter in the righteous nation
that guardeth the truth.'" (The truth in Hebrew is called "Emunim," and
Resh Lakish said, "Do not read Emunim but Amenim, the plural for Amen.")
What is Amen? Said R. Hanina: "Amen is the abbreviation for El (God),
Melech (king), Neamon (truth)." (Meaning that by saying Amen a man
certifies that his Creator is the God and king of truth.)

R. Jehudah, the son of R. Samuel, in the name of Rabh said: "A fire
seldom occurs in a place unless there is a violation of the Sabbath, as
it is written \[Jeremiah xvii. 27\]: 'But if ye will not hearken unto me
to hallow the Sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, and to enter in at
the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire in
its gates, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall
not be quenched.'" What does "it shall not be quenched" signify? Said R.
Na'hman bar Itz'hak: "The fire shall occur at a time when men are not
around, as a rule."

Abayi said: "Jerusalem was destroyed solely on account of the violation
of the Sabbath, as it is written \[Ezekiel xxii. 26\]: 'And from (the
violations of) my Sabbaths do they turn away their eyes, so that I am
profaned among them.'" R. Abuha said: "Jerusalem was not destroyed until
they had abolished the reading of the Shema in the morning and in the
evening, as it is written \[Isaiah v. 11-13\]: 'Wo unto those that rise
up early in the morning, that they may run after strong drink, that
continue until late in the twilight, till wine inflame them! And there
are harp and psaltery, tambourine and flute, and wine, at their drinking
feasts; but the deeds of the Lord they regard not, and the works of his
hands they behold not. Therefore are my people led into exile, for want
of knowledge.'" R. Hamnuna said: "Jerusalem was not destroyed until the
children were kept away from school, as it is written \[Jeremiah vi.
11\]: '(I must) pour it out over the child in the street'; and it may be
explained thus: Why must I pour it out? Because the child is in the
street and not at school."

Ula said: "Jerusalem was destroyed because the people were devoid of
shame, as it is written \[ibid. 15\]: 'They should

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

have been ashamed because they committed an abomination; but they
neither felt the least shame, nor did they know how to blush; therefore
shall they fall among those that fall.'"

R. Itz'hak said: "Jerusalem was destroyed only because no distinction
was made between great and small, as it is written \[Isaiah xxiv. 2,
3\]: 'And it shall be the same with the people as with the priest, etc.
Empty, emptied out shall be the land.'" R. Amram, the son of R. Simeon
bar Aba, in the name of his father, quoting R. Hanina, said: "Jerusalem
was destroyed only because the people did not admonish one another, as
it is written (Lamentations i. 6): 'Her princes have become like harts
that have found no pasture.' As the harts in a herd travel head to rump,
so would the men of Jerusalem not dare face each other with admonitions,
but followed from behind in silence."

R. Jehudah said: "Jerusalem was destroyed because they insulted men of
learning, as it is written \[II Chronicles xxxvii. 16\]: "But they
mocked at the messengers of God, and despised his words, and scorned his
prophets, until the fury of the Lord arose against his people, till
there was no remedy." What does "till there was no remedy" signify? Said
R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh: "He who insults a man of learning, can
find no panacea for his affliction."

R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh said again: "It is written \[I Chronicles
xvi. 22\]: 'Touch not my anointed, and do my prophets no harm.'" By
"touch not my anointed" is meant the children of the school (for
children are usually anointed), and "do my prophets no harm" refers to
the scholars. <span id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151)

Resh Lakish said in the name of R. Jehudah the Second: "The world is
sustained solely through the exhalation of the children" (because they
are pure and without sin). Said R. Papa to Abayi: "What about thy and my
exhalation?" Answered Abayi: "The difference lies therein, that thou and
I might have sinned, but children are incapable of committing sin." Resh
Lakish said again in the name of the same authority: "The children
should not be withheld from attending school, even while the new temple
shall be in process of construction."

Said Resh Lakish to R. Jehudah the Second: "I have heard

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

a tradition coming from thy parents which says, that the city which has
no school for children shall be destroyed; but Rabhina says, the
tradition is to the effect that the high court shall put the city under
a ban (until a school is built for children)."

Rabha said: Jerusalem was destroyed solely because there were no more
trustworthy men there, as it is written \[Jeremiah v. 1\]: "Roam about
through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and notice, and search in
its broad places, if ye can find one man, if there be one that executeth
justice, that searcheth for truth: and I will pardon it." What is meant
by trustworthy men? Such as can be trusted in business.

MISHNA: Further, one may save a basket full of loaves (of bread), be it
even enough for a hundred meals, a fig-cake, and a cask of wine; and one
may also call to others: "Come ye and save for yourselves!" If those who
do so understand their advantage, they make a settlement with the owner
after the Sabbath is over. Where may such articles be taken to (for
safety)? To a court that is joined to the other (court of the house
burning) by an Erub. Ben Bathyra says: "Even to one that is not joined
by an Erub."

There all utensils (dishes) may be brought, that are used on the same
day; one may (in the event of a conflagration on the Sabbath) put on as
many clothes as possible, and may wrap himself in whatever is possible.
R. Jose says: "One may only put on eighteen pieces of ordinary apparel,
but he can come back as often as he chooses and put on the same quantity
and carry them off." One may also call to others: "Come ye and save with
me (whatever ye can)!"

GEMARA: Have we not learned, in the preceding Mishna \[page
[245](#page_245)\], that only (enough victuals for) three meals may be
saved (and in the above Mishna sufficient for a hundred meals is
permitted)? Said R. Huna: "This presents no difficulty. Our Mishna
refers to one who comes to save the food with only one basket (when he
may fill it with any quantity, whereas the preceding Mishna refers to
one who brings several baskets, and in such a case it is not permitted
to put in each basket more than sufficient for three meals)." But R. Aba
bar Zavda in the name of Rabh said: "Both Mishnas refer to one who comes
even with several baskets, but still no difficulty arises. This Mishna
speaks of one who does not carry the food beyond the same court, while
the other refers to one who carries it into another court.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

"*A fig-cake*," etc. Why does the Mishna say, that if those who save for
themselves know their advantage they will make a settlement with the
owner after having saved the things from the conflagration? Are they not
entitled to it under any circumstances, by virtue of the owner having
made it public property when saying, "Come ye and save for yourselves"?
Said R. Hisda: "This refers to pious people who would not take advantage
of a man who is compelled to sacrifice his property." Said Rabha: "Can
they be called pious, who accept remuneration for their time on the
Sabbath? Nay; the Mishna does not refer to pious men, but to God-fearing
men, who, while they would not take anything not belonging to them,
would not care to trouble themselves gratuitously. By stating,
therefore, that those who know their advantage will settle accounts with
the owner afterwards, the Mishna means to say that their prudence
consists in their knowing that they will not receive any remuneration
for their time on Sabbath, but will only receive their own property as
their due."

"*Come ye and save with me*." Why does the first part of the Mishna
permit the saying of "Come and save for yourselves," and in the last
part the permission is given to say: "Come and save with me"? Because
the first part of the Mishna refers to victuals, and a man cannot save
more than sufficient for three meals, while the last part of the Mishna
refers to clothing; and as a man can change his clothing as often as he
pleases, he may call to others to come and help him save whatever is
possible.

"*One may put on as many clothes as possible*." The rabbis taught: One
may dress himself, go out and undress, come back and dress again, and so
on as often as he chooses. So said R. Meir. R. Jose, however, said, that
one may put on only eighteen pieces of ordinary apparel. These were: 1.
and 2. *Macturen* and *Unqly*, a mantle with a head-hold; 3. *Funda*,
pocket for money; 4. *Kalbus*, a dress without sleeves; 5. *Chaluk*, a
kind of shirt; 6. *Apiliute*, cover or overcoat; 7. *Maopareth*; 8 and
9. Drawers and pantaloons and cap for the head; 10. and 11. Shoes; 12
and 13. Socks; 14 and 15. *Pargud*, striped suit; 16. Girdle; 17. Hat;
18. Neckties.

MISHNA: R. Simeon, the son of Nanas, says: "One may spread a goat-skin
over a chest, a box, or a cupboard, which lips caught fire, so that they
only become singed. One may also form a partition with any, utensil (or
vessel), be it full of water

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

or not, in order to keep the fire from spreading. R. Jose forbids the
making of such a partition with new earthenware vessels filled with
water, because such vessels cannot stand heat, but burst and extinguish
the fire."

GEMARA: R. Jehudah said in the name of Rabh: "When one side of a garment
has caught fire, the other side may be put in water, and if thereby the
fire is extinguished it makes no difference." An objection was made: We
have learned in a Tosephta, that if a garment has caught fire one may
wrap it around him, and it makes no difference if the fire is thereby
extinguished. One may also unroll the Sacred Scrolls, if the covering
has caught fire on one side, and it does not matter if thus the fire is
quenched. (This Tosephta then simply permits the unfolding or the
folding of a garment that has caught fire, but says nothing about
soaking the undamaged part in water.) Rabh holds with R. Simeon, the son
of Nanas, in the above Mishna (who permits the prevention of the fire).
R. Simeon, however, restricts his permission so that, while preventing
the fire, it is not extinguished, but simply singes the objects (when
the article, however, is soaked in water the fire will certainly be
quenched, and did R. Simeon permit this also?) Yea, he did; for the last
part of the Mishna relates, that R. Jose forbids the making of a
partition with new pottery filled with water, because such vessels are
liable to burst and extinguish the fire; and if R. Jose forbids this,
surely R. Simeon (the first Tana) must have permitted it in the first
part of the Mishna.

The rabbis taught: If a candle fall on the table, the table board may be
raised and the candle dropped to the floor, and if it become
extinguished, it matters not. Another Boraitha taught, that if a candle
burn behind a door, the door may be opened and closed as usual,
regardless of whether the candle is thus extinguished. Rabh scolded the
one that thus decreed. Said Rabhina to R. A'ha the son of Rabha,
according to others R. A'ha the son of Rabha to R. Ashi: "Why did Rabh
scold the one who made that decree? Shall we say that it was because he
holds with R. Jehudah (who says that an indirect act is also
prohibited), and the Boraitha holds with R. Simeon, who permits the
performance of an indirect act; is it possible that Rabh will scold
every one who holds with R. Simeon?" he answered: "In this matter R.
Simeon would also agree that this is prohibited, as it would be like
decapitating a man without killing him."

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

R. Jehudah said: "One may open a door opposite a hearth-fire." Abayi
scolded the one that decreed thus. Of what circumstances do we treat
here? If the door is opened when there is an ordinary wind blowing, what
reason had the one to prohibit it; and if there be an extraordinary wind
blowing, why did the other permit it? The case here treated of is that
of an ordinary wind, and the one prohibits the door being opened as a
precautionary measure, lest this be done when a high wind is blowing,
while the other does not regard a precautionary measure necessary.

"*One may also form a partition*," etc. Shall we say that the rabbis
hold the indirect bringing about of an extinction to be permissible and
R. Jose holds to the contrary? Have we not heard the case to be the
reverse? We have learned in a Boraitha: One may make a partition with
empty vessels, and with vessels filled with water that are not liable to
burst, and such are iron vessels. R. Jose, however, says, that the
vessels made of pottery in the villages of Shihin and Hananiah are also
proof against bursting. Thus we see that R. Jose is even more lenient
than the rabbis? This presents no difficulty, for the above Boraitha is
altogether in accordance with R. Jose; but it is incomplete, and should
read thus: "One may make a partition with empty vessels, and with such
as are filled with water but are not liable to burst; and such vessels
are iron vessels and vessels made of pottery in the villages of Shihin
and Hananiah," as R. Jose says that the vessels made of pottery in these
villages are proof against heat.

MISHNA: If a non-Israelite comes near to extinguish (the fire), one must
neither say to him: "Extinguish (it)," nor "Do not extinguish it," and
for the reason, that one is not obliged to make him rest (on Sabbath).
If a minor, however, desires to extinguish the fire, one must not allow
him to do so, because one is obliged to see that he (the minor) rests
(on Sabbath).

GEMARA: R. Ami said: "During a conflagration one may proclaim: 'Whoever
will come and extinguish the fire, will lose nothing by it.'"

The rabbis taught: It happened that a fire broke out in the court of
Joseph ben Simai in the town of Shihin, and the men of the fortress of
Sepphoris came to extinguish the fire, because Joseph was an official of
the government; but he would not allow them to do so, in honor of the
Sabbath. A miracle occurred, and it commenced to rain, and the fire was
extinguished. That

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

evening he sent to each man in the fortress two selah and to their
officer fifty selah. When the sages heard this, they said: "It was not
at all necessary to do this, because the Mishna says, that when a
Gentile comes to extinguish a fire on Sabbath, one need not tell him to
do it, or not to do it."

"*If a minor, however, desires to extinguish the fire*," etc. Could we
conclude from this, that if a minor is detected eating forbidden food it
is the duty of the court of justice to prevent his doing so (and we know
such is not the case)? Said R. Johanan: "Yea; if the minor does this
with his father's knowledge. We must say, then, that the same case
applies to the Gentile, who does the work with the knowledge of the
Israelite whose house is burning. Is this permitted? Yea, it is; for the
Gentile does it of his own volition, and it makes no difference whether
the Israelite knows it or not (because he, the Gentile, knows he will be
rewarded)."

MISHNA-. One may cover the top of a lamp with a vessel in order that the
ceiling may not catch fire, and also cover the ordure (of poultry <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_152)) on account of the children (in the
house). (One may also place a vessel) over a scorpion in order to
prevent him from biting. R. Jehudah said: "A case of this kind happened
once in the presence of R. Johanan ben Zakai in Arab, and he said, 'I am
not certain whether (the man) is not culpable (and bound to bring a
sin-offering).'"

GEMARA: R. Jehudah, R. Jeremiah b. Aba, and R. Hanon b. Ram happened to
be the guests of Abin of Nishikia. The two former were furnished with
beds, and the last one was not. At the same time, he noticed him
teaching his son that the ordure of a child is to be covered, in order
that the child should not touch it; and he said, "Abin the fool is
teaching foolishness to his children. Is not the ordure of a child
useful for dogs? What can you say? It was not prepared from yesterday.
But this makes no difference; for we have learned in a Boraitha, that
running rivers and springing wells are to be considered as the feet of
every man." And Abin asked, "How, then, shall we teach?" And Hanon
answered, "Over the ordure of poultry, that the child shall not touch
it."

"*Over a scorpion in order to prevent him from biting*." R. Jehoshua ben
Levi said: "All dangerous creatures may be killed on Sabbath." R. Joseph
raised an objection: "We have

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

learned in a Boraitha, that five creatures may be killed on Sabbath, and
they are: the fly of Egypt, the wasp of Nineveh, and the serpent of
Hadaiev, and the snake of Palestine, and a mad dog from any region."
According to whose opinion is this Boraitha? It is not according to the
opinion of R. Jehudah, who holds, that the performance of an act not in
itself necessary makes one culpable? We must say, then, that the
Boraitha agrees with R. Simeon. If this is so, is it allowed to kill
only these five, and not others? Said R. Jeremiah: "Who can tell us that
this Boraitha is a correct one? It may be erroneous." Said R. Joseph: "I
have studied the Boraitha. The same objection was made before me, and I
defended it by stating, that the Boraitha refers to the case where the
creatures pursued the man in order to harm him, and under these
circumstances even R. Jehudah permits the killing of these creatures."

A certain disciple related before Rabha, the son of R. Huna, quoting a
Boraitha: "One who kills serpents and snakes on the Sabbath does not
find favor in the eyes of the pious." Answered Rabha: "And these pious
men do not find favor in the eyes of our sages." Thus he differs with R.
Huna, for it happened that R. Huna, seeing a man killing a snake on
Sabbath, said to him: Hast thou killed the last of them (if thou hast
only killed one, of what use is it to violate the Sabbath? From this we
see that R. Huna differs from the opinion of his son.)

The rabbis taught: If a man met snakes on the road and killed them, it
was decreed above that he should kill them (thus, removing danger for
others, because a good deed is performed through a righteous man); if,
however, he did not kill them, it was decreed above that he should be
killed by them (that is, he is a sinner and deserving of death), but
through the mercy of the Lord a miracle was performed, and he was saved.
Said Ula, according to others Rabba bar bar Hana, in the name of R.
Johanan: "Only in case the snakes prepared to strike at the man, can it
be said that it was decreed that the man should be killed."

R. Aba bar Kahana said: "It happened that a snake was found in the
school-house, and a man of the city of Neiety killed it." Said Rabbi:
"He met his equal." The schoolman asked: "Did Rabbi mean, that the man
was right in his deed, or on the contrary?" Come and hear: R. Aba, the
son of Hyya b. Aba, and R. Zera were sitting in the hut of R. Janai, and
they resolved to ask R. Janai if one might kill snakes and

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

serpents on the Sabbath. And he answered: "If a bee should annoy me, I
would kill it; *a fortiori*, snakes and serpents."

Aba the son of Marta, who is Aba the son of Minyumi, was indebted in a
sum of money to the Exilarch's house. He was brought there and was
worried. While standing in the room, Aba spat on the floor. This
happened on the Sabbath, and the Exilarch ordered his servants to bring
a dish and cover up the spittle. Said Aba to him: "This is not
necessary, for R. Jehudah says, that one may put his foot on spittle and
thus clear it off." Thereupon the Exilarch remarked: "This proves to me
that the man is a young scholar; let him go in peace."

Aba bar Kahana said in the name of R. Hanina: "The lamps of the house of
Rabbi may be handled on the Sabbath." R. Zera asked him: "Which lamps do
you refer to, the lamps that can be handled with one hand, or those that
require both hands"? and he answered: "The same as can be found in your
father's house (those were small lamps)." The same Aba said in the name
of the same authority, that the carriages of the house of Rabbi might
also be handled on the Sabbath. R. Zera asked him which he referred to,
those that one man can pull, or those that require two men, and the
answer was: "The same that your father possesses." Aba bar Kahana said
again, that the same R. Hanina permitted the house of Rabbi to drink
wine that was scaled with but one seal, in the markets of the heathens,
and he states, that he does not know whether R. Hanina holds with R.
Eliezer (who held that one seal only was necessary) or whether he
permitted this out of respect to the house of the Nassi (for fear that
if he prohibited this, they would become angry <span
id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153)).

MISHNA: If a non-Israelite lit a lamp on the Sabbath, the Israelite
might make use of the light. If he (the non-Israelite) did so
(especially) for the Israelite, the latter must not use it. If the
non-Israelite filled up (a trough) with water, to water his (own)
cattle, the Israelite may water his cattle after him; if he did so for
the Israelite (especially), the latter must not water his cattle with
it. If a non-Israelite made a stairway in order to descend upon it from
a ship, the Israelite might descend after him; if he made it
(especially) for the Israelite, the latter must not descend. Once R.
Gamaliel and several elders arrived on a ship (on Sabbath) and a
non-Israelite made a stairway upon which

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

to descend (from the ship), whereupon R. Gamaliel and the elders also
descended.

GEMARA: And it is necessary for the Mishna to mention the above cases
separately, because if we were taught only concerning a lamp, we would
say, that a lamp only may be used because a lamp will give light for a
hundred men as well as for one; but as for water, we might say, that the
water should not be used, in precaution lest the non-Israelite replenish
the trough especially for the Israelite. For what purpose, however, is
the stairway mentioned? That was only for the purpose of relating what
happened to R. Gamaliel and the elders.

The rabbis taught: With grass which a Gentile mowed for his own cattle,
an Israelite may feed his cattle, but if the grass was mowed especially
for the Israelite, he may not. The same rule applies to water for
watering the cattle. This applies only where the Gentile and the
Israelite are not acquainted; but if they are, it is not allowed, under
any circumstances. This is not so! For R. Huna said in the name of R.
Hanina, that a man may allow his cattle to graze on the Sabbath, but
must not feed them on grass which he designated previously for some
other purpose (it matters not whether the grass is still uncut or cut).
(Now, we see that things which have been designated for another purpose
must not be fed to cattle on the Sabbath; how then is it allowed to feed
one's cattle on the Gentile's grass which was cut on the Sabbath, and
surely designated for some express purpose?) This presents no
difficulty; for the permission to feed one's cattle on the Gentile's
grass only holds good if the cattle feed themselves, and the man may
stand by and prevent them from invading another pasture (but does not
allow the man to feed them by hand).

It is said above: "This applies only where the Gentile and the Israelite
are not acquainted," etc. Is this so? Did not R. Gamaliel descend on the
stairway, although he and the Gentile were acquainted? Said Abayi: "The
Gentile made the stairway when R. Gamaliel did not see him." But Rabha
said: "It may be that the stairway was made in the presence of R.
Gamaliel, but this case would be the same as that of a lamp. A lamp for
one is a lamp for a hundred."

An objection was made to the teaching of Rabha: We have learned in a
Tosephta: R. Gamaliel said to the elders: "As the Gentile made the
stairway while we were not looking, we may descend on it." Answered
Rabha: "Read simply, that R.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gamaliel said,
'because the Gentile had already made it, we may use it.'"

Samuel happened to arrive at the house of Abin in Touron on a Sabbath. A
Gentile came and lit a candle. Samuel turned his face away from the
light; but after seeing that the Gentile brought a paper and commenced
to read by the light of that candle, he said: "I see now that the
Gentile lit the candle for his own use," and he then made use of it
himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_144"></span>[241:1](t0128.htm#fr_144) In the Hebrew
introduction to Tract Rosh Hashana this entire argument is explained,
and we do not deem it advisable to translate it at present.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[243:1](t0128.htm#fr_145) We render these names
without translations, as we also do in the case of Gilyonim, because of
the incessant discussions concerning them among Hebrew theologians, and
we do not desire to decide the definite meaning.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[249:1](t0128.htm#fr_146) Hallel is called the
section of the Psalms from Chapter cxiii. to cxix.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[250:1](t0128.htm#fr_147) It is stated
elsewhere (in Tract Rosh Hashana) that R. Jehudah prayed only once in
every thirty days.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[251:1](t0128.htm#fr_148) Rashi interprets this
passage somewhat differently, namely: R. Aba did not hand the money to
the butchers immediately upon their entering the door, but would hand
the meat to his servants at the door, saying: "Make haste and cook this
while I go and bring more," showing that he went himself for the meat
and brought each piece from each butcher home separately.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[252:1](t0128.htm#fr_149) Rashi explains that
his teacher Levi taught, that the number thirteen was usually used by
the sages for a general sum and must not be taken literally as the above
thirteen butchers, etc.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[252:2](t0128.htm#fr_150) The literal verse
reads "Asser teasher," which is here applied in the sense, that thou
shalt give tithes in order that thou mayst become rich, the word "osher"
also meaning riches.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[256:1](t0128.htm#fr_151) Rashi justifies this
reference by basing it on the verse in Psalms xc. 12, which he
interprets: "A prophet has a heart endowed with wisdom"; although Isaac
Leeser translates the verse, "That we may obtain a heart endowed with
wisdom," the Hebrew word Navi meaning both "prophet" and also "we may
obtain."

<span id="fn_152"></span>[261:1](t0128.htm#fr_152) According to the
explanation of the Gemara. See also translation of the Mishna by De Sola
and Raphall.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[263:1](t0128.htm#fr_153) Rashi gives this a
different explanation, but the above seems correct to us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII: Regulations Concerning Handling of Utensils and
Furniture on the Sabbath](t0129)
