[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0136)  [Next](t0138) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001DDYEI2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*The Babylonian Talmud, Book 1: Tract Sabbath*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1903\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

# THE PRAYER AT THE CONCLUSION OF A TRACT.

"*Abayi said: "May it be reckoned to me (for my reward in the world to
come), that whenever I noticed a young scholar (of my college) had
finished a tract of the Talmud, I gave a feast to all the sages of the
day*." (Pages 250 and 251 of this tract.)

\[Bearing the above motto in mind and as a matter of peculiar interest,
we shall translate below the laudatory prayer published in every edition
of the ancient Talmud at the conclusion of each tract, and in
justification of this our digression from the actual text would state
the following:

With all pious Israelites who were exclusively engaged in the study of
the Talmud, and even with those who made it an incidental feature of
their lives, it has since time immemorial been the custom to celebrate
as a happy event the completion of the study of each tract. So marked
was the degree of gratification at this frequent occurrence, that it
became customary for the first-born sons in Israel, who in commemoration
of one of the plagues sent by the Lord upon the Egyptians were in the
habit of fasting on the eve of Passover, to complete the study of a
tract of the Talmud on that day, and, thanks to the feast given in honor
of the occasion, escape the rather onerous duty of fasting; and even in
the nine days of penance occurring before the Fast of the Ninth of Abh,
when the Temple was destroyed, when meat was not to be eaten and wine
was not to be drunk, the same subterfuge would be resorted to, in order
that a feast might be given and thus break the fast of the nine days.
Apart from this, the prayer is rich in sentiment, and deserves to be
rendered at the end of this volume once for all.\]

We shall return to thee, Tract Sabbath, <span
id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193) and mayest thou return to us! We shall
bear thee in mind, Tract Sabbath, and mayest thou bear us in mind! May
we not be forgotten by thee, Tract Sabbath! and thou shalt not be
forgotten by us on this earth nor in the world to come!

\[This is to be repeated three times, when the following is to be
recited:\]

May it be Thy will, O Lord, our God and God of our fathers, that Thy Law
may be our pursuit in this world and in the world to come! May there be
together with us, in the world to come, Haninah bar Papa, Rami bar Papa,
Na'hman bar Papa, Ahayi bar Papa, Abba Mari bar Papa, Raphram bar Papa,
Rakhesh bar Papa, Sur'hab bar Papa, Ada bar Papa, and Doro bar
Papa. <span id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_194)

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

Make sweet, O Lord, our God, the words of Thy Law in our mouths, and in
the mouth of Thy people the house of Israel; and may we, our children,
and the children of Thy people the house of Israel, all know Thy Name
and learn Thy Law.

Wiser than my enemy doth Thy commandment make me; for it is perpetually
with me. Let my heart be entire in the statutes, that I may not be put
to shame. Never will I forget Thy precepts; for with them Thou hast kept
me alive. Blessed art Thou, O Lord! teach me Thy statutes. Amen, Amen,
Amen. Selah, Vaed (Forever)!

We thank Thee, O Lord, our God and God of our fathers, that thou hast
cast our lot amongst those that dwell in the houses of learning, and not
amongst the occupants of the markets. For we arise early, and they arise
early. We arise to the words of Law, and they arise to words of vanity.
We strive, and they strive. We strive and receive our reward, while they
strive in vain. We run, and they run. We run towards everlasting life,
and they run towards death, as it is written: "But Thou, O God! Thou
wilt bring them down into the pit of destruction; let not the men of
blood and deceit live out half their days; but I will indeed trust in
Thee!"

May it be Thy will, O Lord my God, that as Thou hast assisted me in the
conclusion of Tract Sabbath, so mayest Thou assist me in the
commencement of other tracts and books of Law, and in their conclusion:
that I may live to learn and teach, to observe and to do and to keep all
the words of the teachings of Thy Law with affection. And may the merits
of all the Tanaim and Amoraim and other scholars uphold me and my
children, in order that the Law may not escape from my mouth, from the
mouths of my children and children's children forever, and may it be
verified in me (all that is written): "When thou walkest, it shall lead
thee; when thou liest down, it shall watch over thee; and when thou art
awake, it shall converse with thee. For through me shall thy days be
multiplied and the years of thy life shall be increased unto thee.
Length of days are in her right hand, in her left are riches and honor.
The Lord shall give strength unto His people; the Lord will bless His
people with peace."

\[Revised July 22, 1896, and found all correct.--ISAAC M. WISE.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_193"></span>[379:1](t0137.htm#fr_193) At the conclusion of
another tract, name it instead of Tract Sabbath.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[379:2](t0137.htm#fr_194) At the close of a
learned work, entitled "Answers and Questions," by Rabbi Moses Iserles,
and also in the work entitled "Sea of Solomon," by Solomon Lurie, Tract
Baba Kamah, may be found the reasons why the above ten names must be
mentioned in the prayer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](t0138)
