[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Navajo](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sws07)  [Next](sws09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQAH5Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Spider Woman*, by Gladys A. Reichard, \[1934\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

### V

#### SYMPATHY

<span class="smallcaps">Marie</span> places the skein of yarn around her
knee and moccasined foot, where it fits loosely. She unfastens the end
and unwinds the skein into a loose pile on the floor beside her. This
additional maneuver is her substitute for the chairback our women find
necessary for winding yarn when they cannot get a man to hold it for
them. From the loose pile she winds it into a ball, and I am impressed
by its shape, so simple it is, yet so unlike ours. Around and around her
spread fingers she winds it. After it is about half done she turns it
and winds the rest of the yarn at right angles to it. Her ball when
finished may be large but it is wound in only two directions, never in a
solid ball like ours where the strands cross at all angles of the
surface of the sphere.

By this time my habits are becoming established. I still have trouble
regulating tension; but I am constantly aware of the fault, and the
texture of my fabric is improving. The edges are a greater worry, even
to this day. I am fast approaching the center of the rug, and when I
reach it we take it down because the weaving has become too high to
reach with comfort. After it has advanced somewhat over a foot from the
floor, I sit on a blanket folded smaller and consequently higher as time
goes on. When the ache in my shoulder becomes too great and the
efficiency in pounding weft too

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

little, Marie contributes a strong little box whose three dimensions are
all different. By turning this box I can sit at the exact height I need.

But now that I have woven to the middle we loosen the beam cords and let
the rug down. This is the hour of my disillusionment. Until now the
tightness of the warp and the combined makeshifts of my teachers in
loosening the weft have more or less disguised the insidious drawing in
of the weft which Marie and her mother clearly saw from the very
beginning, and of which I was almost oblivious. The center measures a
thumb-joint and a half less than the end we began with. From the first
black stripe up to the red one which precedes the wide black center the
measurements are versatile, the edge describes a line for which geometry
has no definition.

The family are present in a body at this event. They are more
sympathetic than amused. They say most first attempts are like that.
Marie says some women always weave like that, no matter how long they
are at it. Tom says the rug can be buried in damp sand and stretched to
a better shape. Red-Point says this one will not be good, the second
will also not be good, but the third, *that* will be all right. He says
this one has a nice pattern with its different-sized stripes, the wide
black one in the middle. It looks like the old dresses the Navajo women
used to wear. Why don't they weave patterns like this now, old-fashioned
patterns?

I cannot but take heart at all this sympathy and interest. Marie lets
the rug down, allowing the web to fall in a large fold behind the loom.
Then with a sacking needle she sews the center of the wide black stripe
firmly to the cords which fasten the warp to the cloth beam. We are
ready to start off anew. If we forget the order or width of the stripes
we can

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

refer to the half already finished now lying neat and limp behind the
loom.

Once more I am working at floor level. But now in bringing down the
heavy comb I hit the weft against the warp instead of my own knees.
Occasionally a warp strand tears. Perfect warp never tears. The ideal is
probably never reached, but the spinner always has it in mind. Warp as
good as Atlnaba's would not tear, however, when strung for such a small
rug as this I am making. My warp was made by the old woman who lives
near the well, a pitiable creature who comes to visit us occasionally,
and whom we see herding sheep when we go to the well. Her chief claim to
pity is the fact that she has no relatives—"just that little girl." The
little girl is sweet and painfully shy, though as curious as one of the
ubiquitous goats she herds. The old woman has lost all her daughters,
and her sons, not very responsible, have married and moved elsewhere.
Somehow the old woman and her little granddaughter manage to hold on to
their flock, now much depleted, and to eke out a meager subsistence.
Marie occasionally makes a dress for the child. The two come over to
Red-Point's quite often for a square meal.

As she herds, a task allotted by families in better circumstances to the
young, the half-blind old woman skins. In return for the many favors our
family does her she gives us warp yarn. It is not specially good warp
yarn, not particularly bad either; it can easily be used for smaller
blankets. It would be very aggravating to have to use it for a large rug
because of continual breaking. Her yarn is doubtless like her own life,
drab, mediocre, weak. We are, however, grateful for it because warp is
not easy to get.

My weaving has not advanced far before a warp strand

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

tears. Marie simply pieces a portion in, tying a knot at the top of the
broken strand. Then, drawing it taut, she firmly holds the lower part of
the broken strand as she ties the new piece to the old. Three hands are
necessary for this operation, two to tie the knot, one to hold it tight.
Since there is not always someone around to hold the strands, the weaver
uses her teeth.

Marie of course pieces the first strand that tears to show me. I try to
mend the second myself. My efficient friends have always chaffed me
about my inability to tie a square knot. Knots have never interested me.
Accordingly in my blundering fashion I inexpertly tie a granny in this
torn warp of mine. I need only to turn the batten once and it is a loose
warp, not torn but slipped. Marie watches not in amusement, however, but
with shocked surprise. She shows me how to make a square knot, and now I
*must* pay attention and remember. It is of course not difficult to
learn.

Marie tells me why my carelessness worries her. She never sees me tie my
shoe without a shudder. For the way I tie it is the way the dead wear
their knots. They do everything backward—this granny is a backward knot.
Therefore doing as they do identifies one with them, and there can be no
worse inducement for bad luck. With a reason like this for an incentive
it is no wonder I now tie a square knot automatically.

I advance with my weaving to less than half the latter half of the rug.
The warp by this time has become stretched and smooth. It is no longer
necessary to flip it to separate the strands, or to tighten it. Indeed,
it is becoming tighter and tighter as the web advances. And once again a
warp tears. The portion of warp left is too short to allow for our
piecing it as we did before, when it was possible to tie both ends. We

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

therefore manipulate the long piece of warp differently and have only
one knot to disguise with the weft instead of two as we had before.

Placidly I weave now, the primary motions have become automatic and less
painful. Marie is with me most of the time. I am no longer biting my
tongue in ardent concentration, and she tells me the family impressions.
The schoolgirl Angela, who is herding sheep for Red-Point during the
vacation, is surprised I have learned even this much. On the day of my
arrival she had encouragingly predicted: "She'll never learn to weave.
Why, she doesn't even know how to sit down!" Marie tells me this with a
gloating air which implies that I have proved her faith in me as well as
Maria Antonia's and Atlnaba's.

The day after my arrival at White-Sands, Red-Point gave me a name. He
has called me Weaving-Woman. I tell Marie I think it is a nice name. I
know very well the Navajo liking for nicknames, especially names that
mock at physical shortcomings, and I am pleased to have drawn one so
dignified.

I know also that the Navajo do not like to use their "real" names
ordinarily. These names are sacred, given at a public ceremony. In old
times they were used only when the owner of the name got into "a tight
place," that is when he needed supernatural aid. At such a time the mere
repetition of his name would help him, give him the idea for a ruse
whereby he could entrap his enemy perhaps, or strike the enemy with fear
or impotence. To use the name every day or as a means of designation
wears out its power.

For this reason a Navajo is "bashful" if asked his name. He is often as
"bashful" about his nickname or one given him by whites as he is about
his sacred name. Consequently I am surprised

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

to hear Red-Point telling me the names of his children and
grandchildren. Evidently the belief is no longer held by him. The sacred
names are pretty: Ninaba, Atlnaba, Yikadezba, Djiba. These Red-Point
frequently uses in conversation. But I do not wish to use them, in
address anyway. I know that the Navajo are more likely to use
relationship terms than names. The circle included by any one of these
terms is a large one. Any woman belonging to my clan, whether a blood
relation or not, if she is of my generation, is my sister.

So it is not difficult for me to give Red-Point the most respectful term
befitting his generation and mine. He is my "maternal grandfather";
Maria Antonia, his wife, is my "old mother," that is my "maternal
grandmother." But their children, Marie, Atlnaba, and Ben Wilson's wife
are my contemporaries and I can hardly call them "mother" or "aunt." In
this free-lance sort of relationship one reserves the pleasure of
inconsistency and I call them "younger sister." One reason they are
interested in my age is to know whether to call me "older" or "younger
sister."

This adoption of kin-terms, as matter-of-fact to this family and to
their Navajo friends as their ability at weaving or herding, has amusing
as well as puzzling implications when whites are concerned. Marie is my
younger sister, her husband Tom is my brother-in-law. Their two charming
little boys are my sons. Atlnaba and Curley's-Son have the same
relationship as Marie and Tom; and their intelligent capable Ninaba, I
am proud to call my daughter. Ben Wilson's three little girls who tumble
into my house over the high steps of its entrance are also my daughters.
The terms for my children are not inconsistent. A woman and all her
sisters are called by the same name, "mother," and each one

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

of the group calls her own children and the children of all the others
"child." So I, by getting three sisters, secure six delightful children.
Marie and I talk over all this. She knows enough of white people to
realize how amusing the system is, but she is pleased about it, as are
the others.

One day Atlnaba who has many pets underfoot in her own house, tells me
the pedigree of Nellie, the little white mother dog we saw on our first
visit. She is the "younger sister" of the yellow dog that bites; she has
a grandmother and numerous grandchildren, also uncles and aunts. The
application of kin-terms to the dogs and other animals is the height of
whimsicality—and good practise for me in using kinship terms. I must
talk Navajo to Atlnaba; we joke, and such jokes as these are in the
range of my capacity and of the appreciation of us both.

The weaving of the first blanket is now so far advanced that I am
considering a pattern and colors for my next one. It is to be larger and
more pretentious because it will have design. It is on my mind as I
criticise this one from the vantage point of my trunk. My grandmother
and sisters weave their patterns "out of their heads," but they cannot
be expected to weave one "out of my head." So I sketch one with colored
crayon in the intervals when I have no visitors, and after several
attempts I am satisfied with it. I have drawn it in black, white, and
red. But I have been much impressed with the combination of black,
white, and green in the center of Atlnaba's sun-house blanket. She has
achieved an unexpectedly good shade of green. I decide that, if we can
get that shade in our dyeing, I will make the next one black, white, and
green. This will allow me to get criticisms from my teachers and
visitors at departing from the customary colors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: Marie Learns to Weave](sws09)
