[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Navajo](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sws00)  [Next](sws02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQAH5Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Spider Woman*, by Gladys A. Reichard, \[1934\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Story of Navajo Weavers and Chanters
is self-explanatory as to characters and circumstances. The only
distortion of which I am conscious is a slight one of time and sequence.
There is no twisting of facts; if there is of interpretation it is
because of lack of understanding rather than of the will to understand.

My acknowledgments must be necessarily feeble in proportion to the
harvest I have reaped of good will and kindness. The first are due to
the Southwest Society, which had enough faith in a dubious undertaking
to start me on my way. I thank next the Council for Research in the
Social Sciences of Columbia University, which kept me going once I had
started.

When I consider the service, spiritual and physical, rendered by the
members of the J. L. Hubbell Trading Post, Ganado, Arizona, I am
overwhelmed with the inadequacy of my vocabulary. Mr. Roman Hubbell,
Old-Mexican's-Son, understood in a flash my somewhat difficult problems,
and when he suggested Red-Point's family as the one with which to work
he put the stamp of success on my project. He himself is a constant
source of stimulation and inspiration as he follows my progress with
ever-eager interest and coöperation. The sentiment applies equally to
Mr. Lorenzo Hubbell of Oraibi.

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

My thanks to Mrs. Goodman, Mrs. Parker, Mrs. Hubbell, and their children
are of the kind the lone stranger must have mentally accorded to the
Good Samaritan when he came to.

The debt I contracted when I accepted the generalized information
collected by Mr. Lloyd Ambrose (Mr. Little-Man-with-the-Spectacles) and
Mr. Horace Boardman (Mr. Short-Pants) is one which can never be canceled
since it is measured in the saving of that most rare and precious
commodity, time. Mrs. Laura Armer (White-Haired-White-Woman) made the
same sort of contribution. I am indebted to Franc J. Newcomb for the
double sand-painting.

Can words express the satisfaction the acquisition of the friendship of
a family like Red-Point's can give? I have tried to let *Spider Woman*
make my declaration for me.

To Ruth M. Underhill, Charlotte Leavitt Dyer, and Elizabeth Howsare I
waft gratitude for constructive criticism of the manuscript, and to
Adele Froehlich for "walking happily" amidst the mechanical drudgery
necessary to its preparation. There are many others who have helped by
their interest and suggestions; I have not forgotten them, nor am I
unappreciative.

I cannot sign my name to this and leave out the word "hospitality." I
find the Southwest ever hospitable and, in emphasizing my feeling of
well-being there, must refer back to the residents of the Southwest
previously mentioned as largely responsible for it. This includes all
their families and many others which the exigencies of space forbid me
naming individually.

<span class="smallcaps">Gladys A. Reichard</span>

Barnard College, New York City.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table of Contents](sws02)
