[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Navajo](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sws10)  [Next](sws12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQAH5Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Spider Woman*, by Gladys A. Reichard, \[1934\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

### VIII

#### AT THE WELL

<span class="smallcaps">My white</span> friends, with that
thoughtfulness and understanding for which they are known over this
entire country, have upon my arrival at Ganado, put a room at my
disposal. I may use it as I should my own, come in any day at any hour,
stay as long as I like, vacate for weeks if I like. I celebrate the
completion of the first blanket by staying overnight, getting caught up
on news, examining the new rugs which have come into the trading-post.

I am back at my Navajo home by eight the next morning, and as I lift the
rickety door out of its crevice, a sense of emptiness strikes me. The
house seems desolate, as if a friendly presence has gone. It must be
that this imperfect, unsatisfactory web I have brought into being has
taken hold of me during the last week without my knowing it. Not like a
dog which has been long and lovingly underfoot, but more like an ugly
antique which has stood around since childhood and is at last relegated
to the Salvation Army.

During the last few days of weaving the first blanket Marie has
repeatedly and interestedly inquired about my next one. What colors
shall we use? How big is it to be? I have shown her the design of which
she approves, as do the rest of my critics and visitors. She says she
has enough warp for the size. But it is only this morning that I learn
that her mother,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Atlnaba, Ninaba,
and she have been industriously carding and spinning the yarn for the
new rug.

I am very emphatic about the dyeing of the green, enough for the entire
rug must be dyed at once so we do not get several shades. Yes, of
course, but we have enough. We have four skeins, large skeins, of white
and four of black. We may dye two white ones green and we shall have to
dye the black. "All black must be dyed," says Marie. "The black will
become brown if not dyed." "Just like old hair," I remark. "You know
white people sometimes keep curls or hair and it always gets lighter."
"Just the same," agrees Marie.

Tom comes in as we discuss our needs. He does not laugh at the first
blanket although he also does not minimize its faults. "It's pretty good
for the first," he remarks as he finishes his cigarette. "When are you
going to the well?" "Are we going to the well?" "We usually do the
washing and dyeing there because there is more water," he answers
placidly. They leave to collect the necessary articles for our work at
the well. Marie has arranged with Tom that he need not go to water the
sheep because Ruby, the schoolgirl, will drive them over and Marie will
help her draw the water. When Maria Antonia finds out Tom is not going
she decides to go with us.

When I am ready, shortly after, we forgather about Jonathan, the Ford.
There are Maria Antonia, Marie, her little boys, Ben and Dan, Yikadezba,
the three-year-old daughter of our youngest sister, a tub, three
buckets, the half-dozen skeins of yarn, four empty glass water bottles
with carved wooden stoppers wound about with rags, my own canteens, a
tow rope, a piece of laundry soap. Marie has the two packages of dye I
brought from Ganado. We drive southward two miles along the highway to
the well on which the family and others

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

in the vicinity depend for their water supply. It is on the opposite
side of a sandy wash. We could of course leave the car on the far side;
but we have so many things, and why should we carry them over?

The party turns into something resembling a picnic—but there is no food.
Marie asks me in a somewhat startled tone if I have a match. From
somewhere I produce just one. It is as good to her as a boxful. She
fills two buckets from the well and disappears up the bank of the wash
carrying them, is gone for some minutes. Meanwhile her mother and I
fasten one end of our rope to the remaining bucket, throw it over the
pulley and tie to the other end a rickety dented pail which stands by
the well. It is so full of holes it almost empties in the time it takes
to pull it up. But on the theory that two buckets are better than one we
lower it alternately with the whole one and fill the tub.

Maria Antonia then plunges two of the white skeins, carefully tied at
the top so as not to tangle, into the water which the wool soaks up in a
brownish yellow way. Standing over the tub with knees unbent she
vigorously rubs soap into the wet yarn. After a few minutes of kneading
the foamy mass —the water here is pleasantly soft—the wool appears white
and clean. She presses out the soapy water, which has become the color
of the sand the tub stands on. We draw a few more bucketfuls of water
and she rinses the yarn again in the kneading fashion. It emerges creamy
white, so fluffy I can hardly believe it is wet, with an inviting
wet-woolly odor. Maria Antonia finds the loops which tie the skeins at
the top, shakes them several times and hangs them on the wooden supports
of the well platform to dry.

As Maria Antonia and I once more begin to draw water

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Marie returns
announcing that the water for the dyeing is on the fire and will soon be
ready. I then help her as she draws more and more water to fill the
sheep trough. The flock driven by Ruby appears over the hill. Marie
sends Ben and Dan, who have been wading in the trough, out to tell her
to keep off the sheep until we have the trough filled. "If they all come
up, they drink up the water faster than we can draw it and then some do
not get enough," explains Marie.

And now I lower the rope and it jerks up quickly and lightly, no bucket
on the end. It wasn't a granny knot this time, just neglect to tie a
double knot. But the bucket, our best one of course, is at the bottom of
the well. The women merely laugh at my awkwardness as Marie blandly
sends the old warp weaver's little girl, who has come up, to her home a
quarter of a mile away for a long stiff wire with a hook at one end. We
wait until she returns and then have a fishing party. We soon have the
bucket out, and in no time the trough is full.

Ruby brings up the sheep, having only with difficulty kept them away.
They tumble over, about and around the well platform, sniffing the wool,
the water bottles and the soap. "Su! Su!" The goats will eat the soap!
The large ewes and mother-goats line up along the trough, so close that
the bleating eager lambs and kids cannot get within goat-range as they
nose and push into the interstices of the living wool. When the large
ones have their fill, the little ones get their turn, hardly able to
reach the trough even standing on the tiptoes of their stubby hind legs.
Some achieve a jump to the edge of the trough whence they frequently
slip into the water as they guzzle it with their parched lips. Funny
beings, these

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

sheep, wiggling, curious, eternally unsatisfied, and stupid, how
stupid!…

But Marie quietly turns over the empty bucket to Ruby, gets the dyes
from the front seat of the car and starts off once more up the bank of
the wash. I follow, bearing the two unwashed skeins of white and the
black yarn.

We come to a small fire made of sagebrush and dry weeds over which the
two bucketfuls of water are bubbling. Marie lifts off one with a stout
stick, opens the package of green dye and casually sprinkles about half
of it in. She stirs it with the stick; it is indeterminately darkish.
She adds a little more dye, carefully folds the end of the package and
lays it at the base of a rabbit bush. She stirs the mixture thoroughly
again and sets it on the fire. She now treats the other pailful of hot
water the same way, using a whole package of black dye. When they have
once more boiled she immerses the white wool in the green and the black
wool in the black dye and lets them boil for perhaps half an hour.

We have nothing further to do but wait, and as we sit in the pleasant
sunshine and watch I am once more overcome with the casualness of it
all. I have at home repeatedly tried dyeing; I have always tried to
follow written instructions to the letter; I have invariably achieved
only streaked results. Marie has here done only the most essential
things. The wool has not even been washed; I am soon to find it will not
be rinsed—the dyeing suffices for cleansing and coloring. Verily Navajo
ways are not our ways. Occasionally Marie stirs the yarn and lifts it to
test the color. Too light, not even, she lets it boil longer.

At last she considers it finished, and after pouring out the dye and
lifting the yarn on sticks she finally cools it enough to

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

press out; eventually she presses it reasonably dry. We gather our water
bottles and canteens, place the white wool now dry in the tub, the wet
black in one bucket, the wet green in another. We have our soap, our
rope, what remains of the green dye. But now, to my surprise each woman
and each child is holding a kid or a lamb and intends to take it home.
Marie says they became separated from the flock some days ago and after
Ruby had driven our flock off a boy who had found them watered his and
gave them back to Maria Antonia.

We are loaded, and I start across the wash in what I think are the usual
tracks. I have not been careful to have my motor going in the proper
rhythm, I have gone about half a car width east of the usual tracks. The
car stops. I start it and try to pull forward with no success. I try
reverse and the wheels spin. I run the motor until it sounds more
efficient and try both ways again. We do not move. We unload our
miscellaneous but not heavy load and look into the situation. It had
seemed no different from usual. But I had forgotten that the day before
there had been a short though heavy shower. It had refreshed us all, but
its effects except for making color more steely sharp had been
short-lived. Apparently short-lived!

This seems to be a day of errors. The rain, true, had pretty well
obliterated the usual track across the wash, but a little foresight
combined with a little Navajo sense would have saved us a great deal of
trouble. My slight digression has put the car in dry quicksands just
above the old well now covered over. The harder we try to pull out, the
women pushing, the deeper we sink in.

Then old Curley, the father of Tom and Atlnaba's husband,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

rides up. He is a wizened soul with smiling wrinkles about his eyes and
mouth. He rides a small wiry bay horse with a cream-colored mane. We ask
him to tow us. We tie the rope to the front bumper, he holds it wound
twice round the pommel of his saddle, the horse pulls with all his might
even as Jonathan pulls with all the power of his lowest gear. The wheels
dig deeper into the quicksands. As I jack up the car, putting on the
chains, two riders come loping up gayly.

One has a stolid frame, but the usual jolly expression of the Navajo in
the face of the unusual. His strawberry roan is heavier than Curley's
bay. He announces blithely that he will simply lift the car out of the
hole. "Oh, you can never do that," I exclaim. "Why, it is much too
heavy!" "But he always wins when we have contests in lifting!" says his
companion. "Well, of course you can try," say I dubiously. Curley tells
Marie: "You may just as well leave the car and go home. You'll never get
it out of there." The strong man answers, "When I get that car out of
there I will go home, and not before."

Whereupon he digs his heel into his horse's belly and trots out of
sight. In less time than it takes to tell, he reappears dragging three
long poles, half overcome with dry rot, in his lasso. He dismounts,
unties the rope, lifts a pole above his head, brings it down with
telling force and a three-foot piece breaks off. He continues until he
has the three poles broken into short lengths. Then he directs Curley
and his companion to lift with all their force when he says, "Yego!" and
tells us to shove the logs under when they lift. They set their combined
strength to the car's right mudguard. "Yego!" and the car rises six
inches. Marie and I, almost lying on our stomachs, each get a log under
the wheel. We repeat the maneuver on

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

the other side and try the motor. We discover that to pull forward
involves climbing a grade, very slight but nevertheless a hindrance
where every ounce of traction counts. So I decide to work backward. If
we can move three feet, we shall be off the quicky part and on to rough
sand.

We gain perhaps six inches, but as soon as the wheels get off the short
corrugated road we have made for them they again begin to spin. After
repeating the experiment two or three times during each of which we gain
the width of the combined logs, I perceive that we must increase the
length of our rough surface. I find that quite unnoticed, a piece of
heavy canvas lies on the floor of the car. Tub, bottles, and buckets are
lifted and the canvas is dragged out. I put it near the logs, just
behind the right wheel. The men lift again. Hastily I place my log but
first slide the canvas under. Marie pushes her log in next to mine. We
get both under the wheel. We have only the three pieces of log under the
left wheel. Once more we try the motor. And now the car shows signs of a
real will to move backward with the right wheel, but the left holds it
back as soon as it has moved off the logs.

I make up my mind to concentrate all efforts on the next try. Curley
sees the force of the canvas idea, sees also it is too narrow to do for
both wheels and in a trice whips his blanket off his saddle and lays it
under the left wheel. We now have logs for both sides and fabrics to
extend the rough surface. I ask Curley to let his horse try towing once
more, this time tying on to the rear axle to pull the car backward. The
strong man realizes we are using all our aces on this play. He ties his
lasso also to the rear axle. He lifts the car once more onto its logs. I
climb to the wheel, he to his saddle. The men hold the ropes firmly
around the pommels. Marie and the strong man's

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

companion push. I, with every gasp of his carburetor, coax Jonathan to
his utmost. I slip the clutch and give him the gas, all the gas! The
horses strain, the pushers strain. Suddenly we all feel that surprising
movement for which each pusher feels that he, and he alone, is
responsible. The car is moving, moving—it grips, the horses pick up
their feet to get out of the way. With a concerted warwhoop we are out,
once more on the firm sand by the real well.

Three feet we had to go. Four hours it took to go it. It has been my
custom in the Navajo country, never before having been identified with a
family, to pay such men and horses as have helped me out of a "tight
place." So I tell these very amiable boys that I have no money with me,
but if they come up to the house I will pay them. They mount, once more
we load up our children and kids, and start off, this time taking a
detour on the well side of the wash, thereby avoiding the crossing.
Tired and hungry we arrive home; it is now three o'clock and we have had
no dinner. The boys gallop up in no time and I give them each some
silver. They are much pleased as they ride off and so am I.

Red-Point rides home singing in the resplendence of the setting sun. As
he drinks his evening coffee Marie tells him of our adventure. He is
amused; only those happenings are calamities here over which man has no
control. But when Marie comes to the end of her tale his amusement turns
to indignation. He gulps his last drop of coffee and, followed by Marie,
proceeds rapidly to my roof top, where I am as usual absorbing the
restful charm of the sunset hour. Red-Point is almost too excited to
light the proffered cigarette as he bursts

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

into a perfect tirade against the, in my opinion, very obliging youths
who helped us out of our difficulty.

"You wouldn't have had to pay them anything if I had been here!" Then he
chides Marie for letting me pay them, almost blames her for interpreting
my wish to do so. "The very idea of taking money for helping *Navajo*
out of trouble!"

This day has been a hard one, think I, as I stretch my back flat on my
blankets under the Great Dipper. Muscles are sore and tired, we haven't
got much done, but—what a grandfather I have, what an amazing
grandfather!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: Taking Counsel](sws12)
