[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Navajo](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sws11)  [Next](sws13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQAH5Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Spider Woman*, by Gladys A. Reichard, \[1934\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### IX

#### TAKING COUNSEL

<span class="smallcaps">Red-Point</span> was so excited last evening
about the Navajo boys taking pay for helping us that he did not think of
anything else. Today, as Marie is stringing the new blanket over the
temporary frame and as I unwind the yarn from the skein, preparatory to
winding the ball, he comes in. He is in his usual mild temper, but
cannot refrain from mild remonstrance: "Too bad you paid that money. You
wouldn't have had to do it if I had been here." He has come to see my
first blanket. As I spread it out I tell him that at Ganado they all
laughed at it. Whereupon he leaps to my defense with, "Tell *them* to
make one."

Marie strings up the second blanket exactly as we did the first. This
one is something over five hands wide by somewhat over six long. She has
not enough warp of one kind and uses two kinds, one heavier than the
other. When she comes to twining the warp loops with the binding cords I
ask her to let me do one end while she does the other. She makes no
objection, but when we are finished the warp at my end is at least a
hand narrower than that at her end. Patiently she sets herself to the
task of pushing each warp loop over a slight distance until the warp at
my end is spread over the same length of binding cord as hers. Each
person has her own tension.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mine would have
been all right if I had twined both ends.

I have begun with stripes because I realize how difficult it is to
finish off a blanket with a pattern close to the end. Besides I like
stripes. For some reason blankets with borders do not seem to me truly
Navajo. I do really know how to make stripes now. I have set my teeth
against drawing in the weft and sworn a vow to get a respectable edge.
The weft begins to pull in slightly as I finish the first black stripe
but this time I detect it and take measures against it immediately. I
have learned to lay the weft loosely in a scallop formation and I can
now give the subtle twist to the comb which makes the weft fill the
spaces between the warps instead of pulling it tight against them,
leaving them exposed on the finished web. I know now the signs of
tightness in the appearance of the warp and weft and guard against it
continuously.

This blanket is much wider than the first one. The distance across the
first was just about the distance which can be easily manipulated by one
throw of the sheds and one insertion of the batten. If we wove all the
way across the second blanket we should have to change our sitting
position for every row. We never do this. Instead we work about half of
the width, back and forth, forth and back, for a considerable length.
Each time we weave to the left we take up one warp less than we used
before. When we come back to the right the weft makes a loop over this
strand. So the portion of weaving at the right becomes constantly
narrower.

When I have woven about half a hand length, I move over to the left
side. At the right I now take up one *more* warp strand as I advance,
thus fitting my weaving into the exact space left over from the previous
weaving. This joining involves

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

no real locking of stitches. When the blanket is taken down, even if it
is well woven, a diagonal line will be discernible wherever the weaving
has been done this way. It will be made by tiny holes, the result of the
meeting of two weft strands looped over two adjoining strands.

It is pleasant to see the loops settle into their places. There is a
slight diversion in the monotony of stripes and it is a step I must
understand in weaving designs.

Early in the afternoon the concerted barking of the dogs heralds a
newcomer. A woman rides up; a baby-board is hung on her saddle. For the
rest of the day I am left strangely alone.

It is a rare occasion, and I profit accordingly. There is so much to do
that requires concentration, for which there is practically no
opportunity. As I work, I reflect how peaceful this family is. Intimate
acquaintance with it should, it seems, disclose some inner discord. But
there is no evidence of this. The two pairs of young people seem to be
really in love with each other; one can see it by the glance in their
eyes. The sons-in-law respect the orders of the old man and work
steadily at branding, farming, irrigating as he dictates. One or the
other hauls water whenever the water barrel becomes empty. True, if
worse comes to worst, as sometimes happens, we women eke out the water
supply by taking the water kegs and bottles to the well in the car. Once
in a while Tom or Curley's-Son hauls in a wagonload of large juniper
branches or trunks to replenish the old woman's woodpile. In the short
intervals between the main supplies she has no trouble finding wood in
the immediate vicinity of the house. Not quite so good perhaps, but
quite good enough. Family affairs are well

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

regulated and orderly although there is evidence of none but the
roughest sort of daily schedule.

Marie comes later than usual the next morning and she brings sad news:

Yikadezba's-Mother came home unexpectedly yesterday. This is our
youngest sister whom I do not know. Hers is the uninhabited hogan of our
settlement. She and her husband, Ben Wilson, spend their summer at the
top of the mountain where they care for a part of the family's extensive
flock. We have a large portion of it at our place, but each year Ben and
his wife move to the mountain with the rest. There the grass is long and
plentiful even in the driest part of the season. They have their camp in
the midst of tall yellow pines, the noblest of all the Southwest trees
which grow only at an altitude above seven thousand feet.

Once or twice during the summer Ben and his wife may come back to
White-Sands, but there is always some reason for their coming and they
come in a wagon with all the household necessities, Ben blithely singing
as he drives the heavy, well-fed draft horses. The arrival of
Yikadezba's-Mother is unprecedented. Her very appearance alone on
horseback presages trouble. The women, the only members of the family
who are home, greet her quietly, and without question set mutton stew,
coffee, and bread before her after a short period of preparation.
Yikadezba's-Mother has not eaten since sunrise, she has ridden
twenty-six miles in a much disturbed state of mind, having paused only
once long enough to nurse her baby. Nevertheless she daintily picks the
morsels of meat from the bone, sips her coffee, deliberately breaks
small pieces from the tortilla. Her meal, though eventually a
substantial

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

one, is as leisurely and unconcerned as if she had finished a banquet
only an hour before.

At last, after small talk and long intervals of silence, the question
all have eagerly in mind, but which none would ask, is answered. This
morning Ben doubled a rope and beat his wife with it. Marie implies that
Yikadezba's-Mother has a bad temper, for, she says, she mistreats her
children. "She throws Yikadezba about like a puppy. She beats her too,
that is the reason my father and mother keep her here."

Yikadezba is the miniature Navajo who follows the women about, hardly
more than able to walk. There is nothing which does not arouse her
interest. She wears a modified replica of her mother's dress, a
yoke—instead of a blouse—of Irish green velvet to which is attached a
much-gathered skirt of large pink and green plaid, ruffled at the
bottom. She has tiny red moccasins like her grandfather's with dimes for
buttons, but she seldom chooses to wear them. I cannot take a step off
my bed without picking up a cactus thorn; Yikadezba runs barefoot all
day long and only rarely gets even a sliver in her foot.

Her mischief is the mischief of curiosity. There is so much to
investigate, so much to learn. My things are quite different from her
mother's or her grandmother's; they must be looked into. But her elders
do not think this necessary, and they constantly say, "Leave it alone,
get away from there." She does not always listen; then they harden their
voices and give a firm catch at the end of the second syllable of the
Navajo word which means, "Now I *mean* it." One day she insists on
playing with the lock of my trunk, heedless of the warning no matter how
emphatically it is said. Then Marie speaks very quietly but at greater
length than usual. Whereupon Yikadezba

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

with a start dashes up the high step which forms my threshold as fast as
she can go. As she passes the door she catches her skirt on a nail,
loosens it, and slaps the door. Marie looks at me with an amused
twinkle. "What did you say to her?" I ask. "I told her she was sitting
on an ant."

This is the child her mother beats. No one of her mother's family
approves of such behavior. Children should not be punished. I get the
idea the sympathy is with the husband. But, on the other hand, what are
parents for if they cannot protect their daughters? The fact of marriage
does not give a husband exclusive rights over his wife. Indeed, it is
more likely to put him under obligations to his father-in-law. Therefore
Ben has offended not only his wife but her entire family.

In the afternoon Yikadezba's-Mother brings her baby in to visit me. She
is handsome, but the open good will so striking on the faces of her
relatives I know, is wanting in hers. Her smile, though beautiful and
shy, is rare; her more common expression indicates a sober sullenness.

I have expected that Red-Point, perhaps in family conclave, will settle
the matter of Yikadezba's-Mother. But I reckon without my hosts. About a
week later Marie announces that all the young people and Red-Point are
going to Ganado. There is to be the monthly Council Meeting and Ben
Wilson's case will be considered and settled.

The United States Government, in its capacity of guardian of the
Indians, sees fit to exploit the old Indian custom of "talking it over."
But now, instead of "talking it over" with family and clan
representatives in a more private way, all subjects, even to the most
personal, are aired in a Council

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

which meets as an institution monthly. A judge—at Ganado a Navajo who
speaks English—presides. The Navajo of the community attend these
meetings well, for they like gatherings and news. There is a
particularly large turnout for this one because of two cases, one of
interest because of its subject, an accidental killing; the other
because of the importance of Red-Point's family.

Each Navajo is dressed in his best. Temperature makes no difference in
Navajo styles. The women, no matter how high the thermometer may be,
wear brilliantly patterned Pendleton blankets, soft and woolly, some
with long fringes. The men, though their knees or elbows may be fringed
with wear, never omit their finest four-gallon hats. The judge is
wearing a fur cap. Men and women wear all the white shell, coral, and
turquoise they can procure, either their own or borrowed from the
stay-at-homes. Turquoise-set silver is in evidence as bracelets, rings,
and necklaces.

Many of the Navajo come early. They leave horses and wagons in groups
about the trading-post. Men and women spend hours in the store,
dickering, trading, watching as others trade. They sit in bevies here
and there on the ground, where they refresh themselves with canned
tomatoes, crackers, and soda pop. The children have tumors of hard candy
or chewing gum in their cheeks from the time they arrive until, no
longer able to help themselves, they fall asleep. After considerable
conversation with one and another the judge makes his way to the large
shade where the meetings are held. Leisurely the attendants follow. They
talk—the judge, the plaintiff, the defense, the jury. The complainant
and the accused speak for themselves. The audience is the jury and will
render its decision informally. The talk is quiet, so quiet I cannot
hear

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

it, much less understand the Navajo. But it continues. It may take a
long time to get started, but once begun it is endless. There are no
whites to watch the clock and say, "We'll take an hour out for dinner
now," just as they get deep into the discussion.

The meeting lasts for a day and a half this time. I do not stay long,
for I do not know the cases, nor do I understand the points. Afterwards
the judge tells me about the killing. The summary is as short and
matter-of-fact as the argument was tedious and quiet: "Two boys were
wrestling in a friendly way, and one broke the other's neck. The meeting
decided that the survivor should pay the mother of the dead boy ten
dollars."

I get two versions of Ben Wilson's case. The trader has listened to a
part of the evidence. Ben contends that his wife has a bad temper. She
is jealous of another woman. She said: "Why, that night when he came in
he never even came to bed. Just lay down in the dirt inside the door
like he was drunk, slept there all night. In the morning he got up dazed
just like he was drunk. He must have been with a woman."

The accused, an educated domestic, a girl of sullen, disagreeable
disposition, answers that she has more to do than play about with other
women's husbands.

At first Yikadezba's-Mother wants a divorce, but when she finds Ben also
wants one she becomes less certain. The assembled friends talk and talk
and finally come to a settlement. Marie tells me briefly the next day:
"They are going back to the mountain and try living together again. But
the next time Ben mistreats her they will get a divorce."

The little community council is only a small local model of the Annual
Council of the Navajo held at some convenient

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

point on the Reservation. Red-Point wants to go to this meeting, and I
take a load of Navajo to Fort Wingate, where it is held this year.

Most of those attending this gathering come in cars. Very few of the
Navajo live in the immediate vicinity of Fort Wingate, and many cars are
already parked about the center plaza of the school as we drive up. One
decrepit Model T Ford has a well-woven Navajo blanket hanging from the
top just behind the front seat. I remark about it, it being the first
time I have ever seen Navajo use their own blankets except for saddles.
The trader, who knows the family, remarks that it is because the
son-in-law drives. His mother-in-law is not self-effacing and willing to
stay at home like Maria Antonia. She wants to go along. They have
arranged this curtain so that neither sees the other.

The Council lasts two days. It is much more formal than the other; the
Navajo tribe is represented by delegates elected from the different
divisions of the Reservation who have a vote; the subjects considered
are of tribal rather than personal or family interest. This is the time
when the Navajo thresh out their troubles, grievances, and wants with
the whites. The Commissioner of Indian Affairs and his assistants, the
agents of the several jurisdictions, are there. All opinions and
discussions are rendered in English as well as Navajo.

The subjects they consider are concessions for oil lands, for cutting
timber, the eternal problem of land for the Navajo, schools, sheep
dipping to remove disease from the flocks, water supply, conservation of
pasturage, and so forth. Theoretically the delegates have talked over
the questions with their respective constituencies and vote according to
instructions. Actually the decisions are not quite so satisfactory. The

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

Council is a place where opinions may be aired and where a register of
temper may be gained. It is exceedingly interesting though long-winded;
the results are usually quite indirect. It affords us a trip, takes up
our time, makes us glad to get home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X: Design](sws13)
