[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Navajo](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sws22)  [Next](sws24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQAH5Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Spider Woman*, by Gladys A. Reichard, \[1934\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

### XX

#### COMMUNION OF SUFFERING

<span class="smallcaps">I am</span> up betimes the next morning—I do not
want to miss anything. The sun is still only a promise when the men go
out for wood. They bring a pile into the hogan and call the patients,
who sit in their usual place at the middle point of the back of the
house, facing directly east, behind the fire. Red-Point takes a fire
drill of wood from his bundle. Curley's-Son brings a bundle of juniper
bark, and by rapidly twirling the drill in the hole of the fireboard
creates a spark. Only a faint wisp of smoke indicates its presence; but
Red-Point blows vigorously though steadily upon the shredded bark which
serves as tinder, and soon a lively flame is burning. Curley's-Son,
holding it carefully, moves the ignited mass in the ceremonial cross
from east to west and from south to north, then lays it under the pile
of wood awaiting it at the fireplace, and a good fire results.

Now the women are dismissed as the men prepare for work. A little before
nine we, the audience, are called again. The hogan has once more changed
its appearance. Everything is swept and in order. I am warned as I step
inside the door and behold at my feet four small snakes made in sand, as
if one were crawling into the fire from each direction. We women walk
around the south side of the fire with its paintings to our places at
the north side, I following Atlnaba. Behind the

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

fire but far enough away to leave a trail is a charming bit of mosaic
done in sand. It is like the black cloud of Atlnaba's gray sand-painting
blanket, except that it has a variation of the border.

Ordinarily a frame surrounds the cloud. It is composed of wide red and
blue stripes, each outlined entirely in white. Tom calls my attention to
the fact that this one has the red inside, the blue outside. "There are
two branches of this sing," he explains. "Usually the red is outside and
the blue in, but since this is to do away with evil caused by lightning
the blue must be outside. It will be that way all the way through this
sing. If it were sung to bring blessing and ward off evil the red would
be outside. This black cloud has the Sky People on it. They are the gods
for today."

Everyone familiar with Navajo sand-paintings knows that the outline
frame of white, red, and blue represents a rainbow frame or garland, but
I had never before heard that the red and blue could be reversed. I
notice then that the small light rafts, short stubby versions of the
frame upon the cloud, have the blue outside. I am to find that the
colors will be used thus consistently every time these elements appear
in the chant hereafter.

As I hastily note a few details of this sort, Red-Point is arranging
four sticks about an inch in diameter and three feet long. He spits on
each one, sticks one end into the fire, and lays it at the side of one
of the snakes, always observing the order of direction. He spits again
to east, west, south, north, and around, then sprinkles pollen over the
Sky People at the west of the house, along the canes and their
accompanying snakes, and finally up and down.

He had already sent Curley's-Son to call Marie and Ninaba,

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

and they come in. But now to my dismay he orders me out. I do not know
if I am to be left out permanently or only temporarily, and my chagrin
overpowers my hopes as I loiter alone like a naughty child outside at
the back of the hogan. Almost at once, to my relief, Tom hunts me up,
explaining apologetically: "The old man says you could come in all
right, but he don't think you want to. You see, they are all going to
undress."

"But I don't mind that as long as there are no white people," I protest.
"Your women all do it—why can't I?"

"They are going to take the medicine too, but you can take just a little
and use the rest to bathe yourself," he prompts as we edge toward the
door.

Inside, the participants have made ready. There are no gay blankets or
soft sheepskins for patients, Chanter, or guests. Marie and Ninaba,
naked except for their skirts, and with hair unbound, sit on the ground
behind the painting of the Sky People. The women whom I now join sit,
stripped as are the patients, on the bare floor at the north. Tom has no
red headband across his forehead to bind in his short hair; Curley's-Son
and Red-Point, as well as the few men visitors, have removed their hair
strings and let down their hair. They wear only a gee-string.

The fire is now reasonably hot. The men who are officiating, Tom and
Curley's-Son chiefly, replenish it frequently from the large piles of
wood on each side of the door. At the side of the fire stands a large
old-fashioned soot-blackened Navajo pot in which some concoction is
boiling vigorously. As soon as the fire had been ceremonially lighted
with the fire drill, Red-Point had put on water to boil in a bucket.
Then he had thrown a generous portion of the herbs he had so patiently

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

chopped yesterday into the pot and added the hot water. Since then he
has carefully watched it so that it keeps boiling but does not bubble
over. The surplus water stands ready and hot with a few coals under it.

Each woman, I find, has brought with her a small enamel pan and a
sackful of clean sand which she has deposited on the ground before her.
The Chanter's assistants arrange everything for the patients. They set a
basket on the middle of the cloud and at the side of each patient
arrange a pile of sand which they scoop out in the form of a basin.
Around it Red-Point places four hoops of cottonwood which he has cut and
painted to resemble white snakes. I find myself totally unprepared. But
Atlnaba helps me out. She calls to little Ben outside to bring a pan and
tells Tom to bring me some sand.

By this time I realize that I am to witness the administration of the
emetic which is indispensable for purification. We must make ourselves
acceptable to the gods we shall invite. We have cleaned the hogan,
purified it with new herbs, invoked the gods by sprinkling pollen with a
prayer. We have washed our hair with soapweed, we must now cleanse our
bodies inside and out. Red-Point finishes off the final preparatory
detail as he places an eagle feather against each side of the basket,
one for Ninaba and one for Marie.

All is now in readiness for Tom has brought in a large bucket full of
cold water. Ruby waits outside for orders to get more. We form into a
procession around the fire, lining up north of the east snake while
Red-Point sings. At a particular accented word in the song we cross the
east snake right foot forward, stop and wait for the next accented word
when we cross the south snake left foot forward, repeating likewise for
west and north snakes, and the whole circuit four times.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We have already
gone around the fire this way once upon entering, and we do so once more
at the end of the rite. Atlnaba has brought Yikadezba and Djiba, her
sister. Djiba can walk, but only uncertainly, so Atlnaba carries her.
But Red-Point directs Yikadezba just as he does us. For some unexplained
reason she has tied a long string to her big toe. Most earnestly she
tries to do as she is told but does not know right from left and
succeeds in consistently getting the "wrong foot forward" at the same
time taking exaggerated strides in her attempts to do exactly right. All
burst into loud laughs as they watch her and egg her on.

Red-Point now takes the cane lying beside the black snake at the east,
pokes its end into the fire, then presses it to the soles of his feet,
along his legs, hands, arms, chest, back, and head, singing the while.
He repeats the performance, pressing it to the same parts of Marie's
body, then Ninaba's. Once more he goes through with it using the cane
belonging to the white snake of the south, first on himself, then on the
patients. When he gets to the cane belonging to the blue snake of the
west, Atlnaba begins to treat herself with the one Red-Point has
replaced at the east. She presses the end which is covered with ashes
firmly and repeatedly to her ankles and wrists. She has rheumatism, and
this will make it better. Her husband and Tom use the poker cure also
but in a more general way as Red-Point uses it for his patients.

Latterly the fire has become hotter and as we proceed with the pokers
the men heap more and more of the dry crackling wood upon it. Red-Point
takes down the sack of drying mixed herbs and puts a handful in the
patients' basket and a portion into the dish standing on the floor
before each of the audience. He then pours over each portion some of the
brew

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

from the sacred pot. Curley's-Son follows with the bucket of cold water
and fills each pan until the medicine is lukewarm. After the liquid
settles Red-Point strains the solid parts off from the top of the basket
through a brush he has placed near it during the preparation. Handled
with care this brush made of fine pliant sticks makes an excellent
strainer. After the patients' medicine is clear Red-Point passes the
brush around and we each strain our medicine and rub the herbs over
parts of our bodies.

Over the ceremonial basket Red-Point sifts a cross of white pollen as he
murmurs a prayer. He treats each of our dishes to the same blessing and
follows it with one of yellow. The patients stir their supply with the
eagle feathers, we stir ours with our index fingers. Each of the
audience arranges his sand before him to form a basin as Red-Point
settles into his usual place at the southwest point of the hogan and
starts singing. After repeating the burden of his song several times, he
stresses a word as he accentuates the lilt of his rattle and Marie and
Ninaba stoop and drink of the concoction in the basket directly with
their lips. We have been told to wait. They take four long draughts and
sit waiting miserably. By this time the sweat is dripping from us all,
running in streams down our faces and in tickling trickles down our
backs. It feels like flies, but the heat and smoke have driven them to
the crevices between the house logs of the roof as far removed as
possible from the fire. We have no such refuge.

The four drinks of the emetic should cause the patients to vomit but
Marie never vomits even when she is ill. They sip some more of the
greenish-yellow medicine and now we may drink also. Thinking to myself,
"When in Rome do as the Romans do," I bow to the inevitable. The
medicine has a bitter

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

taste quite in keeping with its bilious color. I have often encountered
more disagreeable tastes in our own medicines. Marie and Ninaba continue
conscientiously their struggles with it, resorting to the feathers for
aid, and after long minutes succeed but only with strain on Marie's
part. I know she has not eaten anything and has a severe headache.

Atlnaba no more than swallows the stuff when up it comes in the most
satisfactory manner. She takes more, and if ever there was internal
purification, she is pure. Her husband is as conscientious about it; but
Tom finds work to do, wood to be put on fire, water to be poured in
basins, anything to keep him away from his own medicine. He does as he
advised me, takes just a little, uses the rest to bathe.

By now the fire has risen and the hogan is suffocating. Even Atlnaba, my
own model of endurance and the object of my constant admiration, pulls
back to the remotest circumference of the house after covering over her
sand basin neatly with the surplus from the outside edges. As she wipes
the perspiration from her face, it registers complete misery. Marie and
Ninaba look wretched, too, and as my eye wanders about the circle I see
the same drawn expression on the faces of all but Red-Point. He is as
active and as cheerful as always, pleased because all is being done
thoroughly and well. I enjoy a certain exultation because, although I am
not inwardly pure, I have not moved from my original place even when the
fire reached its height.

At last there remain only small bits of wood for the fire and small
amounts of medicine in each bowl. Marie and Ninaba stand up and rub the
remainder over all parts of their bodies; the entire audience follows
their cue. The liquid has a clean refreshing feel, but the sticks and
leaves which have

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

settled to the bottom adhere to our bodies, which, even if dripping, are
clean. Red-Point shakes a few ashes from the end of a poker into Marie's
and Ninaba's basins of sand and Curley's-Son covers them over with fresh
sand making them little mounds. We all shake ashes into our own basins
before covering them. Under the big piles of wood there were two neat
sets of small regularly arranged and evenly shaped sticks. These are now
laid on the fire, one set from east to west, the other crossing it. The
flames die down, only the hot coals remain. Red-Point jumps over the
fire; reversing his customary direction, he starts at the west and jumps
to the east and back, then from north to south and back. Curley's-Son
and Tom imitate him exactly. Red-Point tells the audience to go outside.

We sit facing the door while Tom and Curley's-Son gather up the sand of
the paintings and take it out for deposit. As we wait, the agonized
expression gradually gives place to smiles, and we rub the drying leaves
off our backs, arms, and legs. Never did sun and wind feel so good,
never was a breath of fresh air so delightful. After the few minutes
which have sufficed to dry us off, we come into the house again. The
fire is tame once more, only a glowing bed of coals with the four pokers
in their cross formation. The air is comfortably cool and has a slight
pleasant fragrance.

Once more we take our places and wait, as Curley's-Son and Tom sprinkle
the coals with water and move them back and forth with a poker in each
hand until all the fire is gone. They gather the remains into a gunny
sack and deposit them outside. Soon after they return, we place the sand
which formed our receptacles on the sacks and pieces of old cloth in
which it was brought in. Then forming a procession we march in

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

single file to a place near an anthill about one hundred yards northeast
of the hogan where lie also the lifeless remains of the once vehement
fire. Here we deposit our sand.

As we return from performing this office we sit near the patients at the
rear of the hogan. Near us stands a basket filled with clear water on
which bits of dried herbs are floating. Red-Point takes a large bunch of
eagle feathers, dips the tips into this medicine which smells like sweet
grass, and gives us and the house a generous sprinkling. It is a cool
refreshing shower. We breathe the smoke of the purifying incense placed
on the coals of benediction and dress.

Marie goes off to her own house, her head aching too violently for her
to want food. I go in the opposite direction to mine, marvelling on the
way: "There is a communion of suffering, as well as a communion of
Saints? Certainly I have never before felt this sort of oneness with
other individuals. Can I ever make anyone understand how utterly
inoffensive and unobjectionable this barbaric-sounding rite appears?"

I despair but I do not think it matters. I am a part of this activity
and feel exhilarated at the turn the affair has taken. Tomorrow I shall
be casually accepted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI: The Gods Invited](sws24)
