[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](amm03)  [Next](amm05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486435199/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Architecture, Mysticism and Myth*, by W.R. Lethaby, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

### CHAPTER I

### THE WORLD FABRIC

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>'<em>Tales of ages long forgotten<br />
 Now the legends of creation<br />
 Once familiar to the children</em>.'—KALEVALA.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

IF we erase from the mind absolutely all that science has laboriously
spied out of the actual facts of the material universe, and ask
ourselves what would have been the thoughts by which man attempted at
first to explain and image forth the natural order, we may put ourselves
in sympathy with notions that at first seem absurd. We may see that the
progress of science is merely the framing and destruction one by one of
a series of hypotheses, and that the early cosmogonies are one in kind
with the widest generalisations of science—from certain appearances to
frame a theory of explanation, from phenomena to generalise law.

In thus putting ourselves back into the early world, not only must we
remember the limitations to the knowledge of phenomena, but also the
inadequate means of expression. Not only must we ask ourselves what
primitive man—to use the phrase for what it is worth, not letting it
betray us—can have observed: we must ask at the same time; what images
can he have had before him to which he might

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

liken the wonder of the sky and the might of the sea? Or rather, these
are two phases of the same question by which we may realise the early
systems, for in these things at least concepts were immediately linked
with words, words which were descriptive comparisons.

The unknown universe could then only be explained in terms of its known
parts; the earth, shut in by the night sky, must have been thought of as
a living creature, a tree, a tent, a building; and these each form the
world system to peoples now living. 'Given the data,' says Herbert
Spencer, as known to him, the inference drawn by the primitive man is
the reasonable inference.'

A tree with wide over-arching branches must have formed an apt and
satisfactory explanation, for legends of a world tree are so widely
distributed; we meet with them at the dawn of record, and they still
strike their roots where wild in woods' the savage runs.

The Chaldean inscriptions describe such a tree as growing at the centre
of the world; its branches of crystal formed the sky and drooped to the
sea. The Phœnicians thought the world like a revolving tree, over which
was spread a vast tapestry of blue embroidered with stars. Traces of
this scheme linger late into times of culture, and would account for a
story in 'Apollonios of Tyana' that the people of Sardis doubted if the
trees were not created before the earth; an idea exactly parallel to the
controversy in the Talmud, as to the priority in creation of the heavens
or the earth; one side maintaining that the object was made first and
then the pedestal; the other, that the foundation is laid before the
building is erected.

All the East knew of such a tree; in Japan the gods broke their swords
against it in vain; in Greece its

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

memory seems long to have survived as the olive of the forest of
Colonas.

In the Norse system a vast tree, the world-ash, rises in the centre of
the earth, its branches forming the several heavens of the gods, its
roots strike deep into hell, and there—

                  ' . . . . . . A serpent evermore  
Lies deep asleep at the world's dark core.'

Maori science still represents such a tree as rising to the heavens,
'that dark nocturnal canopy which like a forest spreads its shade,' its
mighty growth first forced asunder Heaven and Earth. Such an idea is
probably very uniform at a certain early stage of civilisation—'The
fundamental conception of these myths,' says Lenormant, which never
appear in perfection except under their oldest forms, represents the
universe as an enormous tree.' Its trunk transfixes the earth,
projecting upwards into heaven and below into the abyss, the heavens
revolve on this axis, and may be reached by climbing the stem.

An extract from Dr Tylor's 'Early History of Mankind' will lead us to a
later point of view. Man now surrounded by his own works sees in the
universe a larger 'tent to dwell in,' a chamber, and ultimately a most
elaborate structure, a conception which lasts long even in the direct
line of descent of science. This idea it is children find so difficult
to shake off—that there must be a brick wall somewhere circumscribing
the universe, and we still recognise it in the phrase to 'make the
welkin ring.'

'There are,' says Dr Tylor, 'other mythological ways besides the
heaven-tree by which, in different parts of the world, it is possible to
go up and down between the surface of the ground and the sky or the
regions below. . . . Such tales belong to a rude and primitive state of
knowledge of the earth's surface,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

and what lies above and below it. The earth is a flat plain surrounded
by the sea, and the sky forms a roof on which the sun and moon and stars
travel. The Polynesians who thought, like so many other people ancient
and modern, that the sky descended at the horizon and enclosed the
earth, still call foreigners "heaven bursters," as having broken in from
another world outside. The sky is to most savages, what it is called in
the South American language, "the earth on high," and we can quite
understand the thought of some Paraguayans that at death their souls
would go up to heaven by the tree which joins earth and sky. There are
holes or windows through the sky-roof or firmament where the rain comes
through; and if you climb high enough, you can get through and visit the
dwellers above, who look and talk and live very much in the same way as
the people upon earth. As above the flat earth, so below it, there are
regions inhabited by men or manlike creatures, who sometimes come up to
the surface, and sometimes are visited by the inhabitants of the upper
earth. We live, as it were, upon the ground-floor of a great house, with
upper storeys rising one over another above us, and cellars down below.'

This stage of thought lasted so long, embracing the great architectural
ages in its span, that one cannot but see that there must have been a
relation and reaction between such a world structure and the buildings
of man, especially the sacred buildings set apart, as they mostly were,
for a worship that thought it found its object in earth, sky, and stars.

It would appear generally that to the great civilising races a square
formed universe preceded the hemispherical; indeed, we are much in the
hemispherical age at present, it is just archaic enough to furnish the
poet with his similes, but an old poet like Job found

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

his comparisons in the chamber-form, a cubical box with a lid on. In the
centre of this vast box whose lid is the sky rises the earth mountain,
which is its prop and the pivot of its revolutions. It was seen that the
centre of this revolution is at a point within the space guarded by the
great bear, and that beyond this the stars dip under the earth of the
northern horizon. Thus the earth mountain in the North furnishes a most
adequate explanation of the apparent motions of the heavens; the crystal
or metal heaven of the fixed stars revolves about it, and consequently
the stars are hidden behind it in every revolution. The sun, moon, and
planets issuing from a hole at the east, and sinking into another at the
west, move overhead and find their way back by a subterranean path. The
motive power was sometimes given by active beings, as in the Book of
Enoch, or by the winds; thus the universe was like a great mill.

It is likely that the dome was the next step, although as yet they were
hard put to it to convey the idea, so a skull or half an eggshell
furnished the comparison for the whole canopy of heaven, as in the
northern system of the Edda:—

Earth was not formed nor heaven above, a yawning gap there was, but
grass nowhere. The earth is made fast in the midst, the sea round about
it in a ring. The firmament in the form of a skull was set up over the
earth with four sides, and under each corner they set dwarfs. The earth,
called Midgard, is round without, and beyond is the deep sea; in the
midst of the world was reared Asgard, where Odin is enthroned seeing
over the whole world and each man's doings. Without in the deep sea lies
the Midgard-worm, tail in mouth. The holiest seat of the gods is at
Yggdrasil's ash, its boughs spread over the whole world. Three roots it
has, one in

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

heaven, one in hell, where is Nidhogg, one where before was Yawning-gap,
and there is the Spring of Knowledge. A fair hall is there, and from it
issue three maidens—Has-been, Being, and Will-be—who shape the lives of
men. On the boughs of the ash sits an eagle, wise in much, and between
his eyes a hawk, while a squirrel runs up and down the tree bearing
words of hate betwixt the eagle and the worm.

The following may serve as a general description of what we may call the
chamber type, either square or round, with a ceiling or a dome. The
earth is a mountain, and around its base flows the ocean, or it floats
on the ocean; beyond is a high range of mountains which form the walls
of the enclosure, and on these is either laid the ceiling in one great
slab, or it is domed (sometimes the system is a compromise, the earth
square, the sky circular, and they do not seem to have realised the
difficulty of the pendentives!). The firmament is sustained by the earth
mountain in the centre; as in the Esquimaux account given by Dr Rink
'the earth with the sea supported by it, rests upon pillars, and covers
an under-world accessible by various entrances from the sea, as well as
from mountain clefts. Above the earth an upper world is found, beyond
which the blue sky, being of solid consistence, vaults itself like an
outer shell, and, as some say, revolves around some high mountain top in
the far north.' A man in a boat went 'to the border of ocean, where the
sky comes down to meet it.' (H. Spencer, Sociology, I.) Man was created
on the mountain top, where it is in contact with heaven, and all earthly
vegetation springs from the seeds of the central tree. In the South
Pacific, Mr Andrew Lang tells us, the sky is a solid vault of blue
stone. In the beginning of things the sky pressed hard on the earth, and
the god Ru was

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

obliged to thrust the two asunder. Ru is now the Atlas of Mangaia, 'The
sky-supporting Ru.'

Above the firmament is the Over-sea, and the rain falls from it through
perforations; it serves as the floor of the upper regions, and flowing
down the firmament, or down the sides of the mountain, supplies earthly
seas; the stars are either attached to the firmament or float on this
over-sea. There is an amusing story of this celestial sea as late as
Gervase of Tilbury. Some people coming out of church were surprised to
see an anchor dangling by a rope from the sky, which caught in the
tombstones, presently a man was seen descending with the object of
detaching it, but as he reached the earth he died as we should if
drowned in water.

The Egyptian system would seem to have been of the square type. The
Egyptian, says Champollion, 'compared the sky to the ceiling of an
edifice;' illustrations which figure the Cosmos in personified forms are
frequent on the temples and mummy cases. An example is given by
Lenormant (*Histoire Ancienne*) showing Seb the Earth-Mountain, Tpe the
firmament, and Nut the heavenly waters. In the Book of the Dead the soul
passes through the gateway of this world into the other, 'the House of
Osiris,' and that too was shut in by a wall with a great gateway for the
sun at the east to reach our land; the dead had to be ferried over the
waters which surrounded the earth, and so the river of death had purely
a geographical import in its origin.

Renouf says that 'Ra is addressed as Lord of the great dwelling. The
"great dwelling" is the universe, as the Hall of Seb is the earth, the
Hall of Nut the heaven, and the Hall of the twofold Maat is the
netherworld.'

Water was with them the primordial element in the formation of the
universe, of which Maspero gives this

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

account: 'For the astronomers of Egypt, as for the writer of the first
chapter of Genesis, the sky was "fluid" (*une masse liquide*), and
enclosed wholly the earth resting on the solid atmosphere; when the
elemental chaos took form, the God Schou raised on high the waters and
spread them out in space. It is on this celestial ocean, Nut, that the
planets and stars float, the monuments show us them as genii of human or
animal form navigating each his bark in the wake of Osiris. There was
another widely known conception which presented the stars fixed like
suspended lamps to the celestial vault, and they were lighted afresh
each night by Divine power to give light to the nights of earth.'

The cosmogonic theories in the Veda have been abstracted by Mr Wallis
and summarised in a review in the *Academy* (November 1887). 'The Rig
Vedic hymns disclose three distinct lines of thought in regard to the
creation of the world, yielding three separate views as to its
construction. The simplest theory is that the building of the world was
done very much as the building of a house, by architects and
artificers.' 'What, indeed, was the wood? What, too, was that tree,'
asks a hymn, 'from which they fashioned the heaven and the earth?' The
space was laid out with the measuring rod of Varuna. This measuring-rod
was the sun; and hence the measurers of the earth are the solar deities,
especially Vishnu, 'who measured the regions of the earth, and made fast
the dwelling-places on high, stepping forth the Mighty Strider in three
steps.' The edifice had three stories or flats—the earth, the air, and
the heavens—the measurement beginning from the front of the structure,
or the East. 'Indra measured out as it were a house with measures from
the front.' 'The Dawn shone with brilliance and

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

opened for us the doors;' the doors that 'open high and wide with their
frames.' The roofing of the house is referred to in the epithet of the
sky as 'beamless or without rafters.' The firmness of the edifice is
marvelled at and praised. While the design and general structure are
assigned to the greater deities, and especially to Indra as their
representative, the woodwork and other details are done by artificer
gods. As the first act of the Indian peasant on taking possession of a
new house is to bring in sacred fire, so, says Mr Wallis, 'the first act
of the gods after the formation of the world was to produce the
celestial Agni.'

In the Avesta the sky is said to be 'like a palace built of a heavenly
substance firmly established with ends that lie far apart.' The idea of
the temple of the sky is common to the classic poets, and becomes the
palace or temple of glass of the Romancers.

The early system of Chaldea belongs to the hemispherical class, and it
is an interesting fact that modern evidence goes to show that the dome
was first known in the Land of the Plain. 'The Turanians of Chaldea
represented the earth like a bark inverted and hollow underneath, not
one of those oblong boats in use with us, but of a kind entirely round
which the reliefs show, and which are still used on the Euphrates. In
the interior hollow was concealed the abyss—the place of darkness and of
death; upon the convex surface was spread the earth, properly so called,
enveloped on all sides by the stream of Ocean. Chaldea was regarded as
the centre of the world, and far beyond the Tigris reposed the mountain
of the east which united the heavens and the earth. The heavens were in
the form of a vast hemisphere, of which the lower rim rested upon the
extremity of the terrestrial bark beyond the river of ocean.'

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

'The firmament was spread out over the earth like a curtain; it turned,
as if on a pivot, around the mountain of the east, and carried with it
in its never-resting course the fixed stars with which its vault was
studded. Between the heavens and the earth circled about the seven
planets like large animals full of life; then came the clouds, the
winds, the thunder, the rains. The earth rested on the abyss, the sky
upon the earth. The early Chaldeans had not yet asked themselves upon
what rested the abyss' (Maspero).

It is delightfully appropriate that to the heroic age of Greece a shield
(probably circular and convex with a central boss) figured the form of
the earth. To Homer the land where appeared the phantoms of the dead is
beyond the ocean. We may suppose that this was the lonely shore of the
belt of mountains from which the firmament would spring. The abyss is
Tartarus, as in Iliad VIII., 'gloomy Tartarus very far from hence
(Olympus), where there is a very deep gulf beneath the earth, and iron
portals and a brazen threshold as far below Hades as heaven is from
earth.' Hesiod is more particular; in nine days would a brazen anvil
fall from Heaven to Earth, and nine other days from earth to Tartarus.

Thus the Homeric scheme knew the earth as depicted by the shield of
Achilles; it was surrounded by ocean, and was midway between the solid
metal heavens and Tartarus, probably, like a disc in a spherical
envelope. Many-peaked Olympus, where the gods assembled, is rather the
celestial Olympus—the surface of the vault of heaven, than a mere
earthly mountain. A good account of this is given in Duncker's 'History
of Greece' (I. IX.), on its summit was the 'all-nourishing lake' from
which flowed all the waters of the world; the earthly Olympus was but a
symbol of the heavenly mount. Anaxagoras taught

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

that the celestial vault was made of stone. Theophrastus said the milky
way was the junction of the two halves of the solid dome so badly joined
that the light came through; others said that it was a reflection of the
sun's light on the vault of heaven (Flammarion, 'Astronomical Myths').

Later when Phœnician voyagers had explored the Western seas, and a
knowledge of India opened up the East, it was evidently felt that the
world extended east and west, and with the same climate, while north and
south the range was inconsiderable and the climate changing; so that
Herodotus says, 'I smile when I see many persons describing the
circumference of the earth who have no sound reason to guide them; they
describe ocean flowing round the earth, which is made circular as if by
a lathe.' Certain, however, that it was planned on some simple
geometrical form, the proportion of 2 to 1 was accepted. Mr Charles
Elton, writing of the traveller Pytheas of Marseilles 330 B.C., and the
extension of the estimate of size necessitated by his voyages, says,
'The world was thought to be twice as long as its own breadth; the total
breadth from the spicy regions of Ceylon to the frozen shores of Scythia
being taken at about 3400 miles; the length from Cape of St Vincent to
the ocean east of India at about 6800 miles.' Pytheas increased the
estimate, thus making the world 4700 miles wide, and being compelled by
the accepted formula to extend its length to 9400 miles.'

The next step was to accept the spherical theory for the earth as well
as for the heavens. We shall find a return to the Middle Ages to the
proportion of the double square.

 

Pythagoras seems to have borrowed the fully-developed Eastern scheme;
for the Babylonians had later

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

arrived at a highly complex and carefully reasoned structure of several
heavenly spheres; which apparently were elaborated in this way. The blue
heaven of the fixed stars is seen to revolve around the pole at a
constant rate, sweeping the whole of the stars with it. But the sun and
moon and five other planets do not for long occupy their positions
relative to the other bodies; it is seen that they have a motion through
the signs proper to themselves from the thirty days of the moon to the
thirty years of Saturn, and so the Chaldean astronomers assigned a
revolving sphere to each of these: seven concentric spheres revolving at
rates proportioned to their distance from the centre on a common axis
through the pole star. 'The Chaldean astronomers,' says Lenormant
(Magic), 'imagined a spherical heaven completely enveloping the earth;
the periodical movements of the planets took place in the lower zone of
the heavens underneath the firmament of the fixed stars; astrology
afterwards ascribed to them seven concentric and successive spheres. The
firmament supported the ocean of the celestial waters.' These seven
spheres, forming as many regions above in the heavens or below in the
underworld, were distinguished by colours such as Herodotus describes
for the walls of Ecbatana of the Medes, 'a symbolism which,' continues
Lenormant, 'was borrowed direct from the Babylonian religion—the colours
of the seven planetary bodies.' It is necessary that this system should
be firmly grasped; it is the perfected structure of astrology which for
two thousand years solved the problem of the universe over the whole of
civilisation; it is the system embodied in all Mysticism, Astrology, and
Arts magic. It was by irresistible analogy that the earth also became a
sphere.

In the Western world the scheme attributed to

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pythagoras gives
in all twelve spheres, which succeed each other in the following order,
beginning from the remotest: (1) Sphere of the fixed stars; (2) of
Saturn; (3) Jupiter; (4) Mars; (5) Venus; (6) Mercury; (7) Sun; (8) The
Moon; (9) Sphere of Fire; (10) Sphere of Air; (11) Sphere of Water; (12)
The Earth. 'The early Pythagoreans further conceived that the heavenly
bodies, like other moving bodies, emitted a sound; these they supposed
made up a harmonious symphony. Hence they established an analogy between
the intervals of the seven planets and the musical scale' (Sir G. C.
Lewis, 'Astronomy of the Ancients').

The motive power in the Chaldean system was the energy of seven spirits
who governed the several spheres; these, as angels of the stars,
survived to the Middle Ages, and in their cabbalistic form—Zadkiel,
Raphael, and the like—are still familiar to those who put their trust in
prophetic almanacks. We shall see what Dante says of the orders of
angels.

The most picturesque prospect of these whirling spheres is that in
Cicero's vision of Scipio.—'The globular bodies of the stars greatly
exceeded the magnitude of the earth, which now to me appeared so small
that I was grieved to see our empire contracted as it were into a very
point. Which, while I was too eagerly gazing on, Africanus said:—"How
long will your attention be fixed upon the earth? Do you not see into
what temples you have entered? All things are connected by nine circles,
or rather spheres; one of which (which is the outermost) is heaven, and
comprehends all the rest, inhabited by the all-powerful God, who binds
and controls the others; and in this sphere reside the original
principles of those endless revolutions which the planets perform.
Within this are contained seven other spheres that turn round backward;
that is, in a

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

contrary direction to that of the heaven. Of these, that planet which on
earth you call Saturn occupies one sphere. That shining body which you
see next is called Jupiter, and is friendly and salutary to mankind.
Next, the lucid one, terrible to the earth, which you call Mars. The sun
holds the next place, almost under the middle region; he is the chief,
the leader, and the director of the other luminaries; he is the soul and
guide of the world, and of such immense bulk, that he illuminates and
fills all other objects with his light. He is followed by the orbit of
Venus and that of Mercury as attendants, and the Moon rolls in the
lowest sphere enlightened by the rays of the sun. Below this there is
nothing but what is mortal and transitory, excepting those souls which
are given to the human race by the goodness of the gods. Whatever lies
above the moon is eternal. For the earth, which is the ninth sphere, and
is placed in the centre of the whole system, is immovable, and below all
the rest, and all bodies by their natural gravitation tend toward it."
Which, as I was gazing at in amazement, I said as I recovered myself,
"From whence proceed these sounds so strong and yet so sweet that fill
my ears?"' It is the melody of the spheres which human sensibility is
too dulled by use to be conscious of hearing.

The distinction of above and below was not lost nor the solidity of the
spherical heavens, as seen in this extract from the Astrologer
Manilius:—

'Come, then, prepare your mind for learning the Meridians; they are four
in number, their position in the firmament is fixed, and they modify the
influence of the signs as these speed across them. One is placed where
the heaven rises springing up to form its vault, and this one has the
first view of the earth from the level. The second is placed facing it
on the opposite border of the æther, and from this begins

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

the falling-away of the firmament and its headlong sweep down to the
Nether-world. The third marks the highest part of the heavens aloft,
when Phœbus reaches this he is weary, and his horses out of breath;
here, then, he rests a moment while he is giving the downward turn to
the day and balancing the shadows of noon. The fourth holds the very
bottom of all, and has the glory of being the foundation of the round
world; on it the stars cease their sinkings and begin their upward
course once more; it is equidistant from the setting and the rising.'
The flatness of the earth was not necessarily affected in popular view.
Strabo finds it necessary to argue that the earth must be of a spherical
form, for if it was of an infinite depth it would transfix the planetary
spheres and prevent them going round!

This seven-fold system came westward with Latin civilisation, and made
the world-scheme for our Saxon forefathers.

From the fragments collected by Cory of the writings attributed to
Zoroaster, it would appear that the Persian Universe was fashioned in
the like form: 'For the Father congregated the *seven firmaments* of the
world, circumscribing them of a convex figure.' These seven firmaments
are conceived of in the old Persian writings as transparent 'mountains,'
one without the other.

The ancient Hindus understood the universe to be formed by seven
concentric envelopes around the central earth-mountain Meru, on which
the waters of the celestial Ganges fell out of heaven, and circling it
seven times in its descent, distributed its waters in four great streams
to the whole earth. And the Mexicans had nine heavens distinguished by
different colours one over the other.

The Arab system is clearly set forth by Lane:—

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

'According to the common opinion of the Arabs, there are seven heavens,
one above another, and seven earths, one beneath another; the earth
which we inhabit being the highest of the latter, and next below the
lowest heaven. The upper surface of each heaven and of each earth are
believed to be nearly plane, and are generally supposed to be circular.
Thus is explained a passage of the Koran in which is said that God has
created seven heavens and as many earths or storeys of the earth.
Traditions differ respecting the fabric of the seven heavens. In the
most credible account, according to a celebrated historian, the first is
described as formed of emerald; the second of white silver; the third of
large white pearls; the fourth of ruby; the fifth of red gold; the sixth
of yellow jacinth; and the seventh of shining light. Some assert
Paradise to be in the seventh heaven; indeed, I have found this to be
the general opinion of my Muslim friends; but the author above quoted
proceeds to describe, next above the seventh heaven seven seas of light,
then an undefined number of veils or separations of different substances
seven of each kind, and then Paradise, which consists of seven stages
one above another (these are distinguished by the names of precious
gems) canopied by the Throne of the Compassionate. These several regions
of Paradise are described in some traditions as forming so many degrees,
or stages ascended by steps.'

'The earth is believed by the Arabs to be surrounded by the ocean, which
is described as bounded by a chain of mountains called Kaf, which
encircles the whole as a ring, and confines and strengthens the entire
fabric; these mountains are described as composed of green chrysolite
like the green tint of the sky. Mecca, according to some, or Jerusalem,
according to others, is exactly in the centre. The

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

earth is supported by successive creations one beneath the other. The
earth is upon water, the water upon the rock, the rock on the back of
the bull, the bull on the bed of sand, the sand on the fish, the fish
upon a still suffocating wind, the wind on a vale of darkness, the
darkness on a mist, and what is beneath the mist is unknown. It is
believed that beneath the earth and the seas of darkness is Jahennem,
which consists of seven stages, one beneath another.'

Dante himself sums up in that culminating year 1300 of the Middle Ages
all lore Classic and Oriental, and in the *Convito* gives the clearly
reasoned system on which he constructs the world scheme of the 'Divine
Comedy:'—

'I say, then, that concerning the number of the heavens and their site,
different opinions are held by many, although the truth at last may be
found. Aristotle believed, following merely the ancient foolishness of
the Astrologers, that there might be only eight heavens, of which the
last one, and which contained all, might be that where the *fixed* stars
are ('fixed' in the sense of attached) that is the eighth sphere, and
that beyond it there could be no other. Ptolemy, then, perceiving that
the eighth sphere is moved by many movements, seeing its circle to
depart from the right circle, which turns from east to west, constrained
by the principles of philosophy, of necessity desires a *Primum mobile*,
a most simple one, supposing another heaven to be outside the heaven of
the fixed stars, which might make that revolution from east to west,
which I say is completed in twenty-four hours nearly, that is,
twenty-three hours, fourteen parts of the fifteen of another, counting
roughly. Therefore, according to him, and according to that which is
held in Astrology and in Philosophy, since these movements were

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

seen, there are nine movable heavens, the sight of which is evident and
determined, according to an art which is termed Perspective,
Arithmetical, and Geometrical, by which and by other sensible
appearances it is visibly and reasonably seen, as in the eclipses of the
sun it appears sensibly that the moon is below the sun. And by the
testimony of Aristotle, who saw with his own eyes, according to what he
says in the second book on Heaven and the World, the Moon being new, to
enter below Mars, on the side not shining, and Mars to remain concealed
so long that he reappeared on the other bright side of the Moon which
was towards the west. And the order of the houses is this, that the
first that they enumerate is that where the moon is; the second is that
where Mercury is; the third is that where Venus is; the fourth is that
where the Sun is; the fifth is that where Mars is; the sixth is that
where Jupiter is; the seventh is that where Saturn is; the eighth is
that of the Stars; the ninth is that which is not visible except by that
movement which is mentioned above, which they designate the great
crystalline sphere, diaphanous, or rather all transparent. Truly, beyond
all these the Catholics place the Empyrean Heaven, which is as much as
to say the Heaven of Flame, or rather the Luminous Heaven, and they
assign it to be immovable.'

'So, then, gathering together this which is discussed, it seems that
there may be ten heavens, and it is to be known that each heaven below
the crystalline has two firm poles as to itself; and the ninth has them
firm and fixed, and not mutable in any respect. And each one, the ninth
even as the others, has a circle which one may term the equator of its
own heaven; and this circle has more swiftness in its movement than any
other part of its heaven. I say, then, that in proportion as the heaven
is nearer to

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

the equatorial circle, so much the more noble is it in comparison to its
poles; since it has more motion and more actuality and more life and
more form and more touch from that which is above itself, and
consequently has more virtue. . . . It is then to be known, in the first
place, that the movers thereof are substances apart from material that
is intelligences, which the common people term angels; and of these
creatures, as of the heavens, different persons have different ideas,
although the truth may be found. There were certain philosophers, of
whom Aristotle appears to be one, who only believed these to be so many
as there are revolutions in the heavens, and no more; saying that the
others would have been eternally in vain, and without operation, which
was impossible, inasmuch as their being is their operation. There were
others like Plato, a most excellent man, who placed not only so many
Intelligences as there are movements in heaven, but even as there
species of things, that is, manner of things; as of one species are all
mankind, and of another all the gold, and of another all the silver, and
so with all; and they are of the opinion that as the Intelligences of
the heavens are generators of those movements each after his kind, so
these were generators of the other things, each being a type of its
species; and Plato calls them *Ideas*, which is as much as to say, so
many universal forms and natures. The Gentiles call them gods and
goddesses, although they could not understand these so philosophically
as Plato did.'

He continues that as there are nine movable spheres, so are there nine
orders of Angels divided into three Hierarchies: 'The first is that of
the Angels, the second of the Archangels, the third of the Thrones. Then
there are the Dominations; after them the Virtues; then the
Principalities. Above

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

these are the Powers, and the Cherubim, and above all are the Seraphim.'

As an abstract of the early Jewish system, we will condense the
substance of the article 'Firmament' in Dr Smith's Bible Dictionary.
'The word translated firmament is the Hebrew word *rakia*. The verb
*raka* means to expand by beating, and is especially used of beating out
metals into thin plates, and it is in this sense that the word is
applied to the heaven in Job xxxvii. 18: "Hast thou spread \[rather
hammered\] out the sky, which is strong, and as a molten looking glass?"
The mirrors to which he refers being made of metal. The sense of
solidity, therefore, is combined with the ideas of expansion and
tenuity. . . . Further, the office of the rakia in the economy of the
world demanded strength and substance; it was to serve as a division
between the waters above and the waters below, being supported at the
edge of the earth's disc by the mountains. In keeping with this view the
*rakia* was provided with windows and doors through which the rain and
the snow might descend. A secondary purpose of the *rakia* was to
support the heavenly bodies—sun, moon, and stars—in which they were
fixed as nails, and from which, consequently, they might be said to drop
off.'

 

Philo and Josephus state that there was a relation between the design of
the Temple and the world; and the early Fathers set forth the scheme
with much fulness, as shown by Letronne in the '*Revue des deux
Mondes*.' Clement of Alexandria is one of these, writing in the
beginning of the third century; and Severianus, Bishop of Cabala in
Syria, compares the world to a house of which the earth is the ground
floor, the lower sky (the firmament) the ceiling, and the over-sky the
roof. Dioderus, Bishop of Tarsus,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

about the same time compares the world to a two-staged tent. Theophilus
of Antioch in the second century sets out a similar view. The light
shining as in an enclosed chamber lit up all that was under heaven; a
second heaven is to us invisible, after which this heaven we see has
been called firmament, and to which half the water was taken up that it
might serve for rains, and showers, and dews to mankind; and half the
water was left on earth for rivers, and fountains, and seas. In the
'Recognitions of Clement,' there is an account of the creation. 'In the
beginning when God had made the heaven and the earth as one house, the
shadow which was cast by the mundane bodies involved in darkness those
things which were enclosed in it,' *i.e.* the world before the sun was a
*camera obscura*, 'then at length light is appointed for the day and
darkness for the night. And now the water which was within the world, in
the middle space of that first heaven and earth, congealed as if by
frost, and solid as crystal, is distended; and the middle spaces of the
heaven and earth are separated as by a firmament of this sort; and that
firmament the Creator called heaven, so called by the name of that
previously made; and so He divided into two portions that fabric of the
universe although it was only one house!' The waters that remained below
flowed away to the abyss exposing the land. And so all things were
prepared for the men who were to dwell in it.

The next writer claims also to follow the teaching of an Eastern bishop
as to the world fabric, and reverts to the symbolism of the Tabernacle.
This is Cosmas, a merchant of Alexandria and traveller into India and
the far East, in the first half of the sixth century, who wrote a
treatise on the subject.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In this work,
'Christian Topography,' he attempted to demonstrate that it was
necessary for all Christians to believe the universe to be of the form
of a travelling trunk with a rounded lid; the tabernacle of Moses being
its true image, the whole enclosing the sun, moon, and stars in a sort
of immense coffer of oblong form, of which the upper part forms a double
ceiling. He thinks the Babylonians were led away to believe in the
spherical form of the earth after the building of the tower of Babel,
but he demolishes 'very easily all these fables for the figure and
composition of the universe.'

'God in creating the world supported it on nothing; according to the
word of Job, "He has suspended the earth in the void." God therefore
having created the earth, united the extremity of the sky to the
extremity of the earth, supporting the firmament on four sides by the
sky, as a wall which raised itself aloft, forming so a sort of house
entirely enclosed, or a long vaulted chamber; for, as saith the Prophet
Isaiah, "He has disposed the heavens in form of a vault;" and Job speaks
thus of the earth and the heavens: "He has spread out the sky which is
strong, and like a molten looking glass. Whereupon are the foundations
thereof fashioned? Or who laid the corner stone thereof?" How can such
words be applied to a sphere? Moses, speaking of the Tabernacle—that is,
the image of the world—says that it was twice as long as wide. We say,
therefore, with the Prophet Isaiah, that the form of the heavens that
embraces the universe is that of a vault, with Job that it was joined to
the earth, and with Moses that the earth is more long than large. The
second day of creation God made a second sky, that which we see, like in
appearance, but not in reality, to the first; this second sky is placed
in the midst of the space which separates the earth from the outer
heavens,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

and it extends like a second roof or ceiling all over the earth,
dividing in two the waters, those that are above the firmament from
those below on the earth, and so of one house was two made, the one
above, the other below. The length of the earth is from east to west,
the sea we call ocean divides the part we inhabit from that beyond, to
which is joined the sky.'

Some drawings, given in Charton's '*Voyageurs Anciens*,' accompany the
original manuscript. The earth rises like a mountain, around which
circle the sun and moon, alternately hidden and revealed; at the base is
the ocean, and beyond are the mountains which take the vertical sides of
the sky; from the lateral walls rises a semicircular barrel vault, at
the spring of which is the flat firmament supporting the waters like a
floor.

He then considers the Tabernacle in detail. The candlestick represented
the seven planets, the veil with its tissue of hyacinth, purple,
scarlet, and fine linen, recalled the elements, and divided the outer
temple from the sanctuary, as the earth is divided from the heavens.

'Thus,' says Cosmas, 'were all the phenomena of the universe represented
in the Tabernacle.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Microcosmos](amm05)
