[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb26)  [Next](wfb28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dick the Fiddler's Money

DICK the Fiddler used to spend on drink all the money he earned by
playing at merrymakings, weddings and fairs. After a week's fuddle at
Darowen he was one night wending his way home to his wife and children.
He had to go through Fairy Green Lane, just above the farm-stead of Cefn
Cloddiau, and when he came to it he felt nervous. To banish fear he
tuned his beloved instrument, and as he walked along he played his
favourite air, "The Crow's Black Wing." When he passed the greensward
where the fairies used to revel he felt his fiddle suddenly becoming
very heavy, and he heard a rattling and a tinkling inside it. This
continued until he reached Llwybr Scriw Riw, his home. When he entered
the cottage he had to listen to harsher music than he was wont to
extract from his fiddle, to wit, the angry voice of his wife, who,
justly angered at his absence, began to lecture and scold him. He was
called names which he richly deserved: idler, fool, drunken sot, and so
forth. "How is it possible," asked his wife, "for me to beg enough for
myself and half a houseful of children nearly naked, while you go about
the country spending on drink the little money you earn? The landlord
came here this morning, and said that if you do not pay him the rent
which has long been overdue he will turn us all out, and what are we to
do then? I am sure you have spent all your earnings as usual on beer,
and that you haven't got a ha'penny in your pocket." "Hush, hush, my
good woman," said Dick, "see what's in my old fiddle." She obeyed, shook
it, and out tumbled a number of bright new five-shilling pieces, more
than enough to pay the rent. She promptly put the money away in a safe
place, and asked him how he had come into possession of it, and he told
her.

The following day he went to Llanidloes to pay his rent. His landlord
was more than surprised to find that Dick had come, not to beg for
mercy, as he had done several times before, but to discharge his debt.
He gave him a receipt, and thirsty Dick betook himself to the "Unicorn"
to sample Betty Brunt's ale before returning home. He had not consumed
more than a trifle of half-a-dozen glasses when in came his landlord in
a state of great excitement. "Where did you get the money you gave me?"
he asked. "Why, what's the matter with it?" asked Dick. "It has turned
into cockleshells," said the landlord. "Well, it was all right when I
gave it you, and here is the receipt," said Dick, flourishing the
document triumphantly. "Somebody must have bewitched the coins." He
vouchsafed no further explanation, and even when he was gloriously
drunk, as he finished up the evening by becoming, no one was able to
pump any information out of him as to the origin of the money he had
given the landlord.

<span id="img_09"></span> ![](img/09.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Strange Otter](wfb28)
