[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb25)  [Next](wfb27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Fairy Walking Stick

A FARMER was rounding up his sheep in Cwmllan when he heard the sound.
of weeping. As a general rule, only human beings weep noisily, and as
the farmer had not observed any human beings in the vicinity he was
considerably surprised. He went in the direction from which the sound
came. For some time he could not discover who was causing it, but after
a bit he saw a wee little lass lying on a narrow ledge of rock on the
face of a great precipice, and sobbing as if her heart would break. He
went to her rescue, and with great difficulty extricated her from her
dangerous position. No sooner had he brought her to safety, than a
little old man appeared. "I thank thee," said he, "for thy kindness to
my daughter. Accept this in remembrance of thy good deed," handing a
walking-stick to the farmer. The farmer took it, and the moment it was
in his hand both the wee lass and the little old man disappeared from
his sight.

The year after this every sheep in the farmer's possession had two
ewe-lambs, and this continued for many years. His flocks during all this
time were singularly free from accident and disease. Sheep-stealers were
always frustrated in their evil designs upon them: birds of prey never
ventured near them to pick out the eyes of the young lambs: even when a
murrain devastated other flocks, these were untainted: when they were
buried under snow-drifts in winter, and had to be dug out, they seemed
better rather than worse for their experiences: and their wool was finer
and more plentiful than that of any other sheep in the country. The
farmer became rich, and all envied him.

One night, shortly after the sheep had been brought down from the
mountains for the winter, the farmer went to a village some distance
away to match his blue gamecock against a black fighter which was
carrying all before it. It was late before the farmer started home, and
a great storm arose. The wind howled, and the rain came down in sheets,
and a horror of great darkness fell upon the land. On his way home the
farmer had to cross a stream on some stepping stones. When he came to it
the river was swollen, and sweeping all before it in a swift current. As
he was feeling for the stones with the walking stick given him by the
little old man, it somehow or other slipped from his hand and was swept
away by the raging torrent, and he had a narrow escape of being carried
away himself.

He reached home, and as soon as day came went out to search for the
stick, and at the same time to see what damage had been done by the
flood. He found that nearly all his sheep had been swept away by it. His
wealth had gone as it came--with the walking stick.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dick the Fiddler's Money](wfb27)
