[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb24)  [Next](wfb26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tudor Ap Einion

<span id="img_16"></span> ![](img/16.jpg)

HALF-WAY up the ascent from Llangollen to Dinas Bran, or Bran's Fortress
(the wicked man who called it Crow Castle ought to have been hanged,
drawn and quartered), lies a hollow known by the name of Nant yr
Ellyllon, the Elves' Dell. Once upon a time a young man, who was known
as Tudur ap Einion Gloff, used to pasture his master's sheep in this
hollow. One summer night Tudur was preparing to return to the lowlands
with his woolly charge, when he suddenly saw, perched on a stone near
him, a little man in moss breeches with a fiddle under his arm. He was
the tiniest wee specimen of humanity imaginable. His coat was made of
birch leaves, and he wore upon his head a helmet consisting of a gorse
flower, while his feet were encased in shoes made of beetles' wings. He
ran his fingers over his instrument, and the music made Tudur's hair
stand on end. "Nos dawch, nos dawch," said the little man (this means in
English, "Good night to you, good night to you.") "Ac i chwithau,"
replied Tudur, which is, being interpreted, "The same to you." Then
continued the little man, "You are fond of dancing, Tudur: and if you
but tarry awhile you shall behold some of the best dancers in Wales. I,"
added the little man, swelling his chest out, "I am a musician." "Where
is your harp?" asked Tudur, "a Welshman cannot dance without a harp."
"Harp?" repeated the wee being scornfully, "I can discourse better music
for dancing upon my fiddle." "Is it a fiddle," rejoined Tudur, "that you
call that stringed wooden spoon in your hand?" He had never seen such an
instrument before. And now Tudur beheld through the dusk hundreds of
pretty little sprites converging from all parts of the mountain towards
the spot where they stood. Some were dressed in white and some in blue
and some in pink, and some carried glow-worms in their hands as torches.
So lightly did they tread that not a blade of grass nor any flower was
crushed beneath their weight, and all made a curtsey or a bow to Tudur
as they passed. Tudur was not to be outdone in politeness, and he doffed
his cap and bowed to each in return.

Presently the little minstrel drew his bow across the strings of his
instrument, and the music produced was so enchanting that Tudur stood
transfixed to the spot. Then at the sound of the sweet melody the
fairies, if fairies they were, ranged themselves in groups and began to
dance, and as the minstrel quickened his bow the dancers went round and
round. Now, of all the dancing Tudur had ever seen, none came near the
dancing of the fairies. It was the very poetry of motion. Sian Lan was
the best dancer within ten miles of Llangollen, and Tudur had often had
a turn with her at the merry nights in Glyn Ceiriog, but Sian's dancing
was clumsy and heavy compared with what he now saw. He felt an itching
in his feet and could not help keeping time to the merry music, but he
was afraid to join in the dance. He wanted to go to Heaven in good time,
though he was in no particular hurry, and it occurred to him that it
might not be the most direct route to Paradise to dance on a mountain at
night in strange company, to; perhaps, the devil's fiddle. The music
became faster and the dance wilder, and Tudur's whole body kept time.

"Dance away, Tudur," cried the little man. But Tudur was too wary. "Nay,
nay," he said, "dance on, my little beauties, while I look on and
admire." The music became sweeter and the dance more enticing than
before. Tudur looked on, more absorbed than ever, and his feet and hands
became more and more excited. At last, losing all control over himself,
he went into the middle of the ring. "Now for it," he shouted, throwing
his cap into the air. "Play away, fiddler."

No sooner were these words uttered than everything underwent a change.
The gorse-blossom cap vanished from the minstrel's head, and a pair of
goat's horns branched out instead. His face became as black as soot: a
long tail grew out of his leafy coat and cloven hoofs replaced the
beetle-wing pumps. Tudur's heart was heavy, but his heels were light.
Horror was in his bosom, but irresistible motion was in his feet. The
fairies changed into a variety of forms. Some became goats and some
became dogs, some assumed the shape of foxes and others that of cats. It
was the strangest crew that ever surrounded a human being. The dance
became at last so furious that Tudur could not make out the forms of the
dancers. They whirled round him with such rapidity that they resembled a
wheel of fire. Tudur danced on and on. He could not stop, for the
devil's music was too much for him, as the figure with the goat's horns
poured it out of the strings of his fiddle with unceasing vigour. It
went on thus throughout the night.

Next morning Tudur's master went up the mountain to see what had become
of his sheep and his shepherd. He found the flock safe and sound, but
was astonished to see Tudur spinning like mad in the middle of the
hollow by himself. "Stop me, master, stop me," shouted Tudur to him.
"Stop yourself," replied he. "What is the matter with you, in the name
of Heaven?" At the word Tudur fell panting and exhausted at his master's
feet, and it was long before he recovered his breath and his senses
sufficiently to explain his strange conduct.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fairy Walking Stick](wfb26)
