[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb32)  [Next](wfb34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

St Collen and the King of Faery

ST. COLLEN was so distressed with the wickedness of the people that he
withdrew to a mountain and made himself a cell under the shelter of a
rock in a remote and secluded spot.

One day when he was in his cell he heard two men conversing about Gwyn
ab Nudd, and saying that he was King of Annwn and of the fairies. Collen
put his head out of the cell and said to them, "Hold your tongues
quickly, those are but Devils." "Hold thou thy tongue," said they, "thou
shalt receive a reproof from him." And Collen shut his cell as before.
Soon after he heard a knocking at the door of his cell, and someone
inquired if he were within. Then said Collen: "I am. Who is it that
asks?" "It is I, a messenger from Gwyn ab Nudd, King of Annwn and of the
fairies, to command thee to go and speak with him on the top of the hill
at noon."

But Collen did not go. And the next day behold the same messenger came,
ordering Collen to go and speak with the King on the top of the hill at
noon.

But Collen did not go. And the third day behold the same messenger came,
ordering Collen to go and speak with the King on the top of the hill at
noon. "And if thou dost not go, Collen, thou wilt be the worse for it."

Then Collen, being afraid, arose and prepared some holy water, and put
it in a flask at his side and went to the top of the hill. Arid when he
came there he saw the fairest castle he had ever beheld, and around it
the best appointed troops, and numbers of minstrels, and every kind of
music of voice and instrument, and steeds with youths upon them the
comeliest in the world, and maidens of elegant aspect, sprightly, light
of foot, of graceful apparel and in the bloom of youth: and every
magnificence becoming the court of a great king. A courteous man on the
top of the castle bade him enter, saying that the King was waiting for
him to come to meat. Collen went into the castle, and when he entered
the King was sitting in a golden chair. He welcomed Collen honourably,
and desired him to eat, assuring him that besides what he saw he should
have the most luxurious of every dainty and delicacy that the mind could
desire, and should be supplied with every drink and liquor that his
heart could wish: and that there should be in readiness for him every
luxury of courtesy and service, of banquet and of honourable
entertainment, of rank and of presents: and every respect and welcome
due to a man of wisdom. "I will not eat." said Collen.

"Didst thou ever see men of better equipment than those in red and
blue?" asked the King.

"Their equipment is good enough," said Collen, "for such equipment as it
is."

"What kind of equipment is that?" said the King. Then said Collen: "The
red on the one part signifies burning, and the blue on the other
signifies coldness." With that Collen drew out his flask, and threw the
holy water on their heads, whereupon they vanished from his sight, so
that there was neither castle, nor troops, nor men, nor maidens, nor
music, nor song, nor steeds, nor youths, nor banquet, nor the appearance
of anything whatever but the green hillock.

<span id="img_11"></span> ![](img/11.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Helig's Hollow](wfb34)
