[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb38)  [Next](wfb40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Mantle of Kings' Beards

THERE were formerly two kings in Britain named Nynio and Peibio. One
moonlight night, as they were walking the fields, "See," said Nynio,
"what a beautiful and extensive field I possess." "Where is it?" said
Peibio. "There it is," said Nynio, "the whole sky, as far as vision can
extend." "And dost thou see," said Peibio, "what countless herds and
flocks of cattle and sheep I have grazing in thy field? " "Where are
they? " said Nynio. "There they are," said Peibio, "the whole host of
stars which thou seest, each of golden brightness, with the Moon for
their shepherdess, to look after their wanderings." "They shall not
graze in my pasture," said Nynio. "They shall," said Peibio. " They
shall not," said the one. "They shall," said the other. From contention
it came to furious war, and the armies and subjects of both the kings
were nearly all destroyed.

Rhitta Gawr, King of Wales, hearing of the desolation wrought by these
mad monarchs, determined to attack them. Having previously consulted the
laws and his people, he marched against them, vanquished them and cut
off their beards. When the other Kings of Britain, twenty-eight in
number, heard of this, they combined all their legions to avenge the
degradation committed on the two disbearded kings, and made a fierce
onset on Rhitta the Giant and his forces; and furiously bold was the
engagement. But Rhitta won the day. "This is my extensive field," said
he then, and he shaved the beards of these kings also, so that he now
had the beards of thirty Kings of Britain.

When the kings of the surrounding countries heard of the disgrace
inflicted on all these disbearded kings, they armed themselves against
Rhitta and his men, and tremendous was the conflict. But Rhitta achieved
a decisive victory, and then exclaimed, " This is my immense field," and
at once ordered his men to shave off the beards of the kings. Then
pointing to them, "These," said he, "are the animals that grazed my
field, but I have driven them out: they shall no longer depasture
there!" After that he took up all the beards and trimmed with them a
mantle for himself that extended from head to heel: and Rhitta was twice
as large as any other person ever seen.

Then Rhitta sent a messenger to the Court of King Arthur to say that he
had trimmed a mantle with kings' beards, and to command Arthur carefully
to flay off his beard and send it to him. Out of respect to his
pre-eminence over other kings his beard should have the honour of the
principal place. But if he refused to do it, he challenged him to a
duel, with this offer, that the conqueror should have the mantle and the
beard of the vanquished. Then was Arthur furiously wroth and said:

"Were it permitted to slay a messenger, thou shouldest not go back to
thy lord alive, for this is the most arrogant and villainous message
that ever man sent to a king. By the faith of my body, Rhitta shall lose
his head."

Arthur gathered his host and marched into Gwynedd and encountered
Rhitta. The twain fought on foot, and they gave one another blows so
fierce, so frequent and so powerful, that their helmets were pierced and
their skullcaps were broken and their arms were shattered and the light
of their eyes was darkened by sweat and blood. At the last Arthur became
enraged, and he called to him all his strength: and boldly angry and
swiftly resolute and furiously determined, he lifted up his sword and
struck Rhitta on the crown of the head a blow so fiercely-wounding,
severely-venomous and sternly-smiting that it cut through all his head
armour and his skin and his flesh and clove him in twain. And Rhitta
gave up the ghost, and was buried on the top of the highest mountain of
Eryri, and each of his soldiers placed a stone on his tomb. The place
was afterwards known as Gwyddfa Rhitta, Rhitta's Barrow, but the English
call it Snowdon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pedws Ffowk and St. Elian's Well](wfb40)
