[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb37)  [Next](wfb39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Getting Rid of the Fairies

NOT so very far from the caves of Ystrad Fellte, in Breconshire, is a
farmhouse called Pen Fathor, which in the olden time was inhabited by
Morgan Rhys and his family. They were well-to-do and ought to have been
happy, but they were sorely troubled by the fairies. This was owing to
an insult which was unwittingly offered to one of them. Morgan's wife,
Modlen, seeing a little fairy lady poorly clad, had, in the kindness of
her heart, given her a gown. She was furiously angry and tore it to
shreds. (Not that the Fair Family are always offended by such proffered
gifts. A shepherd of Cwm Dyli used to spend the summer with his sheep on
the mountain. Waking up one morning in his hut he saw a little fairy
mother washing a baby close to his bed, and he noticed that she had
scarcely anything wherewith to clothe the shivering little creature.
Stretching out his arm to reach a ragged old shirt, he threw it to her,
saying, "Take that, poor thing, and wrap it around him." She took the
shirt thankfully, old as it was, and departed. Every evening after this,
as regularly as clockwork, the shepherd found a silver coin in an old
clog in his hut, and this lasted for many years.) After this the Fair
Family gave Morgan and his household no peace. When they were in the
kitchen there were all manner of noises in the cowhouse (in those days
it was on the same floor as the kitchen, and only separated by a
rhag-ddor, or a half-door). When they went to the cowhouse everything
was upset in the kitchen. When they were at their meals, dust was shaken
into their food through the crevices of the flooring above. At night
their crockery was broken, their cows were milked dry, and their horses
ridden until their wind was broken.

The nuisance was unbearable, and Morgan consulted a wise woman at
Penderyn as to the best means of ridding Pen Fathor of such troublesome
company. She must have been a pretender and no real wise woman, for
though her directions were faithfully carried out, they ended in nothing
but disappointment and expense. "You must make out," she said, "that you
are going to quit your farm for another holding in Ystrad Towy. Collect
all your stock together, and put the whole of your household goods upon
wagons. Then go down to Pont Nedd Fechan, as if you meant to leave
Ystrad Fellte for ever. You can then return through Hirwain and
Penderyn, and you will find that the fairies have deserted your house,
for it is their invariable custom to quit a place which passes from an
old family into new hands."

This Morgan did, and the procession had got as far as Pont Nedd Fechan
when Morgan was accosted by an old neighbour whom he met. "And so you
are going to leave us, Morgan *bach,* are you?" Before Morgan had time
to reply, a thin soprano voice piped out of a churn upon the top of one
of the wagons, "Yes, we are going to live in Ystrad Towy." The scheme
had failed, and there was nothing to do but to return by the same way
that they had come by. The behaviour of the fairies was more outrageous
than ever after this. They even tried to steal Modlen's baby from her
arms in bed one night. But she screamed and held on, and as she
afterwards told the neighbours, "God and me were too hard for them."

Then Morgan consulted a cunning man of great reputation living at Pentre
Felin, and his plan was crowned with success. It was the commencement of
the oat harvest, when the Cae Mawr, or big field, by the river side,
which it took fifteen men to mow in a day, was ripe for the sickle. "How
many of the neighbours will be coming to help us with the Cae Mawr
to-morrow?" asked Modlen in a loud voice, so that the fairies might
hear. "There will be fifteen of us in all," answered Morgan, "and. you
must see that the food is substantial and sufficient for the hard job
before us." "The fifteen men will have no reason to complain about
that," said Modlen, "they shall be fed according to our means." Next
morning, when the fifteen men were showing their prowess in the big
field, Modlen set about preparing food for the mowers. She procured a
sparrow, trussed it like a fowl, and roasted it before the kitchen fire.
She then placed some salt in a nutshell, and set the sparrow and a piece
of bread no bigger than her fist upon the table. She had just taken the
horn to summon the mowers to dinner when the fairies, beholding the
scanty provision made for the midday meal of so many hungry men, said,
"We have lived long: we were born just after the earth was made, but
never have we beheld a sight like this. Let us quickly depart from this
place, for the means of our hosts are exhausted. Who before this was
ever so poor as to serve up just one sparrow as the dinner of fifteen
mowers?" They departed that very night, and Pen Fathor was never
troubled by them afterwards.

<span id="img_11"></span> ![](img/11.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mantle of Kings' Beards](wfb39)
