[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb48)  [Next](wfb50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Swallowed Court

<span id="img_21"></span> ![](img/21.jpg)

BENLLI, a wicked Prince of Powys, had been married a long time, and he
was getting tired of his wife's faded looks and wrinkles. One day, as he
was hunting in the Green Forest, a maiden of dazzling beauty rode past
him, and he fell in love with her at first sight. He went to the same
spot in the forest the next day, and the same vision appeared to him,
but vanished before he was able to speak. The third day the damsel
appeared again, and he spoke to her, begging her to come and live with
him at his palace. "You must put your wife away," said the damsel, "and
I will become your wedded wife on one condition. You must allow me to
leave you unfollowed one night in every seven, and you must not inquire
where I go to or what I do. If you will swear this, and if you do not
break your solemn oath whatever happens, my beauty shall know no change
until the tall flag-reeds and the long green rushes grow in your hall."

The Prince took a solemn oath to observe this condition, and the Maid of
the Green Forest went to live with him at his court. The Prince was
spared the necessity of putting his old wife away, because she
disappeared before the new bride came to usurp her position. For a long
time the Prince lived happily with his young wife, and her beauty seemed
to become more and more radiant. He gave her, among other presents, a
glorious crown of beryl and sapphire, and a ring with a magnificent
diamond worth a king's ransom, and his love was so absorbing that he had
no difficulty in abiding by the condition which he had sworn to observe.
As time went on, however, the mystery of her absence every seventh night
began to oppress him, and he became very unhappy.

About nine years after he had wedded the Maid of the Green Forest he
invited, among others, a learned clerk, whose name was Wylan, to a
feast. Wylan was skilled in magic, and he noticed that in spite of the
splendid banquet with its costly viands and racy wines and mirthful
songs, some secret sorrow was brooding over the Prince's mind. Some days
after the clerk sought out the Prince and said to him, "Christ save
thee, Benlli, what secret sorrow makes thy brow so gloomy?" Then the
Prince told him how he had nine years before met the Maid of the Green
Forest, and she had become his bride on condition that she should leave
him unfollowed one night in every seven. "When the owls and the crickets
cry, she leaves my bed and I lie all alone till the day-star appears.
Then a heavy slumber fails on my eyelids, and when the sun rises I start
from a feverish sleep to find her by my side again. The mystery of it
lies heavy on my soul, and I find no peace in the rich banquet, and my
whole life is riven with sorrow."

"I can repair thy peace," said clerk Wylan to the troubled Prince, "if
thou wilt resign to me the Maid of the Green Forest, and bestow upon the
monks of the White Minster a tithe annually of all that feeds in thy
palace meadows and all that flows in thy palace vaults."

The prince consented, and clerk Wylan taking with him his clasped book
went before midnight to the rooks by the Giant's Grave, and concealed
himself by the mouth of a cave leading down to Fairyland. As he lay
there a lady hurried past him into the cave. She was royally dressed,
and her crown glittered in the moonlight--she was the Maid of the Green
Forest.

While she was within the cave the clerk began his potent spells, and he
said to the spirits which he summoned, "Let peace be restored to Prince.
Benlli, for he has promised to the monks of the White Minster a tithe
annually of all that feeds in his palace meadows and all that flows in
his palace vaults. He has resigned the Maid of the Green Forest to me:
let her for ever be as she now appears, and never leave my side. I swear
to make her my own at the Cross near the town of the White Minster.
Thither bear her before the break of day, and I will meet and wed her
there."

By his magical skill he made these words irrevocable, and departing from
the cave's mouth he hastened to the Cross. There he saw a grim ogress
smiling and rolling her bleared eyeballs on him. Thin grey hairs stood
on her wrinkled chin, and the hair on her head was like the moss of old
orchard trees. She stretched out to the clerk a bony finger on which was
the ring with the great flashing diamond given by Benlli to the Maid of
the Green Forest. "Take me to thy bosom," she said with a hideous laugh,
"for I am the wife thou art sworn to wed. A foul ogress am I now, but
thirty years agone I was Benlli's blooming bride. But as I lost my
beauty I lost his love, and I had recourse to magic.

"On condition of returning to the cave which thou sawest me enter, to be
an ogress one night in every seven, I received my youth and beauty
again. With these I charmed the Prince anew, for I was the Maid of the
Green Forest. I promised him that my beauty should know no change until
the tall flag-reeds and the long green rushes grew in his hall. This
promise have I kept, for the deep waters have overwhelmed Prince and
palace, and the flag-reeds and green rushes already grow in the
banqueting chamber. Thy spells, too, were sure, for the peace which thou
didst promise doth now bless Benlli, but it is the peace of the dead.
Our spells have clashed, and no charm can redress our fate. Take me then
to be thy bride, as decreed by oath and spell, and take with me thy
reward, a tithe of the pike and dare feeding in the green meadows of the
palace and of the water flowing in its vaults." Thus was clerk Wylan
caught in his own dark plot.

Llynclys, or Swallowed Court, was the name given to the water which
overwhelmed Benili and his palace. It is on the Welsh border, near
Oswestry, and when the surface is smooth, towers and chimneys can be
seen at a great depth in the lake. The clerk, who fell into his own
trap, is commemorated by the names Croes Wylan, Wylan's Cross, and Tre
Wylan, or Wylan's Stead, both near Oswestry.

<span id="img_11"></span> ![](img/11.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What Marged Rolant Saw](wfb50)
