[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb43)  [Next](wfb45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Fairy Borrowing

THE fairies were in the habit of borrowing things from the old woman of
Hafod Rugog. They continually came for her *padell* and *gradell.* (The
*gradell* is a sort of round flat iron on which the dough is put: the
*padell* is the pan put over it. This method of baking makes beautiful
bread.) By way of payment they used to leave money or a loaf in her
kitchen at night.

One day she went to her peat stack to get fuel for, her fire, and one of
the little women came to ask her for her *troell bach,* or wheel, for
spinning flax. "I am tired of lending you my things," said the old
woman, who was in a bad temper that day, "but you shall have what you
want if you grant me two things, that the first thing I put my hand on
at the door break, and the first thing I put my hand on in the house be
lengthened half a yard."

Now this is why the old crone made these requests: there was a grip
stone *(carreg afael),* as it is called, in the wall near the door of
her house, and she wanted to break it; and in the house she had a piece
of flannel which she wanted to make into a jerkin but it was half a yard
too short. The little woman promised to grant her two demands, and was
told to take the

troell.

The old woman put her creel of peat on her back and started home. As she
came near the door she slipped on a stone and nearly twisted her ankle:
she put her hand on it to rub it, when the joint broke and she fell on
her nose. Dragging herself into the house, she rubbed her injured beak,
and it immediately shot out half a yard.

<span id="img_06"></span> ![](img/06.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Treasure Seeking](wfb45)
