[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb49)  [Next](wfb51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What Marged Rolant Saw

MARGED ROLANT had a terrible experience once, but luckily she came
through it unscathed.

She went from her home in Breconshire to the hiring fair at Rhaiadr Gwy.
She was addressed by a very noble-looking gentleman all in black, who
asked her if she would be a nursemaid and look after his children.
Marged said that she was very fond of children, and inquired what wages
she would receive. The sum mentioned by the stranger was so much larger
than the usual rate of wages for nursemaids in that part of the country
that Marged jumped at the chance offered to her, and the bargain was
struck at once.

The stranger said he would like to start home immediately, and fetched a
coal-black horse. Marged had to submit to being blindfolded: this done,
she mounted behind the stranger and away they rode at a great pace.
After some time the horse stopped and the stranger dismounted: he helped
Marged to dismount and led her, still blindfolded, for a considerable
distance. The handkerchief was then removed, and Marged found herself in
a beautiful palace, lighted up by more candles than she could count:
many noble-looking ladies and gentlemen were walking about, and a number
of little children, as beautiful as angels, came bounding up to her.

The children were put under her charge, and her master gave her a box of
ointment to put on their eyes. At the same time he gave her strict
orders to wash her hands immediately after using the ointment, and not
on any account to let a bit of it touch her own eyes. These injunctions
Marged followed strictly, and for some time she was very happy. She
sometimes thought, however, that it was odd that the household should
always live by candlelight; and she wondered, too, that, grand and
beautiful as the palace was, such fine ladies and gentlemen should never
leave it. But so it was: no one ever went out but her master.

One morning she thought she would see what would happen if she applied
just the teeniest, weeniest bit of ointment to the corner of her eye.
Immediately, with the vision of that corner of her eye, she saw herself
surrounded by fearful flames: the ladies and gentlemen looked like
demons and the beautiful little children resembled hideous imps. Though
with the other parts of her eyes she beheld everything as before, she
could not help feeling much frightened, but she had enough presence of
mind not to show any alarm. However, she took the first opportunity of
asking her master's leave to go and see her father and mother. He said
she might go, but she must again consent to be blindfolded. Accordingly
a handkerchief was put over her eyes: she was again mounted on the
coal-black horse behind her master, and was soon put down near her home.
She slept with a Bible under her pillow every night after this, and it
was a long time before she ventured to a hiring-fair again.

<span id="img_02"></span> ![](img/02.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ned Puw's Farewell](wfb51)
