[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb59)  [Next](wfb61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Fairy Dog

GOING home from Pentre Voelas Church, the good wife of Hafod y Gareg
found a little dog in an exhausted state on the ground. She took it up
tenderly and carried it home in her apron. This she did partly from
natural kindliness of heart and partly from fear, because she remembered
what had happened to her cousin of Bryn Heilyn. She had come across a
strange little dog and treated it cruelly. The fairies had come to her
as she was taking *glasdwr* (which is butter-milk diluted with water) to
the hayfield. They seized her and enquired whether she would travel
above wind, mid wind or below wind. She ought to have selected the
middle course, which would have meant a pleasant voyage through the air
at a moderate height, equally removed from the clouds and the earth.
Above wind is a giddy and terrible passage through the thin ether
between the worlds, and it was well that she did not choose it. But the
course she made choice of, below wind, was almost as bad, because she
was snatched through miry bog and swampy lea, through brambles and
briars, until all her clothes were torn off her body, and she was
brought back to her home scratched and bleeding all over.

The good wife of Hafod y Gareg had no desire for any such excursions,
and she made a nice soft bed for the fairy dog in the pantry, and fed it
well. The following day a company of fairies came to the farmhouse to
make enquiries about it. She told them it was safe and sound, and that
they were welcome to take it away. In gratitude for her kindness, they
asked her which she would prefer, a clean or a dirty cowyard. Reflecting
that you cannot have a clean cowyard unless your cows are very few in
number, she gave the right answer, a dirty cowyard. She found two cows
for every one she had possessed before, and their milk made the best
butter in the whole neighbourhood.

<span id="img_08"></span> ![](img/08.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Grace's Well](wfb61)
