[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sof05)  [Next](sof07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="04"></span>

<div>

<span id="img_head04.png"></span> ![Header Chapter IV.](img/head04.png)

## IV.

### The Spurious Freemasonry of Antiquity.

In the vast but barren desert of polytheism--dark and dreary as were its
gloomy domains--there were still, however, to be found some few oases of
truth. The philosophers and sages of antiquity had, in the course of
their learned researches, aided by the light of nature, discovered
something of those inestimable truths in relation to God and a future
state which their patriarchal contemporaries had received as a
revelation made to their common ancestry before the flood, and which had
been retained and promulgated after that event by Noah.

They were, with these dim but still purifying perceptions, unwilling to
degrade the majesty of the First Great Cause by sharing his attributes
with a Zeus and a Hera in Greece, a Jupiter and a Juno in Rome, an
Osiris and an Isis in Egypt; and they did not believe that the thinking,
feeling, reasoning soul, the guest and companion of the body, would, at
the hour of that body's dissolution, be consigned, with it, to total
annihilation.

Hence, in the earliest ages after the era of the dispersion, there were
some among the heathen who believed in the unity of God and the
immortality of the soul. But these doctrines they durst not publicly
teach. The minds of the people, grovelling in superstition, and devoted,
as St. Paul testifies of the Athenians, to the worship of unknown gods,
were not prepared for the philosophic teachings of a pure theology. It
was, indeed, an axiom unhesitatingly enunciated and frequently repeated
by their writers, that "there are many truths with which it is useless
for the people to be made acquainted, and many fables which it is not
expedient that they should know to be false."  [6](sof37.htm#xref_6)
Such is the language of Varro, as preserved by St. Augustine; and
Strabo, another of their writers, exclaims, "It is not possible for a
philosopher to conduct a multitude of women and ignorant people by a
method of reasoning, and thus to invite them to piety, holiness, and
faith; but the philosopher must also make use of superstition, and not
omit the invention of fables and the performance of wonders."
 [7](sof37.htm#xref_7)

While, therefore, in those early ages of the world, we find the masses
grovelling in the intellectual debasement of a polytheistic and
idolatrous religion, with no support for the present, no hope for the
future,--living without the knowledge of a supreme and superintending
Providence, and dying without the expectation of a blissful
immortality,--we shall at the same time find ample testimony that these
consoling doctrines were secretly believed by the philosophers and their
disciples.

But though believed, they were not publicly taught. They were heresies
which it would have been impolitic and dangerous to have broached to the
public ear; they were truths which might have led to a contempt of the
established system and to the overthrow of the popular superstition.
Socrates, the Athenian sage, is an illustrious instance of the
punishment that was meted out to the bold innovator who attempted to
insult the gods and to poison the minds of youth with the heresies of a
philosophic religion. "They permitted, therefore," says a learned writer
on this subject [8](sof37.htm#xref_8), "the multitude to remain plunged
as they were in the depth of a gross and complicated idolatry; but for
those philosophic few who could bear the light of truth without being
confounded by the blaze, they removed the mysterious veil, and displayed
to them the Deity in the radiant glory of his unity. From the vulgar
eye, however, these doctrines were kept inviolably sacred, and wrapped
in the veil of impenetrable mystery."

The consequence of all this was, that no one was permitted to be
invested with the knowledge of these sublime truths, until by a course
of severe and arduous trials, by a long and painful initiation, and by a
formal series of gradual preparations, he had proved himself worthy and
capable of receiving the full light of wisdom. For this purpose,
therefore, those peculiar religious institutions were organized which
the ancients designated as the MYSTERIES, and which, from the
resemblance of their organization, their objects, and their doctrines,
have by masonic writers been called the "Spurious Freemasonry of
Antiquity."

Warburton, [9](sof37.htm#xref_9) in giving a definition of what these
Mysteries were, says, "Each of the pagan gods had (besides the public
and open) a secret worship paid unto him, to which none were admitted
but those who had been selected by preparatory ceremonies, called
initiation. This secret worship was termed the Mysteries." I shall now
endeavor briefly to trace the connection between these Mysteries and the
institution of Freemasonry; and to do so, it will be necessary to enter
upon some details of the constitution of those mystic assemblies.

Almost every country of the ancient world had its peculiar Mysteries,
dedicated to the occult worship of some especial and favorite god, and
to the inculcation of a secret doctrine, very different from that which
was taught in the public ceremonial of devotion. Thus in Persia the
Mysteries were dedicated to Mithras, or the Sun; in Egypt, to Isis and
Osiris; in Greece, to Demeter; in Samothracia, to the gods Cabiri, the
Mighty Ones; in Syria, to Dionysus; while in the more northern nations
of Europe, such as Gaul and Britain, the initiations were dedicated to
their peculiar deities, and were celebrated under the general name of
the Druidical rites. But no matter where or how instituted, whether
ostensibly in honor of the effeminate Adonis, the favorite of Venus, or
of the implacable Odin, the Scandinavian god of war and carnage; whether
dedicated to Demeter, the type of the earth, or to Mithras, the symbol
of all that fructifies that earth,--the great object and design of the
secret instruction were identical in all places, and the Mysteries
constituted a school of religion in which the errors and absurdities of
polytheism were revealed to the initiated. The candidate was taught that
the multitudinous deities of the popular theology were but hidden
symbols of the various attributes of the supreme god,--a spirit
invisible and indivisible,--and that the soul, as an emanation from his
essence, could "never see corruption," but must, after the death of the
body, be raised to an eternal life. [10](sof37.htm#xref_10)

That this was the doctrine and the object of the Mysteries is evident
from the concurrent testimony both of those ancient writers who
flourished contemporaneously with the practice of them, and of those
modern scholars who have devoted themselves to their investigation.

Thus Isocrates, speaking of them in his Panegyric, says, "Those who have
been initiated in the Mysteries of Ceres entertain better hopes both as
to the end of life and the whole of futurity."  [11](sof37.htm#xref_11)

Epictetus [12](sof37.htm#xref_12) declares that everything in these
Mysteries was instituted by the ancients for the instruction and
amendment of life.

And Plato [13](sof37.htm#xref_13) says that the design of initiation was
to restore the soul to that state of perfection from which it had
originally fallen.

Thomas Taylor, the celebrated Platonist, who possessed an unusual
acquaintance with the character of these ancient rites, asserts that
they "obscurely intimated, by mystic and splendid visions, the felicity
of the soul, both here and hereafter, when purified from the defilements
of a material nature, and constantly elevated to the realities of
intellectual vision."  [14](sof37.htm#xref_14)

Creuzer, [15](sof37.htm#xref_15) a distinguished German writer, who has
examined the subject of the ancient Mysteries with great judgment and
elaboration, gives a theory on their nature and design which is well
worth consideration.

This theory is, that when there had been placed under the eyes of the
initiated symbolical representations of the creation of the universe,
and the origin of things, the migrations and purifications of the soul,
the beginning and progress of civilization and agriculture, there was
drawn from these symbols and these scenes in the Mysteries an
instruction destined only for the more perfect, or the epopts, to whom
were communicated the doctrines of the existence of a single and eternal
God, and the destination of the universe and of man.

Creuzer here, however, refers rather to the general object of the
instructions, than to the character of the rites and ceremonies by which
they were impressed upon the mind; for in the Mysteries, as in
Freemasonry, the Hierophant, whom we would now call the Master of the
Lodge, often, as Lobeck observes, delivered a mystical lecture, or
discourse, on some moral subject.

Faber, who, notwithstanding the predominance in his mind of a theory
which referred every rite and symbol of the ancient world to the
traditions of Noah, the ark, and the deluge, has given a generally
correct view of the systems of ancient religion, describes the
initiation into the Mysteries as a scenic representation of the mythic
descent into Hades, or the grave, and the return from thence to the
light of day.

In a few words, then, the object of instruction in all these Mysteries
was the unity of God, and the intention of the ceremonies of initiation
into them was, by a scenic representation of death, and subsequent
restoration to life, [16](sof37.htm#xref_16) to impress the great truths
of the resurrection of the dead and the immortality of the soul.

I need scarcely here advert to the great similarity in design and
conformation which existed between these ancient rites and the third or
Master's degree of Masonry. Like it they were all funereal in their
character: they began in sorrow and lamentation, they ended in joy;
there was an aphanism, or burial; a pastos, or grave; an euresis, or
discovery of what had been lost; and a legend, or mythical
relation,--all of which were entirely and profoundly symbolical in their
character.

And hence, looking to this strange identity of design and form, between
the initiations of the ancients and those of the modern Masons, writers
have been disposed to designate these mysteries as the SPURIOUS
FREEMASONRY OF ANTIQUITY.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Ancient Mysteries](sof07)

</div>
