[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sof10)  [Next](sof12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="09"></span>

<div>

<span id="img_head09.png"></span> ![Header Chapter IX.](img/head09.png)

## IX.

### Disseverance of the Operative Element.

The next point to which our attention is to be directed is when, a few
centuries later, the operative character of the institution began to be
less prominent, and the speculative to assume a pre-eminence which
eventually ended in the total separation of the two.

At what precise period the speculative began to predominate over the
operative element of the society, it is impossible to say. The change
was undoubtedly gradual, and is to be attributed, in all probability, to
the increased number of literary and scientific men who were admitted
into the ranks of the fraternity.

The Charter of Cologne, to which I have just alluded, speaks of "learned
and enlightened men" as constituting the society long before the date of
that document, which was 1535; but the authenticity of this work has, it
must be confessed, been impugned, and I will not, therefore, press the
argument on its doubtful authority. But the diary of that celebrated
antiquary, Elias Ashmole, which is admitted to be authentic, describes
his admission in the year 1646 into the order, when there is no doubt
that the operative character was fast giving way to the speculative.
Preston tells us that about thirty years before, when the Earl of
Pembroke assumed the Grand Mastership of England, "many eminent,
wealthy, and learned men were admitted."

In the year 1663 an assembly of the Freemasons of England was held at
London, and the Earl of St. Albans was elected Grand Master. At this
assembly certain regulations were adopted, in which the qualifications
prescribed for candidates clearly allude to the speculative character of
the institution.

And, finally, at the commencement of the eighteenth century, and during
the reign of Queen Anne, who died, it will be remembered, in 1714, a
proposition was agreed to by the society "that the privileges of Masonry
should no longer be restricted to operative masons, but extend to men of
various professions, provided that they were regularly approved and
initiated into the order."

Accordingly the records of the society show that from the year 1717, at
least, the era commonly, but improperly, distinguished as the
restoration of Masonry, the operative element of the institution has
been completely discarded, except so far as its influence is exhibited
in the choice and arrangement of symbols, and the typical use of its
technical language.

<div align="center">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

The history of the origin of the order is here concluded; and in briefly
recapitulating, I may say that in its first inception, from the time of
Noah to the building of the temple of Solomon, it was entirely
speculative in its character; that at the construction of that edifice,
an operative element was infused into it by the Tyrian builders; that it
continued to retain this compound operative and speculative organization
until about the middle of the seventeenth century, when the latter
element began to predominate; and finally, that at the commencement of
the eighteenth century, the operative element wholly disappeared, and
the society has ever since presented itself in the character of a simply
speculative association.

The history that I have thus briefly sketched, will elicit from every
reflecting mind at least two deductions of some importance to the
intelligent Mason.

In the first place, we may observe, that ascending, as the institution
does, away up the stream of time, almost to the very fountains of
history, for its source, it comes down to us, at this day, with so
venerable an appearance of antiquity, that for that cause and on that
claim alone it demands the respect of the world. It is no recent
invention of human genius, whose vitality has yet to be tested by the
wear and tear of time and opposition, and no sudden growth of
short-lived enthusiasm, whose existence may be as ephemeral as its birth
was recent. One of the oldest of these modern institutions, the
Carbonarism of Italy, boasts an age that scarcely amounts to the half of
a century, and has not been able to extend its progress beyond the
countries of Southern Europe, immediately adjacent to the place of its
birth; while it and every other society of our own times that have
sought to simulate the outward appearance of Freemasonry, seem to him
who has examined the history of this ancient institution to have sprung
around it, like mushrooms bursting from between the roots and vegetating
under the shade of some mighty and venerable oak, the patriarch of the
forest, whose huge trunk and wide-extended branches have protected them
from the sun and the gale, and whose fruit, thrown off in autumn, has
enriched and fattened the soil that gives these humbler plants their
power of life and growth.

But there is a more important deduction to be drawn from this narrative.
In tracing the progress of Freemasonry, we shall find it so intimately
connected with the history of philosophy, of religion, and of art in all
ages of the world, that it is evident that no Mason can expect
thoroughly to understand the nature of the institution, or to appreciate
its character, unless he shall carefully study its annals, and make
himself conversant with the facts of history, to which and from which it
gives and receives a mutual influence. The brother who unfortunately
supposes that the only requisites of a skilful Mason consist in
repeating with fluency the ordinary lectures, or in correctly opening
and closing the lodge, or in giving with sufficient accuracy the modes
of recognition, will hardly credit the assertion, that he whose
knowledge of the "royal art" extends no farther than these preliminaries
has scarcely advanced beyond the rudiments of our science. There is a
far nobler series of doctrines with which Freemasonry is connected, and
which no student ever began to investigate who did not find himself
insensibly led on, from step to step in his researches, his love and
admiration of the order increasing with the augmentation of his
acquaintance with its character. It is this which constitutes the
science and the philosophy of Freemasonry, and it is this alone which
will return the scholar who devotes himself to the task a sevenfold
reward for his labor.

With this view I propose, in the next place, to enter upon an
examination of that science and philosophy as they are developed in the
system of symbolism, which owes its existence to this peculiar origin
and organization of the order, and without a knowledge of which, such as
I have attempted to portray it in this preliminary inquiry, the science
itself could never be understood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. The System of Symbolic Instuction](sof12)

</div>
