[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Utopia](../../utopia/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sym04) 
[Next](sym06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symzonia; Voyage of Discovery*, by Adam Seaborn (pseud. John Cleves
Symmes?), \[1820\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### CHAPTER II.

<span class="small">The Author arrives at the Falkland Islands—Describes
West Point Island, and States harbour—Visits the city of the Gentoo
Penguins on the Grand Jason—Gives some account of the polity and habits
of those civilized amphibia—Sails for South Georgia.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">I soon</span> had cause to congratulate myself
on my ingenuity. My fin paddles worked to admiration. When the wind
failed, I could, by setting the engine in motion, propel my vessel at
the rate of 12 knots per hour; and with a favourable wind, and under a
press both of canvass and steam, found it easy to drive her at the rate
of 16 knots.

With such advantages, there was no necessity of going the roundabout
passage to gain the trade wind. I therefore stood straight for Cape St.
Roque. Whether I did or did not see a flying fish, catch a dolphin, or
observe a black whirling cloud called a water-spout, is of very little
importance to the world. On the sixteenth day after leaving port, we saw
the land of Cape St. Roque, in South America, and on the twenty-fourth,
anchored in the harbour of

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rio de Janeiro,
having experienced the usual changes of wind and weather, and discovered
that air and water are much the same elements, and are governed by much
the same laws, at sea as on shore.

I entered this harbour under sail, with the paddle ports closed, that no
suspicion might be excited; my object in calling at this place being
only to provide myself with live stock and fruits. I took on board. two
fine horses, four mules, two cows, with calves, a parcel of pigs, sheep,
and goats, with a quantity of fruit and vegetables; and, on the 26th of
August, sailed again.

On the 4th of September, we entered the harbour of West Point, Falkland
Islands. Here 1 had determined to pass a month for the benefit of my
health, which a short passage by water had not completely restored, from
the debility occasioned by the vexations and anxieties of business in
those retrograde times, and the pernicious habits of living, common
among civilized men, upon food rendered palateable by a skilful
admixture of poisons. These Islands being incontestibly in the
healthiest region of the globe, I believed that, by a short stay amongst
them, I should

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

regain the firm health so necessary to a man who undertakes great
things; and at the same time, by employing my people in sealing, learn
them how to manage the boats, to land through a surf, and to execute all
the difficult and dangerous operations, incident to the occupation of
explorers of unknown shores. At the same time, I should be pursuing the
ostensible object of my voyage; a matter very necessary to be kept in
view, for my people were engaged on shares of what should be obtained by
their industry.

The first day was devoted partly to preparations fin. a sealing
excursion to the Jason Islands, and partly to recreation. West Point
Island abounds with hogs and goats, the hunting of which is both
pleasant for exercise, and profitable by supplying excellent food. Here
are no tangled forests to embarrass the sportsman, nor bushes or briars
to annoy his clothes or his flesh. Neither are there mats, moschetos,
sand-flies, snakes, scorpions, or other reptiles, to render every step
dangerous or painful. Near the shore, which is fringed with granite
rocks, a border of tussoc extends around the island, like a belt, of
from one-eighth

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

to a quarter of a mile in width. The tussoc flag grows from the top of a
bog formed apparently by the roots of the plants which had flourished
and decayed on the spot for many successive years. The bogs are,
usually, three to five feet in height, and one to three feet in diameter
The substance of them resembles cork, though it is less compact. They
stand irregularly one to two feet asunder, so as to afford convenient
room for a passage between them, in every direction, over a foundation
of much the same substance as the bogs themselves, which is usually
quite dry. The dry white tussoc grass of preceding years hangs round the
top of the bog like a broad frill; while the fresh green growth, which
waves over the top like a tuft of lofty feathers, gives the whole, when
viewed from a distance, the aspect of an extensive field of indian corn.
The root of the fresh tussoc is pleasant to the palate, being much like
the meat of a chestnut, and it affords an abundance of excellent feed to
the hogs, that enjoy an elysium here. Within this border of tussoc, and
from it to the steep ascent of the mountains, a region of grass
intervenes, which has the appearance

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

of a rich upland meadow. It grows about knee high, and extends as far as
the rise of the land is moderate. Beyond it, short mountain grass and a
few heath plants are found contending with fragments of granite, and
with the polar blasts to which the lofty summit of the mountain is
exposed. It was delightful, after a confinement on ship-board, to ramble
over this sequestered and pleasant scene; to chase the wild hogs from
their tussoc covert to the rising grounds, where they were sure victims
of the spear or the bullet; and to invade from above the retreats of the
gigantic albatross, in the cliffs of perpendicular rocks, a thousand
feet above the sea.

On the second day we landed a sealing party of thirty men, under the
command of Mr. Boneto, chief mate, on the Jason Islands, which are
similar in their formation to those I have described. Intending to join
this party myself with the launch, and being apprehensive that if I left
the Explorer in West Point harbour, with but a few men on board, some
Patriot pirate might look into that much frequented place, and, tempted
by the value of my vessel and

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

her defenceless situation, deem it patriotic. to take her away to aid
the cause of liberty, and leave me to explore my way home in my boats, I
proceeded with her to the deep and intricate inlet of the sea, called
States harbour. This spacious, convenient, and secure harbour, second to
none on the face of the globe, is one of the indications that Providence
formed this group of Islands for the abode of an enlightened and
maritime people. Front a spacious and deep bay, in which the whole navy
of Britain might moor in safety, a cove jets into the land on the left;
and on one side of the cove there is an opening through the land like a
dock-gate, with perpendicular sides of solid rock, against which a ship
of the line might lie with safety, as against a pier. Passing through
this opening. a harbour is found, extending at right angles with the
passage nearly two miles in length, and about one-eighth of a mile in
width. At one end of this interior basin, a large stream of fresh water
empties into it; at the mouth of which fine fish in great quantities are
easily taken in the spring, and on its banks, as also on those of
numerous smaller streams, celery of an excellent kind grows

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

spontaneously. The shores of this basin rise with a very gentle ascent.
They are not exposed to the winds of the open ocean, and are not much
encumbered with tussoc. There is no high land near. Thousands of acres,
well watered and covered with grass fit for hay, exhibit the prospect of
a succession of well-cultivated meadows. There are plenty of hogs on the
island which forms this harbour. Geese, as good as our wild geese, are
very abundant. We caught them with ease, and in great plenty.

What a delightful situation these islands offer, for a virtuous,
enlightened, and industrious community! Nearly four hundred islands, one
of which is some hundred of miles in extent, situated in the most
temperate climate of the globe, where the air is always salubrious, heat
never oppressive, cold never severe, the ground never frozen, and the
heaviest snow of no more than two or three days duration on the ground;
with a soil capable of affording, by cultivation, all the useful
products of the temperate zone; a location convenient for the
prosecution of the whale, seal, and other fisheries; with innumerable
harbours for the accommodation of shipping;

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

with every thing calculated to make them the most desirable residence
for man, these islands remain uninhabited, and lonely deserts.

The fine health which those who stop here for a season invariably enjoy,
the appetite they acquire, the activity with which they exert
themselves, these are the evidences of an invigorating and salubrious
climate. Here are no debilitating heats to enervate, nor frosts to
benumb the faculties, and make it half the business of life to keep the
body comfortable. A people born and educated in such a country might be
expected to partake its characteristics; to have minds solid and
profound, like the granite frame of their mountains, and clear as the
ocean which surrounds them; vigorous, yet temperate like the climate;
sufficient in all things, and without extremes.

Having seen my vessel safely moored, I left her in charge of Mr.
Albicore, the second mate, with strict orders not to permit either fire
or candle to be used on board in my absence. I caused a cook house to be
erected on shore, and left five men with Mr. Albicore, to fill up the
water-casks.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

catch and cure fish, make the necessary repairs to the rigging, and put
the vessel in perfect order against my return. With the remainder of the
officers and men, in the launch and one whale boat, I made a harbour at
West Point Island early the first day, and at the close of the second
joined the party under Mr. Boneto, on the Grand Jason. I found that
Boneto had made good use of his time, having cleared this island and all
the neighbouring keys and shores to which he could prudently go with
open whale boats, of the few seal which could be found. There was but
here and there a seal to be seen, excepting on some points of land,
which on account of the surf were nearly inaccessible. The frequent
visits of sealers from the United States had either destroyed or
frightened most of them away. This gave me no uneasiness, for I expected
it when I planned my voyage. I concurred in the opinion published by
Capt. Symmes, that seals, whales, and mackerel, come from the internal
world through the openings at the poles; and was aware of the fact, that
the nearer we approach those openings, the more abundant do we find
seals and whaled

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I felt perfectly
satisfied that I had only to find an opening in the "icy hoop," through
which I could dash with my vessel, to discover a region where seals
could be taken as fast as they could be stripped and cured. I therefore
employed myself chiefly in procuring comforts for my people, and in
studying the habits and propensities of those amphibious animals which
might be supposed to have communication with the internal world, whither
I was ambitious to find my way.

A colony of Gentoo Penguins, on the borders of the south-east cove of
Grand Jason, first attracted my attention. Their city stands on a
beautiful level spot, a short distance from the water. Every pair of
Penguins has a separate establishment built of earth, stones, and
sticks, of about two feet elevation, and eighteen inches diameter; on
the top of which is their nest. There are some thousands of these stands
arranged in regular order, with an open square in the centre, regular
streets between the ranges of nests, and a broad avenue leading from the
square towards the places of landing and diving. This avenue, a short
distance from the settlement, divides

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

into two broad paths; one leading to the diving place, which is a
perpendicular rock in deep water, and the other to the landing place,
which is a sloping rock of easy access from the sea.

It being the egg season, which soon passes away, I determined to make it
hold out, if practicable, until the lime of our departure, that we might
have a stock of fresh eggs to take with us. Remembering that our
barn-yard fowls continue to deposit eggs as long as but one is daily
left in the nest, I adopted that plan with the Penguins, and stationed
Jack Whiffle, boatswains-mate, with three assistants, to remove the eggs
daily, and stack them; keeping an account of the several stacks, that we
might take our supply from those lest gathered. This was no trifling
job. The nests were so numerous that it was a hard morning's work for
four men to visit them all, and take an egg from each in defiance of the
lawful proprietor, who always defended his property to the best of his
ability, and never forsook the stand, through fear, but maintained
possession until pushed off. The plan answered my expectations: the
Penguins continued to supply

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

eggs in place of those that were removed, until our departure, when we
took with us barrels of them packed in salt.

These Gentoo Penguins are amphibious birds, nearly two feet high when
standing erect. Their bodies are somewhat larger than those of geese,
and well proportioned throughout; their necks being just long enough to
look well. In place of wings they have fins for swimming, and their feet
are equally well adapted to the land and water. Their covering is very
short feathers, closely and firmly set in a thick skin. Their backs,
fins, feet, and legs, are black;. the rest of their bodies pure white;
they walk bolt upright, with a firm step like a grenadier, and have the
appearance, when formed in squadrons, of soldiers, in a uniform of black
coats, white underdress, and black gaiters. From the attentive
observations of Jack Whiffle, I obtained the following particulars of
their habits and polity:

At the time of full sea, one half of the Penguins assemble in the
centre-square, where they parade in regular order. They then march off,
two abreast, and in close order, preceded by a leader, to the
diving-place.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They dive into the
sea in succession, as they arrive, and swim off to feed on kelp,
rock-weed, small fish, and other marine productions. During their
absence, the other half remain stationary upon their stands, keeping
watch; occasional short visits by some few of them to their nearest
neighbours, being the only deviation from strict duty in this
particular, that is allowed. If any one strays far from his station, or
shows a disposition to go out to feed, he is pecked and driven back by
the others. At the turn of the tide, those that are out collect about
the landing-place; some sporting in the water, leaping and diving with
great dexterity; others lounging upon the shore, apparently admiring
themselves and each other, like our fashionable belles and dandies in
Broadway. When the leader lands, they form in regular order, march to
the square, in the same manner as they left it, divide into squadrons,
and file off to their respective stations to relieve guard. As soon as
those returned from feeding mount the stands, the others leap off and
repair to the square. When collected, they form, and march off to the
diving place in the manner before

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

described, to take their tide of feeding and recreation. Thus they
occupy the day; each having the benefit of a full tide, and each doing
his share of domestic duties.

At night all are assembled in the city, and each stand is crowned with
two of these exemplary birds.

The contemplation of these orderly, discreet, and beautiful amphibia,
afforded me much pleasure, and gave rise to many delightful
anticipations. It appeared certain to me that they, in common with
seals, whales, and mackerel, were visiters from the internal world
through the southern opening, which they were admirably formed to pass
and repass; for they moved with great facility, in the water, and could
exist under it as well as fish. On land they walked with as much ease as
men, and in the same erect posture. It occurred to me that a world, in
which the brute creation were so neatly formed, so polished in their
manners, so social in their habits, and so quiet and well behaved, must,
if men existed in it, be the abode of a race perfect in their kind. I
had no apprehension of the air being unhealthy in the internal world, as
suggested by Capt. Symmes,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

because the climate in which these visitors are found in the greatest
numbers is the healthiest of the external world, which indicates that
they are accustomed to good air, or they would not effect this
salubrious region.

Again, I had observed all these amphibia to be of a remarkably gentle
and harmless disposition. The sea-lion, sea-elephant, and common seal,
together with the king-penguin, the Gentoo, macaroni, and
jackass-penguin, all of different habits, yet obviously of the same
origin, accommodated themselves on the same island, fed in the same sea,
and on the same food; without interfering with, and without ever being
observed to offer violence to each other; from which I inferred that the
inhabitants of the internal world, influenced by the same causes, must
be of a remarkably pacific, and gentle disposition.

October had arrived, and I grew impatient of further delay. The sun was
already pouring its rays of light and heat a constant stream upon the
south pole. The season for active research in that region was come, and
would soon he past. I directed Mr. Boneto to collect the skins

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

which had been taken, at a convenient place on Grand Jason, and returned
to the Explorer. I found every thing at States harbour as it should be.
Mr. Albicore was an excellent officer. He took care to understand my
orders, and to obey them implicitly. The launch was immediately hoisted
in, and at dawn of day the following morning we sailed from that port,
took in Boneto's party, with near two thousand seal skins, and bore up
for South Georgia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](sym06)
