[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Utopia](../../utopia/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sym07) 
[Next](sym09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symzonia; Voyage of Discovery*, by Adam Seaborn (pseud. John Cleves
Symmes?), \[1820\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

### CHAPTER V.

<span class="small">The Author discovers the south extremity of
Seaborn's Land, which he names Cape Worldsend.—The compass becomes
useless.—He states the manner in which he obviated the difficulty
occasioned thereby.—He enters the internal world: describes the
phenomena which occur.—Discovers Token Island.—Occurrences at that
Island.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">I proceeded</span> along the coast to the S. S.
E. November 21st, 1817, the sun's altitude corrected for refraction
placed us in a more northern latitude than we had left, which my
officers considered as evidence of our having passed the pole and made
some progress northward, and they accordingly congratulated me on the
occasion. I knew better, and was perfectly aware that if the poles were
open, of which I had no doubt, we must necessarily change our apparent
latitude by observation very fast; and on turning the edge of the
opening have a vertical sun, an equal division of day and night, and all
the phenomena of the equator.

To be prepared for this untried region, I calculated all the changes of
the apparent

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

altitude of the sun in all degrees of declination, as they must
necessarily occur, assuming the form of the earth to be at the openings
as stated by Capt. Symmes in his sublime theory; and formed tables that
I might be able at any time to ascertain the ship's place without
difficulty or delay.

We had thus far found the land to trend S. S. E. and S. Soon after noon
this day we reached a cape, from which the land turned short round to
the W. N. W. and continued in that direction as far as could be seen
from the mast head. This being apparently the most extreme southern land
of the external world, I named it Worlds-end Cape. I felt no disposition
to follow the coast to the N. W. although it might be found to turn
again to the south. The most prudent course appeared to be to keep sight
of the land, that we might certainly find our way back again to Mr.
Boneto's station. But a round about way to the internal world was not in
accordance with my impatient feelings; and yet the indulgence of my
desire required that I should manage with great circumspection.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

The compass was now of no manner of use; the card turned round and round
on the slightest agitation of the box, and the needle pointed sometimes
one way and sometimes another, changing its position every five minutes.
I had frequently heard Slim muttering his apprehensions, and even
Albicore said to me, 'I hope we shall not have any bad weather, or lose
sight of the land.' My best seamen appeared confounded at the loss of
the compass, and a degree of alarm pervaded the whole ship's company. I
had foreseen the difficulty that might take place when I proposed to
leave the land, and to avoid it had placed Slim on the larboard watch
with Albicore, by which arrangement the charge of my watch (the
starboard) when I was off deck, devolved on Will Mackerel, assisted by
Jack Whiffle. This was mortifying to Slim, but he was aware that he
deserved it.

I kept near Cape Worldsend, taking its bearings in a variety of
positions, for the ostensible purpose of ascertaining its exact
position, until four o'clock, when the larboard watch went below. I saw
that both Albicore and Slim turned in to get some sleep, and immediately
ordered Mackerel

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

to keep the vessel on a course corresponding to south, and to press with
both steam and canvass to the utmost. The wind was about N. W., fresh
and very steady, which served as a guide, the helmsman being directed to
keep the wind four points on the quarter. We ran at the rate of 16
knots. I gave strict orders that Albicore and Slim should not be
disturbed at the usual hour of calling the dog watch; and when they came
on deck at 10 P. M. there was no land in sight. The sun to their
astonishment was just setting in the bosom of the ocean: they stared at
one another, and looked at me, but said nothing. They were perfectly
bewildered; they knew not which way was north, south, east or west. Had
they now undertaken to direct the course of the vessel, they would have
been more likely to run from the land than towards it. Mackerel was
delighted to see the sun set once more; it seemed like old times; and
the weather had been for some days so hot that a little night was very
desirable.

I told them all to be perfectly at ease, for that I knew what I was
about; that I could calculate every point of the compass,

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

as well as if that instrument performed its office; that we would heave
to for the night, the occurrence of which was no more than I had
calculated on; and finally, to give them confidence in my skill, told
them, that if we did not find the sun directly over head at noon, within
two days, provided no land impeded our progress, I would give up the
command to Albicore, and show him the way back to Seaborn's Land.

Albicore and Slim both earnestly entreated that I would instruct them
how to calculate the points of the compass, if I possessed that
important knowledge, so that they might be enabled to find their way
back again in case any accident should befal me. I begged to be excused,
choosing to keep the staff in my own hands.

The truth was, having three excellent chronometers, one set to the time
at Washington, one to that of Greenwich, and the other to that of Rio de
Janeiro, and also an excellent watch daily regulated, which gave me the
ship's diurnal time accurately, I could easily calculate my longitude,
and the point on which the sun ought to hear every hour in the 24. With
these

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

calculations before me, I had but to look at my watch and the sun to
determine my course. Thus in the longitude of Greenwich, when the
chronometer set to Greenwich time stood at 12 o'clock noon, wherever the
sun was, was north; and when that chronometer stood at midnight,
wherever the sun was, was south—on the external southern hemisphere,
south of the degree of the sun's declination.

The re-appearance of the stars, and the refreshing coolness of the night
air delighted my people. At daylight we made sail, and set the paddles
in motion. At noon we had the sun nearly overhead, and the declination
being 20° 5´ S. Slim was positive that we were in latitude 28° S. and
wondered why the compass would not traverse. The next day we had a
vertical sun, as I had predicted, and the weather as warm as I had ever
known it at sea, with a fine breeze. No one knew which way we were
steering but myself; and Slim's opinion confidently expressed that we
were near the equator, and must soon make the continent of Asia, Africa,
America, or the Asiatic islands, served to quiet the apprehensions of
the men for their own

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

safety, and at the same time to awaken their solicitude for the
situation of Mr. Boneto's party, whom they said I had barbarously left
to perish by the frosts of a polar winter, on Seaborn's Land.

The next day we observed the sun to the south of us, and nearly over
head, and the compass began to traverse imperfectly. We had a regular
recurrence of day and night, though the latter was very short, which I
knew was occasioned by the rays of the sun being obstructed by the rim
of the earth, when the external side of the part we were on turned
towards the sun. The nights were not dark, when no clouds intervened to
obstruct the rays of the sun, reflected from the opposite rim, and from
a large luminous body northward, in the internal heavens, which
reflected the sun as our moon does, and which I judged to be the second
concentric sphere, according to Capt. Symmes. This gave us very pleasant
nights, but not quite clear enough to render sailing through untried
seas entirely safe.

We continued running due north, interned, three days, when the compass
became pretty regular; but instead of the N. and

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> S. points
corresponding to the N. and S. points on the external world, as Capt.
Symmes supposed it would do, the needle turned fairly end for end; the
south end pointing directly into the globe towards the north pole, with
some variation from the true north. But of this matter, I shall say very
little, for sundry important reasons, and especially because intend to
publish my theory of longitude in due season, and give the courses and
bearings, corrected to true north and south, as understood by the
externals.

On the 28th of November, 1817, we discovered land, just at sunset, and
immediately hove to, to keep a good offing until day-light. I walked the
deck all night, and was very impatient for the morning of that day which
was to disclose to me the wonders of the internal world, and probably to
decide the question whether it was or was not inhabited by rational
beings.

Happily, day soon appeared, and we ran in with the land, keeping a good
look-out, and the leads constantly going. On nearing the coast, we found
the shore to be low and sandy. The body of the land, however, was high,
with one towering peak far

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

inland, Near the sea it appeared to be extremely barren, but some miles
hack, scattered clumps of trees, and some appearances of verdure,
afforded a more cheering prospect. We explored the coast of this island,
for such it proved to be, for two days, before we found anchorage, or a
safe landing place. A very heavy surf rolled on shore, and broke high on
the shoals, which were frequent, and in some places three miles off the
coast, so as to make it dangerous to approach. At length we found a safe
road, sheltered by a sand bank above water, about two miles long, and
lying parallel with the shore, half a league from it. There was a fair
passage in, with 15 fathoms water, and good holding ground. Here we
moored to the great joy of all on board, who, seeing firm land with
living things of some kind moving about upon it, felt satisfied that
they were still in the sublunary world, and complained of nothing but
the excessive heat. It was near night when we came to anchor; all
further research was therefore deferred until the next day.

On the 1st December, I landed for the first time on terra firma of the
internal

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

world, but was greatly disappointed, I must confess, to find no
indications of any other inhabitants than turtles, terrapins of a
monstrous size, some few seals, penguins, and numerous sea fowl. The
great number of turtles was satisfactory evidence to my mind, that there
were no human beings on the island; and, after a short walk on the
burning sand, I returned on board, quite dejected.

The day was passed in fishing, and in collecting turtles and terrapins,
for sea stock. In the evening, Mr. Slim, who was wide awake to his
interest, suggested to me that we might obtain a good quantity of
tortoise shell from this island, as the turtles brought on board were of
the hawksbill kind, the shell of which sells for a high price. I gave
him permission to land the following day, with ten men, and see what he
could do in that way.

The next morning I was quite sick, in consequence of the heat, and of my
disappointment in not finding an inhabited country, after encountering
so many hazards, and exerting so much enterprise and perseverance. Being
thus compelled to remain on board, I permitted Albicore to land

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

with four men, to ramble along shore, and see if he could make any
discoveries. In the evening Slim reported that he had not been able to
effect much, owing to the excessive heat, which compelled him, with his
party, to take refuge under an awning, formed with the boats’ sails, for
full half the day. Albicore stated that he had been eight or ten miles
along the shore, but had seen nothing strange.

The following morning, when I had given orders to prepare for getting
under weigh, having determined to remain no longer in a place where
there was great danger of the yellow fever making its appearance amongst
my people, without intercourse with vessels from the West Indies,
Albicore mentioned incidentally as we sat at breakfast, and as a matter
of no sort of moment, that he had seen, during his walk on the beach,
about five miles from where we lay, something which looked like part of
a wreck of some outlandish vessel. The worthy man, who considered
nothing that did not pertain to the strict line of his duty as deserving
a thought, was astonished to see me spring up from my seat at table,
order the boats manned, and make ready for an immediate

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

expedition. It never occurred to his mind that if there were ships in
those seas, there must also be men to build and sail them. To me the
information he had given was both food and medicine: it revived my
hopes, and fired my curiosity. I felt no desire to complete my repast. I
was restored to health and good spirits, and was soon marching over the
sand, with Albicore for my guide.

After two hours we reached the place which Mr. Albicore had spoken of,
where I found part of the frame of a vessel of some sort, of about one
hundred tons burthen, the form of which satisfied me that it was no
drift from the external world. The stern raked inwards, instead of out,
as we construct them, giving the forward part of the vessel the form of
a double ploughshare; while the broad bulging sides were admirably
adapted to make the vessel sit firm on the water, and prevent her
oversetting. But the most singular part was a piece of planking, which
remained attached to the frame, and which was actually sewed on with a
white elastic wire, resembling in appearance platina, more than any
metal known to us. I extracted

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

some small pieces of this singular metal, and with it fired the
imagination of my people, by representing to them the enormous wealth we
should acquire, could we obtain a cargo of it to carry to our country,
where it would be more valuable than silver; and that the use to which
it was applied was sufficient evidence of its being abundant where this
vessel was built.

I named this island, which was in 81° 20´ internal south latitude, Token
Island, considering its discovery as a token or premonition of some
great things to come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](sym09)
