[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Utopia](../../utopia/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sym14) 
[Next](sym16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symzonia; Voyage of Discovery*, by Adam Seaborn (pseud. John Cleves
Symmes?), \[1820\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

### CHAPTER XII.

<span class="small">Wonderful faculties of the Symzonians.—Translation
of my books into their language.—Proposition of a *Wise* man to make
slaves of the Author and his people.—The Author's remonstrance.—The
*Wise* man disgraced.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> extraordinary strength and vigour of
the faculties of this people enabled them to effect, in a short time,
what would occupy the most intelligent of the externals for years. I can
convey an idea of them only, by calling to the recollection of the
reader the talent at computation manifested by Zera Colburn, who, at the
age of 10 years, calculated the sum of any given number of figures in
the twinkling of an eye, as though he arrived at the result by
intuition.

The faculties of the Symzonians all seemed to be nearly perfect. They
are obviously as much superior to ours, as Colburn's powers of
calculation were greater than those of other untaught boys; which, no
doubt, results from their strict conformity to the law of their nature.

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

With such powers of mind, it need not be matter of surprise that all my
books were very soon translated into their language, and numerous copies
of them printed, and distributed amongst the most learned and discreet,
with instructions to report as to their fitness for general circulation.

This examination and report brought me into serious difficulty. A
certain *Wise* man presented a memorial to the Best Man, in council, in
which he attempted to prove, from the books which I had put into his
hands, my large size, dingy complexion, carnivorous appetite, and my own
account of the sensual habits and propensities of my race, that we were
actually the offspring of the wicked who had been expelled from Symzonia
for their vices, and that we ought to be subjected to the penalty
denounced by their laws in such cases.

On inquiry, I found the penalty alluded to in the *Wise* man's memorial,
was nothing less than the delivering of such persons to the most severe
of the *Useful* class, to be kept at hard work, poorly fed, and debarred
from intercourse with the pure—in the hope that, in process or time,
their

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

gross appetites might be scourged out of them.

All the horrors of a rice swamp, with but a peck of corn a week for
subsistence, sprang up in my affrighted imagination. I immediately set
about an elaborate petition to the Best Man, in which I endeavoured to
refute the arguments advanced by the *Wise* man, and to show that my
dingy complexion was owing to my seafaring life on the external world,
whereby I was much sunburnt; and that the *Wise* man had been led into
error by mistaking a work of imagination, for real history.

I admitted that there was a race on the external world, inhabitants of
some islands far to the north, who, from their vicinity to the place of
exile, might be the descendants of the outcasts, but who, in my opinion,
were more probably the descendants of the Belzubians, being a restless,
turbulent people, much given to depredations upon the rights and
property of others, of insatiable ambition, inordinate avarice, and
excessive vanity: who made war their chief occupation, maintaining vast
fleets and armies; who plundered the feeble, enslaved the unwary, and
levied contributions by

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

force or fraud upon the whole human race:

That these islanders were a distinct people, who were regardless of the
rights of others, being governed by cupidity, whereby they had become
detestable to all the rest of the externals, and to my nation in
particular, to so great a degree, that our *Wise* men (who have the
control in the government, the *Good* and *Useful* being held in but
little estimation by the wise and the useless in my country) had
repeatedly ordained a non-intercourse, in the vain hope of bringing
these supposed descendants of the Belzubians to a sense of justice; and
that we were at this time only secure from their attacks, by an
invention for blowing them into the air, if they ventured to assail our
shores; that the book which had misled the *Wise* man was written by one
of this people, and had no reference to my country.

Before I had completed my work to my satisfaction, I received the
agreeable intelligence, that the Best Man, supported by all the <span
class="smallcaps">Good</span> and most of the <span
class="smallcaps">Useful</span> of his council, had ordered the name of
the *Wise* man who made the proposition,

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

to be erased from the list of Worthies, as a cruel monster, for
seriously proposing the infliction, upon strangers who had voluntarily
thrown themselves upon the hospitality of the country, of penalties
enacted only to render the consequences of the return of the outcasts
too frightful to be encountered by them.

This was the only unpleasant occurrence during my stay. The days flew on
with astonishing rapidity, so agreeably were they passed. The Symzonians
slept but about three hours in the four-and-twenty, and considered me a
very gross and sluggish being because I could not do without six hours
sleep. With the exception of this short interval, every moment was
occupied in conversation, study, observation, or amusement. Statistics,
geography, botany, ærology, geology, mineralogy, zoology, ornithology,
ichthiology, conchology, and entomology, in turn demanded and received
my attention.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](sym16)
