[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Utopia](../../utopia/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sym13) 
[Next](sym15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symzonia; Voyage of Discovery*, by Adam Seaborn (pseud. John Cleves
Symmes?), \[1820\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

### CHAPTER XI.

<span class="small">Containing some account of the Symzonian engine of
defence.—Story of a very ancient war with at; internal nation called
Belzubians, which caused the invention of this engine.—Opposition of the
Good men to its being used.—Fultria the inventor's speech in defence of
it.—Deliberations of the Council.—Termination of the war.—Sentiments of
the people on the subject.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> prohibition by the Best Man of any
information being given to me of their engines of defence, excited my
curiosity. I was anxious to discover what those engines were, and why a
people so good, so benevolent, and so harmless, could have any occasion
for them. I dared not ask for airy direct account of their nature, as I
knew that an attempt to induce any one to break through the Best Man's
injunctions, would be considered as the greatest of offences, and cause
my immediate expulsion from the favoured district.

All my efforts to obtain the desired information indirectly, fell short
of my object. I however gathered from casual observation,

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

and from some manuscripts which fell into my hands, that in times long
past, the people of Symzonia maintained a commercial intercourse with a
nation on the opposite side of the internal world, beyond the equator,
called in their ancient manuscripts <span
class="smallcaps">Belzubians</span>. This intercourse was kept up for
many years; for the *Wise* men contended that it was beneficial, by
enabling the people of Symzonia to obtain many things *cheaper* than
they could themselves produce them. But in process of time, the Good men
discovered that the people became poorer, more addicted to idleness, and
given to the indulgence of many inordinate desires and extravagant
vanities. At length the unworthy became so numerous, as to endanger the
morality and virtue of the whole community, and it was necessary to
banish them to a place of exile. in the hot regions near the extreme
limit of the world at the north.

This was the origin of the system of casting out the corrupted members
of society. At the time of its adoption, the government endeavoured to
remove the cause of the evil by prohibiting, as they had a clear right
to do, all further intercourse, for purposes

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

of trade, with the Belzubians: but the latter had become so depraved and
sordid, by their addiction to traffic, and were so puffed up with the
idea that they were the most *powerful* nation of the two, that they
resolved to maintain a commerce with the Symzonians by force, in
defiance of the regulations of the government.

The Good men were thus placed in a most painful dilemma. They could not
prevent this forced intercourse entirely, without shedding the blood of
their fellow beings, to which they felt an insurmountable aversion. For
a time they contented themselves with endeavours to reclaim the people.
They exhorted them to abstain from the use of the things brought by the
Belzubians; and finally succeeded so far as to diminish the advantages
which their enemies had before derived from the trade, so as to make it
no longer worth pursuing. The Belzubians then sent armed men in their
ships to take possession of Symzonia, and compel the Good men and the
people to submit to the contaminating intercourse demanded by their
cupidity.

The most frightful distress now pervaded the land. The enemy having to
do with a

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

people who had no arms, and who were in the highest degree averse to the
shedding of blood, easily conquered a large portion of the country.
Those who had been corrupted by intercourse with them, joined the
standard of the Belzubians, and forwarded their views.

The total subjection of the country, and the destruction of its virtues
and happiness, would have ensued, but for the timely appearance amongst
them of a man of singular ingenuity. This man, named Fultria, invented
the air vessels, one of which I have before spoken of. He also invented
the engine of defence, the description of which was prohibited. The
knowledge of its construction, and the manner of using it, was confined
to a few select Good men, who were bound to secrecy by the most solemn
obligations. I could obtain no other idea of it, than that it was a vast
machine moved upon wheels, and rendered of but little specific gravity,
by means of the apparatus employed in their air vessels, by the help of
which it could, on an emergency, be raised into the air for a short
time, to cross rivers or broken ground.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

It was propelled by means of a great number of tubes, projecting very
obliquely through the bottom near the ground, through which air was
forced with such prodigious violence, that the resistance of the earth
and atmosphere impelled the machine forwards: in this way it was moved
with astonishing velocity. From all sides of this engine a great number
of double tubes projected, through which two kinds of gas were caused to
issue. These gases uniting at the extremities, produced a flame of
intense heat, like that of our compound blow-pipe on a large scale,
which flame, according to tradition, was ejected with such force, as to
consume every thing for half a mile in every direction. The interior of
the machine was sufficiently capacious to admit men enough to direct its
motions and prepare the gases, and also the materials and apparatus
necessary to their production.

When this terrific engine was completed, Fultria proposed to exterminate
the enemy at once; whereupon all the Good and many of the Wise men
objected to so barbarous a proceeding. They contended that it would be
contrary to the practice

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

of civilized nations, and taking an unjustifiable advantage of the
enemy, by using means of warfare not resorted to by civilized men, and
not much better than poisoning them secretly. They could not consent to
such unheard of barbarity; at best it was justifying the means by the
end, and doing evil that good might come; but it was better to suffer
wrong than to do wrong.

Fultria, on hearing these objections to the use of the means of
emancipation which he had provided with so much labour and ingenuity,
ascended the platform, and addressed the Best Man in Council in defence
of his engine and his views. I found his speech on record, it having
been carefully preserved, notwithstanding the lapse of many centuries. I
translated it with the aid of Surui,, but our language is not
sufficiently nervous to convey the sentiments of this enlightened man
with the energy and conciseness of the original language. I endeavoured
to put down the substance of it in English, but it cannot be expected
that a sailor should do such justice to a fine specimen of Symzonian
eloquence as might be done by some of our professed

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

belles lettres scholars, who pass their lives in studying the
arrangement of words and in admiring the elegance and dignity of their
compositions.

<span class="small">FULTRIA'S SPEECH.</span>

“Best Man of our race! you have been told that it would be barbarous in
us to exterminate the corrupt and contaminating invaders—should we not
be more barbarous to submit to depravement and degradation?

“You have been told that by using the engine I have invented, you would
take an unjustifiable advantage of our foes—do they not take
unjustifiable advantage by employing their superior skill in the
diabolical arts of physical warfare and moral turpitude, to prostrate
the strength and destroy the virtue of our people?

“You have heard it urged, that the practices of civilized men do not
justify the use of such means of warfare, and that the adoption of them
would be the extreme of inhumanity. What then shall we do? Shall we
permit the wicked to gratify their cupidity by plundering the feeble and
devastating the defenceless, with little

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

danger of hardship to themselves, and many allurements of advantage from
success, and thus perpetuate war by rendering the pursuit of it safe and
attractive?

—“No, Sir; it is most humane to cut off the instigators and performers
of inhuman deeds.

“I would show my abhorrence of war by rendering it too horrible to be
encountered.

“I would abolish war by ensuring inevitable destruction to all who
engaged in it.

“I would utterly destroy the invaders that none may hereafter dare to
draw the sword for invasion.

“Let all who take the sword perish by the sword, and war will be known
no more.”

The Council deliberated upon the measures recommended by Fultria, and
upon the miserable situation of the country. They had no support but
their confidence in the Sovereign Ruler of the world, and no hope of
relief but from the favour of his Providence. They feared that a
majority of the people had now become so degenerate in their minds, and
so exasperated by their circumstances, that they would be

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

eager to second the views of Fultria, and engage in the work of
destruction. But, for themselves, with a few exceptions, they remained
steadfast in their virtuous principles and feelings, and could by no
means consent to do what every dictate of reason and religion forbade.
They were accountable for their own acts, not for the acts of others, or
their consequences. They knew that to do right, and that alone, was
safe. If they acted, that must be their rule. The end could not justify
the means.

At last it was thought that the exhibition of this terrible machine,
with all its engines in operation, in sight of the Belzubians and their
adherents, would impress them with such dread and horror, as to drive
them immediately from the country, and effectually deter them from ever
returning. This expedient was therefore tried, and it was completely
successful. The enemy fled with as much precipitancy and haste as did
the Midianites at the sight of the lamps and the noise of the broken
pitchers of Gideon. The land was presently cleared of the Belzubians and
their apostate followers; all intercourse with their country

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

was prohibited; and since that time war had not been known.

Three or four thousand years had now passed away, and doubts were
entertained whether this were matter of genuine history, or an ingenious
allegory, intended to present to the people a glowing picture of the
evils which might follow a gross departure from purity of life and
rectitude of principle. There were very few who could conceive it
possible that human nature had ever sunk to such extreme depravity, and
that so great a proportion of mankind had been enslaved by evil
passions, as to render the wicked the most numerous. In general,
therefore, it was supposed that Fultria, willing to exhibit a
magnificent specimen of his genius, and being somewhat under the
influence of vanity, as *Wise* men often are, fancied it possible for
such a deplorable state of corruption and violence to happen in a long
course of ages, and stated an imaginary case, as an excuse for
constructing his tremendous engine.

I did not express my opinions on this subject, for I thought it most
discreet to conceal the fact, that such a state of things actually
existed in the external world.—

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> My silence,
however, did not avail; for, having put my books, among which were Ree's
Cyclopediæ, Shakspeare's works, Milton's Paradise Lost, and many volumes
of modern history, poetry, and novels, into the hands of Surui, I was
soon called upon for explanations as to what was true, and what
fictitious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](sym15)
