[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Utopia](../../utopia/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sym19) 
[Next](sym21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symzonia; Voyage of Discovery*, by Adam Seaborn (pseud. John Cleves
Symmes?), \[1820\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

### CHAPTER XVII.

<span class="small">The Author loads the Explorer with seal skins, and
sails from Seaborn's Land—Discovers Albicore's Islands.—Transactions at
those islands.—He determines to conceal his discoveries from the
world.—His reasons for this determination, and measures to effect
it.—Sails for Canton.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> continued on the coast of Seaborn's
Land until February 18th, when, having taken on board one hundred
thousand seal skins, which were as many as we could stow without taking
down our machinery, and that I did not think it prudent to do on that
side of the icy hoop, we took our departure from Boneto's station,
leaving all the animals that remained alive on one of the largest
islands, to stock it for the benefit of future adventurers. We steered
due north, and soon lost sight of the coast.

On the second day we fell in with extensive fields of ice, which
compelled us to haul up, first N. W., then W. N. W., and at one time due
west. This was somewhat alarming; but ultimately we realized the

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

correctness of my supposition, that the range of land must keep an open
passage to leeward of it; and on the 1st of March, 1819, I had the
satisfaction to observe in latitude 69° 15´ south, with a clear open
sea.

I now hauled up due east, to run down my longitude with the greater
despatch in this high latitude, where the degrees of longitude are
small. This was fortunate: for by running on this parallel we discovered
on the third day a group of small islands, forming a fine harbour, and
well stocked with seal. Here we anchored. The islands were high broken
rocks of granite and whinstone, apparently dislocated from their
primitive bed, and thrown up by some volcanic eruption, or by the
efforts of elastic gases generated in the 'mid-plane cavity,' to escape
through this outer crust of the earth.

Some scanty tussoc, and a few mountain plants and mosses in the most
favoured spots, formed the only evidence of vegetation observable in
these dreary islands. I named them Albicore's Islands, they having been
first discovered by that vigilant officer; and determined to avail
myself

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

of the discovery to extend the profits of my voyage, by adding as many
seal skins to my cargo as could be stowed in the space occupied by the
steam engine and boiler, which I took to pieces, and placed in the
bottom of the ship for ballast and dunnage. By caulking in the paddle
ports I also gained the place between the double sides, and rendered the
ship to outward observation like an ordinary vessel, ketch rigged.

We remained at Albicore's Islands six weeks, in which time we obtained
seventeen thousand skins. Having taken these on board, and performed the
important ceremony of taking possession of the islands for the United
States, by hoisting the stripes and stars upon them in the usual manner,
I was ready to depart. for Canton.

Being now about to visit a place where I should meet many of my
countrymen and persons full of curiosity from every part of the world,
who would be very inquisitive as to the discoveries I had made, I was
led to reflect maturely on the consequences which might result from a
disclosure of them; and the advantages which might be derived to myself,
my friends, and my officers

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

and people, by withholding all knowledge of them from the world.

At length, having made up my own mind on the subject, I called my
officers and people together, and stated to them that if we should on
our return to the United States, or at Canton, declare the discoveries
we had made, we should in the first place expose ourselves to the charge
of being impostors and outrageous falsifiers; in the second place, our
countrymen, and even the Europeans, who would give us no credit for our
bravery and enterprise, would avail themselves of all the information we
might communicate, to fit out expeditions to Seaborn's Land, and
possibly to Belzubia, and thus reap the harvest of our planting; but,
worse than all, after thus appropriating to themselves the benefits of
our skill and perseverance, they would assert that they had made all
those discoveries, call all those places by new names, and affirm that
we had never been there at all.

On the other hand, by concealing the knowledge of these discoveries in
our own breasts, we could derive extensive benefits therefrom during the
remainder of our lives. To effect this, they had only to bind themselves

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

to me by oath, to keep this matter a. profound secret, and when they had
been a sufficient time on shore, or had spent most of their money, I
would fit out the Explorer, or another and better vessel, under the
command of Mr. Boneto or Mr. Albicore, in which all should share
according to their present standing on my books, and for which I should
have money enough out of my profits from the present voyage. This would
give us all a certain resource for the good things of this life; whereas
if we made our adventures public, the business would be overdone in a
year or two, and we should then have to look to the moon or some of the
planets for room for further discoveries.

All assented to my proposal except Mr. Slim, who objected that an extra
judicial oath would not be binding, that it would be a dereliction of
duty on my part to withhold from mankind the knowledge of the most
valuable part of the world, and finally, that he was principled against
taking oaths. Slim was not open to persuasion. There was no moving him.
He had gloated his imagination with the figure he should cut when, in
consequence of having been an

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

officer with me on this voyage, he should get command of a ship for a
voyage to the sea of wealth, have the merchants crowding round him to
obtain the benefit of the valuable information he possessed, and hear
the delightful sound of 'Captain Slim.'

All my other officers and men took the prescribed obligation, whereby
they bound themselves not to disclose by word, deed, writing, or sign,
any of the discoveries or occurrences of this voyage, after our
departure from off South Georgia, without my consent and approbation
first obtained in writing. Slim's conduct was thought by all to be very
unreasonable, and many of the men would willingly have thrown him
overboard: but, with some difficulty, I pacified them, and persuaded
them that Slim would think better of the matter before we reached
Canton, if not, I would, while there, confine him to his state-room, and
prevent his doing mischief. in the hope that he would become more
rational on the homeward passage. This important matter settled, we bore
up for Canton.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](sym21)
