[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Accad**</span> The high land or mountains, a city in
the land of Shinar. It has been identified with the mounds of Akker Kuf,
some 50 miles to the north of Babylon; but this is doubtful. It was one
of the cities of Nimrod's kingdom ([Gen 10:10](../kjv/gen010.htm#010)).
It stood close to the Euphrates, opposite Sippara. (See SEPHARVAIM.) It
is also the name of the country of which this city was the capital,
namely, northern or upper Babylonia. The Accadians who came from the
"mountains of the east," where the ark rested, attained to a high degree
of civilization. In the Babylonian inscriptions they are called "the
black heads" and "the black faces," in contrast to "the white race" of
Semitic descent. They invented the form of writing in pictorial
hieroglyphics, and also the cuneiform system, in which they wrote many
books partly on papyrus and partly on clay. The Semitic Babylonians
("the white race"), or, as some scholars think, first the Cushites, and
afterwards, as a second immigration, the Semites, invaded and conquered
this country; and then the Accadian language ceased to be a spoken
language, although for the sake of its literary treasures it continued
to be studied by the educated classes of Babylonia. A large portion of
the Ninevite tablets brought to light by Oriental research consists of
interlinear or parallel translations from Accadian into Assyrian; and
thus that long-forgotten language has been recovered by scholars. It
belongs to the class of languages called agglutinative, common to the
Tauranian race; i.e., it consists of words "glued together," without
declension of conjugation. These tablets in a remarkable manner
illustrate ancient history. Among other notable records, they contain an
account of the Creation which closely resembles that given in the book
of Genesis, of the Sabbath as a day of rest, and of the Deluge and its
cause. (See BABYLONIA, CHALDEA.)

<span id="001">**Accho**</span> Sultry or sandy, a town and harbor of
Phoenicia, in the tribe of Asher, but never acquired by them ([Jdg
1:31](../kjv/jdg001.htm#031)). It was known to the ancient Greeks and
Romans by the name of Ptolemais, from Ptolemy the king of Egypt, who
rebuilt it about 100 B.C.. Here Paul landed on his last journey to
Jerusalem ([Act 21:7](../kjv/act021.htm#007)). During the crusades of
the Middle Ages it was called Acra; and subsequently, on account of its
being occupied by the Knights Hospitallers of Jerusalem, it was called
St. Jean d'Acre, or simply Acre.

<span id="002">**Accuser**</span> Satan is styled the "accuser of the
brethren" ([Rev 12:10](../kjv/rev012.htm#010). Compare [Job
1:6](../kjv/job001.htm#006); [Zac 3:1](../kjv/zac003.htm#001)), as
seeking to uphold his influence among men by bringing false charges
against Christians, with the view of weakening their influence and
injuring the cause with which they are identified. He was regarded by
the Jews as the accuser of men before God, laying to their charge the
violations of the law of which they were guilty, and demanding their
punishment. The same Greek word, rendered "accuser," is found in [Joh
8:10](../kjv/joh008.htm#010) (but omitted in the Revised Version); [Act
23:30](../kjv/act023.htm#030), [Act 23:35](../kjv/act023.htm#035); [Act
24:8](../kjv/act024.htm#008); [Act 25:16](../kjv/act025.htm#016), [Act
25:18](../kjv/act025.htm#018), in all of which places it is used of one
who brings a charge against another.

<span id="003">**Aceldama**</span> The name which the Jews gave in their
proper tongue, i.e., in Aramaic, to the field which was purchased with
the money which had been given to the betrayer of our Lord. The word
means "field of blood." It was previously called "the potter's field"
([Mat 27:7](../kjv/mat027.htm#007), [Mat 27:8](../kjv/mat027.htm#008);
[Act 1:19](../kjv/act001.htm#019)), and was appropriated as the
burial-place for strangers. It lies on a narrow level terrace on the
south face of the valley of Hinnom. Its modern name is Hak ed-damm.

<span id="004">**Achaia**</span> The name originally of a narrow strip
of territory in Greece, on the north-west of the Peloponnesus.
Subsequently it was applied by the Romans to the whole Peloponnesus, now
called the Morea, and the south of Greece. It was then one of the two
provinces (Macedonia being the other) into which they divided the
country when it fell under their dominion. It is in this latter enlarged
meaning that the name is always used in the New Testament ([Act
18:12](../kjv/act018.htm#012), [Act 18:27](../kjv/act018.htm#027); [Act
19:21](../kjv/act019.htm#021); [Rom 15:26](../kjv/rom015.htm#026); [Rom
16:5](../kjv/rom016.htm#005), etc.). It was at the time when Luke wrote
the Acts of the Apostles under the proconsul form of government; hence
the appropriate title given to Gallio as the "deputy," i.e., proconsul,
of Achaia ([Act 18:12](../kjv/act018.htm#012)).

<span id="005">**Achaichus**</span> ([Co1
16:17](../kjv/co1016.htm#017)), one of the members of the church of
Corinth who, with Fortunatus and Stephanas, visited Paul while he was at
Ephesus, for the purpose of consulting him on the affairs of the church.
These three probably were the bearers of the letter from Corinth to the
apostle to which he alludes in [Co1 7:1](../kjv/co1007.htm#001).

<span id="006">**Achan**</span> Called also Achar, i.e., one who
troubles ([Ch1 2:7](../kjv/ch1002.htm#007)), in commemoration of his
crime, which brought upon him an awful destruction ([Jos
7:1](../kjv/jos007.htm#001)). On the occasion of the fall of Jericho, he
seized, contrary to the divine command, an ingot of gold, a quantity of
silver, and a costly Babylonish garment, which he hid in his tent.
Joshua was convinced that the defeat which the Israelites afterwards
sustained before Ai was a proof of the divine displeasure on account of
some crime, and he at once adopted means by the use of the lot for
discovering the criminal. It was then found that Achan was guilty, and
he was stoned to death in the valley of Achor. He and all that belonged
to him were then consumed by fire, and a heap of stones was raised over
the ashes.

<span id="007">**Achbor**</span> Gnawing = mouse. (1.) An Edomitish king
([Gen 36:38](../kjv/gen036.htm#038); [Ch1 1:49](../kjv/ch1001.htm#049)).
(2.) One of Josiah's officers sent to the prophetess Huldah to inquire
regarding the newly-discovered book of the law ([Kg2
22:12](../kjv/kg2022.htm#012), [Kg2 22:14](../kjv/kg2022.htm#014)). He
is also called Abdon ([Ch2 34:20](../kjv/ch2034.htm#020)).

<span id="008">**Achish**</span> Angry, perhaps only a general title of
royalty applicable to the Philistine kings. (1.) The king with whom
David sought refuge when he fled from Saul ([Sa1
21:10](../kjv/sa1021.htm#010)). He is called Abimelech in the
superscription of Ps. 34. It was probably this same king to whom David a
second time repaired at the head of a band of 600 warriors, and who
assigned him Ziklag, whence he carried on war against the surrounding
tribes ([Sa1 27:5](../kjv/sa1027.htm#005)). Achish had great confidence
in the valor and fidelity of David ([Sa1 28:1](../kjv/sa1028.htm#001),
[Sa1 28:2](../kjv/sa1028.htm#002)), but at the instigation of his
courtiers did not permit him to go up to battle along with the
Philistine hosts ([Sa1 29:2](../kjv/sa1029.htm#002)). David remained
with Achish a year and four months. (2.) Another king of Gath, probably
grandson of the foregoing, to whom the two servants of Shimei fled. This
led Shimei to go to Gath in pursuit of them, and the consequence was
that Solomon put him to death ([Kg1 2:39](../kjv/kg1002.htm#039)).

<span id="009">**Achmetha**</span> ([Ezr 6:2](../kjv/ezr006.htm#002)),
called Ecbatana by classical writers, the capital of northern Media.
Here was the palace which was the residence of the old Median monarchs,
and of Cyrus and Cambyses. In the time of Ezra, the Persian kings
resided usually at Susa of Babylon. But Cyrus held his court at
Achmetha; and Ezra, writing a century after, correctly mentions the
place where the decree of Cyrus was found.
