[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Church**</span> Derived probably from the Greek
kuriakon (i.e., "the Lord's house"), which was used by ancient authors
for the place of worship. In the New Testament it is the translation of
the Greek word ecclesia , which is synonymous with the Hebrew kahal of
the Old Testament, both words meaning simply an assembly, the character
of which can only be known from the connection in which the word is
found. There is no clear instance of its being used for a place of
meeting or of worship, although in post-apostolic times it early
received this meaning. Nor is this word ever used to denote the
inhabitants of a country united in the same profession, as when we say
the "Church of England," the "Church of Scotland," etc. We find the word
ecclesia used in the following senses in the New Testament: (1.) It is
translated "assembly" in the ordinary classical sense ([Act
19:32](../kjv/act019.htm#032), [Act 19:39](../kjv/act019.htm#039), [Act
19:41](../kjv/act019.htm#041)). (2.) It denotes the whole body of the
redeemed, all those whom the Father has given to Christ, the invisible
catholic church ([Eph 5:23](../kjv/eph005.htm#023), [Eph
5:25](../kjv/eph005.htm#025), [Eph 5:27](../kjv/eph005.htm#027), [Eph
5:29](../kjv/eph005.htm#029); [Heb 12:23](../kjv/heb012.htm#023)). (3.)
A few Christians associated together in observing the ordinances of the
gospel are an eccesia ([Rom 16:5](../kjv/rom016.htm#005); [Col
4:15](../kjv/col004.htm#015)). (4.) All the Christians in a particular
city, whether they assembled together in one place or in several places
for religious worship, were an ecclesia. Thus all the disciples in
Antioch, forming several congregations, were one church ([Act
13:1](../kjv/act013.htm#001)); so also we read of the "church of God at
Corinth" ([Co1 1:2](../kjv/co1001.htm#002)), "the church at Jerusalem"
([Act 8:1](../kjv/act008.htm#001)), "the church of Ephesus" ([Rev
2:1](../kjv/rev002.htm#001)), etc. (5.) The whole body of professing
Christians throughout the world ([Co1 15:9](../kjv/co1015.htm#009); [Gal
1:13](../kjv/gal001.htm#013); [Mat 16:18](../kjv/mat016.htm#018)) are
the church of Christ. The church visible "consists of all those
throughout the world that profess the true religion, together with their
children." It is called "visible" because its members are known and its
assemblies are public. Here there is a mixture of "wheat and chaff," of
saints and sinners. "God has commanded his people to organize themselves
into distinct visible ecclesiastical communities, with constitutions,
laws, and officers, badges, ordinances, and discipline, for the great
purpose of giving visibility to his kingdom, of making known the gospel
of that kingdom, and of gathering in all its elect subjects. Each one of
these distinct organized communities which is faithful to the great King
is an integral part of the visible church, and all together constitute
the catholic or universal visible church." A credible profession of the
true religion constitutes a person a member of this church. This is "the
kingdom of heaven," whose character and progress are set forth in the
parables recorded in Matt. 13. The children of all who thus profess the
true religion are members of the visible church along with their
parents. Children are included in every covenant God ever made with man.
They go along with their parents ([Gen 9:9](../kjv/gen009.htm#009); [Gen
12:1](../kjv/gen012.htm#001); [Gen 17:7](../kjv/gen017.htm#007); [Exo
20:5](../kjv/exo020.htm#005); [Deu 29:10](../kjv/deu029.htm#010)).
Peter, on the day of Pentecost, at the beginning of the New Testament
dispensation, announces the same great principle. "The promise \[just as
to Abraham and his seed the promises were made\] is unto you, and to
your children" ([Act 2:38](../kjv/act002.htm#038), [Act
2:39](../kjv/act002.htm#039)). The children of believing parents are
"holy", i.e., are "saints", a title which designates the members of the
Christian church ([Co1 7:14](../kjv/co1007.htm#014)). (See BAPTISM.) The
church invisible "consists of the whole number of the elect that have
been, are, or shall be gathered into one under Christ, the head
thereof." This is a pure society, the church in which Christ dwells. It
is the body of Christ. it is called "invisible" because the greater part
of those who constitute it are already in heaven or are yet unborn, and
also because its members still on earth cannot certainly be
distinguished. The qualifications of membership in it are internal and
are hidden. It is unseen except by Him who "searches the heart." "The
Lord knoweth them that are his" ([Ti2 2:19](../kjv/ti2002.htm#019)). The
church to which the attributes, prerogatives, and promises appertaining
to Christ's kingdom belong, is a spiritual body consisting of all true
believers, i.e., the church invisible. (1.) Its unity. God has ever had
only one church on earth. We sometimes speak of the Old Testament Church
and of the New Testament church, but they are one and the same. The Old
Testament church was not to be changed but enlarged ([Isa
49:13](../kjv/isa049.htm#013); [Isa 60:1](../kjv/isa060.htm#001)). When
the Jews are at length restored, they will not enter a new church, but
will be grafted again into "their own olive tree" ([Rom
11:18](../kjv/rom011.htm#018); compare [Eph
2:11](../kjv/eph002.htm#011)). The apostles did not set up a new
organization. Under their ministry disciples were "added" to the
"church" already existing ([Act 2:47](../kjv/act002.htm#047)). (2.) Its
universality. It is the "catholic" church; not confined to any
particular country or outward organization, but comprehending all
believers throughout the whole world. (3.) Its perpetuity. It will
continue through all ages to the end of the world. It can never be
destroyed. It is an "everlasting kindgdom."

<span id="001">**Churl**</span> In [Isa 32:5](../kjv/isa032.htm#005)
(R.V. marg., "crafty"), means a deceiver. In [Sa1
25:3](../kjv/sa1025.htm#003), the word churlish denotes a man that is
coarse and ill-natured, or, as the word literally means, "hard." The
same Greek word as used by the LXX. here is found in [Mat
25:24](../kjv/mat025.htm#024), and there is rendered "hard."

<span id="002">**Chushan-rishathaim**</span> Cush of double wickedness,
or governor of two presidencies, the king of Mesopotamia who oppressed
Israel in the generation immediately following Joshua ([Jdg
3:8](../kjv/jdg003.htm#008)). We learn from the Tell-el-Amarna tablets
that Palestine had been invaded by the forces of Aram-naharaim (A.V.,
"Mesopotamia") more than once, long before the Exodus, and that at the
time they were written the king of Aram-naharaim was still intriguing in
Canaan. It is mentioned among the countries which took part in the
attack upon Egypt in the reign of Rameses III. (of the Twentieth
Dynasty), but as its king is not one of the princes stated to have been
conquered by the Pharaoh, it would seem that he did not actually enter
Egypt. As the reign of Rameses III. corresponds with the Israelitish
occupation of Canaan, it is probable that the Egyptian monuments refer
to the oppression of the Israelites by Chushan-rishathaim. Canaan was
still regarded as a province of Egypt, so that, in attacking it
Chushan-rishathaim would have been considered to be attacking Egypt.

<span id="003">**Cilicia**</span> A maritime province in the south-east
of Asia Minor. Tarsus, the birth-place of Paul, was one of its chief
towns, and the seat of a celebrated school of philosophy. Its luxurious
climate attracted to it many Greek residents after its incorporation
with the Macedonian empire. It was formed into a Roman province, 67
B.C.. The Jews of Cilicia had a synagogue at Jerusalem ([Act
6:9](../kjv/act006.htm#009)). Paul visited it soon after his conversion
([Gal 1:21](../kjv/gal001.htm#021); [Act 9:30](../kjv/act009.htm#030)),
and again, on his second missionary journey ([Act
15:41](../kjv/act015.htm#041)), "he went through Syria and Cilicia,
confirming the churches." It was famous for its goat's-hair cloth,
called cilicium. Paul learned in his youth the trade of making tents of
this cloth.

<span id="004">**Cinnamon**</span> Heb. kinamon , the Cinnamomum
zeylanicum of botanists, a tree of the Laurel family, which grows only
in India on the Malabar coast, in Ceylon, and China. There is no trace
of it in Egypt, and it was unknown in Syria. The inner rind when dried
and rolled into cylinders forms the cinnamon of commerce. The fruit and
coarser pieces of bark when boiled yield a fragrant oil. It was one of
the principal ingredients in the holy anointing oil ([Exo
30:23](../kjv/exo030.htm#023)). It is mentioned elsewhere only in [Pro
7:17](../kjv/pro007.htm#017); [Sol 4:14](../kjv/sol004.htm#014); [Rev
18:13](../kjv/rev018.htm#013). The mention of it indicates a very early
and extensive commerce carried on between Palestine and the East.

<span id="005">**Cinnereth**</span> A harp, one of the "fenced cities"
of Naphtali ([Jos 19:35](../kjv/jos019.htm#035); compare [Deu
3:17](../kjv/deu003.htm#017)). It also denotes, apparently, a district
which may have taken its name from the adjacent city or lake of
Gennesaret, anciently called "the sea of Chinnereth" (q.v.), and was
probably that enclosed district north of Tiberias afterwards called "the
plain of Gennesaret." Called Chinneroth (R.V., Chinnereth) [Jos
11:2](../kjv/jos011.htm#002). The phrase "all Cinneroth, with all the
land of Naphtali" in [Kg1 15:20](../kjv/kg1015.htm#020) is parallel to
"the store-houses of the cities of Naphtali" (R.V. marg.) in [Ch2
16:4](../kjv/ch2016.htm#004).

<span id="006">**Circuit**</span> The apparent diurnal revolution of the
sun round the earth ([Psa 19:6](../kjv/psa019.htm#006)), and the changes
of the wind ([Ecc 1:6](../kjv/ecc001.htm#006)). In [Job
22:14](../kjv/job022.htm#014), "in the circuit of heaven" (R.V. marg.,
"on the vault of heaven") means the "arch of heaven," which seems to be
bent over our heads.

<span id="007">**Circumcision**</span> Cutting around. This rite,
practised before, as some think, by divers races, was appointed by God
to be the special badge of his chosen people, an abiding sign of their
consecration to him. It was established as a national ordinance ([Gen
17:10](../kjv/gen017.htm#010), [Gen 17:11](../kjv/gen017.htm#011)). In
compliance with the divine command, Abraham, though ninety-nine years of
age, was circumcised on the same day with Ishmael, who was thirteen
years old ([Gen 17:24](../kjv/gen017.htm#024)). Slaves, whether homeborn
or purchased, were circumcised ([Gen 17:12](../kjv/gen017.htm#012), [Gen
17:13](../kjv/gen017.htm#013)); and all foreigners must have their males
circumcised before they could enjoy the privileges of Jewish citizenship
([Exo 12:48](../kjv/exo012.htm#048)). During the journey through the
wilderness, the practice of circumcision fell into disuse, but was
resumed by the command of Joshua before they entered the Promised Land
([Jos 5:2](../kjv/jos005.htm#002)). It was observed always afterwards
among the tribes of israel, although it is not expressly mentioned from
the time of the settlement in Canaan till the time of Christ, about
1,450 years. The Jews prided themselves in the possession of this
covenant distinction ([Jdg 14:3](../kjv/jdg014.htm#003); [Jdg
15:18](../kjv/jdg015.htm#018); [Sa1 14:6](../kjv/sa1014.htm#006); [Sa1
17:26](../kjv/sa1017.htm#026); [Sa2 1:20](../kjv/sa2001.htm#020); [Eze
31:18](../kjv/eze031.htm#018)). As a rite of the church it ceased when
the New Testament times began ([Gal 6:15](../kjv/gal006.htm#015); [Col
3:11](../kjv/col003.htm#011)). Some Jewish Christians sought to impose
it, however, on the Gentile converts; but this the apostles resolutely
resisted ([Act 15:1](../kjv/act015.htm#001); [Gal
6:12](../kjv/gal006.htm#012)). Our Lord was circumcised, for it "became
him to fulfil all righteousness," as of the seed of Abraham, according
to the flesh; and Paul "took and circumcised" Timothy ([Act
16:3](../kjv/act016.htm#003)), to avoid giving offence to the Jews. It
would render Timothy's labours more acceptable to the Jews. But Paul
would by no means consent to the demand that Titus should be circumcised
([Gal 2:3](../kjv/gal002.htm#003)). The great point for which he
contended was the free admission of uncircumcised Gentiles into the
church. He contended successfully in behalf of Titus, even in Jerusalem.
In the Old Testament a spiritual idea is attached to circumcision. It
was the symbol of purity ([Isa 52:1](../kjv/isa052.htm#001)). We read of
uncircumcised lips ([Exo 6:12](../kjv/exo006.htm#012), [Exo
6:30](../kjv/exo006.htm#030)), ears ([Jer 6:10](../kjv/jer006.htm#010)),
hearts ([Lev 26:41](../kjv/lev026.htm#041)). The fruit of a tree that is
unclean is spoken of as uncircumcised ([Lev
19:23](../kjv/lev019.htm#023)). It was a sign and seal of the covenant
of grace as well as of the national covenant between God and the
Hebrews. (1.) It sealed the promises made to Abraham, which related to
the commonwealth of Israel, national promises. (2.) But the promises
made to Abraham included the promise of redemption ([Gal
3:14](../kjv/gal003.htm#014)), a promise which has come upon us. The
covenant with Abraham was a dispensation or a specific form of the
covenant of grace, and circumcision was a sign and seal of that
covenant. It had a spiritual meaning. It signified purification of the
heart, inward circumcision effected by the Spirit ([Deu
10:16](../kjv/deu010.htm#016); [Deu 30:6](../kjv/deu030.htm#006); [Eze
44:7](../kjv/eze044.htm#007); [Act 7:51](../kjv/act007.htm#051); [Rom
2:28](../kjv/rom002.htm#028); [Col 2:11](../kjv/col002.htm#011)). Under
the Jewish dispensation, church and state were identical. No one could
be a member of the one without also being a member of the other.
Circumcision was a sign and seal of membership in both. Every
circumcised person bore thereby evidence that he was one of the chosen
people, a member of the church of God as it then existed, and
consequently also a member of the Jewish commonwealth.

<span id="008">**Cistern**</span> The rendering of a Hebrew work bor,
which means a receptacle for water conveyed to it; distinguished from
beer, which denotes a place where water rises on the spot ([Jer
2:13](../kjv/jer002.htm#013); [Pro 5:15](../kjv/pro005.htm#015); [Isa
36:16](../kjv/isa036.htm#016)), a fountain. Cisterns are frequently
mentioned in Scripture. The scarcity of springs in Palestine made it
necessary to collect rain-water in reservoirs and cisterns ([Num
21:22](../kjv/num021.htm#022)). (See WELL.) Empty cisterns were
sometimes used as prisons ([Jer 38:6](../kjv/jer038.htm#006); [Lam
3:53](../kjv/lam003.htm#053); [Psa 40:2](../kjv/psa040.htm#002); [Psa
69:15](../kjv/psa069.htm#015)). The "pit" into which Joseph was cast
([Gen 37:24](../kjv/gen037.htm#024)) was a beer or dry well. There are
numerous remains of ancient cisterns in all parts of Palestine.

<span id="009">**Citizenship**</span> The rights and privileges of a
citizen in distinction from a foreigner ([Luk
15:15](../kjv/luk015.htm#015); [Luk 19:14](../kjv/luk019.htm#014); [Act
21:39](../kjv/act021.htm#039)). Under the Mosaic law non-Israelites,
with the exception of the Moabites and the Ammonites and others
mentioned in [Deu 23:1](../kjv/deu023.htm#001), were admitted to the
general privileges of citizenship among the Jews ([Exo
12:19](../kjv/exo012.htm#019); [Lev 24:22](../kjv/lev024.htm#022); [Num
15:15](../kjv/num015.htm#015); [Num 35:15](../kjv/num035.htm#015); [Deu
10:18](../kjv/deu010.htm#018); [Deu 14:29](../kjv/deu014.htm#029); [Deu
16:10](../kjv/deu016.htm#010), [Deu 16:14](../kjv/deu016.htm#014)). The
right of citizenship under the Roman government was granted by the
emperor to individuals, and sometimes to provinces, as a favour or as a
recompense for services rendered to the state, or for a sum of money
([Act 22:28](../kjv/act022.htm#028)). This "freedom" secured privileges
equal to those enjoyed by natives of Rome. Among the most notable of
these was the provision that a man could not be bound or imprisoned
without a formal trial ([Act 22:25](../kjv/act022.htm#025), [Act
22:26](../kjv/act022.htm#026)), or scourged ([Act
16:37](../kjv/act016.htm#037)). All Roman citizens had the right of
appeal to Caesar ([Act 25:11](../kjv/act025.htm#011)).
