[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Cord**</span> Frequently used in its proper sense, for
fastening a tent ([Exo 35:18](../kjv/exo035.htm#018); [Exo
39:40](../kjv/exo039.htm#040)), yoking animals to a cart ([Isa
5:18](../kjv/isa005.htm#018)), binding prisoners ([Jdg
15:13](../kjv/jdg015.htm#013); [Psa 2:3](../kjv/psa002.htm#003); [Psa
129:4](../kjv/psa129.htm#004)), and measuring ground (2 Sam. 8; 2; [Psa
78:55](../kjv/psa078.htm#055)). Figuratively, death is spoken of as the
giving way of the tent-cord ([Job 4:21](../kjv/job004.htm#021). "Is not
their tent-cord plucked up?" R.V.). To gird one's self with a cord was a
token of sorrow and humiliation. To stretch a line over a city meant to
level it with the ground ([Lam 2:8](../kjv/lam002.htm#008)). The "cords
of sin" are the consequences or fruits of sin ([Pro
5:22](../kjv/pro005.htm#022)) A "threefold cord" is a symbol of union
([Ecc 4:12](../kjv/ecc004.htm#012)). The "cords of a man" ([Hos
11:4](../kjv/hos011.htm#004)) means that men employ, in inducing each
other, methods such as are suitable to men, and not "cords" such as oxen
are led by. Isaiah ([Isa 5:18](../kjv/isa005.htm#018)) says, "Woe unto
them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a
cart rope." This verse is thus given in the Chaldee paraphrase: "Woe to
those who begin to sin by little and little, drawing sin by cords of
vanity: these sins grow and increase till they are strong and are like a
cart rope." This may be the true meaning. The wicked at first draw sin
with a slender cord; but by-and-by their sins increase, and they are
drawn after them by a cart rope. Henderson in his commentary says: "The
meaning is that the persons described were not satisfied with ordinary
modes of provoking the Deity, and the consequent ordinary approach of
his vengeance, but, as it were, yoked themselves in the harness of
iniquity, and, putting forth all their strength, drew down upon
themselves, with accelerated speed, the load of punishment which their
sins deserved."

<span id="001">**Coriander**</span> Heb. gad , ([Exo
16:31](../kjv/exo016.htm#031); [Num 11:7](../kjv/num011.htm#007)), seed
to which the manna is likened in its form and colour. It is the
Coriandrum sativum of botanists, an umbelliferous annual plant with a
round stalk, about two feet high. It is widely cultivated in Eastern
countries and in the south of Europe for the sake of its seeds, which
are in the form of a little ball of the size of a peppercorn. They are
used medicinally and as a spice. The Greek name of this plant is korion
or koriannon , whence the name "coriander."

<span id="002">**Corinth**</span> A Grecian city, on the isthmus which
joins the Peloponnesus to the mainland of Greece. It is about 48 miles
west of Athens. The ancient city was destroyed by the Romans (146 B.C.),
and that mentioned in the New Testament was quite a new city, having
been rebuilt about a century afterwards and peopled by a colony of
freedmen from Rome. It became under the Romans the seat of government
for Southern Greece or Achaia ([Act 18:12](../kjv/act018.htm#012)). It
was noted for its wealth, and for the luxurious and immoral and vicious
habits of the people. It had a large mixed population of Romans, Greeks,
and Jews. When Paul first visited the city (A.D. 51 or 52), Gallio, the
brother of Seneca, was proconsul. Here Paul resided for eighteen months
(Acts 18:1-18). Here he first became aquainted with Aquila and
Priscilla, and soon after his departure Apollos came to it from Ephesus.
After an interval he visited it a second time, and remained for three
months ([Act 20:3](../kjv/act020.htm#003)). During this second visit his
Epistle to the Romans was written (probably A.D. 55). Although there
were many Jewish converts at Corinth, yet the Gentile element prevailed
in the church there. Some have argued from [Co2
12:14](../kjv/co2012.htm#014); [Co2 13:1](../kjv/co2013.htm#001), that
Paul visited Corinth a third time (i.e., that on some unrecorded
occasion he visited the city between what are usually called the first
and second visits). But the passages referred to only indicate Paul's
intention to visit Corinth (compare [Co1 16:5](../kjv/co1016.htm#005),
where the Greek present tense denotes an intention), an intention which
was in some way frustrated. We can hardly suppose that such a visit
could have been made by the apostle without more distinct reference to
it.

<span id="003">**Corinthians, First Epistle to the**</span> Was written
from Ephesus ([Co1 16:8](../kjv/co1016.htm#008)) about the time of the
Passover in the third year of the apostle's sojourn there ([Act
19:10](../kjv/act019.htm#010); [Act 20:31](../kjv/act020.htm#031)), and
when he had formed the purpose to visit Macedonia, and then return to
Corinth (probably A.D. 57). The news which had reached him, however,
from Corinth frustrated his plan. He had heard of the abuses and
contentions that had arisen among them, first from Apollos ([Act
19:1](../kjv/act019.htm#001)), and then from a letter they had written
him on the subject, and also from some of the "household of Chloe," and
from Stephanas and his two friends who had visited him ([Co1
1:11](../kjv/co1001.htm#011); [Co1 16:17](../kjv/co1016.htm#017)). Paul
thereupon wrote this letter, for the purpose of checking the factious
spirit and correcting the erroneous opinions that has sprung up among
them, and remedying the many abuses and disorderly practices that
prevailed. Titus and a brother whose name is not given were probably the
bearers of the letter ([Co2 2:13](../kjv/co2002.htm#013); [Co2
8:6](../kjv/co2008.htm#006), [Co2 8:16](../kjv/co2008.htm#016)). The
epistle may be divided into four parts: (1.) The apostle deals with the
subject of the lamentable divisions and party strifes that had arisen
among them (1 Cor. 1-4). (2.) He next treats of certain cases of
immorality that had become notorious among them. They had apparently set
at nought the very first principles of morality ([Co1
5:1](../kjv/co1005.htm#001); 6). (3.) In the third part he discusses
various questions of doctrine and of Christian ethics in reply to
certain communications they had made to him. He especially rectifies
certain flagrant abuses regarding the celebration of the Lord's supper
(1 Cor. 7-14). (4.) The concluding part (1 Cor. 15; 16) contains an
elaborate defense of the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, which
had been called in question by some among them, followed by some general
instructions, intimations, and greetings. This epistle "shows the
powerful selfcontrol of the apostle in spite of his physical weakness,
his distressed circumstances, his incessant troubles, and his emotional
nature. It was written, he tells us, in bitter anguish, 'out of much
affliction and pressure of heart... and with streaming eyes' ([Co2
2:4](../kjv/co2002.htm#004)); yet he restrained the expression of his
feelings, and wrote with a dignity and holy calm which he thought most
calculated to win back his erring children. It gives a vivid picture of
the early church... It entirely dissipates the dream that the apostolic
church was in an exceptional condition of holiness of life or purity of
doctrine." The apostle in this epistle unfolds and applies great
principles fitted to guide the church of all ages in dealing with the
same and kindred evils in whatever form they may appear. This is one of
the epistles the authenticity of which has never been called in question
by critics of any school, so many and so conclusive are the evidences of
its Pauline origin. The subscription to this epistle states erroneously
in the Authorized Version that it was written at Philippi. This error
arose from a mistranslation of [Co1 16:5](../kjv/co1016.htm#005), "For I
do pass through Macedonia," which was interpreted as meaning, "I am
passing through Macedonia." In [Co1 16:8](../kjv/co1016.htm#008) he
declares his intention of remaining some time longer in Ephesus. After
tha, his purpose is to "pass through Macedonia."

<span id="004">**Corinthians, Second Epistle to the**</span> Shortly
after writing his first letter to the Corinthians, Paul left Ephesus,
where intense excitement had been aroused against him, the evidence of
his great success, and proceeded to Macedonia. Pursuing the usual route,
he reached Troas, the port of departure for Europe. Here he expected to
meet with Titus, whom he had sent from Ephesus to Corinth, with tidings
of the effects produced on the church there by the first epistle; but
was disappointed ([Co1 16:9](../kjv/co1016.htm#009); [Co2
1:8](../kjv/co2001.htm#008); [Co2 2:12](../kjv/co2002.htm#012), [Co2
2:13](../kjv/co2002.htm#013)). He then left Troas and proceeded to
Macedonia; and at Philippi, where he tarried, he was soon joined by
Titus ([Co2 7:6](../kjv/co2007.htm#006), [Co2
7:7](../kjv/co2007.htm#007)), who brought him good news from Corinth,
and also by Timothy. Under the influence of the feelings awakened in his
mind by the favourable report which Titus brought back from Corinth,
this second epistle was written. It was probably written at Philippi,
or, as some think, Thessalonica, early in the year A.D. 58, and was sent
to Corinth by Titus. This letter he addresses not only to the church in
Corinth, but also to the saints in all Achaia, i.e., in Athens,
Cenchrea, and other cities in Greece. The contents of this epistle may
be thus arranged: (1.) Paul speaks of his spiritual labours and course
of life, and expresses his warm affection toward the Corinthians (2 Cor.
1-7). (2.) He gives specific directions regarding the collection that
was to be made for their poor brethren in Judea (2 Cor. 8; [Co2
9:1](../kjv/co2009.htm#001)). (3.) He defends his own apostolic claim (2
Cor. 10-13), and justifies himself from the charges and insinuations of
the false teacher and his adherents. This epistle, it has been well
said, shows the individuallity of the apostle more than any other.
"Human weakness, spiritual strength, the deepest tenderness of
affection, wounded feeling, sternness, irony, rebuke, impassioned
self-vindication, humility, a just self-respect, zeal for the welfare of
the weak and suffering, as well as for the progress of the church of
Christ and for the of the church of Christ and for the spiritual
advancement of its members, are all displayed in turn in the course of
his appeal." Lias, Second Corinthians. Of the effects produced on the
Corinthian church by this epistle we have no definite information. We
know that Paul visited Corinth after he had written it ([Act
20:2](../kjv/act020.htm#002), [Act 20:3](../kjv/act020.htm#003)), and
that on that occasion he tarried there for three months. In his letter
to Rome, written at this time, he sent salutations from some of the
principal members of the church to the Romans.

<span id="005">**Cormorant**</span> ([Lev 11:17](../kjv/lev011.htm#017);
[Deu 14:17](../kjv/deu014.htm#017)), Heb. shalak , "plunging," or
"darting down (the Phalacrocorax carbo), ranked among the "unclean"
birds; of the same family group as the pelican. It is a "plunging" bird,
and is common on the coasts and the island seas of Palestine. Some think
the Hebrew word should be rendered "gannet" (Sula bassana, "the solan
goose"); others that it is the "tern" or "sea swallow," which also
frequents the coasts of Palestine as well as the Sea of Galilee and the
Jordan valley during several months of the year. But there is no reason
to depart from the ordinary rendering. In [Isa
34:11](../kjv/isa034.htm#011); [Zep 2:14](../kjv/zep002.htm#014) (but in
R.V., "pelican") the Hebrew word rendered by this name is ka'ath . It is
translated "pelican" (q.v.) in [Psa 102:6](../kjv/psa102.htm#006). The
word literally means the "vomiter," and the pelican is so called from
its vomiting the shells and other things which it has voraciously
swallowed. (See PELICAN.)

<span id="006">**Corn**</span> The word so rendered (dagan) in [Gen
27:28](../kjv/gen027.htm#028), [Gen 27:37](../kjv/gen027.htm#037); [Num
18:27](../kjv/num018.htm#027); [Deu 28:51](../kjv/deu028.htm#051); [Lam
2:12](../kjv/lam002.htm#012) is a general term representing all the
commodities we usually describe by the words corn, grain, seeds, peas,
beans. With this corresponds the use of the word in [Joh
12:24](../kjv/joh012.htm#024). In [Gen 41:35](../kjv/gen041.htm#035),
[Gen 41:49](../kjv/gen041.htm#049); [Pro 11:26](../kjv/pro011.htm#026);
[Joe 2:24](../kjv/joe002.htm#024) ("wheat"), the word thus translated
(bar; i.e., "winnowed") means corn purified from chaff. With this
corresponds the use of the word in the New Testament ([Mat
3:12](../kjv/mat003.htm#012); [Luk 3:17](../kjv/luk003.htm#017); [Act
7:12](../kjv/act007.htm#012)). In [Psa 65:13](../kjv/psa065.htm#013) it
means "growing corn." In [Gen 42:1](../kjv/gen042.htm#001), [Gen
42:2](../kjv/gen042.htm#002), [Gen 42:19](../kjv/gen042.htm#019); [Jos
9:14](../kjv/jos009.htm#014); [Neh 10:31](../kjv/neh010.htm#031)
("victuals"), the word (sheber; i.e., "broken," i.e., grist) denotes
generally victuals, provisions, and corn as a principal article of food.
From the time of Solomon, corn began to be exported from Palestine ([Eze
27:17](../kjv/eze027.htm#017); [Amo 8:5](../kjv/amo008.htm#005)).
"Plenty of corn" was a part of Issac's blessing conferred upon Jacob
([Gen 27:28](../kjv/gen027.htm#028); compare [Psa
65:13](../kjv/psa065.htm#013)).

<span id="007">**Cornelius**</span> A centurion whose history is
narrated in Acts 10. He was a "devout man," and like the centurion of
Capernaum, believed in the God of Israel. His residence at Caesrea
probably brought him into contact with Jews who communicated to him
their expectations regarding the Messiah; and thus he was prepared to
welcome the message Peter brought him. He became the first fruit of the
Gentile world to Christ. He and his family were baptized and admitted
into the Christian church ([Act 10:1](../kjv/act010.htm#001), [Act
10:44](../kjv/act010.htm#044)). (See CENTURION.)

<span id="008">**Corner**</span> The angle of a house ([Job
1:19](../kjv/job001.htm#019)) or a street ([Pro
7:8](../kjv/pro007.htm#008)). "Corners" in [Neh
9:22](../kjv/neh009.htm#022) denotes the various districts of the
promised land allotted to the Israelites. In [Num
24:17](../kjv/num024.htm#017), the "corners of Moab" denotes the whole
land of Moab. The "corner of a field" ([Lev
19:9](../kjv/lev019.htm#009); [Lev 23:22](../kjv/lev023.htm#022)) is its
extreme part, which was not to be reaped. The Jews were prohibited from
cutting the "corners," i.e., the extremities, of the hair and whiskers
running round the ears ([Lev 19:27](../kjv/lev019.htm#027); [Lev
21:5](../kjv/lev021.htm#005)). The "four corners of the earth" in [Isa
11:12](../kjv/isa011.htm#012) and [Eze 7:2](../kjv/eze007.htm#002)
denotes the whole land. The "corners of the streets" mentioned in [Mat
6:5](../kjv/mat006.htm#005) means the angles where streets meet so as to
form a square or place of public resort. The corner gate of Jerusalem
([Kg2 14:13](../kjv/kg2014.htm#013); [Ch2 26:9](../kjv/ch2026.htm#009))
was on the north-west side of the city. Corner-stone ([Job
38:6](../kjv/job038.htm#006); [Isa 28:16](../kjv/isa028.htm#016)), a
block of great importance in binding together the sides of a building.
The "head of the corner" ([Psa 118:22](../kjv/psa118.htm#022), [Psa
118:23](../kjv/psa118.htm#023)) denotes the coping, the "coign of
vantage", i.e., the topstone of a building. But the word "corner stone"
is sometimes used to denote some person of rank and importance ([Isa
28:16](../kjv/isa028.htm#016)). It is applied to our Lord, who was set
in highest honour ([Mat 21:42](../kjv/mat021.htm#042)). He is also
styled "the chief corner stone" ([Eph 2:20](../kjv/eph002.htm#020); [Pe1
2:6](../kjv/pe1002.htm#006)). When Zechariah ([Zac
10:4](../kjv/zac010.htm#004)), speaking of Judah, says, "Out of him came
forth the corner," he is probably to be understood as ultimately
referring to the Messiah as the "corner stone." (See TEMPLE, SOLOMON's.)

<span id="009">**Cornet**</span> Heb. shophar , "brightness," with
reference to the clearness of its sound ([Ch1
15:28](../kjv/ch1015.htm#028); [Ch2 15:14](../kjv/ch2015.htm#014); [Psa
98:6](../kjv/psa098.htm#006); [Hos 5:8](../kjv/hos005.htm#008)). It is
usually rendered in the Authorized Version "trumpet." It denotes the
long and straight horn, about eighteen inches long. The words of Joel,
"Blow the trumpet," literally, "Sound the cornet," refer to the festival
which was the preparation for the day of Atonement. In [Dan
3:5](../kjv/dan003.htm#005), [Dan 3:7](../kjv/dan003.htm#007), [Dan
3:10](../kjv/dan003.htm#010), [Dan 3:15](../kjv/dan003.htm#015), the
word (keren) so rendered is a curved horn. The word "cornet" in [Sa2
6:5](../kjv/sa2006.htm#005) (Heb. mena'an'im , occurring only here\] was
some kind of instrument played by being shaken like the Egyptian
sistrum, consisting of rings or bells hung loosely on iron rods.
