[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Chaldea**</span> The southern portion of Babylonia,
Lower Mesopotamia, lying chiefly on the right bank of the Euphrates, but
commonly used of the whole of the Mesopotamian plain. The Hebrew name is
Kasdim, which is usually rendered "Chaldeans" ([Jer
50:10](../kjv/jer050.htm#010); [Jer 51:24](../kjv/jer051.htm#024), [Jer
51:35](../kjv/jer051.htm#035)). The country so named is a vast plain
formed by the deposits of the Euphrates and the Tigris, extending to
about 400 miles along the course of these rivers, and about 100 miles in
average breadth. "In former days the vast plains of Babylon were
nourished by a complicated system of canals and water-courses, which
spread over the surface of the country like a network. The wants of a
teeming population were supplied by a rich soil, not less bountiful than
that on the banks of the Egyptian Nile. Like islands rising from a
golden sea of waving corn stood frequent groves of palmtrees and
pleasant gardens, affording to the idler or traveller their grateful and
highly-valued shade. Crowds of passengers hurried along the dusty roads
to and from the busy city. The land was rich in corn and wine." Recent
discoveries, more especially in Babylonia, have thrown much light on the
history of the Hebrew patriarchs, and have illustrated or confirmed the
Biblical narrative in many points. The ancestor of the Hebrew people,
Abram, was, we are told, born at "Ur of the Chaldees." "Chaldees" is a
mistranslation of the Hebrew Kasdim, Kasdim being the Old Testament name
of the Babylonians, while the Chaldees were a tribe who lived on the
shores of the Persian Gulf, and did not become a part of the Babylonian
population till the time of Hezekiah. Ur was one of the oldest and most
famous of the Babylonian cities. Its site is now called Mugheir, or
Mugayyar, on the western bank of the Euphrates, in Southern Babylonia.
About a century before the birth of Abram it was ruled by a powerful
dynasty of kings. Their conquests extended to Elam on the one side, and
to the Lebanon on the other. They were followed by a dynasty of princes
whose capital was Babylon, and who seem to have been of South Arabian
origin. The founder of the dynasty was Sumu-abi ("Shem is my father").
But soon afterwards Babylonia fell under Elamite dominion. The kings of
Babylon were compelled to acknowledge the supremacy of Elam, and a rival
kingdom to that of Babylon, and governed by Elamites, sprang up at
Larsa, not far from Ur, but on the opposite bank of the river. In the
time of Abram the king of Larsa was Eri-Aku, the son of an Elamite
prince, and Eri-Aku, as has long been recognized, is the Biblical
"Arioch king of Ellasar" ([Gen 14:1](../kjv/gen014.htm#001)). The
contemporaneous king of Babylon in the north, in the country termed
Shinar in Scripture, was Khammu-rabi. (See BABYLON; ABRAHAM; AMRAPHEL.)

<span id="001">**Chaldee Language**</span> Employed by the sacred
writers in certain portions of the Old Testament, viz., [Dan
2:4](../kjv/dan002.htm#004), [Dan 2:28](../kjv/dan002.htm#028); Ezra
4:8-6:18; [Ezr 7:12](../kjv/ezr007.htm#012); [Gen
31:46](../kjv/gen031.htm#046); [Jer 10:11](../kjv/jer010.htm#011). It is
the Aramaic dialect, as it is sometimes called, as distinguished from
the Hebrew dialect. It was the language of commerce and of social
intercourse in Western Asia, and after the Exile gradually came to be
the popular language of Palestine. It is called "Syrian" in [Kg2
18:26](../kjv/kg2018.htm#026). Some isolated words in this language are
preserved in the New Testament ([Mat 5:22](../kjv/mat005.htm#022); [Mat
6:24](../kjv/mat006.htm#024); [Mat 16:17](../kjv/mat016.htm#017); [Mat
27:46](../kjv/mat027.htm#046); [Mar 3:17](../kjv/mar003.htm#017); [Mar
5:41](../kjv/mar005.htm#041); [Mar 7:34](../kjv/mar007.htm#034); [Mar
14:36](../kjv/mar014.htm#036); [Act 1:19](../kjv/act001.htm#019); [Co1
16:22](../kjv/co1016.htm#022)). These are specimens of the vernacular
language of Palestine at that period. The term "Hebrew" was also
sometimes applied to the Chaldee because it had become the language of
the Hebrews ([Joh 5:2](../kjv/joh005.htm#002); [Joh
19:20](../kjv/joh019.htm#020)).

<span id="002">**Chaldees**</span> Or Chaldeans, the inhabitants of the
country of which Babylon was the capital. They were so called till the
time of the Captivity (2 Kings 25; [Isa 13:19](../kjv/isa013.htm#019);
[Isa 23:13](../kjv/isa023.htm#013)), when, particularly in the Book of
Daniel ([Dan 5:30](../kjv/dan005.htm#030); [Dan
9:1](../kjv/dan009.htm#001)), the name began to be used with special
reference to a class of learned men ranked with the magicians and
astronomers. These men cultivated the ancient Cushite language of the
original inhabitants of the land, for they had a "learning" and a
"tongue" ([Dan 1:4](../kjv/dan001.htm#004)) of their own. The common
language of the country at that time had become assimilated to the
Semitic dialect, especially through the influence of the Assyrians, and
was the language that was used for all civil purposes. The Chaldeans
were the learned class, interesting themselves in science and religion,
which consisted, like that of the ancient Arabians and Syrians, in the
worship of the heavenly bodies. There are representations of this
priestly class, of magi and diviners, on the walls of the Assyrian
palaces.

<span id="003">**Chamber**</span> "On the wall," which the Shunammite
prepared for the prophet Elisha ([Kg2 4:10](../kjv/kg2004.htm#010)), was
an upper chamber over the porch through the hall toward the street. This
was the "guest chamber" where entertainments were prepared ([Mar
14:14](../kjv/mar014.htm#014)). There were also "chambers within
chambers" ([Kg1 22:25](../kjv/kg1022.htm#025); [Kg2
9:2](../kjv/kg2009.htm#002)). To enter into a chamber is used
metaphorically of prayer and communion with God ([Isa
26:20](../kjv/isa026.htm#020)). The "chambers of the south" ([Job
9:9](../kjv/job009.htm#009)) are probably the constelations of the
southern hemisphere. The "chambers of imagery", i.e., chambers painted
with images, as used by Ezekiel ([Eze 8:12](../kjv/eze008.htm#012)), is
an expression denoting the vision the prophet had of the abominations
practised by the Jews in Jerusalem.

<span id="004">**Chambering**</span> ([Rom
13:13](../kjv/rom013.htm#013)), wantonness, impurity.

<span id="005">**Chamberlain**</span> A confidential servant of the king
([Gen 37:36](../kjv/gen037.htm#036); [Gen 39:1](../kjv/gen039.htm#001)).
In [Rom 16:23](../kjv/rom016.htm#023) mention is made of "Erastus the
chamberlain." Here the word denotes the treasurer of the city, or the
qucestor, as the Romans styled him. He is almost the only convert from
the higher ranks of whom mention is made (compare [Act
17:34](../kjv/act017.htm#034)). Blastus, Herod's "chamberlain" ([Act
12:20](../kjv/act012.htm#020)), was his personal attendant or
valet-de-chambre. The Hebrew word saris, thus translated in [Est
1:10](../kjv/est001.htm#010), [Est 1:15](../kjv/est001.htm#015); [Est
2:3](../kjv/est002.htm#003), [Est 2:14](../kjv/est002.htm#014), [Est
2:21](../kjv/est002.htm#021), etc., properly means an eunuch (as in the
marg.), as it is rendered in [Isa 39:7](../kjv/isa039.htm#007); [Isa
56:3](../kjv/isa056.htm#003).

<span id="006">**Chameleon**</span> A species of lizard which has the
faculty of changing the colour of its skin. It is ranked among the
unclean animals in [Lev 11:30](../kjv/lev011.htm#030), where the Hebrew
word so translated is coah (R.V., "land crocodile"). In the same verse
the Hebrew tanshemeth, rendered in Authorized Version "mole" is in
Revised Version "chameleon," which is the correct rendering. This animal
is very common in Egypt and in the Holy Land, especially in the Jordan
valley.

<span id="007">**Chamois**</span> Only in [Deu
14:5](../kjv/deu014.htm#005) (Heb. zemer ), an animal of the deer or
gazelle species. It bears this Hebrew name from its leaping or
springing. The animal intended is probably the wild sheep (Ovis
tragelephus), which is still found in Sinai and in the broken ridges of
Stony Arabia. The LXX. and Vulgate render the word by camelopardus,
i.e., the giraffe; but this is an animal of Central Africa, and is not
at all known in Syria.

<span id="008">**Champion**</span> ([Sa1 17:4](../kjv/sa1017.htm#004),
[Sa1 17:23](../kjv/sa1017.htm#023)), properly "the man between the two,"
denoting the position of Goliath between the two camps. Single combats
of this kind at the head of armies were common in ancient times. In [Sa1
17:51](../kjv/sa1017.htm#051) this word is the rendering of a different
Hebrew word, and properly denotes "a mighty man."

<span id="009">**Chance**</span> ([Luk 10:31](../kjv/luk010.htm#031)).
"It was not by chance that the priest came down by that road at that
time, but by a specific arrangement and in exact fulfilment of a plan;
not the plan of the priest, nor the plan of the wounded traveller, but
the plan of God. By coincidence (Gr. sungkuria ) the priest came down,
that is, by the conjunction of two things, in fact, which were
previously constituted a pair in the providence of God. In the result
they fell together according to the omniscient Designer's plan. This is
the true theory of the divine government." Compare the meeting of Philip
with the Ethiopian ([Act 8:26](../kjv/act008.htm#026), [Act
8:27](../kjv/act008.htm#027)). There is no "chance" in God's empire.
"Chance" is only another word for our want of knowledge as to the way in
which one event falls in with another ([Sa1 6:9](../kjv/sa1006.htm#009);
[Ecc 9:11](../kjv/ecc009.htm#011)).
