[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Jabin**</span> Discerner; the wise. (1.) A king of
Hazor, at the time of the entrance of Israel into Canaan ([Jos
11:1](../kjv/jos011.htm#001)), whose overthrow and that of the northern
chief with whom he had entered into a confederacy against Joshua was the
crowning act in the conquest of the land ([Jos
11:21](../kjv/jos011.htm#021); compare [Jos
14:6](../kjv/jos014.htm#006)). This great battle, fought at Lake Merom,
was the last of Joshua's battles of which we have any record. Here for
the first time the Israelites encountered the iron chariots and horses
of the Canaanites. (2.) Another king of Hazor, called "the king of
Canaan," who overpowered the Israelites of the north one hundred and
sixty years after Joshua's death, and for twenty years held them in
painful subjection. The whole population were paralyzed with fear, and
gave way to hopeless despondency ([Jdg 5:6](../kjv/jdg005.htm#006)),
till Deborah and Barak aroused the national spirit, and gathering
together ten thousand men, gained a great and decisive victory over
Jabin in the plain of Esdraelon ([Jdg 4:10](../kjv/jdg004.htm#010);
compare [Psa 83:9](../kjv/psa083.htm#009)). This was the first great
victory Israel had gained since the days of Joshua. They never needed to
fight another battle with the Canaanites ([Jdg
5:31](../kjv/jdg005.htm#031)).

<span id="001">**Jabneel**</span> Built by God. (1.) A town in the north
boundary of Judah ([Jos 15:11](../kjv/jos015.htm#011)), called
afterwards by the Greeks Jamnia, the modern Yebna, 11 miles south of
Jaffa. After the fall of Jerusalem (A.D. 70), it became one of the most
populous cities of Judea, and the seat of a celebrated school. (2.) A
town on the border of Naphtali ([Jos 19:33](../kjv/jos019.htm#033)). Its
later name was Kefr Yemmah, "the village by the sea," on the south shore
of Lake Merom.

<span id="002">**Jabneh**</span> Building, ([Ch2
26:6](../kjv/ch2026.htm#006)), identical with Jabneel ([Jos
15:11](../kjv/jos015.htm#011)).

<span id="003">**Jachan**</span> Mourner, one of the chief Gadite
"brothers" in Bashan ([Ch1 5:13](../kjv/ch1005.htm#013)).

<span id="004">**Jachin**</span> Firm. (1.) The fourth son of Simeon
([Gen 46:10](../kjv/gen046.htm#010)), called also Jarib ([Ch1
4:24](../kjv/ch1004.htm#024)). (2.) The head of one of the courses (the
twenty-first) of priests ([Ch1 24:17](../kjv/ch1024.htm#017)). (3.) One
of the priests who returned from the Exile ([Ch1
9:10](../kjv/ch1009.htm#010)).

<span id="005">**Jachin and Boaz**</span> The names of two brazen
columns set up in Solomon's temple ([Kg1 7:15](../kjv/kg1007.htm#015)).
Each was eighteen cubits high and twelve in circumference ([Jer
52:21](../kjv/jer052.htm#021), [Jer 52:23](../kjv/jer052.htm#023); [Kg1
7:17](../kjv/kg1007.htm#017)). They had doubtless a symbolical import.

<span id="006">**Jacinth**</span> Properly a flower of a reddish blue or
deep purple (hyacinth), and hence a precious stone of that colour ([Rev
21:20](../kjv/rev021.htm#020)). It has been supposed to designate the
same stone as the ligure (Heb. leshem ) mentioned in [Exo
28:19](../kjv/exo028.htm#019) as the first stone of the third row in the
high priest's breast-plate. In [Rev 9:17](../kjv/rev009.htm#017) the
word is simply descriptive of colour.

<span id="007">**Jacob**</span> One who follows on another's heels;
supplanter, ([Gen 25:26](../kjv/gen025.htm#026); [Gen
27:36](../kjv/gen027.htm#036); [Hos 12:2](../kjv/hos012.htm#002)), the
second born of the twin sons of Isaac by Rebekah. He was born probably
at Lahai-roi, when his father was fifty-nine and Abraham one hundred and
fifty-nine years old. Like his father, he was of a quiet and gentle
disposition, and when he grew up followed the life of a shepherd, while
his brother Esau became an enterprising hunter. His dealing with Esau,
however, showed much mean selfishness and cunning ([Gen
25:29](../kjv/gen025.htm#029)). When Isaac was about 160 years of age,
Jacob and his mother conspired to deceive the aged patriarch (Gen. 27),
with the view of procuring the transfer of the birthright to himself.
The birthright secured to him who possessed it (1.) superior rank in his
family ([Gen 49:3](../kjv/gen049.htm#003)); (2.) a double portion of the
paternal inheritance ([Deu 21:17](../kjv/deu021.htm#017)); (3.) the
priestly office in the family ([Num 8:17](../kjv/num008.htm#017)); and
(4.) the promise of the Seed in which all nations of the earth were to
be blessed ([Gen 22:18](../kjv/gen022.htm#018)). Soon after his
acquisition of his father's blessing (Gen. 27), Jacob became conscious
of his guilt; and afraid of the anger of Esau, at the suggestion of
Rebekah Isaac sent him away to Haran, 400 miles or more, to find a wife
among his cousins, the family of Laban, the Syrian (Gen. 28). There he
met with Rachel (Gen. 29). Laban would not consent to give him his
daughter in marriage till he had served seven years; but to Jacob these
years "seemed but a few days, for the love he had to her." But when the
seven years were expired, Laban craftily deceived Jacob, and gave him
his daughter Leah. Other seven years of service had to be completed
probably before he obtained the beloved Rachel. But "life-long sorrow,
disgrace, and trials, in the retributive providence of God, followed as
a consequence of this double union." At the close of the fourteen years
of service, Jacob desired to return to his parents, but at the entreaty
of Laban he tarried yet six years with him, tending his flocks ([Gen
31:41](../kjv/gen031.htm#041)). He then set out with his family and
property "to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan" (Gen. 31).
Laban was angry when he heard that Jacob had set out on his journey, and
pursued after him, overtaking him in seven days. The meeting was of a
painful kind. After much recrimination and reproach directed against
Jacob, Laban is at length pacified, and taking an affectionate farewell
of his daughters, returns to his home in Padanaram. And now all
connection of the Israelites with Mesopotamia is at an end. Soon after
parting with Laban he is met by a company of angels, as if to greet him
on his return and welcome him back to the Land of Promise ([Gen
32:1](../kjv/gen032.htm#001), [Gen 32:2](../kjv/gen032.htm#002)). He
called the name of the place Mahanaim, i.e., "the double camp," probably
his own camp and that of the angels. The vision of angels was the
counterpart of that he had formerly seen at Bethel, when, twenty years
before, the weary, solitary traveler, on his way to Padan-aram, saw the
angels of God ascending and descending on the ladder whose top reached
to heaven ([Gen 28:12](../kjv/gen028.htm#012)). He now hears with dismay
of the approach of his brother Esau with a band of 400 men to meet him.
In great agony of mind he prepares for the worst. He feels that he must
now depend only on God, and he betakes himself to him in earnest prayer,
and sends on before him a munificent present to Esau, "a present to my
lord Esau from the servant Jacob." Jacob's family were then transported
across the Jabbok; but he himself remained behind, spending the night in
communion with God. While thus engaged, there appeared one in the form
of a man who wrestled with him. In this mysterious contest Jacob
prevailed, and as a memorial of it his name was changed to Israel
(wrestler with God); and the place where this occurred he called Peniel,
"for", said he, "I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved"
([Gen 32:25](../kjv/gen032.htm#025)). After this anxious night, Jacob
went on his way, halting, mysteriously weakened by the conflict, but
strong in the assurance of the divine favour. Esau came forth and met
him; but his spirit of revenge was appeased, and the brothers met as
friends, and during the remainder of their lives they maintained
friendly relations. After a brief sojourn at Succoth, Jacob moved
forward and pitched his tent near Shechem (q.v.), [Gen
33:18](../kjv/gen033.htm#018); but at length, under divine directions,
he moved to Bethel, where he made an altar unto God ([Gen
35:6](../kjv/gen035.htm#006), [Gen 35:7](../kjv/gen035.htm#007)), and
where God appeared to him and renewed the Abrahamic covenant. While
journeying from Bethel to Ephrath (the Canaanitish name of Bethlehem),
Rachel died in giving birth to her second son Benjamin ([Gen
35:16](../kjv/gen035.htm#016)), fifteen or sixteen years after the birth
of Joseph. He then reached the old family residence at Mamre, to wait on
the dying bed of his father Isaac. The complete reconciliation between
Esau and Jacob was shown by their uniting in the burial of the patriarch
([Gen 35:27](../kjv/gen035.htm#027)). Jacob was soon after this deeply
grieved by the loss of his beloved son Joseph through the jealousy of
his brothers ([Gen 37:33](../kjv/gen037.htm#033)). Then follows the
story of the famine, and the successive goings down into Egypt to buy
corn (Gen. 42), which led to the discovery of the long-lost Joseph, and
the patriarch's going down with all his household, numbering about
seventy souls ([Exo 1:5](../kjv/exo001.htm#005); [Deu
10:22](../kjv/deu010.htm#022); [Act 7:14](../kjv/act007.htm#014)), to
sojourn in the land of Goshen. Here Jacob, "after being strangely tossed
about on a very rough ocean, found at last a tranquil harbour, where all
the best affections of his nature were gently exercised and largely
unfolded" (Gen. 48). At length the end of his checkered course draws
nigh, and he summons his sons to his bedside that he may bless them.
Among his last words he repeats the story of Rachel's death, although
forty years had passed away since that event took place, as tenderly as
if it had happened only yesterday; and when "he had made an end of
charging his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up
the ghost" ([Gen 49:33](../kjv/gen049.htm#033)). His body was embalmed
and carried with great pomp into the land of Canaan, and buried beside
his wife Leah in the cave of Machpelah, according to his dying charge.
There, probably, his embalmed body remains to this day ([Gen
50:1](../kjv/gen050.htm#001)). (See HEBRON.) The history of Jacob is
referred to by the prophets Hosea ([Hos 12:3](../kjv/hos012.htm#003),
[Hos 12:4](../kjv/hos012.htm#004), [Hos 12:12](../kjv/hos012.htm#012))
and Malachi ([Mal 1:2](../kjv/mal001.htm#002)). In [Mic
1:5](../kjv/mic001.htm#005) the name is a poetic synonym for Israel, the
kingdom of the ten tribes. There are, besides the mention of his name
along with those of the other patriarchs, distinct references to events
of his life in Paul's epistles ([Rom 9:11](../kjv/rom009.htm#011); [Heb
12:16](../kjv/heb012.htm#016); [Heb 11:21](../kjv/heb011.htm#021)). See
references to his vision at Bethel and his possession of land at Shechem
in [Joh 1:51](../kjv/joh001.htm#051); [Joh 4:5](../kjv/joh004.htm#005),
[Joh 4:12](../kjv/joh004.htm#012); also to the famine which was the
occasion of his going down into Egypt in [Act
7:12](../kjv/act007.htm#012) (See LUZ; BETHEL.)

<span id="008">**Jacob's Well**</span> ([Joh
4:5](../kjv/joh004.htm#005), [Joh 4:6](../kjv/joh004.htm#006)). This is
one of the few sites in Palestine about which there is no dispute. It
was dug by Jacob, and hence its name, in the "parcel of ground" which he
purchased from the sons of Hamor ([Gen 33:19](../kjv/gen033.htm#019)).
It still exists, but although after copious rains it contains a little
water, it is now usually quite dry. It is at the entrance to the valley
between Ebal and Gerizim, about 2 miles south-east of Shechem. It is
about 9 feet in diameter and about 75 feet in depth, though in ancient
times it was no doubt much deeper, probably twice as deep. The digging
of such a well must have been a very laborious and costly undertaking.
"Unfortunately, the well of Jacob has not escaped that misplaced
religious veneration which cannot be satisfied with leaving the object
of it as it is, but must build over it a shrine to protect and make it
sacred. A series of buildings of various styles, and of different ages,
have cumbered the ground, choked up the well, and disfigured the natural
beauty and simplicity of the spot. At present the rubbish in the well
has been cleared out; but there is still a domed structure over it, and
you gaze down the shaft cut in the living rock and see at a depth of 70
feet the surface of the water glimmering with a pale blue light in the
darkness, while you notice how the limestone blocks that form its curb
have been worn smooth, or else furrowed by the ropes of centuries" (Hugh
Macmillan). At the entrance of the enclosure round the well is planted
in the ground one of the wooden poles that hold the telegraph wires
between Jerusalem and Haifa.

<span id="009">**Jaddua**</span> Known. (1.) One of the chief who
subscribed the covenant ([Neh 10:21](../kjv/neh010.htm#021)). (2.) The
last high priest mentioned in the Old Testament ([Neh
12:11](../kjv/neh012.htm#011), [Neh 12:22](../kjv/neh012.htm#022)), sons
of Jonathan.
