[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Dehavites**</span> Villagers, one of the Assyrian
tribes which Asnapper sent to repopulate Samaria ([Ezr
4:9](../kjv/ezr004.htm#009)). They were probably a nomad Persian tribe
on the east of the Caspian Sea, and near the Sea of Azof.

<span id="001">**Delaiah**</span> Freed by Jehovah. (1.) The head of the
twenty-third division of the priestly order ([Ch1
24:18](../kjv/ch1024.htm#018)). (2.) A son of Shemaiah, and one of the
courtiers to whom Jeremiah's first roll of prophecy was read ([Jer
36:12](../kjv/jer036.htm#012)). (3.) The head of one of the bands of
exiles that returned under Zerubbabel to Jerusalem ([Ezr
2:60](../kjv/ezr002.htm#060); [Neh 7:62](../kjv/neh007.htm#062)).

<span id="002">**Delilah**</span> Languishing, a Philistine woman who
dwelt in the valley of Sorek (Judg. 16:4-20). She was bribed by the
"lords of the Philistines" to obtain from Samson the secret of his
strength and the means of overcoming it ([Jdg
16:4](../kjv/jdg016.htm#004)). She tried on three occasions to obtain
from him this secret in vain. On the fourth occasion she wrung it from
him. She made him sleep upon her knees, and then called the man who was
waiting to help her; who "cut off the seven locks of his head," and so
his "strength went from him." (See SAMSON.)

<span id="003">**Deluge**</span> The name given to Noah's flood, the
history of which is recorded in Gen. 7 - 8. It began in the year 2516
B.C., and continued twelve lunar months and ten days, or exactly one
solar year. The cause of this judgment was the corruption and violence
that filled the earth in the ninth generation from Adam. God in
righteous indignation determined to purge the earth of the ungodly race.
Amid a world of crime and guilt there was one household that continued
faithful and true to God, the household of Noah. "Noah was a just man
and perfect in his generations." At the command of God, Noah made an ark
300 cubits long, 50 broad, and 30 high. He slowly proceeded with this
work during a period of one hundred and twenty years ([Gen
6:3](../kjv/gen006.htm#003)). At length the purpose of God began to be
carried into effect. The following table exhibits the order of events as
they occurred:, In the six hundredth year of his life Noah is commanded
by God to enter the ark, taking with him his wife, and his three sons
with their wives ([Gen 7:1](../kjv/gen007.htm#001)). The rain begins on
the seventeenth day of the second month ([Gen
7:11](../kjv/gen007.htm#011)). The rain ceases, the waters prevail,
fifteen cubits upward ([Gen 7:18](../kjv/gen007.htm#018)). The ark
grounds on one of the mountains of Ararat on the seventeenth day of the
seventh month, or one hundred and fifty days after the Deluge began
([Gen 8:1](../kjv/gen008.htm#001)). Tops of the mountains visible on the
first day of the tenth month ([Gen 8:5](../kjv/gen008.htm#005)). Raven
and dove sent out forty days after this ([Gen
8:6](../kjv/gen008.htm#006)). Dove again sent out seven days afterwards;
and in the evening she returns with an olive leaf in her mouth ([Gen
8:10](../kjv/gen008.htm#010), [Gen 8:11](../kjv/gen008.htm#011)). Dove
sent out the third time after an interval of other seven days, and
returns no more ([Gen 8:12](../kjv/gen008.htm#012)). The ground becomes
dry on the first day of the first month of the new year ([Gen
8:13](../kjv/gen008.htm#013)). Noah leaves the ark on the twenty-seventh
day of the second month ([Gen 8:14](../kjv/gen008.htm#014)). The
historical truth of the narrative of the Flood is established by the
references made to it by our Lord ([Mat 24:37](../kjv/mat024.htm#037);
compare [Luk 17:26](../kjv/luk017.htm#026)). Peter speaks of it also
([Pe1 3:20](../kjv/pe1003.htm#020); [Pe2 2:5](../kjv/pe2002.htm#005)).
In [Isa 54:9](../kjv/isa054.htm#009) the Flood is referred to as "the
waters of Noah." The Biblical narrative clearly shows that so far as the
human race was concerned the Deluge was universal; that it swept away
all men living except Noah and his family, who were preserved in the
ark; and that the present human race is descended from those who were
thus preserved. Traditions of the Deluge are found among all the great
divisions of the human family; and these traditions, taken as a whole,
wonderfully agree with the Biblical narrative, and agree with it in such
a way as to lead to the conclusion that the Biblical is the authentic
narrative, of which all these traditions are more or less corrupted
versions. The most remarkable of these traditions is that recorded on
tablets prepared by order of Assur-bani-pal, the king of Assyria. These
were, however, copies of older records which belonged to somewhere about
2000 B.C., and which formed part of the priestly library at Erech
(q.v.), "the ineradicable remembrance of a real and terrible event."
(See NOAH; and DELUGE.)

<span id="004">**Demas**</span> A companion and fellow-labourer of Paul
during his first imprisonment at Rome ([Plm
1:24](../kjv/plm001.htm#024); [Col 4:14](../kjv/col004.htm#014)). It
appears, however, that the love of the world afterwards mastered him,
and he deserted the apostle ([Ti2 4:10](../kjv/ti2004.htm#010)).

<span id="005">**Demetrius**</span> (1.) A silversmith at Ephesus, whose
chief occupation was to make "silver shrines for Diana" (q.v.), [Act
19:24](../kjv/act019.htm#024), i.e., models either of the temple of
Diana or of the statue of the goddess. This trade brought to him and his
fellow-craftsmen "no small gain," for these shrines found a ready sale
among the countless thousands who came to this temple from all parts of
Asia Minor. This traffic was greatly endangered by the progress of the
gospel, and hence Demetrius excited the tradesmen employed in the
manufacture of these shrines, and caused so great a tumult that "the
whole city was filled with confusion." (2.) A Christian who is spoken of
as having "a good report of all men, and of the truth itself" ([Jo3
1:12](../kjv/jo3001.htm#012)).

<span id="006">**Demon**</span> See DAEMON.

<span id="007">**Den**</span> A liar of wild beasts ([Psa
10:9](../kjv/psa010.htm#009); [Psa 104:22](../kjv/psa104.htm#022); [Job
37:8](../kjv/job037.htm#008)); the hole of a venomous reptile ([Isa
11:8](../kjv/isa011.htm#008)); a recess for secrecy "in dens and caves
of the earth" ([Heb 11:38](../kjv/heb011.htm#038)); a resort of thieves
([Mat 21:13](../kjv/mat021.htm#013); [Mar
11:17](../kjv/mar011.htm#017)). Daniel was cast into "the den of lions"
([Dan 6:16](../kjv/dan006.htm#016), [Dan 6:17](../kjv/dan006.htm#017)).
Some recent discoveries among the ruins of Babylon have brought to light
the fact that the practice of punishing offenders against the law by
throwing them into a den of lions was common.

<span id="008">**Deputy**</span> In [Kg1 22:47](../kjv/kg1022.htm#047),
means a prefect; one set over others. The same Hebrew word is rendered
"officer;" i.e., chief of the commissariat appointed by Solomon ([Kg1
4:5](../kjv/kg1004.htm#005), etc.). In [Est 8:9](../kjv/est008.htm#009);
[Est 9:3](../kjv/est009.htm#003) (R.V., "governor") it denotes a Persian
prefect "on this side" i.e., in the region west of the Euphrates. It is
the modern word pasha. In [Act 13:7](../kjv/act013.htm#007), [Act
13:8](../kjv/act013.htm#008), [Act 13:12](../kjv/act013.htm#012); [Act
18:12](../kjv/act018.htm#012), it denotes a proconsul; i.e., the
governor of a Roman province holding his appointment from the senate.
The Roman provinces were of two kinds, (1.) senatorial and (2.)
imperial. The appointment of a governor to the former was in the hands
of the senate, and he bore the title of proconsul (Gr. anthupatos ). The
appointment of a governor to the latter was in the hands of the emperor,
and he bore the title of propraetor (Gr. antistrategos).

<span id="009">**Derbe**</span> A small town on the eastern part of the
upland plain of Lycaonia, about 20 miles from Lystra. Paul passed
through Derbe on his route from Cilicia to Iconium, on his second
missionary journey ([Act 16:1](../kjv/act016.htm#001)), and probably
also on his third journey ([Act 18:23](../kjv/act018.htm#023); [Act
19:1](../kjv/act019.htm#001)). On his first journey ([Act
14:20](../kjv/act014.htm#020), [Act 14:21](../kjv/act014.htm#021)) he
came to Derbe from the other side; i.e., from Iconium. It was the native
place of Gaius, one of Paul's companions ([Act
20:4](../kjv/act020.htm#004)). He did not here suffer persecution ([Ti2
3:11](../kjv/ti2003.htm#011)).
