[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Evil-speaking**</span> Is expressly forbidden ([Tit
3:2](../kjv/tit003.htm#002); [Jam 4:11](../kjv/jam004.htm#011)), and
severe punishments are denounced against it ([Co1
5:11](../kjv/co1005.htm#011); [Co1 6:10](../kjv/co1006.htm#010)). It is
spoken of also with abhorrence ([Psa 15:3](../kjv/psa015.htm#003); [Pro
18:6](../kjv/pro018.htm#006), [Pro 18:7](../kjv/pro018.htm#007)), and is
foreign to the whole Christian character and the example of Christ.

<span id="001">**Example**</span> Of Christ ([Pe1
2:21](../kjv/pe1002.htm#021); [Joh 13:15](../kjv/joh013.htm#015)); of
pastors to their flocks ([Phi 3:17](../kjv/phi003.htm#017); [Th2
3:9](../kjv/th2003.htm#009); [Ti1 4:12](../kjv/ti1004.htm#012); [Pe1
5:3](../kjv/pe1005.htm#003)); of the Jews as a warning ([Heb
4:11](../kjv/heb004.htm#011)); of the prophets as suffering affliction
([Jam 5:10](../kjv/jam005.htm#010)).

<span id="002">**Executioner**</span> ([Mar
6:27](../kjv/mar006.htm#027)). Instead of the Greek word, Mark here uses
a Latin word, speculator , which literally means "a scout," "a spy," and
at length came to denote one of the armed bodyguard of the emperor.
Herod Antipas, in imitation of the emperor, had in attendance on him a
company of speculators. They were sometimes employed as executioners,
but this was a mere accident of their office. (See MARK, GOSPEL OF,)

<span id="003">**Exercise, Bodily**</span> ([Ti1
4:8](../kjv/ti1004.htm#008)). An ascetic mortification of the flesh and
denial of personal gratification (compare [Col
2:23](../kjv/col002.htm#023)) to which some sects of the Jews,
especially the Essenes, attached importance.

<span id="004">**Exile**</span> (1.) Of the kingdom of Israel. In the
time of Pekah, Tiglath-pileser II. carried away captive into Assyria
([Kg2 15:29](../kjv/kg2015.htm#029); compare [Isa
10:5](../kjv/isa010.htm#005), [Isa 10:6](../kjv/isa010.htm#006)) a part
of the inhabitants of Galilee and of Gilead (741 B.C.). After the
destruction of Samaria (720 B.C.) by Shalmaneser and Sargon (q.v.),
there was a general deportation of the Israelites into Mesopotamia and
Media ([Kg2 17:6](../kjv/kg2017.htm#006); [Kg2
18:9](../kjv/kg2018.htm#009); [Ch1 5:26](../kjv/ch1005.htm#026)). (See
ISRAEL, KINGDOM OF.) (2.) Of the kingdom of the two tribes, the kingdom
of Judah. Nebuchadnezzar, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim ([Jer
25:1](../kjv/jer025.htm#001)), invaded Judah, and carried away some
royal youths, including Daniel and his companions (606 B.C.), together
with the sacred vessels of the temple ([Ch2
36:7](../kjv/ch2036.htm#007); [Dan 1:2](../kjv/dan001.htm#002)). In 598
B.C. ([Jer 52:28](../kjv/jer052.htm#028); [Kg2
24:12](../kjv/kg2024.htm#012)), in the beginning of Jehoiachin's reign
([Kg2 24:8](../kjv/kg2024.htm#008)), Nebuchadnezzar carried away captive
3,023 eminent Jews, including the king ([Ch2
36:10](../kjv/ch2036.htm#010)), with his family and officers ([Kg2
24:12](../kjv/kg2024.htm#012)), and a large number of warriors ([Kg2
24:16](../kjv/kg2024.htm#016)), with very many persons of note ([Kg2
24:14](../kjv/kg2024.htm#014)), and artisans ([Kg2
24:16](../kjv/kg2024.htm#016)), leaving behind only those who were poor
and helpless. This was the first general deportation to Babylon. In 588
B.C., after the revolt of Zedekiah (q.v.), there was a second general
deportation of Jews by Nebuchadnezzar ([Jer
52:29](../kjv/jer052.htm#029); [Kg2 25:8](../kjv/kg2025.htm#008)),
including 832 more of the principal men of the kingdom. He carried away
also the rest of the sacred vessels ([Ch2
36:18](../kjv/ch2036.htm#018)). From this period, when the temple was
destroyed ([Kg2 25:9](../kjv/kg2025.htm#009)), to the complete
restoration, 517 B.C. ([Ezr 6:15](../kjv/ezr006.htm#015)), is the period
of the "seventy years." In 582 B.C. occurred the last and final
deportation. The entire number Nebuchadnezzar carried captive was 4,600
heads of families with their wives and children and dependents ([Jer
52:30](../kjv/jer052.htm#030); [Jer 43:5](../kjv/jer043.htm#005); [Ch2
36:20](../kjv/ch2036.htm#020), etc.). Thus the exiles formed a very
considerable community in Babylon. When Cyrus granted permission to the
Jews to return to their own land ([Ezr 1:5](../kjv/ezr001.htm#005); [Ezr
7:13](../kjv/ezr007.htm#013)), only a comparatively small number at
first availed themselves of the privilege. It cannot be questioned that
many belonging to the kingdom of Israel ultimately joined the Jews under
Ezra, Zerubbabel, and Nehemiah, and returned along with them to
Jerusalem ([Jer 50:4](../kjv/jer050.htm#004), [Jer
50:5](../kjv/jer050.htm#005), [Jer 50:17](../kjv/jer050.htm#017), [Jer
50:33](../kjv/jer050.htm#033)). Large numbers had, however, settled in
the land of Babylon, and formed numerous colonies in different parts of
the kingdom. Their descendants very probably have spread far into
Eastern lands and become absorbed in the general population. (See JUDAH,
KINGDOM OF; CAPTIVITY.)

<span id="005">**Exodus**</span> The great deliverance wrought for the
children of Israel when they were brought out of the land of Egypt with
"a mighty hand and with an outstretched 136), about 1490 B.C., and four
hundred and eighty years ([Kg1 6:1](../kjv/kg1006.htm#001)) before the
building of Solomon's temple. The time of their sojourning in Egypt was,
according to [Exo 12:40](../kjv/exo012.htm#040), the space of four
hundred and thirty years. In the LXX., the words are, "The sojourning of
the children of Israel which they sojourned in Egypt and in the land of
Canaan was four hundred and thirty years;" and the Samaritan version
reads, "The sojourning of the children of Israel and of their fathers
which they sojourned in the land of Canaan and in the land of Egypt was
four hundred and thirty years." In [Gen 15:13](../kjv/gen015.htm#013),
the period is prophetically given (in round numbers) as four hundred
years. This passage is quoted by Stephen in his defense before the
council ([Act 7:6](../kjv/act007.htm#006)). The chronology of the
"sojourning" is variously estimated. Those who adopt the longer term
reckon thus in the following table: Sojourning Years From the descent of
Jacob into Ehypt to the death of Joseph 71 From the death of Joseph to
the birth of Moses 278 From the birth of Moses to his flight into Midian
40 From the flight of Moses to his return into Egypt 40 From the return
of Moses to the Exodus 1 Total years 430 Others contend for the shorter
period of two hundred and fifteen years, holding that the period of four
hundred and thirty years comprehends the years from the entrance of
Abraham into Canaan (see SEPTUAGINT. and SAMARITAN) to the descent of
Jacob into Egypt. They reckon thus: Sojourning Years From Abraham's
arrival in Canaan to Isaac's birth 25 From Isaac's birth to that of his
twin sons Esau and Jacob 60 From Jacob's birth to the going down into
Egypt 130 Total years 215 From Jacob's going down into Egypt to the
death of Joseph 71 From death of Joseph to the birth of Moses 64 From
birth of Moses to the Exodus 80 Total years in all 430 During the forty
years of Moses' sojourn in the land of Midian, the Hebrews in Egypt were
being gradually prepared for the great national crisis which was
approaching. The plagues that successively fell upon the land loosened
the bonds by which Pharaoh held them in slavery, and at length he was
eager that they should depart. But the Hebrews must now also be ready to
go. They were poor; for generations they had laboured for the Egyptians
without wages. They asked gifts from their neighbours around them ([Exo
12:35](../kjv/exo012.htm#035)), and these were readily bestowed. And
then, as the first step towards their independent national organization,
they observed the feast of the Passover, which was now instituted as a
perpetual memorial. The blood of the paschal lamb was duly sprinkled on
the poor-posts and lintels of all their houses, and they were all
within, waiting the next movement in the working out of God's plan. At
length the last stroke fell on the land of Egypt. "It came to pass, that
at midnight Jehovah smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt."
Pharaoh rose up in the night, and called for Moses and Aaron by night,
and said, "Rise up, and get you forth from among my people, both ye and
the children of Israel; and go, serve Jehovah, as ye have said. Also
take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; and bless
me also." Thus was Pharaoh (q.v.) completely humbled and broken down.
These words he spoke to Moses and Aaron "seem to gleam through the tears
of the humbled king, as he lamented his son snatched from him by so
sudden a death, and tremble with a sense of the helplessness which his
proud soul at last felt when the avenging hand of God had visited even
his palace." The terror-stricken Egyptians now urged the instant
departure of the Hebrews. In the midst of the Passover feast, before the
dawn of the 15th day of the month Abib (our April nearly), which was to
be to them henceforth the beginning of the year, as it was the
commencement of a new epoch in their history, every family, with all
that appertained to it, was ready for the march, which instantly began
under the leadership of the heads of tribes with their various
sub-divisions. They moved onward, increasing as they went forward from
all the districts of Goshen, over the whole of which they were
scattered, to the common centre. Three or four days perhaps elapsed
before the whole body of the people were assembled at Rameses, and ready
to set out under their leader Moses ([Exo 12:37](../kjv/exo012.htm#037);
[Num 33:3](../kjv/num033.htm#003)). This city was at that time the
residence of the Egyptian court, and here the interviews between Moses
and Pharaoh had taken place. From Rameses they journeyed to Succoth
([Exo 12:37](../kjv/exo012.htm#037)), identified with Tel-el-Maskhuta,
about 12 miles west of Ismailia. (See PITHOM.) Their third station was
Etham (q.v.), [Exo 13:20](../kjv/exo013.htm#020), "in the edge of the
wilderness," and was probably a little to the west of the modern town of
Ismailia, on the Suez Canal. Here they were commanded "to turn and
encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea", i.e., to change
their route from east to due south. The Lord now assumed the direction
of their march in the pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night. They
were then led along the west shore of the Red Sea till they came to an
extensive camping-ground "before Pi-hahiroth," about 40 miles from
Etham. This distance from Etham may have taken three days to traverse,
for the number of camping-places by no means indicates the number of
days spent on the journey: e.g., it took fully a month to travel from
Rameses to the wilderness of Sin ([Exo 16:1](../kjv/exo016.htm#001)),
yet reference is made to only six camping-places during all that time.
The exact spot of their encampment before they crossed the Red Sea
cannot be determined. It was probably somewhere near the present site of
Suez. Under the direction of God the children of Israel went "forward"
from the camp "before Pi-hahiroth," and the sea opened a pathway for
them, so that they crossed to the farther shore in safety. The Egyptian
host pursued after them, and, attempting to follow through the sea, were
overwhelmed in its returning waters, and thus the whole military force
of the Egyptians perished. They "sank as lead in the mighty waters"
([Exo 15:1](../kjv/exo015.htm#001); compare [Psa
77:16](../kjv/psa077.htm#016)). Having reached the eastern shore of the
sea, perhaps a little way to the north of 'Ayun Musa ("the springs of
Moses"), there they encamped and rested probably for a day. Here Miriam
and the other women sang the triumphal song recorded in Ex. 15:1-21.
From 'Ayun Musa they went on for three days through a part of the barren
"wilderness of Shur" ([Exo 15:22](../kjv/exo015.htm#022)), called also
the "wilderness of Etham" ([Num 33:8](../kjv/num033.htm#008); compare
[Exo 13:20](../kjv/exo013.htm#020)), without finding water. On the last
of these days they came to Marah (q.v.), where the "bitter" water was by
a miracle made drinkable. Their next camping-place was Elim (q.v.),
where were twelve springs of water and a grove of "threescore and ten"
palm trees ([Exo 15:27](../kjv/exo015.htm#027)). After a time the
children of Israel "took their journey from Elim," and encamped by the
Red Sea ([Num 33:10](../kjv/num033.htm#010)), and thence removed to the
"wilderness of Sin" (to be distinguished from the wilderness of Zin,
[Num 20:1](../kjv/num020.htm#001)), where they again encamped. Here,
probably the modern el-Markha, the supply of bread they had brought with
them out of Egypt failed. They began to "murmur" for want of bread. God
"heard their murmurings" and gave them quails and manna, "bread from
heaven" (Ex. 16:4-36). Moses directed that an omer of manna should be
put aside and preserved as a perpetual memorial of God's goodness. They
now turned inland, and after three encampments came to the rich and
fertile valley of Rephidim, in the Wady Feiran. Here they found no
water, and again murmured against Moses. Directed by God, Moses procured
a miraculous supply of water from the "rock in Horeb," one of the hills
of the Sinai group ([Exo 17:1](../kjv/exo017.htm#001)); and shortly
afterwards the children of Israel here fought their first battle with
the Amalekites, whom they smote with the edge of the sword. From the
eastern extremity of the Wady Feiran the line of march now probably led
through the Wady esh-Sheikh and the Wady Solaf, meeting in the Wady
er-Rahah, "the enclosed plain in front of the magnificent cliffs of Ras
Sufsafeh." Here they encamped for more than a year ([Num
1:1](../kjv/num001.htm#001); [Num 10:11](../kjv/num010.htm#011)) before
Sinai (q.v.). The different encampments of the children of Israel, from
the time of their leaving Egypt till they reached the Promised Land, are
mentioned in Ex. 12:37 - 19; Num. 10-21; 33; Deut. 1, 2, 10. It is
worthy of notice that there are unmistakable evidences that the
Egyptians had a tradition of a great exodus from their country, which
could be none other than the exodus of the Hebrews.

<span id="006">**Exodus, Book of**</span> Exodus is the name given in
the LXX. to the second book of the Pentateuch (q.v.). It means
"departure" or "outgoing." This name was adopted in the Latin
translation, and thence passed into other languages. The Hebrews called
it by the first words, according to their custom, Ve-eleh shemoth (i.e.,
"and these are the names"). It contains, (1.) An account of the increase
and growth of the Israelites in Egypt (Ex. 1) (2.) Preparations for
their departure out of Egypt (Ex. 2 - 12:36). (3.) Their journey from
Egypt to Sinai (Ex. 12:37 - 19:2). (4.) The giving of the law and the
establishment of the institutions by which the organization of the
people was completed, the theocracy, "a kingdom of priest and an holy
nation" ([Exo 19:3](../kjv/exo019.htm#003) - 40). The time comprised in
this book, from the death of Joseph to the erection of the tabernacle in
the wilderness, is about one hundred and forty-five years, on the
supposition that the four hundred and thirty years ([Exo
12:40](../kjv/exo012.htm#040)) are to be computed from the time of the
promises made to Abraham ([Gal 3:17](../kjv/gal003.htm#017)). The
authorship of this book, as well as of that of the other books of the
Pentateuch, is to be ascribed to Moses. The unanimous voice of tradition
and all internal evidences abundantly support this opinion.

<span id="007">**Exorcist**</span> ([Act 19:13](../kjv/act019.htm#013)).
"In that skeptical and therefore superstitious age professional exorcist
abounded. Many of these professional exorcists were disreputable Jews,
like Simon in Samaria and Elymas in Cyprus ([Act
8:9](../kjv/act008.htm#009); [Act 13:6](../kjv/act013.htm#006))." Other
references to exorcism as practiced by the Jews are found in [Mat
12:27](../kjv/mat012.htm#027); [Mar 9:38](../kjv/mar009.htm#038); [Luk
9:49](../kjv/luk009.htm#049), [Luk 9:50](../kjv/luk009.htm#050). It
would seem that it was an opinion among the Jews that miracles might be
wrought by invoking the divine name. Thus also these "vagabond Jews"
pretended that they could expel demons. The power of casting out devils
was conferred by Christ on his apostles ([Mat
10:8](../kjv/mat010.htm#008)), and on the seventy ([Luk
10:17](../kjv/luk010.htm#017)), and was exercised by believers after his
ascension ([Mar 16:17](../kjv/mar016.htm#017); [Act
16:18](../kjv/act016.htm#018)); but this power was never spoken of as
exorcism.

<span id="008">**Expiation**</span> Guilt is said to be expiated when it
is visited with punishment falling on a substitute. Expiation is made
for our sins when they are punished not in ourselves but in another who
consents to stand in our room. It is that by which reconciliation is
effected. Sin is thus said to be "covered" by vicarious satisfaction.
The cover or lid of the ark is termed in the LXX. hilasterion, that
which covered or shut out the claims and demands of the law against the
sins of God's people, whereby he became "propitious" to them. The idea
of vicarious expiation runs through the whole Old Testament system of
sacrifices. (See PROPITIATION.)

<span id="009">**Eye**</span> (Heb. 'ain , meaning "flowing"), applied
(1.) to a fountain, frequently; (2.) to colour ([Num
11:7](../kjv/num011.htm#007); R.V., "appearance," marg. "eye"); (3.) the
face ([Exo 10:5](../kjv/exo010.htm#005), [Exo
10:15](../kjv/exo010.htm#015); [Num 22:5](../kjv/num022.htm#005), [Num
22:11](../kjv/num022.htm#011)), in [Num 14:14](../kjv/num014.htm#014),
"face to face" (R.V. marg., "eye to eye"). "Between the eyes", i.e., the
forehead ([Exo 13:9](../kjv/exo013.htm#009), [Exo
13:16](../kjv/exo013.htm#016)). The expression ([Pro
23:31](../kjv/pro023.htm#031)), "when it giveth his colour in the cup,"
is literally, "when it giveth out \[or showeth\] its eye." The beads or
bubbles of wine are thus spoken of. "To set the eyes" on any one is to
view him with favour ([Gen 44:21](../kjv/gen044.htm#021); [Job
24:23](../kjv/job024.htm#023); [Jer 39:12](../kjv/jer039.htm#012)). This
word is used figuratively in the expressions an "evil eye" ([Mat
20:15](../kjv/mat020.htm#015)), a "bountiful eye" ([Pro
22:9](../kjv/pro022.htm#009)), "haughty eyes" ([Pro
6:17](../kjv/pro006.htm#017) marg.), "wanton eyes" ([Isa
3:16](../kjv/isa003.htm#016)), "eyes full of adultery" ([Pe2
2:14](../kjv/pe2002.htm#014)), "the lust of the eyes" ([Jo1
2:16](../kjv/jo1002.htm#016)). Christians are warned against
"eye-service" ([Eph 6:6](../kjv/eph006.htm#006); [Col
3:22](../kjv/col003.htm#022)). Men were sometimes punished by having
their eyes put out ([Sa1 11:2](../kjv/sa1011.htm#002); Samson, [Jdg
16:21](../kjv/jdg016.htm#021); Zedekiah, [Kg2
25:7](../kjv/kg2025.htm#007)). The custom of painting the eyes is
alluded to in [Kg2 9:30](../kjv/kg2009.htm#030), R.V.; [Jer
4:30](../kjv/jer004.htm#030); [Eze 23:40](../kjv/eze023.htm#040), a
custom which still prevails extensively among Eastern women.
