[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Eder**</span> Flock. (1.) A city in the south of Judah,
on the border of Idumea ([Jos 15:21](../kjv/jos015.htm#021)). (2.) The
second of the three sons of Mushi, of the family of Merari, appointed to
the Levitical office ([Ch1 23:23](../kjv/ch1023.htm#023); [Ch1
24:30](../kjv/ch1024.htm#030)).

<span id="001">**Edom**</span> (1.) The name of Esau (q.v.), [Gen
25:30](../kjv/gen025.htm#030), "Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red
pottage \[Heb. haadom , haadom , i.e., 'the red pottage, the red
pottage'\]... Therefore was his name called Edom", i.e., Red. (2.)
Idumea ([Isa 34:5](../kjv/isa034.htm#005), [Isa
34:6](../kjv/isa034.htm#006); [Eze 35:15](../kjv/eze035.htm#015)). "The
field of Edom" ([Gen 32:3](../kjv/gen032.htm#003)), "the land of Edom"
([Gen 36:16](../kjv/gen036.htm#016)), was mountainous ([Oba
1:8](../kjv/oba001.htm#008), [Oba 1:9](../kjv/oba001.htm#009), [Oba
1:19](../kjv/oba001.htm#019), [Oba 1:21](../kjv/oba001.htm#021)). It was
called the land, or "the mountain of Seir," the rough hills on the east
side of the Arabah. It extended from the head of the Gulf of Akabah, the
Elanitic gulf, to the foot of the Dead Sea ([Kg1
9:26](../kjv/kg1009.htm#026)), and contained, among other cities, the
rock-hewn Sela (q.v.), generally known by the Greek name Petra ([Kg2
14:7](../kjv/kg2014.htm#007)). It is a wild and rugged region, traversed
by fruitful valleys. Its old capital was Bozrah ([Isa
63:1](../kjv/isa063.htm#001)). The early inhabitants of the land were
Horites. They were destroyed by the Edomites ([Deu
2:12](../kjv/deu002.htm#012)), between whom and the kings of Israel and
Judah there was frequent war ([Kg2 8:20](../kjv/kg2008.htm#020); [Ch2
28:17](../kjv/ch2028.htm#017)). At the time of the Exodus they
churlishly refused permission to the Israelites to pass through their
land ([Num 20:14](../kjv/num020.htm#014)), and ever afterwards
maintained an attitude of hostility toward them. They were conquered by
David ([Sa2 8:14](../kjv/sa2008.htm#014); compare [Kg1
9:26](../kjv/kg1009.htm#026)), and afterwards by Amaziah ([Ch2
25:11](../kjv/ch2025.htm#011), [Ch2 25:12](../kjv/ch2025.htm#012)). But
they regained again their independence, and in later years, during the
decline of the Jewish kingdom ([Kg2 16:6](../kjv/kg2016.htm#006); R.V.
marg., "Edomites"), made war against Israel. They took part with the
Chaldeans when Nebuchadnezzar captured Jerusalem, and afterwards they
invaded and held possession of the south of Palestine as far as Hebron.
At length, however, Edom fell under the growing Chaldean power ([Jer
27:3](../kjv/jer027.htm#003), [Jer 27:6](../kjv/jer027.htm#006)). There
are many prophecies concerning Edom ([Isa 34:5](../kjv/isa034.htm#005),
[Isa 34:6](../kjv/isa034.htm#006); [Jer 49:7](../kjv/jer049.htm#007);
[Eze 25:13](../kjv/eze025.htm#013); [Eze 35:1](../kjv/eze035.htm#001);
[Joe 3:19](../kjv/joe003.htm#019); [Amo 1:11](../kjv/amo001.htm#011);
Obad.; [Mal 1:3](../kjv/mal001.htm#003), [Mal
1:4](../kjv/mal001.htm#004)) which have been remarkably fulfilled. The
present desolate condition of that land is a standing testimony to the
inspiration of these prophecies. After an existence as a people for
above seventeen hundred years, they have utterly disappeared, and their
language even is forgotten for ever. In Petra, "where kings kept their
court, and where nobles assembled, there no man dwells; it is given by
lot to birds, and beasts, and reptiles." The Edomites were Semites,
closely related in blood and in language to the Israelites. They
dispossessed the Horites of Mount Seir; though it is clear, from Gen.
36, that they afterwards intermarried with the conquered population.
Edomite tribes settled also in the south of Judah, like the Kenizzites
([Gen 36:11](../kjv/gen036.htm#011)), to whom Caleb and Othniel belonged
([Jos 15:17](../kjv/jos015.htm#017)). The southern part of Edom was
known as Teman.

<span id="002">**Edrei**</span> Mighty; strength. (1.) One of the chief
towns of the kingdom of Bashan ([Jos 12:4](../kjv/jos012.htm#004), [Jos
12:5](../kjv/jos012.htm#005)). Here Og was defeated by the Israelites,
and the strength of the Amorites broken ([Num
21:33](../kjv/num021.htm#033)). It subsequently belonged to Manasseh,
for a short time apparently, and afterwards became the abode of bandits
and outlaws ([Jos 13:31](../kjv/jos013.htm#031)). It has been identified
with the modern Edr'a , which stands on a rocky promontory on the
south-west edge of the Lejah (the Argob of the Hebrews, and Trachonitis
of the Greeks). The ruins of Edr'a are the most extensive in the Hauran.
They are 3 miles in circumference. A number of the ancient houses still
remain; the walls, roofs, and doors being all of stone. The wild region
of which Edrei was the capital is thus described in its modern aspect:
"Elevated about 20 feet above the plain, it is a labyrinth of clefts and
crevasses in the rock, formed by volcanic action; and owing to its
impenetrable condition, it has become a refuge for outlaws and turbulent
characters, who make it a sort of Cave of Adullam... It is, in fact, an
impregnable natural fortress, about 20 miles in length and 15 in
breadth" (Porter's Syria, etc.). Beneath this wonderful city there is
also a subterranean city, hollowed out probably as a refuge for the
population of the upper city in times of danger. (See BASHAN.) (2.) A
town of Naphtali ([Jos 19:37](../kjv/jos019.htm#037)).

<span id="003">**Effectual Call**</span> See CALL.

<span id="004">**Effectual Prayer**</span> Occurs in Authorized Version,
[Jam 5:16](../kjv/jam005.htm#016). The Revised Version renders
appropriately: "The supplication of a righteous man availeth much in its
working", i.e., "it moves the hand of Him who moves the world."

<span id="005">**Egg**</span> (Heb. beytsah , "whiteness"). Eggs
deserted ([Isa 10:14](../kjv/isa010.htm#014)), of a bird ([Deu
22:6](../kjv/deu022.htm#006)), an ostrich ([Job
39:14](../kjv/job039.htm#014)), the cockatrice ([Isa
59:5](../kjv/isa059.htm#005)). In [Luk 11:12](../kjv/luk011.htm#012), an
egg is contrasted with a scorpion, which is said to be very like an egg
in its appearance, so much so as to be with difficulty at times
distinguished from it. In [Job 6:6](../kjv/job006.htm#006) ("the white
of an egg") the word for egg (hallamuth) occurs nowhere else. It has
been translated "purslain" (R.V. marg.), and the whole phrase
"purslain-broth", i.e., broth made of that herb, proverbial for its
insipidity; and hence an insipid discourse. Job applies this expression
to the speech of Eliphaz as being insipid and dull. But the common
rendering, "the white of an egg", may be satisfactorily maintained.

<span id="006">**Eglah**</span> A heifer, one of David's wives, and
mother of Ithream ([Sa2 3:5](../kjv/sa2003.htm#005); [Ch1
3:3](../kjv/ch1003.htm#003)). According to a Jewish tradition she was
Michal.

<span id="007">**Eglaim**</span> Two ponds, ([Isa
15:8](../kjv/isa015.htm#008)), probably En-eglaim of [Eze
47:10](../kjv/eze047.htm#010).

<span id="008">**Eglon**</span> The bullock; place of heifers. (1.)
Chieftain or king of one of the Moabite tribes ([Jdg
3:12](../kjv/jdg003.htm#012)). Having entered into an alliance with
Ammon and Amalek, he overran the trans-Jordanic region, and then
crossing the Jordan, seized on Jericho, the "city of palm trees," which
had been by this time rebuilt, but not as a fortress. He made this city
his capital, and kept Israel in subjection for eighteen years. The
people at length "cried unto the Lord" in their distress, and he "raised
them up a deliverer" in Ehud (q.v.), the son of Gera, a Benjamite. (2.)
A city in Judah, near Lachish ([Jos 15:39](../kjv/jos015.htm#039)). It
was destroyed by Joshua ([Jos 10:5](../kjv/jos010.htm#005), [Jos
10:6](../kjv/jos010.htm#006)). It has been identified with Tell Nejileh,
6 miles south of Tell Hesy or Ajlan, north-west of Lachish. (See
LACHISH.)

<span id="009">**Egypt**</span> The land of the Nile and the pyramids,
the oldest kingdom of which we have any record, holds a place of great
significance in Scripture. The Egyptians belonged to the white race, and
their original home is still a matter of dispute. Many scholars believe
that it was in Southern Arabia, and recent excavations have shown that
the valley of the Nile was originally inhabited by a low-class
population, perhaps belonging to the Nigritian stock, before the
Egyptians of history entered it. The ancient Egyptian language, of which
the latest form is Coptic, is distantly connected with the Semitic
family of speech. Egypt consists geographically of two halves, the
northern being the Delta, and the southern Upper Egypt, between Cairo
and the First Cataract. In the Old Testament, Northern or Lower Egypt is
called Mazor, "the fortified land" ([Isa 19:6](../kjv/isa019.htm#006);
[Isa 37:25](../kjv/isa037.htm#025), where the A.V. mistranslates
"defense" and "besieged places"); while Southern or Upper Egypt is
Pathros, the Egyptian Pa-to-Res, or "the land of the south" ([Isa
11:11](../kjv/isa011.htm#011)). But the whole country is generally
mentioned under the dual name of Mizraim, "the two Mazors." The
civilization of Egypt goes back to a very remote antiquity. The two
kingdoms of the north and south were united by Menes, the founder of the
first historical dynasty of kings. The first six dynasties constitute
what is known as the Old Empire, which had its capital at Memphis, south
of Cairo, called in the Old Testament Moph ([Hos
9:6](../kjv/hos009.htm#006)) and Noph. The native name was Mennofer,
"the good place." The Pyramids were tombs of the monarchs of the Old
Empire, those of Gizeh being erected in the time of the Fourth Dynasty.
After the fall of the Old Empire came a period of decline and obscurity.
This was followed by the Middle Empire, the most powerful dynasty of
which was the Twelfth. The Fayyum was rescued for agriculture by the
kings of the Twelfth Dynasty; and two obelisks were erected in front of
the temple of the sun-god at On or Heliopolis (near Cairo), one of which
is still standing. The capital of the Middle Empire was Thebes, in Upper
Egypt. The Middle Empire was overthrown by the invasion of the Hyksos,
or shepherd princes from Asia, who ruled over Egypt, more especially in
the north, for several centuries, and of whom there were three dynasties
of kings. They had their capital at Zoan or Tanis (now San), in the
north-eastern part of the Delta. It was in the time of the Hyksos that
Abraham, Jacob, and Joseph entered Egypt. The Hyksos were finally
expelled about 1600 B.C., by the hereditary princes of Thebes, who
founded the Eighteenth Dynasty, and carried the war into Asia. Canaan
and Syria were subdued, as well as Cyprus, and the boundaries of the
Egyptian Empire were fixed at the Euphrates. The Soudan, which had been
conquered by the kings of the Twelfth Dynasty, was again annexed to
Egypt, and the eldest son of the Pharaoh took the title of "Prince of
Cush." One of the later kings of the dynasty, Amenophis IV., or
Khu-n-Aten, endeavoured to supplant the ancient state religion of Egypt
by a new faith derived from Asia, which was a sort of pantheistic
monotheism, the one supreme god being adored under the image of the
solar disk. The attempt led to religious and civil war, and the Pharaoh
retreated from Thebes to Central Egypt, where he built a new capital, on
the site of the present Tell-el-Amarna. The cuneiform tablets that have
been found there represent his foreign correspondence (about 1400 B.C.).
He surrounded himself with officials and courtiers of Asiatic, and more
especially Canaanitish, extraction; but the native party succeeded
eventually in overthrowing the government, the capital of Khu-n-Aten was
destroyed, and the foreigners were driven out of the country, those that
remained being reduced to serfdom. The national triumph was marked by
the rise of the Nineteenth Dynasty, in the founder of which, Rameses I.,
we must see the "new king, who knew not Joseph." His grandson, Rameses
II., reigned sixty-seven years (1348-1281 B.C.), and was an
indefatigable builder. As Pithom, excavated by Dr. Naville in 1883, was
one of the cities he built, he must have been the Pharaoh of the
Oppression. The Pharaoh of the Exodus may have been one of his immediate
successors, whose reigns were short. Under them Egypt lost its empire in
Asia, and was itself attacked by barbarians from Libya and the north.
The Nineteenth Dynasty soon afterwards by civil war; and for a short
time a Canaanite, Arisu, ruled over it. Then came the Twentieth Dynasty,
the second Pharaoh of which, Rameses III., restored the power of his
country. In one of his campaigns he overran the southern part of
Palestine, where the Israelites had not yet settled. They must at the
time have been still in the wilderness. But it was during the reign of
Rameses III. that Egypt finally lost Gaza and the adjoining cities,
which were seized by the Pulista, or Philistines. After Rameses III.,
Egypt fell into decay. Solomon married the daughter of one of the last
kings of the Twenty-first Dynasty, which was overthrown by Shishak I.,
the general of the Libyan mercenaries, who founded the Twenty-second
Dynasty ([Kg1 11:40](../kjv/kg1011.htm#040); [Kg1
14:25](../kjv/kg1014.htm#025), [Kg1 14:26](../kjv/kg1014.htm#026)). A
list of the places he captured in Palestine is engraved on the outside
of the south wall of the temple of Karnak. In the time of Hezekiah,
Egypt was conquered by Ethiopians from the Soudan, who constituted the
Twenty-fifth Dynasty. The third of them was Tirhakah ([Kg2
19:9](../kjv/kg2019.htm#009)). In 674 B.C. it was conquered by the
Assyrians, who divided it into twenty satrapies, and Tirhakah was driven
back to his ancestral dominions. Fourteen years later it successfully
revolted under Psammetichus I. of Sais, the founder of the Twenty-sixth
Dynasty. Among his successors were Necho ([Kg2
23:29](../kjv/kg2023.htm#029)) and Hophra, or Apries ([Jer
37:5](../kjv/jer037.htm#005), [Jer 37:7](../kjv/jer037.htm#007), [Jer
37:11](../kjv/jer037.htm#011)). The dynasty came to an end in 525 B.C.,
when the country was subjugated by Cambyses. Soon afterwards it was
organized into a Persian satrapy. The title of Pharaoh, given to the
Egyptian kings, is the Egyptian Per-aa, or "Great House," which may be
compared to that of "Sublime Porte." It is found in very early Egyptian
texts. The Egyptian religion was a strange mixture of pantheism and
animal worship, the gods being adored in the form of animals. While the
educated classes resolved their manifold deities into manifestations of
one omnipresent and omnipotent divine power, the lower classes regarded
the animals as incarnations of the gods. Under the Old Empire, Ptah, the
Creator, the god of Memphis, was at the head of the Pantheon; afterwards
Amon, the god of Thebes, took his place. Amon, like most of the other
gods, was identified with Ra, the sun-god of Heliopolis. The Egyptians
believed in a resurrection and future life, as well as in a state of
rewards and punishments dependent on our conduct in this world. The
judge of the dead was Osiris, who had been slain by Set, the
representative of evil, and afterwards restored to life. His death was
avenged by his son Horus, whom the Egyptians invoked as their
"Redeemer." Osiris and Horus, along with Isis, formed a trinity, who
were regarded as representing the sun-god under different forms. Even in
the time of Abraham, Egypt was a flourishing and settled monarchy. Its
oldest capital, within the historic period, was Memphis, the ruins of
which may still be seen near the Pyramids and the Sphinx. When the Old
Empire of Menes came to an end, the seat of empire was shifted to
Thebes, some 300 miles farther up the Nile. A short time after that, the
Delta was conquered by the Hyksos, or shepherd kings, who fixed their
capital at Zoan, the Greek Tanis , now San , on the Tanic arm of the
Nile. All this occurred before the time of the new king "which knew not
Joseph" ([Exo 1:8](../kjv/exo001.htm#008)). In later times Egypt was
conquered by the Persians (525 B.C.), and by the Greeks under Alexander
the Great (332 B.C.), after whom the Ptolemies ruled the country for
three centuries. Subsequently it was for a time a province of the Roman
Empire; and at last, in A.D. 1517, it fell into the hands of the Turks,
of whose empire it still forms nominally a part. Abraham and Sarah went
to Egypt in the time of the shepherd kings. The exile of Joseph and the
migration of Jacob to "the land of Goshen" occurred about 200 years
later. On the death of Solomon, Shishak, king of Egypt, invaded
Palestine ([Kg1 14:25](../kjv/kg1014.htm#025)). He left a list of the
cities he conquered. A number of remarkable clay tablets, discovered at
Tell-el-Amarna in Upper Egypt, are the most important historical records
ever found in connection with the Bible. They most fully confirm the
historical statements of the Book of Joshua, and prove the antiquity of
civilization in Syria and Palestine. As the clay in different parts of
Palestine differs, it has been found possible by the clay alone to
decide where the tablets come from when the name of the writer is lost.
The inscriptions are cuneiform, and in the Aramaic language, resembling
Assyrian. The writers are Phoenicians, Amorites, and Philistines, but in
no instance Hittites, though Hittites are mentioned. The tablets consist
of official dispatches and letters, dating from 1480 B.C., addressed to
the two Pharaohs, Amenophis III. and IV., the last of this dynasty, from
the kings and governors of Phoenicia and Palestine. There occur the
names of three kings killed by Joshua, Adoni-zedec, king of Jerusalem,
Japhia, king of Lachish ([Jos 10:3](../kjv/jos010.htm#003)), and Jabin,
king of Hazor ([Jos 11:1](../kjv/jos011.htm#001)); also the Hebrews
(Abiri) are said to have come from the desert. The principal prophecies
of Scripture regarding Egypt are these, Isa. 19; [Jer
43:8](../kjv/jer043.htm#008); [Jer 44:30](../kjv/jer044.htm#030); 46;
Ezek. 29-32; and it might be easily shown that they have all been
remarkably fulfilled. For example, the singular disappearance of Noph
(i.e., Memphis) is a fulfillment of [Jer 46:19](../kjv/jer046.htm#019),
[Eze 30:13](../kjv/eze030.htm#013).
