[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Merib-baal**</span> Contender with Baal, ([Ch1
8:34](../kjv/ch1008.htm#034); [Ch1 9:40](../kjv/ch1009.htm#040)),
elsewhere called Mephibosheth ([Sa2 4:4](../kjv/sa2004.htm#004)), the
son of Jonathan.

<span id="001">**Merodach**</span> Death; slaughter, the name of a
Babylonian god, probably the planet Mars ([Jer
50:2](../kjv/jer050.htm#002)), or it may be another name of Bel, the
guardian divinity of Babylon. This name frequently occurs as a surname
to the kings of Assyria and Babylon.

<span id="002">**Merodach-baladan**</span> Merodach has given a son,
([Isa 39:1](../kjv/isa039.htm#001)), "the hereditary chief of the
Chaldeans, a small tribe at that time settled in the marshes at the
mouth of the Euphrates, but in consequence of his conquest of Babylon
afterwards, they became the dominant caste in Babylonia itself." One
bearing this name sent ambassadors to Hezekiah (721 B.C.). He is also
called Berodach-baladan ([Kg2 20:12](../kjv/kg2020.htm#012); [Ch2
20:31](../kjv/ch2020.htm#031)). (See HEZEKIAH.)

<span id="003">**Merom**</span> Height, a lake in Northern Palestine
through which the Jordan flows. It was the scene of the third and last
great victory gained by Joshua over the Canaanites ([Jos
11:5](../kjv/jos011.htm#005)). It is not again mentioned in Scripture.
Its modern name is Bakrat el-Huleh. "The Ard el-Huleh, the centre of
which the lake occupies, is a nearly level plain of 16 miles in length
from north to south, and its breadth from east to west is from 7 to 8
miles. On the west it is walled in by the steep and lofty range of the
hills of Kedesh-Naphtali; on the east it is bounded by the lower and
more gradually ascending slopes of Bashan; on the north it is shut in by
a line of hills hummocky and irregular in shape and of no great height,
and stretching across from the mountains of Naphtali to the roots of
Mount Hermon, which towers up at the north-eastern angle of the plain to
a height of 10,000 feet. At its southern extremity the plain is
similarly traversed by elevated and broken ground, through which, by
deep and narrow clefts, the Jordan, after passing through Lake Huleh,
makes its rapid descent to the Sea of Galilee." The lake is triangular
in form, about 4 1/2 miles in length by 3 1/2 at its greatest breadth.
Its surface is 7 feet above that of the Mediterranean. It is surrounded
by a morass, which is thickly covered with canes and papyrus reeds,
which are impenetrable. Macgregor with his canoe, the Rob Roy, was the
first that ever, in modern times, sailed on its waters. (See JORDAN.)

<span id="004">**Meronothite**</span> A name given to Jehdeiah, the
herdsman of the royal asses in the time of David and Solomon ([Ch1
27:30](../kjv/ch1027.htm#030)), probably as one being a native of some
unknown town called Meronoth.

<span id="005">**Meroz**</span> A plain in the north of Palestine, the
inhabitants of which were severely condemned because they came not to
help Barak against Sisera ([Jdg 5:23](../kjv/jdg005.htm#023) : compare
[Jdg 21:8](../kjv/jdg021.htm#008); [Sa1 11:7](../kjv/sa1011.htm#007)).
It has been identified with Marassus, on a knoll to the north of Wady
Jalud, but nothing certainly is known of it. Like Chorazin, it is only
mentioned in Scripture in connection with the curse pronounced upon it.

<span id="006">**Mesha**</span> Middle district, Vulgate, Messa. (1.) A
plain in that part of the boundaries of Arabia inhabited by the
descendants of Joktan ([Gen 10:30](../kjv/gen010.htm#030)). (2.) Heb.
meysh'a , "deliverance," the eldest son of Caleb ([Ch1
2:42](../kjv/ch1002.htm#042)), and brother of Jerahmeel. (3.) Heb. id ,
a king of Moab, the son of Chemosh-Gad, a man of great wealth in flocks
and herds ([Kg2 3:4](../kjv/kg2003.htm#004)). After the death of Ahab at
Ramoth-Gilead, Mesha shook off the yoke of Israel; but on the ascension
of Jehoram to the throne of Israel, that king sought the help of
Jehoshaphat in an attempt to reduce the Moabites again to their former
condition. The united armies of the two kings came unexpectedly on the
army of the Moabites, and gained over them an easy victory. The whole
land was devastated by the conquering armies, and Mesha sought refuge in
his last stronghold, Kir-harasheth (q.v.). Reduced to despair, he
ascended the wall of the city, and there, in the sight of the allied
armies, offered his first-born son a sacrifice to Chemosh, the fire-god
of the Moabites. This fearful spectacle filled the beholders with
horror, and they retired from before the besieged city, and re-crossed
the Jordan laden with spoil ([Kg2 3:25](../kjv/kg2003.htm#025)). The
exploits of Mesha are recorded in the Phoenician inscription on a block
of black basalt found at Dibon, in Moab, usually called the "Moabite
stone" (q.v.).

<span id="007">**Meshach**</span> The title given to Mishael, one of the
three Hebrew youths who were under training at the Babylonian court for
the rank of Magi ([Dan 1:7](../kjv/dan001.htm#007); [Dan
2:49](../kjv/dan002.htm#049); 3:12-30). This was probably the name of
some Chaldean god.

<span id="008">**Meshech**</span> Drawing out, the sixth son of Japheth
([Gen 10:2](../kjv/gen010.htm#002)), the founder of a tribe ([Ch1
1:5](../kjv/ch1001.htm#005); [Eze 27:13](../kjv/eze027.htm#013); [Eze
38:2](../kjv/eze038.htm#002), [Eze 38:3](../kjv/eze038.htm#003)). They
were in all probability the Moschi, a people inhabiting the Moschian
Mountains, between the Black and the Caspian Seas. In [Psa
120:5](../kjv/psa120.htm#005) the name occurs as simply a synonym for
foreigners or barbarians. "During the ascendancy of the Babylonians and
Persians in Western Asia, the Moschi were subdued; but it seems probable
that a large number of them crossed the Caucasus range and spread over
the northern steppes, mingling with the Scythians. There they became
known as Muscovs, and gave that name to the Russian nation and its
ancient capital by which they are still generally known throughout the
East"

<span id="009">**Meshelemiah**</span> Friendship of Jehovah, a Levite of
the family of the Korhites, called also Shelemiah ([Ch1
9:21](../kjv/ch1009.htm#021); [Ch1 26:1](../kjv/ch1026.htm#001), [Ch1
26:2](../kjv/ch1026.htm#002), [Ch1 26:9](../kjv/ch1026.htm#009), [Ch1
26:14](../kjv/ch1026.htm#014)). He was a temple gate-keeper in the time
of David.
