[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Pasach**</span> Clearing, one of the sons of Japhlet,
of the tribe of Asher ([Ch1 7:33](../kjv/ch1007.htm#033)).

<span id="001">**Pas-dammim**</span> The border of blood = Ephes-dammim
(q.v.), between Shochoh and Azekah ([Sa1 17:1](../kjv/sa1017.htm#001);
[Ch1 11:13](../kjv/ch1011.htm#013)).

<span id="002">**Pashur**</span> Release. (1.) The son of Immer
(probably the same as Amariah, [Neh 10:3](../kjv/neh010.htm#003); [Neh
12:2](../kjv/neh012.htm#002)), the head of one of the priestly courses,
was "chief governor \[Heb. paqid nagid , meaning "deputy governor"\] of
the temple" ([Jer 20:1](../kjv/jer020.htm#001), [Jer
20:2](../kjv/jer020.htm#002)). At this time the nagid, or "governor," of
the temple was Seraiah the high priest ([Ch1
6:14](../kjv/ch1006.htm#014)), and Pashur was his paqid, or "deputy."
Enraged at the plainness with which Jeremiah uttered his solemn warnings
of coming judgments, because of the abounding iniquity of the times,
Pashur ordered the temple police to seize him, and after inflicting on
him corporal punishment (forty stripes save one, [Deu
25:3](../kjv/deu025.htm#003); compare [Co2
11:24](../kjv/co2011.htm#024)), to put him in the stocks in the high
gate of Benjamin, where he remained all night. On being set free in the
morning, Jeremiah went to Pashur ([Jer 20:3](../kjv/jer020.htm#003),
[Jer 20:5](../kjv/jer020.htm#005)), and announced to him that God had
changed his name to Magor-missabib, i.e., "terror on every side." The
punishment that fell upon him was probably remorse, when he saw the ruin
he had brought upon his country by advising a close alliance with Egypt
in opposition to the counsels of Jeremiah ([Jer
20:4](../kjv/jer020.htm#004)). He was carried captive to Babylon, and
died there. (2.) A priest sent by king Zedekiah to Jeremiah to inquire
of the Lord ([Ch1 24:9](../kjv/ch1024.htm#009); [Jer
21:1](../kjv/jer021.htm#001); [Jer 38:1](../kjv/jer038.htm#001)). He
advised that the prophet should be put to death. (3.) The father of
Gedaliah. He was probably the same as (1).

<span id="003">**Passage**</span> Denotes in [Jos
22:11](../kjv/jos022.htm#011), as is generally understood, the place
where the children of Israel passed over Jordan. The words "the passage
of" are, however, more correctly rendered "by the side of," or "at the
other side of," thus designating the position of the great altar erected
by the eastern tribes on their return home. This word also designates
the fords of the Jordan to the south of the Sea of Galilee ([Jdg
12:5](../kjv/jdg012.htm#005), [Jdg 12:6](../kjv/jdg012.htm#006)), and a
pass or rocky defile ([Sa1 13:23](../kjv/sa1013.htm#023); [Sa1
14:4](../kjv/sa1014.htm#004)). "Passages" in [Jer
22:20](../kjv/jer022.htm#020) is in the Revised Version more correctly
"Abarim" (q.v.), a proper name.

<span id="004">**Passion**</span> Only once found, in [Act
1:3](../kjv/act001.htm#003), meaning suffering, referring to the
sufferings of our Lord.

<span id="005">**Passover**</span> The name given to the chief of the
three great historical annual festivals of the Jews. It was kept in
remembrance of the Lord's passing over the houses of the Israelites
([Exo 12:13](../kjv/exo012.htm#013)) when the first born of all the
Egyptians were destroyed. It is called also the "feast of unleavened
bread" ([Exo 23:15](../kjv/exo023.htm#015); [Mar
14:1](../kjv/mar014.htm#001); [Act 12:3](../kjv/act012.htm#003)),
because during its celebration no leavened bread was to be eaten or even
kept in the household ([Exo 12:15](../kjv/exo012.htm#015)). The word
afterwards came to denote the lamb that was slain at the feast ([Mar
14:12](../kjv/mar014.htm#012); [Co1 5:7](../kjv/co1005.htm#007)). A
detailed account of the institution of this feast is given in Ex. 12 and
13. It was afterwards incorporated in the ceremonial law ([Lev
23:4](../kjv/lev023.htm#004)) as one of the great festivals of the
nation. In after times many changes seem to have taken place as to the
mode of its celebration as compared with its first celebration (Compare
[Deu 16:2](../kjv/deu016.htm#002), [Deu 16:5](../kjv/deu016.htm#005),
[Deu 16:6](../kjv/deu016.htm#006); [Ch2 30:16](../kjv/ch2030.htm#016);
[Lev 23:10](../kjv/lev023.htm#010); [Num 9:10](../kjv/num009.htm#010),
[Num 9:11](../kjv/num009.htm#011); [Num 28:16](../kjv/num028.htm#016)).
Again, the use of wine ([Luk 22:17](../kjv/luk022.htm#017), [Luk
22:20](../kjv/luk022.htm#020)), of sauce with the bitter herbs ([Joh
13:26](../kjv/joh013.htm#026)), and the service of praise were
introduced. There is recorded only one celebration of this feast between
the Exodus and the entrance into Canaan, namely, that mentioned in [Num
9:5](../kjv/num009.htm#005). (See JOSIAH.) It was primarily a
commemorative ordinance, reminding the children of Israel of their
deliverance out of Egypt; but it was, no doubt, also a type of the great
deliverance wrought by the Messiah for all his people from the doom of
death on account of sin, and from the bondage of sin itself, a worse
than Egyptian bondage ([Co1 5:7](../kjv/co1005.htm#007); [Joh
1:29](../kjv/joh001.htm#029); [Joh 19:32](../kjv/joh019.htm#032); [Pe1
1:19](../kjv/pe1001.htm#019); [Gal 4:4](../kjv/gal004.htm#004), [Gal
4:5](../kjv/gal004.htm#005)). The appearance of Jerusalem on the
occasion of the Passover in the time of our Lord is thus fittingly
described: "The city itself and the neighbourhood became more and more
crowded as the feast approached, the narrow streets and dark arched
bazaars showing the same throng of men of all nations as when Jesus had
first visited Jerusalem as a boy. Even the temple offered a strange
sight at this season, for in parts of the outer courts a wide space was
covered with pens for sheep, goats, and cattle to be used for offerings.
Sellers shouted the merits of their beasts, sheep bleated, oxen lowed.
Sellers of doves also had a place set apart for them. Potters offered a
choice from huge stacks of clay dishes and ovens for roasting and eating
the Passover lamb. Booths for wine, oil, salt, and all else needed for
sacrifices invited customers. Persons going to and from the city
shortened their journey by crossing the temple grounds, often carrying
burdens... Stalls to change foreign money into the shekel of the temple,
which alone could be paid to the priests, were numerous, the whole
confusion making the sanctuary like a noisy market" (Geikie's Life of
Christ).

<span id="006">**Patara**</span> A city on the south-west coast of Lycia
at which Paul landed on his return from his third missionary journey
([Act 21:1](../kjv/act021.htm#001), [Act 21:2](../kjv/act021.htm#002)).
Here he found a larger vessel, which was about to sail across the open
sea to the coast of Phoenicia. In this vessel he set forth, and reached
the city of Tyre in perhaps two or three days.

<span id="007">**Pathros**</span> The name generally given to Upper
Egypt (the Thebaid of the Greeks), as distinguished from Matsor, or
Lower Egypt ([Isa 11:11](../kjv/isa011.htm#011); [Jer
44:1](../kjv/jer044.htm#001), [Jer 44:15](../kjv/jer044.htm#015); [Eze
30:14](../kjv/eze030.htm#014)), the two forming Mizraim. After the
destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, colonies of Jews settled "in
the country of Pathros" and other parts of Egypt.

<span id="008">**Patmos**</span> A small rocky and barren island, one of
the group called the "Sporades," in the Aegean Sea. It is mentioned in
Scripture only in [Rev 1:9](../kjv/rev001.htm#009). It was on this
island, to which John was banished by the emperor Domitian (A.D. 95),
that he received from God the wondrous revelation recorded in his book.
This has naturally invested it with the deepest interest for all time.
It is now called Patmo. (See JOHN.)

<span id="009">**Patriarch**</span> A name employed in the New Testament
with reference to Abraham ([Heb 7:4](../kjv/heb007.htm#004)), the sons
of Jacob ([Act 7:8](../kjv/act007.htm#008), [Act
7:9](../kjv/act007.htm#009)), and to David ([Act
2:29](../kjv/act002.htm#029)). This name is generally applied to the
progenitors of families or "heads of the fathers" ([Jos
14:1](../kjv/jos014.htm#001)) mentioned in Scripture, and they are
spoken of as antediluvian (from Adam to Noah) and post-diluvian (from
Noah to Jacob) patriarchs. But the expression "the patriarch," by way of
eminence, is applied to the twelve sons of Jacob, or to Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. "Patriarchal longevity presents itself as one of the most
striking of the facts concerning mankind which the early history of the
Book of Genesis places before us. There is a large amount of consentient
tradition to the effect that the life of man was originally far more
prolonged than it is at present, extending to at least several hundred
years. The Babylonians, Egyptians, and Chinese exaggerated these
hundreds into thousands. The Greeks and Romans, with more moderation,
limited human life within a thousand or eight hundred years. The Hindus
still farther shortened the term. Their books taught that in the first
age of the world man was free from diseases, and lived ordinarily four
hundred years; in the second age the term of life was reduced from four
hundred to three hundred; in the third it became two hundred; in the
fourth and last it was brought down to one hundred" (Rawlinson's
Historical Illustrations).
