[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Napkin**</span> (Gr. soudarion , [Joh
11:44](../kjv/joh011.htm#044); [Joh 20:7](../kjv/joh020.htm#007); Lat.
sudarium , a "sweat-cloth"), a cloth for wiping the sweat from the face.
But the word is used of a wrapper to fold money in ([Luk
19:20](../kjv/luk019.htm#020)), and as an article of dress, a
"handkerchief" worn on the head ([Act 19:12](../kjv/act019.htm#012)).

<span id="001">**Narcissus**</span> Daffofil, a Roman whom Paul salutes
([Rom 16:11](../kjv/rom016.htm#011)). He is supposed to have been the
private secretary of the emperor Claudius. This is, however, quite
uncertain.

<span id="002">**Nathan**</span> Given. (1.) A prophet in the reigns of
David and Solomon ([Ch2 9:29](../kjv/ch2009.htm#029)). He is first
spoken of in connection with the arrangements David made for the
building of the temple ([Sa2 7:2](../kjv/sa2007.htm#002), [Sa2
7:3](../kjv/sa2007.htm#003), [Sa2 7:17](../kjv/sa2007.htm#017)), and
next appears as the reprover of David on account of his sin with
Bathsheba ([Sa2 12:1](../kjv/sa2012.htm#001)). He was charged with the
education of Solomon ([Sa2 12:25](../kjv/sa2012.htm#025)), at whose
inauguration to the throne he took a prominent part ([Kg1
1:8](../kjv/kg1001.htm#008), [Kg1 1:10](../kjv/kg1001.htm#010), [Kg1
1:11](../kjv/kg1001.htm#011), 22-45). His two sons, Zabad ([Ch1
2:36](../kjv/ch1002.htm#036)) and Azariah ([Kg1
4:5](../kjv/kg1004.htm#005)) occupied places of honour at the king's
court. He last appears in assisting David in reorganizing the public
worship ([Ch2 29:25](../kjv/ch2029.htm#025)). He seems to have written a
life of David, and also a life of Solomon ([Ch1
29:29](../kjv/ch1029.htm#029); [Ch2 9:29](../kjv/ch2009.htm#029)). (2.)
A son of David, by Bathsheba ([Sa2 5:14](../kjv/sa2005.htm#014)), whose
name appears in the genealogy of Mary, the mother of our Lord ([Luk
3:31](../kjv/luk003.htm#031)). (3.) [Ezr 8:16](../kjv/ezr008.htm#016).

<span id="003">**Nathanael**</span> Given or gift of God, one of our
Lord's disciples, "of Cana in Galilee" ([Joh
21:2](../kjv/joh021.htm#002)). He was "an Israelite indeed, in whom was
no guile" ([Joh 1:47](../kjv/joh001.htm#047), [Joh
1:48](../kjv/joh001.htm#048)). His name occurs only in the Gospel of
John, who in his list of the disciples never mentions Bartholomew, with
whom he has consequently been identified. He was one of those to whom
the Lord showed himself alive after his resurrection, at the Sea of
Tiberias.

<span id="004">**Nativity of Christ**</span> The birth of our Lord took
place at the time and place predicted by the prophets ([Gen
49:10](../kjv/gen049.htm#010); [Isa 7:14](../kjv/isa007.htm#014); [Jer
31:15](../kjv/jer031.htm#015); [Mic 5:2](../kjv/mic005.htm#002); [Hag
2:6](../kjv/hag002.htm#006); [Dan 9:24](../kjv/dan009.htm#024), [Dan
9:25](../kjv/dan009.htm#025)). Joseph and Mary were providentially led
to go up to Bethlehem at this period, and there Christ was born ([Mat
2:1](../kjv/mat002.htm#001), [Mat 2:6](../kjv/mat002.htm#006); [Luk
2:1](../kjv/luk002.htm#001), [Luk 2:7](../kjv/luk002.htm#007)). The
exact year or month or day of his birth cannot, however, now be exactly
ascertained. We know, however, that it took place in the "fulness of the
time" ([Gal 4:4](../kjv/gal004.htm#004)), i.e., at the fittest time in
the world's history. Chronologists are now generally agreed that the
year 4 before the Christian era was the year of Christ's nativity, and
consequently that he was about four years old in the year A.D. 1

<span id="005">**Naughty Figs**</span> ([Jer
24:2](../kjv/jer024.htm#002)). "The bad figs may have been such either
from having decayed, and thus been reduced to a rotten condition, or as
being the fruit of the sycamore, which contains a bitter juice"
(Tristram, Nat. Hist.). The inferiority of the fruit is here referred to
as an emblem of the rejected Zedekiah and his people.

<span id="006">**Nazarene**</span> This epithet (Gr. Nazaraios ) is
applied to Christ only once ([Mat 2:23](../kjv/mat002.htm#023)). In all
other cases the word is rendered "of Nazareth" ([Mar
1:24](../kjv/mar001.htm#024); [Mar 10:47](../kjv/mar010.htm#047); [Mar
14:67](../kjv/mar014.htm#067), etc.). When this Greek designation was at
first applied to our Lord, it was meant simply to denote the place of
his residence. In course of time the word became a term of reproach.
Thus the word "Nazarene" carries with it an allusion to those prophecies
which speak of Christ as "despised of men" ([Isa
53:3](../kjv/isa053.htm#003)). Some, however, think that in this name
there is an allusion to the Hebrew netser, which signifies a branch or
sprout. It is so applied to the Messiah ([Isa
11:1](../kjv/isa011.htm#001)), i.e., he whom the prophets called the
Netse, the "Branch." The followers of Christ were called "the sect of
Nazarenes" ([Act 24:5](../kjv/act024.htm#005)). All over Palestine and
Syria this name is still given to Christians. (See NAZARETH.)

<span id="007">**Nazareth**</span> Separated, generally supposed to be
the Greek form of the Hebrew netser , a "shoot" or "sprout." Some,
however, think that the name of the city must be connected with the name
of the hill behind it, from which one of the finest prospects in
Palestine is obtained, and accordingly they derive it from the Hebrew
notserah, i.e., one guarding or watching, thus designating the hill
which overlooks and thus guards an extensive region. This city is not
mentioned in the Old Testament. It was the home of Joseph and Mary ([Luk
2:39](../kjv/luk002.htm#039)), and here the angel announced to the
Virgin the birth of the Messiah ([Luk 1:26](../kjv/luk001.htm#026)).
Here Jesus grew up from his infancy to manhood ([Luk
4:16](../kjv/luk004.htm#016)); and here he began his public ministry in
the synagogue ([Mat 13:54](../kjv/mat013.htm#054)), at which the people
were so offended that they sought to cast him down from the precipice
whereon their city was built ([Luk 4:29](../kjv/luk004.htm#029)). Twice
they expelled him from their borders ([Luk 4:16](../kjv/luk004.htm#016);
[Mat 13:54](../kjv/mat013.htm#054)); and he finally retired from the
city, where he did not many mighty works because of their unbelief ([Mat
13:58](../kjv/mat013.htm#058)), and took up his residence in Capernaum.
Nazareth is situated among the southern ridges of Lebanon, on the steep
slope of a hill, about 14 miles from the Sea of Galilee and about 6 west
from Mount Tabor. It is identified with the modern village en-Nazirah,
of six or ten thousand inhabitants. It lies "as in a hollow cup" lower
down upon the hill than the ancient city. The main road for traffic
between Egypt and the interior of Asia passed by Nazareth near the foot
of Tabor, and thence northward to Damascus. It is supposed from the
words of Nathanael in [Joh 1:46](../kjv/joh001.htm#046) that the city of
Nazareth was held in great disrepute, either because, it is said, the
people of Galilee were a rude and less cultivated class, and were
largely influenced by the Gentiles who mingled with them, or because of
their lower type of moral and religious character. But there seems to be
no sufficient reason for these suppositions. The Jews believed that,
according to [Mic 5:2](../kjv/mic005.htm#002), the birth of the Messiah
would take place at Bethlehem, and nowhere else. Nathanael held the same
opinion as his countrymen, and believed that the great "good" which they
were all expecting could not come from Nazareth. This is probably what
Nathanael meant. Moreover, there does not seem to be any evidence that
the inhabitants of Galilee were in any respect inferior, or that a
Galilean was held in contempt, in the time of our Lord. (See Dr.
Merrill's Galilee in the Time of Christ.) The population of this city
(now about 10,000) in the time of Christ probably amounted to 15,000 or
20,000 souls. "The so-called 'Holy House' is a cave under the Latin
church, which appears to have been originally a tank. The 'brow of the
hill', site of the attempted precipitation, is probably the northern
cliff: the traditional site has been shown since the middle ages at some
distance to the south. None of the traditional sites are traceable very
early, and they have no authority. The name Nazareth perhaps means 'a
watch tower' (now en-Nasrah), but is connected in the New Testament with
Netzer, 'a branch' ([Isa 4:2](../kjv/isa004.htm#002); [Jer
23:5](../kjv/jer023.htm#005); [Zac 3:8](../kjv/zac003.htm#008); [Zac
6:12](../kjv/zac006.htm#012); [Mat 2:23](../kjv/mat002.htm#023)),
Nazarene being quite a different word from Nazarite."

<span id="008">**Nazarite**</span> (Heb. form Nazirite ), the name of
such Israelites as took on them the vow prescribed in Num. 6:2-21. The
word denotes generally one who is separated from others and consecrated
to God. Although there is no mention of any Nazarite before Samson, yet
it is evident that they existed before the time of Moses. The vow of a
Nazarite involved these three things, (1.) abstinence from wine and
strong drink, (2.) refraining from cutting the hair off the head during
the whole period of the continuance of the vow, and (3.) the avoidance
of contact with the dead. When the period of the continuance of the vow
came to an end, the Nazarite had to present himself at the door of the
sanctuary with (1.) a he lamb of the first year for a burnt-offering,
(2.) a ewe lamb of the first year for a sin-offering, and (3.) a ram for
a peace-offering. After these sacrifices were offered by the priest, the
Nazarite cut off his hair at the door and threw it into the fire under
the peace-offering. For some reason, probably in the midst of his work
at Corinth, Paul took on himself the Nazarite vow. This could only be
terminated by his going up to Jerusalem to offer up the hair which till
then was to be left uncut. But it seems to have been allowable for
persons at a distance to cut the hair, which was to be brought up to
Jerusalem, where the ceremony was completed. This Paul did at Cenchrea
just before setting out on his voyage into Syria ([Act
18:18](../kjv/act018.htm#018)). On another occasion ([Act
21:23](../kjv/act021.htm#023)), at the feast of Pentecost, Paul took on
himself again the Nazarite vow. "The ceremonies involved took a longer
time than Paul had at his disposal, but the law permitted a man to share
the vow if he could find companions who had gone through the prescribed
ceremonies, and who permitted him to join their company. This permission
was commonly granted if the new comer paid all the fees required from
the whole company (fee to the Levite for cutting the hair and fees for
sacrifices), and finished the vow along with the others. Four Jewish
Christians were performing the vow, and would admit Paul to their
company, provided he paid their expenses. Paul consented, paid the
charges, and when the last seven days of the vow began he went with them
to live in the temple, giving the usual notice to the priests that he
had joined in regular fashion, was a sharer with the four men, and that
his vow would end with theirs. Nazarites retired to the temple during
the last period of seven days, because they could be secure there
against any accidental defilement" (Lindsay's Acts). As to the duration
of a Nazarite's vow, every one was left at liberty to fix his own time.
There is mention made in Scripture of only three who were Nazarites for
life, Samson, Samuel, and John the Baptist ([Jdg
13:4](../kjv/jdg013.htm#004), [Jdg 13:5](../kjv/jdg013.htm#005); [Sa1
1:11](../kjv/sa1001.htm#011); [Luk 1:15](../kjv/luk001.htm#015)). In its
ordinary form, however, the Nazarite's vow lasted only thirty, and at
most one hundred, days. (See RECHABITES.) This institution was a symbol
of a life devoted to God and separated from all sin a holy life.

<span id="009">**Neah**</span> Shaking, or settlement, or descent a town
on the east side of Zebulun, not far from Rimmon ([Jos
19:13](../kjv/jos019.htm#013)).
