[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Jehoiachin**</span> Succeeded his father Jehoiakin (599
B.C.) when only eight years of age, and reigned for one hundred days
([Ch2 36:9](../kjv/ch2036.htm#009)). He is also called Jeconiah ([Jer
24:1](../kjv/jer024.htm#001); [Jer 27:20](../kjv/jer027.htm#020), etc.),
and Coniah ([Jer 22:24](../kjv/jer022.htm#024); [Jer
37:1](../kjv/jer037.htm#001)). He was succeeded by his uncle, Mattaniah
= Zedekiah (q.v.). He was the last direct heir to the Jewish crown. He
was carried captive to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar, along with the flower
of the nobility, all the leading men in Jerusalem, and a great body of
the general population, some thirteen thousand in all ([Kg2
24:12](../kjv/kg2024.htm#012); [Jer 52:28](../kjv/jer052.htm#028)).
After an imprisonment of thirty-seven years ([Jer
52:31](../kjv/jer052.htm#031), [Jer 52:33](../kjv/jer052.htm#033)), he
was liberated by Evil-merodach, and permitted to occupy a place in the
king's household and sit at his table, receiving "every day a portion
until the day of his death, all the days of his life" ([Jer
52:32](../kjv/jer052.htm#032)).

<span id="001">**Jehoiakim**</span> He whom Jehovah has set up, the
second son of Josiah, and eighteenth king of Judah, which he ruled over
for eleven years (610-599 B.C.). His original name was Eliakim (q.v.).
On the death of his father his younger brother Jehoahaz (= Shallum, [Jer
22:11](../kjv/jer022.htm#011)), who favoured the Chaldeans against the
Egyptians, was made king by the people; but the king of Egypt,
Pharaoh-necho, invaded the land and deposed Jehoahaz ([Kg2
23:33](../kjv/kg2023.htm#033), [Kg2 23:34](../kjv/kg2023.htm#034); [Jer
22:10](../kjv/jer022.htm#010)), setting Eliakim on the throne in his
stead, and changing his name to Jehoiakim. After this the king of Egypt
took no part in Jewish politics, having been defeated by the Chaldeans
at Carchemish ([Kg2 24:7](../kjv/kg2024.htm#007); [Jer
46:2](../kjv/jer046.htm#002)). Palestine was now invaded and conquered
by Nebuchadnezzar. Jehoiakim was taken prisoner and carried captive to
Babylon ([Ch2 36:6](../kjv/ch2036.htm#006), [Ch2
36:7](../kjv/ch2036.htm#007)). It was at this time that Daniel also and
his three companions were taken captive to Babylon ([Dan
1:1](../kjv/dan001.htm#001), [Dan 1:2](../kjv/dan001.htm#002)).
Nebuchadnezzar reinstated Jehoiakim on his throne, but treated him as a
vassal king. In the year after this, Jeremiah caused his prophecies to
be read by Baruch in the court of the temple. Jehoiakim, hearing of
this, had them also read in the royal palace before himself. The words
displeased him, and taking the roll from the hands of Baruch he cut it
in pieces and threw it into the fire ([Jer
36:23](../kjv/jer036.htm#023)). During his disastrous reign there was a
return to the old idolatry and corruption of the days of Manasseh. After
three years of subjection to Babylon, Jehoiakim withheld his tribute and
threw off the yoke ([Kg2 24:1](../kjv/kg2024.htm#001)), hoping to make
himself independent. Nebuchadnezzar sent bands of Chaldeans, Syrians,
and Ammonites ([Kg2 24:2](../kjv/kg2024.htm#002)) to chastise his
rebellious vassal. They cruelly harassed the whole country (compare [Jer
49:1](../kjv/jer049.htm#001)). The king came to a violent death, and his
body having been thrown over the wall of Jerusalem, to convince the
besieging army that he was dead, after having been dragged away, was
buried beyond the gates of Jerusalem "with the burial of an ass," 599
B.C. ([Jer 22:18](../kjv/jer022.htm#018), [Jer
22:19](../kjv/jer022.htm#019); [Jer 36:30](../kjv/jer036.htm#030)).
Nebuchadnezzar placed his son Jehoiachin on the throne, wishing still to
retain the kingdom of Judah as tributary to him.

<span id="002">**Jehoiarib**</span> Jehovah defends, a priest at
Jerusalem, head of one of the sacerdotal courses ([Ch1
9:10](../kjv/ch1009.htm#010); [Ch1 24:7](../kjv/ch1024.htm#007)). His
"course" went up from Babylon after the Exile ([Ezr
2:36](../kjv/ezr002.htm#036); [Neh 7:39](../kjv/neh007.htm#039)).

<span id="003">**Jehonadab**</span> Jehovah is liberal; or, whom Jehovah
impels. (1.) A son of Shimeah, and nephew of David. It was he who gave
the fatal wicked advice to Amnon, the heir to the throne ([Sa2
13:3](../kjv/sa2013.htm#003)). He was very "subtle," but unprincipled.
(2.) A son of Rechab, the founder of a tribe who bound themselves by a
vow to abstain from wine ([Jer 35:6](../kjv/jer035.htm#006)). There were
different settlements of Rechabites ([Jdg 1:16](../kjv/jdg001.htm#016);
[Jdg 4:11](../kjv/jdg004.htm#011); [Ch1 2:55](../kjv/ch1002.htm#055)).
(See RECHABITE.) His interview and alliance with Jehu are mentioned in
[Kg2 10:15](../kjv/kg2010.htm#015). He went with Jehu in his chariot to
Samaria.

<span id="004">**Jehonathan**</span> Whom Jehovah gave. (1.) One of the
stewards of David's store-houses ([Ch1 27:25](../kjv/ch1027.htm#025)).
(2.) A Levite who taught the law to the people of Judah ([Ch2
17:8](../kjv/ch2017.htm#008)). (3.) [Neh 12:18](../kjv/neh012.htm#018).

<span id="005">**Jehoram**</span> Jehovah-exalted. (1.) Son of Toi, king
of Hamath, sent by his father to congratulate David on the occasion of
his victory over Hadadezer ([Sa2 8:10](../kjv/sa2008.htm#010)). (2.) A
Levite of the family of Gershom ([Ch1 26:25](../kjv/ch1026.htm#025)).
(3.) A priest sent by Jehoshaphat to instruct the people in Judah ([Ch2
17:8](../kjv/ch2017.htm#008)). (4.) The son of Ahab and Jezebel, and
successor to his brother Ahaziah on the throne of Israel. He reigned
twelve years, 896-884 B.C. ([Kg2 1:17](../kjv/kg2001.htm#017); [Kg2
3:1](../kjv/kg2003.htm#001)). His first work was to reduce to subjection
the Moabites, who had asserted their independence in the reign of his
brother. Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, assisted Jehoram in this effort. He
was further helped by his ally the king of Edom. Elisha went forth with
the confederated army (2 Kings 3:1-19), and at the solicitation of
Jehoshaphat encouraged the army with the assurance from the Lord of a
speedy victory. The Moabites under Mesha their king were utterly routed
and their cities destroyed. At Kir-haraseth Mesha made a final stand.
The Israelites refrained from pressing their victory further, and
returned to their own land. Elisha afterwards again befriended Jehoram
when a war broke out between the Syrians and Israel, and in a remarkable
way brought that war to a bloodless close ([Kg2
6:23](../kjv/kg2006.htm#023)). But Jehoram, becoming confident in his
own power, sank into idolatry, and brought upon himself and his land
another Syrian invasion, which led to great suffering and distress in
Samaria ([Kg2 6:24](../kjv/kg2006.htm#024)). By a remarkable
providential interposition the city was saved from utter destruction,
and the Syrians were put to flight ([Kg2 7:6](../kjv/kg2007.htm#006)).
Jehoram was wounded in a battle with the Syrians at Ramah, and obliged
to return to Jezreel ([Kg2 8:29](../kjv/kg2008.htm#029); [Kg2
9:14](../kjv/kg2009.htm#014), [Kg2 9:15](../kjv/kg2009.htm#015)), and
soon after the army proclaimed their leader Jehu king of Israel, and
revolted from their allegiance to Jehoram (2 Kings 9). Jehoram was
pierced by an arrow from Jehu's bow on the piece of ground at Jezreel
which Ahab had taken from Naboth, and there he died ([Kg2
9:21](../kjv/kg2009.htm#021)). (5.) The eldest son and successor of
Jehoshaphat, king of Judah. He reigned eight years (892-885 B.C.) alone
as king of Judah, having been previously for some years associated with
his father ([Ch2 21:5](../kjv/ch2021.htm#005), [Ch2
21:20](../kjv/ch2021.htm#020); [Kg2 8:16](../kjv/kg2008.htm#016)). His
wife was Athaliah, the daughter of Ahab and Jezebel. His daughter
Jehosheba was married to the high priest Jehoiada. He sank into gross
idolatry, and brought upon himself and his kingdom the anger of Jehovah.
The Edomites revolted from under his yoke, and the Philistines and the
Arabians and Cushites invaded the land, and carried away great spoil,
along with Jehoram's wives and all his children, except Ahaziah. He died
a painful death from a fearful malady, and was refused a place in the
sepulchre of the kings ([Kg2 8:16](../kjv/kg2008.htm#016); 2 Chr. 21).

<span id="006">**Jehoshaphat**</span> Jehovah-judged. (1.) One of
David's body-guard ([Ch1 11:43](../kjv/ch1011.htm#043)). (2.) One of the
priests who accompanied the removal of the ark to Jerusalem ([Ch1
15:24](../kjv/ch1015.htm#024)). (3.) Son of Ahilud, "recorder" or
anna-list under David and Solomon ([Sa2 8:16](../kjv/sa2008.htm#016)), a
state officer of high rank, chancellor or vizier of the kingdom. (4.)
Solomon's purveyor in Issachar ([Kg1 4:17](../kjv/kg1004.htm#017)). (5.)
The son and successor of Asa, king of Judah. After fortifying his
kingdom against Israel ([Ch2 17:1](../kjv/ch2017.htm#001), [Ch2
17:2](../kjv/ch2017.htm#002)), he set himself to cleanse the land of
idolatry ([Kg1 22:43](../kjv/kg1022.htm#043)). In the third year of his
reign he sent out priests and Levites over the land to instruct the
people in the law ([Ch2 17:7](../kjv/ch2017.htm#007)). He enjoyed a
great measure of peace and prosperity, the blessing of God resting on
the people "in their basket and their store." The great mistake of his
reign was his entering into an alliance with Ahab, the king of Israel,
which involved him in much disgrace, and brought disaster on his kingdom
(1 Kings 22:1-33). Escaping from the bloody battle of Ramoth-gilead, the
prophet Jehu ([Ch2 19:1](../kjv/ch2019.htm#001)) reproached him for the
course he had been pursuing, whereupon he entered with rigour on his
former course of opposition to all idolatry, and of deepening interest
in the worship of God and in the righteous government of the people
([Ch2 19:4](../kjv/ch2019.htm#004)). Again he entered into an alliance
with Ahaziah, the king of Israel, for the purpose of carrying on
maritime commerce with Ophir. But the fleet that was then equipped at
Ezion-gaber was speedily wrecked. A new fleet was fitted out without the
co-operation of the king of Israel, and although it was successful, the
trade was not prosecuted ([Ch2 20:35](../kjv/ch2020.htm#035); [Kg1
22:48](../kjv/kg1022.htm#048)). He subsequently joined Jehoram, king of
Israel, in a war against the Moabites, who were under tribute to Israel.
This war was successful. The Moabites were subdued; but the dreadful act
of Mesha in offering his own son a sacrifice on the walls of
Kir-haresheth in the sight of the armies of Israel filled him with
horror, and he withdrew and returned to his own land (2 Kings 3:4-27).
The last most notable event of his reign was that recorded in 2 Chr. 20.
The Moabites formed a great and powerful confederacy with the
surrounding nations, and came against Jehoshaphat. The allied forces
were encamped at Engedi. The king and his people were filled with alarm,
and betook themselves to God in prayer. The king prayed in the court of
the temple, "O our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might
against this great company that cometh against us." Amid the silence
that followed, the voice of Jahaziel the Levite was heard announcing
that on the morrow all this great host would be overthrown. So it was,
for they quarreled among themselves, and slew one another, leaving to
the people of Judah only to gather the rich spoils of the slain. This
was recognized as a great deliverance wrought for them by God (890
B.C.). Soon after this Jehoshaphat died, after a reign of twenty-five
years, being sixty years of age, and was succeeded by his son Jehoram
([Kg1 22:50](../kjv/kg1022.htm#050)). He had this testimony, that "he
sought the Lord with all his heart" ([Ch2 22:9](../kjv/ch2022.htm#009)).
The kingdom of Judah was never more prosperous than under his reign.
(6.) The son of Nimshi, and father of Jehu, king of Israel ([Kg2
9:2](../kjv/kg2009.htm#002), [Kg2 9:14](../kjv/kg2009.htm#014)).

<span id="007">**Jehoshaphat, Valley of**</span> Mentioned in Scripture
only in [Joe 3:2](../kjv/joe003.htm#002), [Joe
3:12](../kjv/joe003.htm#012). This is the name given in modern times to
the valley between Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives, and the Kidron
flows through it. Here Jehoshaphat overthrew the confederated enemies of
Israel ([Psa 83:6](../kjv/psa083.htm#006)); and in this valley also God
was to overthrow the Tyrians, Zidonians, etc. ([Joe
3:4](../kjv/joe003.htm#004), [Joe 3:19](../kjv/joe003.htm#019)), with an
utter overthrow. This has been fulfilled; but Joel speaks of the final
conflict, when God would destroy all Jerusalem's enemies, of whom Tyre
and Zidon, etc., were types. The "valley of Jehoshaphat" may therefore
be simply regarded as a general term for the theatre of God's final
judgments on the enemies of Israel. This valley has from ancient times
been used by the Jews as a burial-ground. It is all over paved with flat
stones as tombstones, bearing on them Hebrew inscriptions.

<span id="008">**Jehosheba**</span> Jehovah-swearing, the daughter of
Jehoram, the king of Israel. She is called Jehoshabeath in [Ch2
22:11](../kjv/ch2022.htm#011). She was the only princess of the royal
house who was married to a high priest, Jehoiada ([Ch2
22:11](../kjv/ch2022.htm#011)).

<span id="009">**Jehovah**</span> The special and significant name (not
merely an appellative title such as Lord) by which God revealed himself
to the ancient Hebrews ([Exo 6:2](../kjv/exo006.htm#002), [Exo
6:3](../kjv/exo006.htm#003)). This name, the Tetragrammaton of the
Greeks, was held by the later Jews to be so sacred that it was never
pronounced except by the high priest on the great Day of Atonement, when
he entered into the most holy place. Whenever this name occurred in the
sacred books they pronounced it, as they still do, "Adonai" (i.e.,
Lord), thus using another word in its stead. The Massorets gave to it
the vowel-points appropriate to this word. This Jewish practice was
founded on a false interpretation of [Lev 24:16](../kjv/lev024.htm#016).
The meaning of the word appears from [Exo 3:14](../kjv/exo003.htm#014)
to be "the unchanging, eternal, self-existent God," the "I am that I
am," a covenant-keeping God. (Compare [Mal 3:6](../kjv/mal003.htm#006);
[Hos 12:5](../kjv/hos012.htm#005); [Rev 1:4](../kjv/rev001.htm#004),
[Rev 1:8](../kjv/rev001.htm#008).) The Hebrew name "Jehovah" is
generally translated in the Authorized Version (and the Revised Version
has not departed from this rule) by the word LORD printed in small
capitals, to distinguish it from the rendering of the Hebrew Adonai and
the Greek Kurios , which are also rendered Lord, but printed in the
usual type. The Hebrew word is translated "Jehovah" only in [Exo
6:3](../kjv/exo006.htm#003); [Psa 83:18](../kjv/psa083.htm#018); [Isa
12:2](../kjv/isa012.htm#002); [Isa 26:4](../kjv/isa026.htm#004), and in
the compound names mentioned below. It is worthy of notice that this
name is never used in the LXX., the Samaritan Pentateuch, the Apocrypha,
or in the New Testament. It is found, however, on the "Moabite stone"
(q.v.), and consequently it must have been in the days of Mesba so
commonly pronounced by the Hebrews as to be familiar to their heathen
neighbours.
