[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Phalec**</span> ([Luk 3:35](../kjv/luk003.htm#035)) =
Peleg (q.v.), [Gen 11:16](../kjv/gen011.htm#016).

<span id="001">**Phallu**</span> Separated, the second son of Reuben
([Gen 46:9](../kjv/gen046.htm#009)).

<span id="002">**Phalti**</span> Deliverance of the Lord, the son of
Laish of Gallim ([Sa1 25:44](../kjv/sa1025.htm#044)) =

<span id="003">**Phaltiel**</span> ([Sa2 3:15](../kjv/sa2003.htm#015)).
Michal, David's wife, was given to him.

<span id="004">**Phanuel**</span> Face of God, father of the prophetess
Anna (q.v.), [Luk 2:36](../kjv/luk002.htm#036).

<span id="005">**Pharaoh**</span> The official title borne by the
Egyptian kings down to the time when that country was conquered by the
Greeks. (See EGYPT.) The name is a compound, as some think, of the words
Ra, the "sun" or "sun-god," and the article phe, "the," prefixed; hence
phera, "the sun," or "the sun-god." But others, perhaps more correctly,
think the name derived from Perao, "the great house" = his majesty = in
Turkish, "the Sublime Porte." (1.) The Pharaoh who was on the throne
when Abram went down into Egypt ([Gen 12:10](../kjv/gen012.htm#010)) was
probably one of the Hyksos, or "shepherd kings." The Egyptians called
the nomad tribes of Syria Shasu, "plunderers," their king or chief Hyk,
and hence the name of those invaders who conquered the native kings and
established a strong government, with Zoan or Tanis as their capital.
They were of Semitic origin, and of kindred blood accordingly with
Abram. They were probably driven forward by the pressure of the
Hittites. The name they bear on the monuments is "Mentiu." (2.) The
Pharaoh of Joseph's days (Gen. 41) was probably Apopi, or Apopis, the
last of the Hyksos kings. To the old native Egyptians, who were an
African race, shepherds were "an abomination;" but to the Hyksos kings
these Asiatic shepherd who now appeared with Jacob at their head were
congenial, and being akin to their own race, had a warm welcome ([Gen
47:5](../kjv/gen047.htm#005), [Gen 47:6](../kjv/gen047.htm#006)). Some
argue that Joseph came to Egypt in the reign of Thothmes III., long
after the expulsion of the Hyksos, and that his influence is to be seen
in the rise and progress of the religious revolution in the direction of
monotheism which characterized the middle of the Eighteenth Dynasty. The
wife of Amenophis III., of that dynasty, was a Semite. Is this singular
fact to be explained from the presence of some of Joseph's kindred at
the Egyptian court? Pharaoh said to Joseph, "Thy father and thy brethren
are come unto thee: the land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the
land make thy father and brethren to dwell" ([Gen
47:5](../kjv/gen047.htm#005), [Gen 47:6](../kjv/gen047.htm#006)). (3.)
The "new king who knew not Joseph" ([Exo 1:8](../kjv/exo001.htm#008))
has been generally supposed to have been Aahmes I., or Amosis, as he is
called by Josephus. Recent discoveries, however, have led to the
conclusion that Seti was the "new king." For about seventy years the
Hebrews in Egypt were under the powerful protection of Joseph. After his
death their condition was probably very slowly and gradually changed.
The invaders, the Hyksos, who for some five centuries had been masters
of Egypt, were driven out, and the old dynasty restored. The Israelites
now began to be looked down upon. They began to be afflicted and
tyrannized over. In process of time a change appears to have taken place
in the government of Egypt. A new dynasty, the Nineteenth, as it is
called, came into power under Seti I., who was its founder. He
associated with him in his government his son, Rameses II., when he was
yet young, probably ten or twelve years of age. Note: Professor Maspero,
keeper of the museum of Bulak, near Cairo, had his attention in 1870
directed to the fact that scarabs, i.e., stone and metal imitations of
the beetle (symbols of immortality), originally worn as amulets by royal
personages, which were evidently genuine relics of the time of the
ancient Pharaohs, were being sold at Thebes and different places along
the Nile. This led him to suspect that some hitherto undiscovered
burial-place of the Pharaohs had been opened, and that these and other
relics, now secretly sold, were a part of the treasure found there. For
a long time he failed, with all his ingenuity, to find the source of
these rare treasures. At length one of those in the secret volunteered
to give information regarding this burial-place. The result was that a
party was conducted in 1881 to Dier el-Bahari, near Thebes, when the
wonderful discovery was made of thirty-six mummies of kings, queens,
princes, and high priests hidden away in a cavern prepared for them,
where they had lain undisturbed for thirty centuries. "The temple of
Deir el-Bahari stands in the middle of a natural amphitheater of cliffs,
which is only one of a number of smaller amphitheaters into which the
limestone mountains of the tombs are broken up. In the wall of rock
separating this basin from the one next to it some ancient Egyptian
engineers had constructed the hiding-place, whose secret had been kept
for nearly three thousand years." The exploring party being guided to
the place, found behind a great rock a shaft 6 feet square and about 40
feet deep, sunk into the limestone. At the bottom of this a passage led
westward for 25 feet, and then turned sharply northward into the very
heart of the mountain, where in a chamber 23 feet by 13, and 6 feet in
height, they came upon the wonderful treasures of antiquity. The mummies
were all carefully secured and brought down to Bulak, where they were
deposited in the royal museum, which has now been removed to Ghizeh.
Among the most notable of the ancient kings of Egypt thus discovered
were Thothmes III., Seti I., and Rameses II. Thothmes III. was the most
distinguished monarch of the brilliant Eighteenth Dynasty. When this
mummy was unwound "once more, after an interval of thirty-six centuries,
human eyes gazed on the features of the man who had conquered Syria and
Cyprus and Ethiopia, and had raised Egypt to the highest pinnacle of her
power. The spectacle, however, was of brief duration. The remains proved
to be in so fragile a state that there was only time to take a hasty
photograph, and then the features crumbled to pieces and vanished like
an apparition, and so passed away from human view for ever." "It seems
strange that though the body of this man," who overran Palestine with
his armies two hundred years before the birth of Moses, "mouldered to
dust, the flowers with which it had been wreathed were so wonderfully
preserved that even their colour could be distinguished" (Manning's Land
of the Pharaohs). Seti I. (his throne name Merenptah), the father of
Rameses II., was a great and successful warrior, also a great builder.
The mummy of this Pharaoh, when unrolled, brought to view "the most
beautiful mummy head ever seen within the walls of the museum. The
sculptors of Thebes and Abydos did not flatter this Pharaoh when they
gave him that delicate, sweet, and smiling profile which is the
admiration of travelers. After a lapse of thirty-two centuries, the
mummy retains the same expression which characterized the features of
the living man. Most remarkable of all, when compared with the mummy of
Rameses II., is the striking resemblance between the father and the son.
Seti I. is, as it were, the idealized type of Rameses II. He must have
died at an advanced age. The head is shaven, the eyebrows are white, the
condition of the body points to considerably more than threescore years
of life, thus confirming the opinions of the learned, who have
attributed a long reign to this king." (4.) Rameses II., the son of Seti
I., is probably the Pharaoh of the Oppression. During his forty years'
residence at the court of Egypt, Moses must have known this ruler well.
During his sojourn in Midian, however, Rameses died, after a reign of
sixty-seven years, and his body embalmed and laid in the royal sepulchre
in the Valley of the Tombs of Kings beside that of his father. Like the
other mummies found hidden in the cave of Deir el-Bahari, it had been
for some reason removed from its original tomb, and probably carried
from place to place till finally deposited in the cave where it was so
recently discovered. In 1886, the mummy of this king, the "great
Rameses," the "Sesostris" of the Greeks, was unwound, and showed the
body of what must have been a robust old man. The features revealed to
view are thus described by Maspero: "The head is long and small in
proportion to the body. The top of the skull is quite bare. On the
temple there are a few sparse hairs, but at the poll the hair is quite
thick, forming smooth, straight locks about two inches in length. White
at the time of death, they have been dyed a light yellow by the spices
used in embalming. The forehead is low and narrow; the brow-ridge
prominent; the eye-brows are thick and white; the eyes are small and
close together; the nose is long, thin, arched like the noses of the
Bourbons; the temples are sunk; the cheek-bones very prominent; the ears
round, standing far out from the head, and pierced, like those of a
woman, for the wearing of earrings; the jaw-bone is massive and strong;
the chin very prominent; the mouth small, but thick-lipped; the teeth
worn and very brittle, but white and well preserved. The mustache and
beard are thin. They seem to have been kept shaven during life, but were
probably allowed to grow during the king's last illness, or they may
have grown after death. The hairs are white, like those of the head and
eyebrows, but are harsh and bristly, and a tenth of an inch in length.
The skin is of an earthy-brown, streaked with black. Finally, it may be
said, the face of the mummy gives a fair idea of the face of the living
king. The expression is unintellectual, perhaps slightly animal; but
even under the somewhat grotesque disguise of mummification there is
plainly to be seen an air of sovereign majesty, of resolve, and of
pride." Both on his father's and his mother's side it has been pretty
clearly shown that Rameses had Chaldean or Mesopotamian blood in his
veins to such a degree that he might be called an Assyrian. This fact is
thought to throw light on [Isa 52:4](../kjv/isa052.htm#004). (5.) The
Pharaoh of the Exodus was probably Menephtah I., the fourteenth and
eldest surviving son of Rameses II. He resided at Zoan, where he had the
various interviews with Moses and Aaron recorded in the book of Exodus.
His mummy was not among those found at Deir el-Bahari. It is still a
question, however, whether Seti II. or his father Menephtah was the
Pharaoh of the Exodus. Some think the balance of evidence to be in
favour of the former, whose reign it is known began peacefully, but came
to a sudden and disastrous end. The "Harris papyrus," found at
Medinet-Abou in Upper Egypt in 1856, a state document written by Rameses
III., the second king of the Twentieth Dynasty, gives at length an
account of a great exodus from Egypt, followed by wide-spread confusion
and anarchy. This, there is great reason to believe, was the Hebrew
exodus, with which the Nineteenth Dynasty of the Pharaohs came to an
end. This period of anarchy was brought to a close by Setnekht, the
founder of the Twentieth Dynasty. "In the spring of 1896, Professor
Flinders Petrie discovered, among the ruins of the temple of Menephtah
at Thebes, a large granite stela, on which is engraved a hymn of victory
commemorating the defeat of Libyan invaders who had overrun the Delta.
At the end other victories of Menephtah are glanced at, and it is said
that 'the Israelites (I-s-y-r-a-e-l-u) are minished (?) so that they
have no seed.' Menephtah was son and successor of Rameses II., the
builder of Pithom, and Egyptian scholars have long seen in him the
Pharaoh of the Exodus. The Exodus is also placed in his reign by the
Egyptian legend of the event preserved by the historian Manetho. In the
inscription the name of the Israelites has no determinative of 'country'
or 'district' attached to it, as is the case with all the other names
(Canaan, Ashkelon, Gezer, Khar or Southern Palestine, etc.) mentioned
along with it, and it would therefore appear that at the time the hymn
was composed, the Israelites had already been lost to the sight of the
Egyptians in the desert, At all events they must have had as yet no
fixed home or district of their own. We may therefore see in the
reference to them the Pharaoh's version of the Exodus, the disasters
which befell the Egyptians being naturally passed over in silence, and
only the destruction of the 'men children' of the Israelites being
recorded. The statement of the Egyptian poet is a remarkable parallel to
[Exo 1:10](../kjv/exo001.htm#010)." (6.) The Pharaoh of [Kg1
11:18](../kjv/kg1011.htm#018). (7.) So, king of Egypt ([Kg2
17:4](../kjv/kg2017.htm#004)). (8.) The Pharaoh of [Ch1
4:18](../kjv/ch1004.htm#018). (9.) Pharaoh, whose daughter Solomon
married ([Kg1 3:1](../kjv/kg1003.htm#001); [Kg1
7:8](../kjv/kg1007.htm#008)). (10.) Pharaoh, in whom Hezekiah put his
trust in his war against Sennacherib ([Kg2
18:21](../kjv/kg2018.htm#021)). (11.) The Pharaoh by whom Josiah was
defeated and slain at Megiddo ([Ch2 35:20](../kjv/ch2035.htm#020); [Kg2
23:29](../kjv/kg2023.htm#029), [Kg2 23:30](../kjv/kg2023.htm#030)). (See
NECHO.) (12.) Pharaoh-hophra, who in vain sought to relieve Jerusalem
when it was besieged by Nebuchadnezzar (q.v.), [Kg2
25:1](../kjv/kg2025.htm#001); compare [Jer 37:5](../kjv/jer037.htm#005);
[Eze 17:11](../kjv/eze017.htm#011). (See ZEDEKIAH.)

<span id="006">**Pharaoh's Daughters**</span> Three princesses are thus
mentioned in Scripture:, (1.) The princess who adopted the infant Moses
(q.v.), [Exo 2:10](../kjv/exo002.htm#010). She is twice mentioned in the
New Testament ([Act 7:21](../kjv/act007.htm#021); [Heb
11:24](../kjv/heb011.htm#024)). It would seem that she was alive and in
some position of influence about the court when Moses was compelled to
flee from Egypt, and thus for forty years he had in some way been under
her influence. She was in all probability the sister of Rameses, and the
daughter of Seti I. Josephus calls her Thermuthis. It is supposed by
some that she was Nefert-ari, the wife as well as sister of Rameses. The
mummy of this queen was among the treasures found at Deir-el-Bahari.
(2.) "Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mered took ([Ch1
4:18](../kjv/ch1004.htm#018)). (3.) The wife of Solomon ([Kg1
3:1](../kjv/kg1003.htm#001)). This is the first reference since the
Exodus to any connection of Israel with Egypt.

<span id="007">**Pharez**</span> Breach, the elder of the twin sons of
Judah ([Gen 38:29](../kjv/gen038.htm#029)). From him the royal line of
David sprang ([Rut 4:18](../kjv/rut004.htm#018)). "The chief of all the
captains of the host" was of the children of Perez ([Ch1
27:3](../kjv/ch1027.htm#003); [Mat 1:3](../kjv/mat001.htm#003)).

<span id="008">**Pharisees**</span> Separatists (Heb. persahin , from
parash , "to separate"). They were probably the successors of the
Assideans (i.e., the "pious"), a party that originated in the time of
Antiochus Epiphanes in revolt against his heathenizing policy. The first
mention of them is in a description by Josephus of the three sects or
schools into which the Jews were divided (145 B.C.). The other two sects
were the Essenes and the Sadducees. In the time of our Lord they were
the popular party ([Joh 7:48](../kjv/joh007.htm#048)). They were
extremely accurate and minute in all matters appertaining to the law of
Moses ([Mat 9:14](../kjv/mat009.htm#014); [Mat
23:15](../kjv/mat023.htm#015); [Luk 11:39](../kjv/luk011.htm#039); [Luk
18:12](../kjv/luk018.htm#012)). Paul, when brought before the council of
Jerusalem, professed himself a Pharisee ([Act
23:6](../kjv/act023.htm#006); [Act 26:4](../kjv/act026.htm#004), [Act
26:5](../kjv/act026.htm#005)). There was much that was sound in their
creed, yet their system of religion was a form and nothing more. Theirs
was a very lax morality ([Mat 5:20](../kjv/mat005.htm#020); [Mat
15:4](../kjv/mat015.htm#004), [Mat 15:8](../kjv/mat015.htm#008); [Mat
23:3](../kjv/mat023.htm#003), [Mat 23:14](../kjv/mat023.htm#014), [Mat
23:23](../kjv/mat023.htm#023), [Mat 23:25](../kjv/mat023.htm#025); [Joh
8:7](../kjv/joh008.htm#007)). On the first notice of them in the New
Testament ([Mat 3:7](../kjv/mat003.htm#007)), they are ranked by our
Lord with the Sadducees as a "generation of vipers." They were noted for
their self-righteousness and their pride ([Mat
9:11](../kjv/mat009.htm#011); [Luk 7:39](../kjv/luk007.htm#039); [Luk
18:11](../kjv/luk018.htm#011), [Luk 18:12](../kjv/luk018.htm#012)). They
were frequently rebuked by our Lord ([Mat 12:39](../kjv/mat012.htm#039);
[Mat 16:1](../kjv/mat016.htm#001)). From the very beginning of his
ministry the Pharisees showed themselves bitter and persistent enemies
of our Lord. They could not bear his doctrines, and they sought by every
means to destroy his influence among the people.

<span id="009">**Pharpar**</span> Swift, one of the rivers of Damascus
([Kg2 5:12](../kjv/kg2005.htm#012)). It has been identified with the
'Awaj , "a small lively river." The whole of the district watered by the
'Awaj is called the Wady el-'Ajam , i.e., "the valley of the Persians",
so called for some unknown reason. This river empties itself into the
lake or marsh Bahret Hijaneh , on the east of Damascus. One of its
branches bears the modern name of Wady Barbar , which is probably a
corruption of Pharpar .
