[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Philippians, Epistle to**</span> Was written by Paul
during the two years when he was "in bonds" in Rome ([Phi
1:7](../kjv/phi001.htm#007)), probably early in the year A.D. 62 or in
the end of 61. The Philippians had sent Epaphroditus, their messenger,
with contributions to meet the necessities of the apostle; and on his
return Paul sent back with him this letter. With this precious
communication Epaphroditus sets out on his homeward journey. "The joy
caused by his return, and the effect of this wonderful letter when first
read in the church of Philippi, are hidden from us. And we may almost
say that with this letter the church itself passes from our view.
To-day, in silent meadows, quiet cattle browse among the ruins which
mark the site of what was once the flourishing Roman colony of Philippi,
the home of the most attractive church of the apostolic age. But the
name and fame and spiritual influence of that church will never pass. To
myriads of men and women in every age and nation the letter written in a
dungeon at Rome, and carried along the Egnatian Way by an obscure
Christian messenger, has been a light divine and a cheerful guide along
the most rugged paths of life" (Professor Beet). The church at Philippi
was the first-fruits of European Christianity. Their attachment to the
apostle was very fervent, and so also was his affection for them. They
alone of all the churches helped him by their contributions, which he
gratefully acknowledges ([Act 20:33](../kjv/act020.htm#033); [Co2
11:7](../kjv/co2011.htm#007); [Th2 3:8](../kjv/th2003.htm#008)). The
pecuniary liberality of the Philippians comes out very conspicuously
([Phi 4:15](../kjv/phi004.htm#015)). "This was a characteristic of the
Macedonian missions, as 2 Cor. 8 and [Co2 9:1](../kjv/co2009.htm#001)
amply and beautifully prove. It is remarkable that the Macedonian
converts were, as a class, very poor ([Co2 8:2](../kjv/co2008.htm#002));
and the parallel facts, their poverty and their open-handed support of
the great missionary and his work, are deeply harmonious. At the present
day the missionary liberality of poor Christians is, in proportion,
really greater than that of the rich" (Moule's Philippians, Introd.).
The contents of this epistle give an interesting insight into the
condition of the church at Rome at the time it was written. Paul's
imprisonment, we are informed, was no hindrance to his preaching the
gospel, but rather "turned out to the furtherance of the gospel." The
gospel spread very extensively among the Roman soldiers, with whom he
was in constant contact, and the Christians grew into a "vast
multitude." It is plain that Christianity was at this time making rapid
advancement in Rome. The doctrinal statements of this epistle bear a
close relation to those of the Epistle to the Romans. Compare also [Phi
3:20](../kjv/phi003.htm#020) with [Eph 2:12](../kjv/eph002.htm#012),
[Eph 2:19](../kjv/eph002.htm#019), where the church is presented under
the idea of a city or commonwealth for the first time in Paul's
writings. The personal glory of Christ is also set forth in almost
parallel forms of expression in [Phi 2:5](../kjv/phi002.htm#005),
compared with [Eph 1:17](../kjv/eph001.htm#017); [Eph
2:8](../kjv/eph002.htm#008); and [Col 1:15](../kjv/col001.htm#015).
"This exposition of the grace and wonder of His personal majesty,
personal self-abasement, and personal exaltation after it," found in
these epistles, "is, in a great measure, a new development in the
revelations given through St. Paul" (Moule). Other minute analogies in
forms of expression and of thought are also found in these epistles of
the Captivity.

<span id="001">**Philistia**</span> =Palestine (q.v.), "the land of the
Philistines" ([Psa 60:8](../kjv/psa060.htm#008); [Psa
87:4](../kjv/psa087.htm#004); [Psa 108:9](../kjv/psa108.htm#009)). The
word is supposed to mean "the land of wanderers" or "of strangers."

<span id="002">**Philistines**</span> ([Gen
10:14](../kjv/gen010.htm#014), R.V.; but in A.V., "Philistim"), a tribe
allied to the Phoenicians. They were a branch of the primitive race
which spread over the whole district of the Lebanon and the valley of
the Jordan, and Crete and other Mediterranean islands. Some suppose them
to have been a branch of the Rephaim ([Sa2
21:16](../kjv/sa2021.htm#016)). In the time of Abraham they inhabited
the south-west of Judea, Abimelech of Gerar being their king ([Gen
21:32](../kjv/gen021.htm#032), [Gen 21:34](../kjv/gen021.htm#034); [Gen
26:1](../kjv/gen026.htm#001)). They are, however, not noticed among the
Canaanitish tribes mentioned in the Pentateuch. They are spoken of by
Amos ([Amo 9:7](../kjv/amo009.htm#007)) and Jeremiah ([Jer
47:4](../kjv/jer047.htm#004)) as from Caphtor, i.e., probably Crete, or,
as some think, the Delta of Egypt. In the whole record from Exodus to
Samuel they are represented as inhabiting the tract of country which lay
between Judea and Egypt ([Exo 13:17](../kjv/exo013.htm#017); [Exo
15:14](../kjv/exo015.htm#014), [Exo 15:15](../kjv/exo015.htm#015); [Jos
13:3](../kjv/jos013.htm#003); 1 Sam. 4). This powerful tribe made
frequent incursions against the Hebrews. There was almost perpetual war
between them. They sometimes held the tribes, especially the southern
tribes, in degrading servitude ([Jdg 15:11](../kjv/jdg015.htm#011); [Sa1
13:19](../kjv/sa1013.htm#019)); at other times they were defeated with
great slaughter (1 Sam. 14:1-47; 17). These hostilities did not cease
till the time of Hezekiah ([Kg2 18:8](../kjv/kg2018.htm#008)), when they
were entirely subdued. They still, however, occupied their territory,
and always showed their old hatred to Israel ([Eze
25:15](../kjv/eze025.htm#015)). They were finally conquered by the
Romans. The Philistines are called Pulsata or Pulista on the Egyptian
monuments; the land of the Philistines (Philistia) being termed Palastu
and Pilista in the Assyrian inscriptions. They occupied the five cities
of Gaza, Ashkelon, Ashdod, Ekron, and Gath, in the south-western corner
of Canaan, which belonged to Egypt up to the closing days of the
Nineteenth Dynasty. The occupation took place during the reign of
Rameses III. of the Twentieth Dynasty. The Philistines had formed part
of the great naval confederacy which attacked Egypt, but were eventually
repulsed by that Pharaoh, who, however, could not dislodge them from
their settlements in Palestine. As they did not enter Palestine till the
time of the Exodus, the use of the name Philistines in [Gen
26:1](../kjv/gen026.htm#001) must be proleptic. Indeed the country was
properly Gerar, as in Gen. 20. They are called Allophyli, "foreigners,"
in the Septuagint, and in the Books of Samuel they are spoken of as
uncircumcised. It would therefore appear that they were not of the
Semitic race, though after their establishment in Canaan they adopted
the Semitic language of the country. We learn from the Old Testament
that they came from Caphtor, usually supposed to be Crete. From
Philistia the name of the land of the Philistines came to be extended to
the whole of "Palestine." Many scholars identify the Philistines with
the Pelethites of [Sa2 8:18](../kjv/sa2008.htm#018).

<span id="003">**Phinehas**</span> Mouth of brass, or from old Egypt.
the negro. (1.) Son of Eleazar, the high priest ([Exo
6:25](../kjv/exo006.htm#025)). While yet a youth he distinguished
himself at Shittim by his zeal against the immorality into which the
Moabites had tempted the people ([Num 25:1](../kjv/num025.htm#001)), and
thus "stayed the plague" that had broken out among the people, and by
which twenty-four thousand of them perished. For his faithfulness on
that occasion he received the divine approbation ([Num
25:10](../kjv/num025.htm#010)). He afterwards commanded the army that
went out against the Midianites ([Num 31:6](../kjv/num031.htm#006)).
When representatives of the people were sent to expostulate with the two
and a half tribes who, just after crossing Jordan, built an altar and
departed without giving any explanation, Phinehas was their leader, and
addressed them in the words recorded in [Jos
22:16](../kjv/jos022.htm#016). Their explanation follows. This great
altar was intended to be all ages only a witness that they still formed
a part of Israel. Phinehas was afterwards the chief adviser in the war
with the Benjamites. He is commemorated in [Psa
106:30](../kjv/psa106.htm#030), [Psa 106:31](../kjv/psa106.htm#031).
(See ED.) (2.) One of the sons of Eli, the high priest ([Sa1
1:3](../kjv/sa1001.htm#003); [Sa1 2:12](../kjv/sa1002.htm#012)). He and
his brother Hophni were guilty of great crimes, for which destruction
came on the house of Eli ([Sa1 2:31](../kjv/sa1002.htm#031)). He died in
battle with the Philistines ([Sa1 4:4](../kjv/sa1004.htm#004), [Sa1
4:11](../kjv/sa1004.htm#011)); and his wife, on hearing of his death,
gave birth to a son, whom she called "Ichabod," and then she died ([Sa1
4:19](../kjv/sa1004.htm#019)).

<span id="004">**Phlegon**</span> Burning, a Roman Christian to whom
Paul sent salutations ([Rom 16:14](../kjv/rom016.htm#014)).

<span id="005">**Phoenicia**</span> ([Act 21:2](../kjv/act021.htm#002)).
(See PHENICIA.)

<span id="006">**Phrygia**</span> Dry, an irregular and ill-defined
district in Asia Minor. It was divided into two parts, the Greater
Phrygia on the south, and the Lesser Phrygia on the west. It is the
Greater Phrygia that is spoken of in the New Testament. The towns of
Antioch in Pisidia ([Act 13:14](../kjv/act013.htm#014)), Colosse,
Hierapolis, Iconium, and Laodicea were situated in it.

<span id="007">**Phut**</span> Phut is placed between Egypt and Canaan
in [Gen 10:6](../kjv/gen010.htm#006), and elsewhere we find the people
of Phut described as mercenaries in the armies of Egypt and Tryp Tyre
([Jer 46:9](../kjv/jer046.htm#009); [Eze 30:5](../kjv/eze030.htm#005);
[Eze 27:10](../kjv/eze027.htm#010)). In a fragment of the annuals of
Nebuchadrezzar which records his invasion of Egypt, reference is made to
"Phut of the Ionians."

<span id="008">**Phygellus**</span> Fugitive, a Christian of Asia, who
"turned away" from Paul during his second imprisonment at Rome ([Ti2
1:15](../kjv/ti2001.htm#015)). Nothing more is known of him.

<span id="009">**Phylacteries**</span> (Gr. phulakteria ; i.e.,
"defenses" or "protections"), called by modern Jews tephillin (i.e.,
"prayers") are mentioned only in [Mat 23:5](../kjv/mat023.htm#005). They
consisted of strips of parchment on which were inscribed these four
texts: (1.) [Exo 13:1](../kjv/exo013.htm#001); (2.) [Exo
13:11](../kjv/exo013.htm#011); (3.) [Deu 6:4](../kjv/deu006.htm#004);
(4.) [Deu 11:18](../kjv/deu011.htm#018), and which were enclosed in a
square leather case, on one side of which was inscribed the Hebrew
letter shin, to which the rabbis attached some significance. This case
was fastened by certain straps to the forehead just between the eyes.
The "making broad the phylacteries" refers to the enlarging of the case
so as to make it conspicuous. (See FRONTLETS.) Another form of the
phylactery consisted of two rolls of parchment, on which the same texts
were written, enclosed in a case of black calfskin. This was worn on the
left arm near the elbow, to which it was bound by a thong. It was called
the "Tephillah on the arm."
