[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Persis**</span> A female Christian at Rome whom Paul
salutes ([Rom 16:12](../kjv/rom016.htm#012)). She is spoken of as
"beloved," and as having "laboured much in the Lord."

<span id="001">**Peruda**</span> One whose descendants returned with
Zerubbabel ([Ezr 2:55](../kjv/ezr002.htm#055)); called also Perida ([Neh
7:57](../kjv/neh007.htm#057)).

<span id="002">**Peter**</span> Originally called Simon (= Simeon, i.e.,
"hearing"), a very common Jewish name in the New Testament. He was the
son of Jona ([Mat 16:17](../kjv/mat016.htm#017)). His mother is nowhere
named in Scripture. He had a younger brother called Andrew, who first
brought him to Jesus ([Joh 1:40](../kjv/joh001.htm#040)). His native
town was Bethsaida, on the western coast of the Sea of Galilee, to which
also Philip belonged. Here he was brought up by the shores of the Sea of
Galilee, and was trained to the occupation of a fisher. His father had
probably died while he was still young, and he and his brother were
brought up under the care of Zebedee and his wife Salome ([Mat
27:56](../kjv/mat027.htm#056); [Mar 15:40](../kjv/mar015.htm#040); [Mar
16:1](../kjv/mar016.htm#001)). There the four youths, Simon, Andrew,
James, and John, spent their boyhood and early manhood in constant
fellowship. Simon and his brother doubtless enjoyed all the advantages
of a religious training, and were early instructed in an acquaintance
with the Scriptures and with the great prophecies regarding the coming
of the Messiah. They did not probably enjoy, however, any special
training in the study of the law under any of the rabbis. When Peter
appeared before the Sanhedrin, he looked like an "unlearned man" ([Act
4:13](../kjv/act004.htm#013)). "Simon was a Galilean, and he was that
out and out... The Galileans had a marked character of their own. They
had a reputation for an independence and energy which often ran out into
turbulence. They were at the same time of a franker and more transparent
disposition than their brethren in the south. In all these respects, in
bluntness, impetuosity, headiness, and simplicity, Simon was a genuine
Galilean. They spoke a peculiar dialect. They had a difficulty with the
guttural sounds and some others, and their pronunciation was reckoned
harsh in Judea. The Galilean accent stuck to Simon all through his
career. It betrayed him as a follower of Christ when he stood within the
judgment-hall ([Mar 14:70](../kjv/mar014.htm#070)). It betrayed his own
nationality and that of those conjoined with him on the day of Pentecost
([Act 2:7](../kjv/act002.htm#007))." It would seem that Simon was
married before he became an apostle. His wife's mother is referred to
([Mat 8:14](../kjv/mat008.htm#014); [Mar 1:30](../kjv/mar001.htm#030);
[Luk 4:38](../kjv/luk004.htm#038)). He was in all probability
accompanied by his wife on his missionary journeys ([Co1
9:5](../kjv/co1009.htm#005); compare [Pe1 5:13](../kjv/pe1005.htm#013)).
He appears to have been settled at Capernaum when Christ entered on his
public ministry, and may have reached beyond the age of thirty. His
house was large enough to give a home to his brother Andrew, his wife's
mother, and also to Christ, who seems to have lived with him ([Mar
1:29](../kjv/mar001.htm#029), [Mar 1:36](../kjv/mar001.htm#036); [Mar
2:1](../kjv/mar002.htm#001)), as well as to his own family. It was
apparently two stories high ([Mar 2:4](../kjv/mar002.htm#004)). At
Bethabara (R.V., [Joh 1:28](../kjv/joh001.htm#028), "Bethany"), beyond
Jordan, John the Baptist had borne testimony concerning Jesus as the
"Lamb of God" ([Joh 1:29](../kjv/joh001.htm#029)). Andrew and John
hearing it, followed Jesus, and abode with him where he was. They were
convinced, by his gracious words and by the authority with which he
spoke, that he was the Messiah ([Luk 4:22](../kjv/luk004.htm#022); [Mat
7:29](../kjv/mat007.htm#029)); and Andrew went forth and found Simon and
brought him to Jesus ([Joh 1:41](../kjv/joh001.htm#041)). Jesus at once
recognized Simon, and declared that hereafter he would be called Cephas,
an Aramaic name corresponding to the Greek Petros , which means "a mass
of rock detached from the living rock." The Aramaic name does not occur
again, but the name Peter gradually displaces the old name Simon, though
our Lord himself always uses the name Simon when addressing him ([Mat
17:25](../kjv/mat017.htm#025); [Mar 14:37](../kjv/mar014.htm#037); [Luk
22:31](../kjv/luk022.htm#031), compare [Luk
21:15](../kjv/luk021.htm#015)). We are not told what impression the
first interview with Jesus produced on the mind of Simon. When we next
meet him it is by the Sea of Galilee ([Mat
4:18](../kjv/mat004.htm#018)). There the four (Simon and Andrew, James
and John) had had an unsuccessful night's fishing. Jesus appeared
suddenly, and entering into Simon's boat, bade him launch forth and let
down the nets. He did so, and enclosed a great multitude of fishes. This
was plainly a miracle wrought before Simon's eyes. The awe-stricken
disciple cast himself at the feet of Jesus, crying, "Depart from me; for
I am a sinful man, O Lord" ([Luk 5:8](../kjv/luk005.htm#008)). Jesus
addressed him with the assuring words, "Fear not," and announced to him
his life's work. Simon responded at once to the call to become a
disciple, and after this we find him in constant attendance on our Lord.
He is next called into the rank of the apostleship, and becomes a
"fisher of men" ([Mat 4:19](../kjv/mat004.htm#019)) in the stormy seas
of the world of human life ([Mat 10:2](../kjv/mat010.htm#002); [Mar
3:13](../kjv/mar003.htm#013); [Luk 6:13](../kjv/luk006.htm#013)), and
takes a more and more prominent part in all the leading events of our
Lord's life. It is he who utters that notable profession of faith at
Capernaum ([Joh 6:66](../kjv/joh006.htm#066)), and again at Caesarea
Philippi ([Mat 16:13](../kjv/mat016.htm#013); [Mar
8:27](../kjv/mar008.htm#027); [Luk 9:18](../kjv/luk009.htm#018)). This
profession at Caesarea was one of supreme importance, and our Lord in
response used these memorable words: "Thou art Peter, and upon this rock
I will build my church." "From that time forth" Jesus began to speak of
his sufferings. For this Peter rebuked him. But our Lord in return
rebuked Peter, speaking to him in sterner words than he ever used to any
other of his disciples ([Mat 16:21](../kjv/mat016.htm#021); [Mar
8:31](../kjv/mar008.htm#031)). At the close of his brief sojourn at
Caesarea our Lord took Peter and James and John with him into "an high
mountain apart," and was transfigured before them. Peter on that
occasion, under the impression the scene produced on his mind,
exclaimed, "Lord, it is good for us to be here: let us make three
tabernacles" ([Mat 17:1](../kjv/mat017.htm#001)). On his return to
Capernaum the collectors of the temple tax (a didrachma, half a sacred
shekel), which every Israelite of twenty years old and upwards had to
pay ([Exo 30:15](../kjv/exo030.htm#015)), came to Peter and reminded him
that Jesus had not paid it ([Mat 17:24](../kjv/mat017.htm#024)). Our
Lord instructed Peter to go and catch a fish in the lake and take from
its mouth the exact amount needed for the tax, viz., a stater, or two
half-shekels. "That take," said our Lord, "and give unto them for me and
thee." As the end was drawing nigh, our Lord sent Peter and John ([Luk
22:7](../kjv/luk022.htm#007)) into the city to prepare a place where he
should keep the feast with his disciples. There he was forewarned of the
fearful sin into which he afterwards fell ([Luk
22:31](../kjv/luk022.htm#031)). He accompanied our Lord from the
guest-chamber to the garden of Gethsemane ([Luk
22:39](../kjv/luk022.htm#039)), which he and the other two who had been
witnesses of the transfiguration were permitted to enter with our Lord,
while the rest were left without. Here he passed through a strange
experience. Under a sudden impulse he cut off the ear of Malchus ([Luk
22:47](../kjv/luk022.htm#047)), one of the band that had come forth to
take Jesus. Then follow the scenes of the judgment-hall ([Luk
22:54](../kjv/luk022.htm#054)) and his bitter grief ([Luk
22:62](../kjv/luk022.htm#062)). He is found in John's company early on
the morning of the resurrection. He boldly entered into the empty grave
([Joh 20:1](../kjv/joh020.htm#001)), and saw the "linen clothes laid by
themselves" ([Luk 24:9](../kjv/luk024.htm#009)). To him, the first of
the apostles, our risen Lord revealed himself, thus conferring on him a
signal honour, and showing how fully he was restored to his favour ([Luk
24:34](../kjv/luk024.htm#034); [Co1 15:5](../kjv/co1015.htm#005)). We
next read of our Lord's singular interview with Peter on the shores of
the Sea of Galilee, where he thrice asked him, "Simon, son of Jonas,
lovest thou me?" (John 21:1-19). (See LOVE.) After this scene at the
lake we hear nothing of Peter till he again appears with the others at
the ascension ([Act 1:15](../kjv/act001.htm#015)). It was he who
proposed that the vacancy caused by the apostasy of Judas should be
filled up. He is prominent on the day of Pentecost (Acts 2:14-40). The
events of that day "completed the change in Peter himself which the
painful discipline of his fall and all the lengthened process of
previous training had been slowly making. He is now no more the
unreliable, changeful, self-confident man, ever swaying between rash
courage and weak timidity, but the stead-fast, trusted guide and
director of the fellowship of believers, the intrepid preacher of Christ
in Jerusalem and abroad. And now that he is become Cephas indeed, we
hear almost nothing of the name Simon (only in [Act
10:5](../kjv/act010.htm#005), [Act 10:32](../kjv/act010.htm#032); [Act
15:14](../kjv/act015.htm#014)), and he is known to us finally as Peter."
After the miracle at the temple gate (Acts 3) persecution arose against
the Christians, and Peter was cast into prison. He boldly defended
himself and his companions at the bar of the council ([Act
4:19](../kjv/act004.htm#019), [Act 4:20](../kjv/act004.htm#020)). A
fresh outburst of violence against the Christians ([Act
5:17](../kjv/act005.htm#017)) led to the whole body of the apostles
being cast into prison; but during the night they were wonderfully
delivered, and were found in the morning teaching in the temple. A
second time Peter defended them before the council ([Act
5:29](../kjv/act005.htm#029)), who, "when they had called the apostles
and beaten them, let them go." The time had come for Peter to leave
Jerusalem. After labouring for some time in Samaria, he returned to
Jerusalem, and reported to the church there the results of his work
([Act 8:14](../kjv/act008.htm#014)). Here he remained for a period,
during which he met Paul for the first time since his conversion ([Act
9:26](../kjv/act009.htm#026); [Gal 1:18](../kjv/gal001.htm#018)).
Leaving Jerusalem again, he went forth on a missionary journey to Lydda
and Joppa ([Act 9:32](../kjv/act009.htm#032)). He is next called on to
open the door of the Christian church to the Gentiles by the admission
of Cornelius of Caesarea (Acts 10). After remaining for some time at
Caesarea, he returned to Jerusalem (Acts 11:1-18), where he defended his
conduct with reference to the Gentiles. Next we hear of his being cast
into prison by Herod Agrippa (Acts 12:1-19); but in the night an angel
of the Lord opened the prison gates, and he went forth and found refuge
in the house of Mary. He took part in the deliberations of the council
in Jerusalem (Acts 15:1-31; [Gal 2:1](../kjv/gal002.htm#001)) regarding
the relation of the Gentiles to the church. This subject had awakened
new interest at Antioch, and for its settlement was referred to the
council of the apostles and elders at Jerusalem. Here Paul and Peter met
again. We have no further mention of Peter in the Acts of the Apostles.
He seems to have gone down to Antioch after the council at Jerusalem,
and there to have been guilty of dissembling, for which he was severely
reprimanded by Paul ([Gal 2:11](../kjv/gal002.htm#011)), who "rebuked
him to his face." After this he appears to have carried the gospel to
the east, and to have laboured for a while at Babylon, on the Euphrates
([Pe1 5:13](../kjv/pe1005.htm#013)). There is no satisfactory evidence
that he was ever at Rome. Where or when he died is not certainly known.
Probably he died between A.D. 64 and 67.

<span id="003">**Peter, First Epistle of**</span> This epistle is
addressed to "the strangers scattered abroad", i.e., to the Jews of the
Dispersion (the Diaspora). Its object is to confirm its readers in the
doctrines they had been already taught. Peter has been called "the
apostle of hope," because this epistle abounds with words of comfort and
encouragement fitted to sustain a "lively hope." It contains about
thirty-five references to the Old Testament. It was written from
Babylon, on the Euphrates, which was at this time one of the chief seats
of Jewish learning, and a fitting centre for labour among the Jews. It
has been noticed that in the beginning of his epistle Peter names the
provinces of Asia Minor in the order in which they would naturally occur
to one writing from Babylon. He counsels (1.) to steadfastness and
perseverance under persecution (1 Pet. 1 - 2:10); (2.) to the practical
duties of a holy life (1 Pet. 2:11 - 3:13); (3.) he adduces the example
of Christ and other motives to patience and holiness (1 Pet. 3:14 -
4:19); and (4.) concludes with counsels to pastors and people ([Pe1
5:1](../kjv/pe1005.htm#001)).

<span id="004">**Peter, Second Epistle of**</span> The question of the
authenticity of this epistle has been much discussed, but the weight of
evidence is wholly in favour of its claim to be the production of the
apostle whose name it bears. It appears to have been written shortly
before the apostle's death ([Pe2 1:14](../kjv/pe2001.htm#014)). This
epistle contains eleven references to the Old Testament. It also
contains ([Pe2 3:15](../kjv/pe2003.htm#015), [Pe2
3:16](../kjv/pe2003.htm#016)) a remarkable reference to Paul's epistles.
Some think this reference is to 1 Thess. 4:13-5:11. A few years ago,
among other documents, a parchment fragment, called the "Gospel of
Peter," was discovered in a Christian tomb at Akhmim in Upper Egypt.
Origen (obiit A.D. 254), Eusebius (obiit 340), and Jerome (obiit 420)
refer to such a work, and hence it has been concluded that it was
probably written about the middle of the second century. It professes to
give a history of our Lord's resurrection and ascension. While differing
in not a few particulars from the canonical Gospels, the writer shows
plainly that he was acquainted both with the synoptics and with the
Gospel of John. Though apocryphal, it is of considerable value as
showing that the main facts of the history of our Lord were then widely
known.

<span id="005">**Pethahiah**</span> Loosed of the Lord. (1.) The chief
of one of the priestly courses (the nineteenth) in the time of David
([Ch1 24:16](../kjv/ch1024.htm#016)). (2.) A Levite ([Ezr
10:23](../kjv/ezr010.htm#023)). (3.) [Neh 9:5](../kjv/neh009.htm#005).
(4.) A descendant of Judah who had some office at the court of Persia
([Neh 11:24](../kjv/neh011.htm#024)).

<span id="006">**Pethor**</span> Interpretation of dreams, identified
with Pitru, on the west bank of the Euphrates, a few miles south of the
Hittite capital of Carchemish ([Num 22:5](../kjv/num022.htm#005), "which
is by the river of the land of the children of \[the god\] Ammo"). (See
BALAAM.)

<span id="007">**Pethuel**</span> Vision of God, the father of Joel the
prophet ([Joe 1:1](../kjv/joe001.htm#001)).

<span id="008">**Petra**</span> Rock, [Isa 16:1](../kjv/isa016.htm#001),
marg. (See SELA.)

<span id="009">**Peulthai**</span> Wages of the Lord, one of the sons of
Obed-edom, a Levite porter ([Ch1 26:5](../kjv/ch1026.htm#005)).
