[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Justus**</span> (1.) Another name for Joseph, surnamed
Barsabas. He and Matthias are mentioned only in [Act
1:2](../kjv/act001.htm#002). "They must have been among the earliest
disciples of Jesus, and must have been faithful to the end; they must
have been well known and esteemed among the brethren. What became of
them afterwards, and what work they did, are entirely unknown"
(Lindsay's Acts of the Apostles). (2.) A Jewish proselyte at Corinth, in
whose house, next door to the synagogue, Paul held meetings and preached
after he left the synagogue ([Act 18:7](../kjv/act018.htm#007)). (3.) A
Jewish Christian, called Jesus, Paul's only fellow-labourer at Rome,
where he wrote his Epistle to the Colossians ([Col
4:11](../kjv/col004.htm#011)).

<span id="001">**Juttah**</span> Extended, a Levitical city in the
mountains or hill-country of Judah ([Jos 15:55](../kjv/jos015.htm#055);
[Jos 21:16](../kjv/jos021.htm#016)). Its modern name is Yutta, a place
about 5 1/2 miles south of Hebron. It is supposed to have been the
residence of Zacharias and Elisabeth, and the birthplace of John the
Baptist, and on this account is annually visited by thousands of
pilgrims belonging to the Greek Church ([Luk
1:39](../kjv/luk001.htm#039)). (See MARY.)

<span id="002">**Kabzeel**</span> Gathering of God, a city in the
extreme south of Judah, near to Idumaea ([Jos
15:21](../kjv/jos015.htm#021)), the birthplace of Benaiah, one of
David's chief warriors ([Sa2 23:20](../kjv/sa2023.htm#020); [Ch1
11:22](../kjv/ch1011.htm#022)). It was called also Jekabzeel ([Neh
11:25](../kjv/neh011.htm#025)), after the Captivity.

<span id="003">**Kadesh**</span> (1.) Holy, or Kadesh-Barnea, sacred
desert of wandering, a place on the south-eastern border of Palestine,
about 165 miles from Horeb. It lay in the "wilderness" or "desert of
Zin" ([Gen 14:7](../kjv/gen014.htm#007); Num. 13:3-26; [Num
14:29](../kjv/num014.htm#029); [Num 20:1](../kjv/num020.htm#001); [Num
27:14](../kjv/num027.htm#014)), on the border of Edom ([Num
20:16](../kjv/num020.htm#016)). From this place, in compliance with the
desire of the people, Moses sent forth "twelve spies" to spy the land.
After examining it in all its districts, the spies brought back an evil
report, Joshua and Caleb alone giving a good report of the land ([Num
13:18](../kjv/num013.htm#018)). Influenced by the discouraging report,
the people abandoned all hope of entering into the Promised Land. They
remained a considerable time at Kadesh. (See HORMAH; KORAH.) Because of
their unbelief, they were condemned by God to wander for thirty-eight
years in the wilderness. They took their journey from Kadesh into the
deserts of Paran, "by way of the Red Sea" ([Deu
2:1](../kjv/deu002.htm#001)). (One theory is that during these
thirty-eight years they remained in and about Kadesh.) At the end of
these years of wanderings, the tribes were a second time gathered
together at Kadesh. During their stay here at this time Miriam died and
was buried. Here the people murmured for want of water, as their
forefathers had done formerly at Rephidim; and Moses, irritated by their
chidings, "with his rod smote the rock twice," instead of "speaking to
the rock before their eyes," as the Lord had commanded him (Compare [Num
27:14](../kjv/num027.htm#014); [Deu 9:23](../kjv/deu009.htm#023); [Psa
106:32](../kjv/psa106.htm#032), [Psa 106:33](../kjv/psa106.htm#033)).
Because of this act of his, in which Aaron too was involved, neither of
them was to be permitted to set foot within the Promised Land ([Num
20:12](../kjv/num020.htm#012), [Num 20:24](../kjv/num020.htm#024)). The
king of Edom would not permit them to pass on through his territory, and
therefore they commenced an eastward march, and "came unto Mount Hor"
([Num 20:22](../kjv/num020.htm#022)). This place has been identified
with 'Ain el-Kadeis , about 12 miles east-south-east of Beersheba. (See
SPIES.) (2.) The sacred city of the Hittites, on the left bank of the
Orontes, about 4 miles south of the Lake of Homs. It is identified with
the great mound Tell Neby Mendeh, some 50 to 100 feet high, and 400
yards long. On the ruins of the temple of Karnak, in Egypt, has been
found an inscription recording the capture of this city by Rameses II.
(See PHARAOH.) Here the sculptor "has chiseled in deep work on the
stone, with a bold execution of the several parts, the procession of the
warriors, the battle before Kadesh, the storming of the fortress, the
overthrow of the enemy, and the camp life of the Egyptians." (See
HITTITES.)

<span id="004">**Kadmiel**</span> Before God; i.e., his servant, one of
the Levites who returned with Zerubbabel from the Captivity ([Neh
9:4](../kjv/neh009.htm#004); [Neh 10:9](../kjv/neh010.htm#009); [Neh
12:8](../kjv/neh012.htm#008)).

<span id="005">**Kadmonites**</span> Orientals, the name of a
Canaanitish tribe which inhabited the north-eastern part of Palestine in
the time of Abraham ([Gen 15:19](../kjv/gen015.htm#019)). Probably they
were identical with the "children of the east," who inhabited the
country between Palestine and the Euphrates.

<span id="006">**Kanah**</span> Reedy; brook of reeds. (1.) A stream
forming the boundary between Ephraim and Manasseh, from the
Mediterranean eastward to Tappuah ([Jos 16:8](../kjv/jos016.htm#008)).
It has been identified with the sedgy streams that constitute the Wady
Talaik, which enters the sea between Joppa and Caesarea. Others identify
it with the river 'Aujeh . (2.) A town in the north of Asher ([Jos
19:28](../kjv/jos019.htm#028)). It has been identified with 'Ain-Kana ,
a village on the brow of a valley some 7 miles south-east of Tyre. About
a mile north of this place are many colossal ruins strewn about. And in
the side of a neighbouring ravine are figures of men, women, and
children cut in the face of the rock. These are supposed to be of
Phoenician origin.

<span id="007">**Kareah**</span> Bald, the father of Johanan and
Jonathan, who for a time were loyal to Gedaliah, the Babylonian governor
of Jerusalem ([Jer 40:8](../kjv/jer040.htm#008), [Jer
40:13](../kjv/jer040.htm#013), [Jer 40:15](../kjv/jer040.htm#015), [Jer
40:16](../kjv/jer040.htm#016)).

<span id="008">**Karkaa**</span> A floor; bottom, a place between Adar
and Azmon, about midway between the Mediterranean and the Dead Sea ([Jos
15:3](../kjv/jos015.htm#003)).

<span id="009">**Karkor**</span> Foundation, a place in the open desert
wastes on the east of Jordan ([Jdg 8:10](../kjv/jdg008.htm#010)), not
far beyond Succoth and Penuel, to the south. Here Gideon overtook and
routed a fugitive band of Midianites under Zeba and Zalmunna, whom he
took captive.
