[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Sinaiticus Codex**</span> Usually designated by the
first letter of the Hebrew alphabet, is one of the most valuable of
ancient MSS. of the Greek New Testament. On the occasion of a third
visit to the convent of St. Catherine, on Mount Sinai, in 1859, it was
discovered by Dr. Tischendorf. He had on a previous visit in 1844
obtained forty-three parchment leaves of the LXX., which he deposited in
the university library of Leipsic, under the title of the Codex
Frederico-Augustanus, after his royal patron the king of Saxony. In the
year referred to (1859) the emperor of Russia sent him to prosecute his
search for MSS., which he was convinced were still to be found in the
Sinai convent. The story of his finding the manuscript of the New
Testament has all the interest of a romance. He reached the convent on
31st January; but his inquiries appeared to be fruitless. On the 4th
February he had resolved to return home without having gained his
object. "On that day, when walking with the provisor of the convent, he
spoke with much regret of his ill-success. Returning from their
promenade, Tischendorf accompanied the monk to his room, and there had
displayed to him what his companion called a copy of the LXX., which he,
the ghostly brother, owned. The MS. was wrapped up in a piece of cloth,
and on its being unrolled, to the surprise and delight of the critic the
very document presented itself which he had given up all hope of seeing.
His object had been to complete the fragmentary LXX. of 1844, which he
had declared to be the most ancient of all Greek codices on vellum that
are extant; but he found not only that, but a copy of the Greek New
Testament attached, of the same age, and perfectly complete, not wanting
a single page or paragraph." This precious fragment, after some
negotiations, he obtained possession of, and conveyed it to the Emperor
Alexander, who fully appreciated its importance, and caused it to be
published as nearly as possible in facsimile, so as to exhibit correctly
the ancient handwriting. The entire codex consists of 3461/2 folios. Of
these 199 belong to the Old Testament and 1471/2 to the New, along with
two ancient documents called the Epistle of Barnabas and the Shepherd of
Hermas. The books of the New Testament stand thus:, the four Gospels,
the epistles of Paul, the Acts of the Apostles, the Catholic Epistles,
the Apocalypse of John. It is shown by Tischendorf that this codex was
written in the fourth century, and is thus of about the same age as the
Vatican codex; but while the latter wants the greater part of Matthew
and sundry leaves here and there besides, the Sinaiticus is the only
copy of the New Testament in uncial characters which is complete. Thus
it is the oldest extant MS. copy of the New Testament. Both the Vatican
and the Sinai codices were probably written in Egypt. (See VATICANUS.)

<span id="001">**Sinim, The Land of**</span> ([Isa
49:12](../kjv/isa049.htm#012)), supposed by some to mean China, but more
probably Phoenicia ([Gen 10:17](../kjv/gen010.htm#017)) is intended.

<span id="002">**Sinite**</span> An inhabitant of Sin, near Arka ([Gen
10:17](../kjv/gen010.htm#017); [Ch1 1:15](../kjv/ch1001.htm#015)). (See
ARKITE.)

<span id="003">**Sion**</span> Elevated. (1.) Denotes Mount Hermon in
[Deu 4:48](../kjv/deu004.htm#048); called Sirion by the Sidonians, and
by the Amorites Shenir ([Deu 3:9](../kjv/deu003.htm#009)). (See HERMON.)
(2.) The Greek form of Zion (q.v.) in [Mat 21:5](../kjv/mat021.htm#005);
[Joh 12:15](../kjv/joh012.htm#015).

<span id="004">**Siphmoth**</span> Fruitful places, some unknown place
in the south, where David found friends when he fled from Saul ([Sa1
30:28](../kjv/sa1030.htm#028)).

<span id="005">**Sirah**</span> Retiring, a well from which Joab's
messenger brought back Abner ([Sa2 3:26](../kjv/sa2003.htm#026)). It is
now called 'Ain Sarah , and is situated about a mile from Hebron, on the
road to the north.

<span id="006">**Sirion**</span> A breastplate, the Sidonian name of
Hermon (q.v.), [Deu 3:9](../kjv/deu003.htm#009); [Psa
29:6](../kjv/psa029.htm#006).

<span id="007">**Sisera**</span> (Egypt. Ses-Ra, "servant of Ra"). (1.)
The captain of Jabin's army ([Jdg 4:2](../kjv/jdg004.htm#002)), which
was routed and destroyed by the army of Barak on the plain of Esdraelon.
After all was lost he fled to the settlement of Heber the Kenite in the
plain of Zaanaim. Jael, Heber's wife, received him into her tent with
apparent hospitality, and "gave him butter" (i.e., lebben, or curdled
milk) "in a lordly dish." Having drunk the refreshing beverage, he lay
down, and soon sank into the sleep of the weary. While he lay asleep
Jael crept stealthily up to him, and taking in her hand one of the tent
pegs, with a mallet she drove it with such force through his temples
that it entered into the ground where he lay, and "at her feet he bowed,
he fell; where he bowed, there he fell down dead." The part of Deborah's
song ([Jdg 5:24](../kjv/jdg005.htm#024)) referring to the death of
Sisera (which is a "mere patriotic outburst, " and "is no proof that
purer eyes would have failed to see gross sin mingling with Jael's
service to Israel") is thus rendered by Professor Roberts (Old Testament
Revision):, "Extolled above women be Jael, The wife of Heber the Kenite,
Extolled above women in the tent. He asked for water, she gave him milk;
She brought him cream in a lordly dish. She stretched forth her hand to
the nail, Her right hand to the workman's hammer, And she smote Sisera;
she crushed his head, She crashed through and transfixed his temples. At
her feet he curled himself, he fell, he lay still; At her feet he curled
himself, he fell; And where he curled himself, there he fell dead." (2.)
The ancestor of some of the Nethinim who returned with Zerubbabel ([Ezr
2:53](../kjv/ezr002.htm#053); [Neh 7:55](../kjv/neh007.htm#055)).

<span id="008">**Sitnah**</span> Strife, the second of the two wells dug
by Isaac, whose servants here contended with the Philistines ([Gen
26:21](../kjv/gen026.htm#021)). It has been identified with the modern
Shutneh, in the valley of Gerar, to the west of Rehoboth, about 20 miles
south of Beersheba.

<span id="009">**Sitting**</span> The attitude generally assumed in
Palestine by those who were engaged in any kind of work. "The carpenter
saws, planes, and hews with his hand-adze, sitting on the ground or upon
the plank he is planning. The washerwoman sits by the tub; and, in a
word, no one stands when it is possible to sit. Shopkeepers always sit,
and Levi sitting at the receipt of custom ([Mat
9:9](../kjv/mat009.htm#009)) is the exact way to state the case.",
Thomson, Land and Book.
