[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ain16)  [Next](ain18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

### NOTES ON THE STORY OF WAYHOHM

There is a suggestion of Thor in the Story of Wayhohm, and also of
Prometheus. Wayhohm's house must have been the hall of the clouds.

How true to nature, here, is the touch describing the Coyote-person,
Toehahvs. The [excessive](errata.htm#12) caution of the coyote, making
it impossible for him, however eager, to force himself into any position
be suspects, here stands out before us, contrasted in the most dramatic
way with the dashing boldness of the road-runner.

When we reached the end of this story Comalk Hawk-Kih took two pieces of
wood to rub them together to make fire. But he was old and breathless,
and "Sparkling-Soft-Feather," the mother of my interpreter, took them
and made the fire for me. I have the implements yet.

There were two parts to the apparatus. Gee-uh-toe-dah, the socket stick
was of a soft dry piece of giant cactus rib, and a notch was whittled in
one side of this with a small socket at the apex, that is on the upper
side.

This was placed flat on the ground, with a bit of corn husk under the
notch, and held firmly in position by the bare feet. The twirling stick,
eev-a-dah-kote, was a hard arrow weed, very dry and scraped smooth. The
end of this was engaged in the little socket, at the top of the cactus
rib, and then, held perpendicularly, was twirled between the two bands
till the friction rubbed off a powder which crowded out of the socket,
and fell down the notch at its side to the corn-husk. This little
increasing pile of powder was the tinder, and, as the twirling
continued, grew black, smelled like burned wood, smoked and finally
glowed like punk. It was now picked up on the corn husk and placed in
dry horse dung, a bunch of dry grass, or some such inflammable material,
and blown into flame.

It looked very simple, and took little time, but I never could do it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Hawawk](ain18)
