[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ain11)  [Next](ain13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

### THE STORY OF VANDAIH, THE MAN-EAGLE

AND thus Ahahnheteatoepahk Mahkai became famous for the killing of game;
and there was another young man, named *Van-daih*, who wanted to be his
friend, So one day Vandaih made him four tube-pipes of cane, such as the
Indians use for ceremonious smoking, and went to see the young hunter.
But when he entered the young man was lying down, and he just looked at
Vandaih and then turned his face away, saying nothing,

And Vandaih sat there and when the young man became tired of lying one
way and turned over he lit up one of his pipes. But the young man took
no notice of him. And this went on all night. Every time there was a
chance Vandaih tried his pipe, but Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai never spoke,
and in the morning Vandaih went away without the friend he desired
having responded to him.

The next evening Vandaih came again and sat there all night, but the
friend he courted never said a word, and in the morning he went away
again.

And he slept in the daytime, and when evening came he went again, and
sat all night long, but the young man spoke to him not at all.

And the third morning that this happened the wife of Ahahnheeattoepahk
Mahkai said to him:

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Why are you so mean to Vandaih as never to
speak to him? Perhaps he has something important to say. He comes here
every night, and sits the whole night thru before you, and you do not
speak to him. And maybe he will come tonight again, and I feel very
sorry for him that you never say a word to him when he comes."

And the young man said: 'I know it is true, what you have said, but I
know, too, very well, that Vandaih is not a good man. He gambles with
the *gains-skoot*, he is a liar, thief, licentious, and is everything
that is bad. I wish some other boys would come to see me instead of him,
and better than he, for I know very well that he will repeat things that
I say in a way that I did not mean and raise a scandal about it."

And the next night Vandaih came again and sat in the same place; and
when Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai saw him he just looked at him and then
turned over and went to sleep. But along in the night he awoke, and when
Vandaih saw he was awake he lit one of his pipes. Then Ahahnheeattoepahk
Mahkai got up. And when he got up Vandaih buried his pipe, but the other
said: "What do you bury your pipe for? I want to smoke."

Vandaih said: "I have another pipe," and he lit one and gave it to
Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai, and then he dug up own pipe, and relighted it,
and they both began to smoke.

And Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai said: "When

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

did you come?" And Vandaih replied: "O just a little while ago."

And Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai said: "I have seen you here for four
nights, now, but I know you too well not to know you have a way to
follow," \["a way to follow" means to have some purpose behind\] "but if
you will quit all the bad habits you have I will be glad to have you
come; but there are many others, better than you, whom I would rather
have come to see me.

And now I am going to tell you something, but I am afraid that when you
go away from here you will tell what I have said and make more of it,
and then people will talk, and I shall be sorry.

I will tell you the habits you have--you are a liar, a gambler with the
dice-game and the *wah-pah-tee*, a beggar, you follow after women and
are a thief.

Now I want you to stop these bad habits. You may not know all that the
people say about you: They say that when any hunter brings in game you
are always the first to be there, and you will be very apt to swallow
charcoal <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) if you are so greedy.

Wherever you go, when the people see you coming, they say: 'There comes
a man who is a thief,' and they hide their precious things. When you
arrive they are kind to you, of course, but they do not care much about
you.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

I don't know whether you know that people talk thus about you, but it is
a great shame to me to know, when I have done some bad thing, that
people talk about it.

Now if you quit these things you will be happy, and I want you to stop
them. I am not angry with you, but I want you to know how the people are
talking about you.

Now I want you to go home, but not say anything about what I have told
you. Just take a rest, and tomorrow night come again."

And the next night Vandaih came again, and Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai was
in bed when he came, but he got right up and received him, and said:
"Now after this I mean to tell you what is for your good, but I want you
to keep quiet about it. There are many people that gamble with you. If
they ask you again to gamble with them, do not do it. Tell them you do
not gamble any more. And if they do not stop when you tell them this,
but keep on asking you, come to me, and tell me, first, that you are
going to play. And if I tell you, then, that I do not want you to
gamble, I want you not to do it, but if I tell you you may gamble & you
win once, then you may bet again, but I do not want you to keep on after
winning twice. Twice is enough. But if the other man beats you at first,
then I do not want you to play any more, but to quit gambling forever."

And after this a man did want to gamble with

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Vandaih, but Vandaih said: "I have nothing to
wager, and so cannot play with you."

And still another man wanted to gamble with him, and he made him the
same answer, but this man kept on asking, and at last Vandaih said:
"Perhaps I will play with you, I will see about it. But I must have a
little time first." And he came to Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai and said:
"There is a man who keeps on asking me to gamble with him, and I have
come to tell you about it as you told me to do."

And Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai told him to gamble, and gave him things to
wager on the game, but said: "If he beats you I do not want you to
gamble any more."

And Vandaih took the things which had been given him, and went & played
a game with this man who was so persistent, and won a game. And he
played another game and won that, and then he said, "That is enough, I
do not want to play any more;" but the other man kept on asking him to
play.

But Vandaih refused & took the things which he had won to
Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai and gave them all to him.

And the next morning he gambled again, and won twice, and he stopped
after the second winning, as before.

And thus the young man kept on winning and Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai made
gainskoot (dice-sticks) for him, and this was one reason why he

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

won, for Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai was a powerful doctor & the dice were
charmed.

And he beat every one who played against him till he had beat all the
gamblers of his neighborhood, and then distant gamblers came & he beat
them also. And so he won all the precious things that were in the
country and gave all to Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai & kept nothing back.
But one man went to Ee-ee-toy, who was living at the Salt River Mountain
(*Mo-hah-dheck*) and asked him to let him have some things to wager
against Vandaih. And Ee-ee-toy said: "You can have whatever you want,
and I will go along to see the game."

But when Ee-ee-toy got there he found the dice were not like common
dice, and it would be difficult for any one to win against them, they
were made by so powerful a man.

And Ee-eetoy went westward and found a powerful doctor who had a
daughter, and said to the father: "I want your daughter to go around to
all the big trees and find me all the feathers she can of large birds,
not of small birds, and bring them here. And I will come again & see
what she may have found."

And her father told her, and the very next morning she began to hunt the
feathers, and when Ee-eetoy came again she had a bundle, and Eeeetoy
took them and took the pith out of their shafts and cleansed every
feather which she had brought him.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

And Ee-ee-toy threw away the pith and cut the shafts into small pieces
and told the girl to roast them in a broken pot over a fire; and she got
the broken pot & roasted them, and they curled up as they roasted till
they looked like grains of corn. And then he told her to roast some real
corn & mix both together and grind them all up very fine, And Ee-ee-toy
told her to take some ollas of this pinole in her *syih-haw* to the
reservoirs.

And she did so, and passed by where Vandaih was going to play, and
Vandaih said: "Before I can play I must drink." But the man who was
playing with him said: "Get some water of some one near," but Vandaih
said, "I would rather go to the reservoir."

And Ee-ee-toy had prepared the girl before this, telling her that when
she passed the players Vandaih would follow her to the reservoir and
want too marry her. "Be polite to him," he said "and ask him to drink
some of the pinole, and to see your parents first."

And the man who was going to gamble with Vandaih asked him not to go so
far, for he wanted to gamble right away, but Vandaih replied: "I would
rather go there. I will come right back. You be making holes till I get
back."

So the girl went to the reservoir, and Vandaih followed her and asked
her to be his wife, and she said: "I want you to drink some of this
pinole,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

and in the evening you may go and see my folks and ask them about it."

So Vandaih mixed some pinole and drank it, and it made him feet
feverish, like one with a cold; and the second time he drank the
gooseflesh came out on his skin; and the third time he drank feathers
came out all over him; and the fourth time long feathers grew out on his
arms, and the fifth time he became an eagle and went and perched on the
high place, or bank of the reservoir.

Then the girl went to the place where the other man was waiting to play
the game and told all the people to come and see the terrible thing
which had happened to Vandaih.

And the people, when they saw him, got their bows and arrows and
surrounded him and were going to shoot him.

And they fired arrows at him, and some of them struck him, but could not
pierce him, and then all were afraid of him. And first he began to hop
around, and then to fly a little higher, until he perched on a tree, but
he broke the tree down; and he tried another tree and broke that down;
and then he flew to a mountain and tumbled its rocks down its side, and
finally he settled on a strong cliff. And even the cliff swayed at first
as if it would fall,--but finally it settled and stood still.

And this was foretold when the earth was being made, that one of the
race of men should be

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

turned into an eagle. Vandaih was a handsome man, but he had a bad
character, and ever since the beginning parents had warned their
children to practice virtue lest they be turned into eagles; because it
had been foretold that some good-looking bad person should be thus
transformed, and it was to be seen that good-looking people were often
bad and homely ones good characters.

And Vandaih took that cliff for his residence and hunted over all the
country round about, killing jack-rabbits, deer and all kinds of game
for his food. And when the game became scarce he turned to men and one
day he killed a man and took the body to his cliff to eat. And after
this manner he went on. Early in the morning he would bring home a human
being, and sometimes he would bring home two.

Then the people sent a messenger to Ee-eetoy, to his home on Mohahdheck,
asking him to kill for them this man-eagle. And Ee-ee-toy said to the
man: "You can go back, and in about four days I will be there." But when
the fourth day came Ee-eetoy had not arrived, as he had promised, but
Vandaih was among the people, killing them, carrying them away to -the
cliff.

And the people again sent the messenger, saying to him: "You must tell
Ee-ee-toy he *must* come and help his people or we shall all be lost."

And the man delivered his message and Ee-ee-toy said, as before, that he
would be there in four days.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

And this went on, the people sending to Ee-ee-toy, and Ee-ee-toy
promising to come in four days, until a whole year had passed. And not
only for one year, but for four years, for the people had misunderstood
him, and when he said four days he meant four years, and so for four
years it went on as we have said.

(Now Ee-ee-toy and Vandaih were relatives, and that was one reason why
Ee-ee-toy kept the people waiting so long for his help and worked to
gain time. He did not want to hurt Vandaih.)

But when the fourth year came Ee-ee-toy did go, and told the people to
get him the "seed-roaster."

And the people ran around, guessing what he meant, and they brought him
the charcoal, but Ee-ee-toy said: "I did not mean this, I meant the
'seed-roaster'!"

So they ran around again, and they brought him the long open earthen
vessel with handles at each end, used for roasting, and with it they
brought the charcoal which is made from ironwood. But he said: "I did
not mean these. I mean the 'seed-roaster.'"

And they kept on guessing, and nobody could guess it right. They brought
him the black stones of the nahdahcote, or fire place, and he said: "I
do not want these. I want the 'seed-roaster.'"

And the people kept on guessing, and could not guess it right, and so,
at last, he told them that what he wanted was obsidian, that black
volcanic

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

stone, like glass, from which arrow heads are made. And this was what he
called the "seed-roaster."

So the people got it for him.

Then he told them to bring him four springy sticks. And they ran and
brought all the kinds of springy sticks they could find, but he told
them he did not mean any of these.

And for many days they kept on trying to get him the sticks which he
wanted. And after they had completely failed Ee-ee-toy told them what he
wanted. It was a kind of stick called *vahs-iff*, which did not grow
there, therefore they had not been able to find it. And beside vahsiff
sticks were not springy sticks at all, but the strongest kind of sticks,
very stiff.

So they sent a person to get these, who brought them, and Ee-ee-toy
whittled them so that they had sharp points. And there were four of
them.

And Ee-ee-toy said: "Now I am going, and I want you to watch the top of
the highest mountain, and if you see a big cloud over it, you will know
I have done something wonderful. But if there is a fog over the world
for four days you will know I am killed."

When he started he allowed one of the dust storms of the desert to
arise, and went in that, so that the man-eagle should not see him.

For many days he journeyed toward the cliff, and when sunset of the last
day came he was still a good way off; but he went on and arrived at

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

the foot of the cliff after it was dark, and hid himself there under a
rock.

About daybreak the man-eagle got up and flew around the cliff four times
and then flew off. And after he was gone Ee-ee-toy took one of his
sticks and stuck it into a crack in the cliff, and climbed on it, and
stuck another above it and so he went on to the top, pulling out the
sticks behind him and putting them in above.

And when he got to the home of the man-eagle, Vandaih, on the top of the
cliff, he found a woman there. And she was the same woman who had given
Vandaih the pinole with eagles' feathers in it. He had found her, and
carried her up there, and made her his wife.

When Ee-ee-toy came to the woman he found she had a little boy, and he
asked her if the child could speak yet, and she replied that he was just
beginning to talk; and he enquired further when the man-eagle would
return, and she said that formerly when game was plenty he had not
stayed away long, but now that game was scarce it usually took him about
half a day, so he likely would not be there till noon.

And Ee-ee-toy enquired: "What does he do when he comes back? Does he
sleep or not? Does he lie right down, or does he go looking around
first?"

And the wife said: "He looks all around first, everywhere. And even the
little flies he will kill, he is so afraid that some one will come to
kill

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

him. And after he has looked around, and finished eating, he comes to
lay his head in my lap and have me look for the lice in his head. And it
is then that he goes to sleep."

So Ee-ee-toy turned into a big fly and hid in a crack in the rock, and
asked the woman if she could see him, and she said: "Yes, I can see you
very plainly."

And he hid himself three times, and each time she could see him, but the
fourth time he got into one of the dead bodies, into its lungs, and had
her pile the other dead bodies over him, and then when he asked her she
said: "No, I cannot see you now."

And Ee-ee-toy told her: "As soon as he goes to sleep, whistle, so that I
may know that he is surely asleep."

At noon Ee-ee-toy heard the man-eagle coming. He-was bringing two
bodies, still living & moaning, and dropped them over the place where
Ee-ee-toy lay. And the first thing the man-eagle did was to look all
around, and he said to his wife: "What smell is this that I smell?" And
she said: "What kind of a smell?" And he replied: "Why, it smells like
an uncooked person!" "These you have just brought in are uncooked
persons, perhaps it is these you smell."

Then Vandaih went to the pile of dead bodies and turned them over &
over, but the oldest body at the bottom he did not examine, for he did
not think there could be anyone there.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

So his wife cooked his dinner, and he ate it and then asked her to look
for the lice in his head. And as he lay down he saw a fly pass before
his face, and he jumped up to catch it, but the fly got into a crack in
the rock where he could not get it.

And when he lay down again the child said: "Father! come!" And Vandaih
said: "Why does he say that? He never said that before. He must be
trying to tell me that some one is coming to .injure me!" But the wife
said: "You know he is only learning to talk, and what he means is that
he is glad that his father has come. That is very plain." But Vandaih
said: "No, I think he is trying to tell me some one has come."

But at last Vandaih lay down and the woman searched his head and sang to
put him to sleep. And when he seemed sound asleep she whistled. And her
whistle waked him up and he said: "Why did you whistle! you never did
that before?" And she said: "I whistled because I am so glad about the
game you have brought. I used to feel bad about the people you killed,
but now I know I must be contented & rejoice when you have a good hunt.
And after this I will whistle every time when you bring game home."

And she sang him to sleep again, and whistled when he slept; and waked
him up again, and said the same thing again in reply to his question.

And the third time, while she was singing, she turned Vandaih's head
from side to side. And

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

when he seemed fast asleep she whistled. And after she had whistled she
turned the head again, but Vandaih did not get up, and so she knew that
this time he was fast asleep.

So Ee-ee-toy came out of the dead body he had hidden in, and came to
where Vandaih was, and the woman laid his head down & left him. And
Ee-ee-toy took the knife which he had made from the volcanic glass,
obsidian, and cut Vandaih's throat, and beheaded him, and threw his head
eastward & his body westward. And he beheaded the child, too, and threw
its head westward and its body eastward.

And because of the killing of so powerful a personage the cliff swayed
as if it would fall down, but Ee-ee-toy took one of his sharpened stakes
and drove it into the cliff and told the woman to hold onto that; and he
took another and drove that in and took hold of that himself.

And after the cliff had steadied enuf, Ee-ee-toy told the woman to heat
some water, and when she had done so he sprinkled the dead bodies.

The first ones he sprinkled came to life and he asked them where there
home was & when they told him he sent them there by his power.

And he had more water heated and sprinkled more bodies, and when he
learned where their home was he sent them home, also, by his power.

And this was done a third time, with a third set of bodies.

And the forth time the hot water was sprinkled

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

on the oldest bodies of all, the mere skeletons, and it took them a long
time to come to life, and when they were revived they could not remember
where their homes were or where they had come from.. So Ee-ee-toy cutoff
eagles' feathers slanting-wise (pens) and gave them, and gave them dried
blood mixed with water (ink) and told them their home should be in the
East, and by the sign of the slanting-cut feather they should know each
other. And they are the white people of this day. And he sent them
eastward by his power.

And in the evening he & the woman went down the cliff by the aid of the
sharpened stakes, even as he had come up, and when they reached the foot
of the mountain they stayed there over night. They took some of the long
eagle feathers and made a kee from them, & some of the soft eagle
feathers and made a bed with them. And they stayed there four nights, at
the foot of the cliff.

And after a day's journey they made another kee of shorter eagle
feathers, and a bed of tail feathers. And they staid at this second camp
four nights.

And then they journeyed on again another day and build another kee, like
the first one, & stayed there also four nights.

And they journeyed on yet another day and built again a kee, like the
second one, and stayed there four nights.

And on the morning of each fourth day Ee-ee-toy took the bath of
purification, as the Pimas

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

have since done when they have slain Apaches, and when he arrived home
he did not go right among the people but stayed out in the bushes for a
while.

And the people knew he had killed Vandaih, the man-eagle, for they had
watched and had seen the cloud over the high mountain.

And after the killing of Vandaih, for a long time, the people had
nothing to be afraid of, and they were all happy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[74:1](ain12.htm#fr_2) "To swallow charcoal"
implies the swallowing of meat so greedily it is not properly cleansed
of the ashes of its roasting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Story of Vandaih](ain13)
