[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ain42)  [Next](ain44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

### THE STORY OF THE CHILDREN OF CLOUD

THERE was a woman who lived in the mountains, who was very beautiful,
and had many suitors, but she never married anyone.

And one day she was making mats of cane; and she fell asleep and a rain
came and a drop fell on her navel.

And she had twin babies, and all the men claimed them, but when the
babies were old enuf to crawl she told all the claimants to get in a
circle, and she would put the babies in the middle, and if they crawled
up to any man he would be the father.

But the babies climbed upon nobody, And she never married.

And when these twin boys were old enuf their mother showed them a cloud
in the east, and said: "That is your father, and his name is Cloud, and
the Wind is your uncle, your father's older brother."

But the children paid little attention, but when they got older they
asked their mother if they could go and see their father. And their
mother let them go.

And they went, and came to a house, and the man who lived there asked
them where they were going, and they said they were looking for their
father, whose name was Cloud.

And the man pointed to the next house, and

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

said: "That man, there, is your father."

And they went to that man, but he said: "It is not so. He is your
father. He is Cloud." and sent them back again.

But the first man sent them back once more to the second, who was really
Cloud.

And Cloud said, that time; "I wonder if it is so that you are my
children!"

And the boys said: "That is what they say."

And Cloud said: "I want you to do something to prove it."

Then the oldest boy thundered loud and lightened, and the other
lightened a little, and Cloud said, "It is true, you are my children!"

And before night Cloud fed them, and then wept into his kee and shut it
up and left them outside all night. And it rained and snowed all night,
but they staid outside.

And in the morning Cloud came out, and said: "It is really so, that you
are my children."

And the next night he took them to a pond, where there was ice, and left
them there all. night, And the next day, when he came there and found
they had staid in the water all night he said: "It is really so--you are
my children.",

So Cloud [acknowledged](errata.htm#37) them for his children and took
them into his kee. And after a while the boys wanted to go back to their
mother. and Cloud said: "You may go, but you must not speak to anybody
on the Way. And I will be with you on the journey."

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

So the boys started, and cloud was over them, in the sky, shadowing
them.

And after a while they saw a man coming, and the younger boy said: "We
must ask him how our mother is."

But the older brother said: "Don't you remember that our father told us
not to speak to anyone?"

The younger said: "Yes, I remember, but it would not be right not ask
how our mother is."

So when the Man came the boy asked: "How is everybody at home, and how
is the old woman, our mother?"

And then the cloud above them lightened and thundered, and they were
both turned into century plants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Story of Cloud](ain44)
