<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf04)  [Next](sbf06) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE STORY OF THE LEOPARD TORTOISE.<span class="small">\[1\]</span>

The people had gone hunting: she was ill; and she perceived a man <span
class="small">\[2\]</span> who came up to her hut; he had been hunting
around.

She asked the man to rub her neck a little with fat for her; for, it
ached. The man rubbed it with fat for her. And she altogether held the
man firmly with it.<span class="small">\[3\]</span> The man's hands
altogether decayed away in it. <span class="small">\[4\]</span>

Again, she espied another man, who came hunting. And she also spoke, she
said.: "Rub me with fat a little."

And the man whose hands had decayed away in

\[1. *Testudo pardalis*.

2\. The narrator explains that this misfortune happened to men of the
Early Race.

3\. By drawing in her neck.

4\. The flesh decayed away and came off, as well as the skin and nails,
leaving, the narrator says, merely the bones.\]

her neck, he was hiding his hands,<span class="small">\[1\]</span> so
that the other man should not perceive them, namely, that they had
decayed away in it. And he said: "Yes; O my mate! rub our elder sister a
little with fat; for, the moon has been cut,<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> while our elder sister lies ill. Thou shalt
also rub our elder sister with fat." He was hiding his hands, so that
the other one should not perceive them.

The Leopard Tortoise said Rubbing with fat, put (thy hands) into my
neck. And he, rubbing with fat, put in his hands upon the Leopard
Tortoise's neck; and the Leopard Tortoise drew in her head upon her
neck; while his hands were altogether in her neck; and he dashed the
Leopard Tortoise upon the ground, on account of it; while he desired, he
thought, that he should, by dashing (it) upon the ground, break the
Leopard Tortoise. And the Leopard Tortoise held him fast.

The other one had taken out his bands (from behind his back); and he
exclaimed: "Feel (thou) that which I did also feel!" and he showed the
other one his hands; and the other one's hands were altogether inside
the Leopard Tortoise's neck. And he arose, he returned home. And the
other one was dashing the Leopard Tortoise upon the ground; while he
returning went; and he said that the other, one also felt what he had
felt. A pleasant thing

\[1. He sat, putting his hands behind him, when the other man came,
taking them out from the Leopard Tortise's neck.

2\. The moon 'died', and another moon came, while she still lay ill, the
narrator explains. "Whilst in the preceeding myths of the Mantis, the
Moon, according to its origin, is only a piece of leather (a shoe of the
Mantis),-in Bushman astrological mythology the Moon is looked upon as a
man who incurrs the wrath of the Sun, and is consequently pierced by the
knife (*i.e rays*) of the latter. This process is repeated until almost
the whole of the Moon is cut away, and only one little piece left; which
the Moon piteously implores the Sun to spare for his (the Moon's)
children. (As mentioned above, the Moon is in Bushman mythology a male
being.) From this little piece, the Moon gradually grows again until it
becomes a full moon, when the Sun's stabbing and cutting processes
recommence." ("A Brief Account of Bushman Folk-lore and other Texts." By
W.H.I. Bleek, Ph.D. Cape Town, 1875. p. 9, §16.)\]

(it) was not, in which he had been! He yonder returning went; (he)
arrived at home.

The people exclaimed: "Where hast thou been? And he, answering, said
that the Leopard Tortoise had been the one in whose neck his hands had
been; that was why he had not returned home, The people said: "Art thou
a fool? Did not (thy) parents instruct thee? The Leopard Tortoise always
seems as if she would die; while she is deceiving us."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Children Are Sent To Throw The Sleeping Sun Into The
Sky.](sbf06)

</div>
