<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf08)  [Next](sbf10.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE GIRL OF THE EARLY RACE, WHO MADE STARS.<span class="small">\[1\]</span>

My mother was the one who told me that the girl arose; she put her hands
into the wood ashes; she threw up the wood ashes into the sky. She said
to the wood ashes: "The wood ashes which are here, they must altogether
become the Milky Way. They must white lie along in the sky, that the
stars may stand outside of the Milky Way, while the Milky Way is the
Milky Way, while it used to be wood ashes." They (the ashes) altogether
become the Milky Way. The Milky Way must go round with the stars; while
the Milky Way feels that, the Milky Way lies going round; while the
stars sail along; therefore, the Milky Way, lying, goes along with the
stars. The Milky Way, when the Milky Way stands upon the earth, the
Milky Way turns across in front, while the Milky Way means to wait(?),
While the Milky Way feels that the Stars are turning back; while the
Stars feel that the Sun is the one who has turned back; he is upon his
path; the Stars turn back; while they go to fetch the daybreak; that
they may lie nicely, while the Milky Way lies nicely. The Stars shall
also stand nicely around.

<span class="small">\[1. This girl is said to have been one of the
people of the early race (*!Xwe-\|na-ssho-!ke*) and the 'first' girl;
and to have acted ill. She was finally shot by her husband. These
*!Xwe-\|na-ssho-!ke* are said to have been stupid, and not to have
understood things well.\]</span>

They shall sail along upon their footprints, which they, always sailing
along, are following. While they feel that, they are the Stars which
descend.

The Milky Way lying comes to its place, to which the girl threw up the
wood ashes, that it may descend nicely; it had lying gone along, while
it felt that it lay upon the sky. It had lying gone round, while it felt
that the Stars also turned round. They turning round passed over the
sky. The sky lies (still); the Stars are those which go along; while
they feel that they sail. They had been setting; they had, again, been
coming out; they had, sailing along, been following their footprints.
They become white, when the Sun comes out. The Sun sets, they stand
around above; while they feel that they did turning follow the Sun.

The darkness comes out; they (the Stars) wax red, while they had at
first been white. They feel that they stand brightly around; that they
may sail along; while they feel that it is night. Then, the people go by
night; while they feel that the ground is made light. While they feel
that the Stars shine a little. Darkness is upon the ground. The Milky
Way gently glows; while it feels that it is wood ashes. Therefore, it
gently glows. While it feels that the girl was the one who said that the
Milky Way should give a little light for the people, that they might
return home by night, in the middle of the night. For, the earth would
not have been a little light, had not the Milky Way been there. It and
the Stars.

The girl thought that she would throw up (into the air) roots of the
*!huing*, in order that the *!huing* roots should become Stars;
therefore, the Stars are red; while they feel that (they) are *!huing*
roots.<span class="small">\[1\]</span>

She first gently threw up wood ashes into the sky, that she might
presently throw up *!huing* roots; while she felt that she was angry
with her mother, because her mother had not given her many *!huing*
roots, that she might eat abundantly; for, she was in the hut. She did
not herself go out to seek food; that she might get(?) *!huing* for
herself; that she might be bringing it (home) for herself; that she
might eat; for, she was hungry; while she lay ill in the hut. Her
mothers were those who went out. They were those who sought for food.
They were bringing home *!huing*, that they might eat. She lay in her
little hut, which her mother had made for her. Her stick stood there;
because she did not yet dig out food. And, she was still in the hut. Her
mother was the one who was bringing her food. That she might be eating,
lying in the little hut; while her mother thought that she (the girl)
did not eat the young men's game (i.e. game killed by them). For, she
ate the game of her father, who was an old man. While she thought that
the hands of the young men would become cool. Then, the arrow would
become cool. The arrow head which is at the top, it would be cold; while
the arrow head felt that the bow was cold; while the bow felt that his

\[1. She threw up a scented root (eaten by some Bushmen) called
*!huing,* which became stars; the red (or old) *!huing* making red
stars, the white or young *!huing* making white stars. This root is,
*\|\|kabbo* says, eaten by baboons and also by the porcupine.

The same girl also made locusts, by throwing up into the sky the peel of
the *!kuissi* <span class="small">\[an edible root\]</span> which she
was eating.

2\. *\|\|kabbo* here explained that, when a girl has 'grown', she is put
into a tiny hut, made by her mother, with a very small arpeture for the
door; which her mother closes upon her. When she goes out, she looks
upon the ground; and when she returns to the hut, she sits and looks
down. She does not go far, or walk about at this time. When presently
she becomes a, 'big girl', she is allowed to look about, and to look
afar again; being, on the first occasion, allowed to look afar over her
mother's hand. She leaves the small hut, when allowed to look about and
around again; and she then walks about like the other women. During the
time she is in retreat, she must not look at the springbok, lest they
should become wild.\]

(the young man's) hands were cold. While the girl thought of her saliva,
which, eating, she had put into the springbok meat; this saliva would go
into the bow, the inside of the bow would become cool; she, in this
manner, thought. Therefore, she feared the young men's game. Her father
was the one from whom she alone ate (game). While she felt that she had
worked (*i.e.* treated) her father's hands: she had worked, taking away
her saliva (from them).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Great Star, !Gaunu, Which, Singing, Named The Stars.](sbf10.md)

</div>
