<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf14)  [Next](sbf16) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# \#KAGA'RA<span class="small">\[1\]</span> AND !HAUNU, WHO FOUGHT EACH OTHER WITH LIGHTNING.

They formerly, *\#kagara* formerly went to fetch his younger sister, he
went to take her away; he went to take her away from *!haunu*<span
class="small">\[2\]</span>; and he took (her) back to her parents.

!haunu gave chase to his brother-in-law, he passed along behind the
hill.

The clouds came, clouds which were unequalled in beauty (lit. "clouds
which not beautiful like them"); they vanished away.

\#kagara said:<span class="small">\[3\]</span> "Thou must walk on." His
younger sister walked, carrying (a heavy burden of)

\[1 A bird (it) is; a little bird (it) is; it resembles the *Lanius
Collaris* (a Butcher-Bird).

2\. A man (it) is; the Rain (it) is. I think that a Rain's Sorcerer (he)
seems to have been. His name resembles (that of) the mucus which we are
used to blow out of our nose, which is thick, that which the Bushmen
call *!hau!haung*.

3\. To his younger sister.\]

things, (her) husband's things. He (*\#kagara*) said: "Thou must walk
on; for, home is not near at hand."

!haunu passed along behind (the hill).

The clouds came, the clouds vanished away.

\#kagara said: "Thou must walk on, for, thou art the one who dost see."
And he, because the house became near) he exclaimed: "Walk on! Walk on!"
He waited for his younger sister; his younger sister came up to his
side. He exclaimed: "What things can these be, which thou dost heavily
carry?"

Then *!haunu* sneezed, on account of it;<span class="small">\[3\]</span>
blood poured out of his nostrils; he stealthily lightened at his
brother-in-law. His brother-in-law fended him quickly off,<span
class="small">\[4\]</span> his brother-in-law also stealthily lightened
at him. He quickly fended off his brother-in-law. His brother-in-law
also lightened at him. He (*\#kagara*) said: "Thou must come (and) walk
close beside me; for, thou art the one who dost see that husband does
not allow us time; for, he does not singly lighten."

They (*\#kagara* and *!haunu*) went along angry with

\[1. The things which the wife carried, they resembled water; they, in
this manner, were pushing at her; while they felt that they were not
hard, they did in this manner (i.e. swayed forward), behind her back.

2\. *!haunu* was the one from whose nostrils blood came out, when he
intended to sneeze. He sneezed on account of his things, to which
*\#kagara* did in this manner (i.e. felt at roughly).

3\. In the word *\|\|khabbe(t)* the *t* is barely pronounced. The
meaning of this word is explained by the narrator as follows: (He) fends
off his brother-in-law (by motioning with his arm). Fending off (it) is,
when other people are fighting their fellows with their fists. Fending
off is that which they are wont to do, they wave off with the arm, while
they fend off the other one's arm. He (*\#kagara*) fended off the other
one's lightning.\]

each other. *!haunu* had intended that he should be the one lightening
to *\#kagara* to whisk away

\#kagara. *\#kagara* was one who was strong (lit. "was not light", or
"did not feel light"), he continued to fend off his younger sister's
husband, *!haunu*. His younger sister's husband was also lightening at
him; he was lightening at his brother-in-law. Then he stealthily
lightened at his younger sister's husband with black lightning,<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> he, lightening, whisked him up (and carried
him to a little distance).

His younger sister's husband, in this manner, lay dying; he, in this
manner, he thundered,<span class="small">\[2\]</span> while *\#kagara*
bound up his head<span class="small">\[3\]</span> with the net, he,
returning, arrived at home.

He went to lie down in the hut, while *!haunu* lay thundering;<span
class="small">\[4\]</span> he thundered there, while *\#kagara* went to
lie down, when he had rubbed them (i.e. himself and his younger sister)
with buchu,<span class="small">\[5\]</span> buchu, buchu, buchu, he lay
down.

\[1. Black lightning is that which kills us, that which we do not
perceive it come; it resembles a gun, we are merely startled by the
clouds' thundering, while the other man lies, shrivelled up lies.

2\. As he lay.

3\. His head ached; his head was splitting (with pain).

4\. To thunder is *!kuerriten*; but the narrator explained that
*!ke!keya* here means 'to lie thundering'; and illustrated the
expression by saying that "the Bushmen are wont to say that the
springbok is one which goes to lie bleating; it is not willing to die
quickly".

5\. Buchu (in Webster's international Dictionary of 1902) is stated to
be, "A South African shrub (*Barosma*)".\]

Note by the Narrator.

My grandmothers used to say: "*\#kagara* and his companion are those who
fight in the East, he and *!haunu*."

When the clouds were thick, and the clouds, when the clouds were thick,
and the clouds were at this place, and the clouds resembled a mountain,
then, the clouds were lightening, on account of it. And my grandmothers
used to say: "It is *\#kagara*, with *!haunu*."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hyena's Revenge. First Version.](sbf16)

</div>
