<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf10)  [Next](sbf12.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# WHAT THE STARS SAY, AND A PRAYER TO A STAR.

They (the Bushmen) wish, that they may also perceive things.<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> Therefore, they say that the Star shall take
their heart, with which they do not a little hunger; the Star shall give
them the Star's heart, the Star's heart,--with which the Star sits in
plenty. For the Star is not small; the Star seems as if it had food.
Therefore, they say, that the Star shall give them of the Star's heart,
that they may not hunger.

The Stars are wont to call, "*Tsau!* *Tsau!*" therefore the Bushmen are
wont to say, that the Stars curse for them the springboks' eyes; the
Stars say, "*Tsau!*" they say, "*Tsau!* *Tsau!*" I am one who was
listening to them. I questioned my grandfather (*Tsatsi*), what things
it could be that spoke thus. My grandfather said to me that the Stars
were those who spoke thus. The Stars were those who said, *Tsau!* while
they cursed for the people

<span class="small">\[1. i.e. things which their dogs may kill.\]</span>

the springboks' eyes. Therefore, when I grew up, I was listening to
them. The Stars said, "*Tsau!* *Tsau!*" Summer is (the time) when they
sound.

Because I used to sleep with my grandfather, I was the one who sat with
my grandfather, when he sat in the coolness outside. Therefore) I
questioned him, about the things which spoke thus. He said, the Stars
were those who spoke thus; they cursed for the people the springboks'
eyes.<span class="small">\[1\]</span>

My grandfather used to speak to Canopus, when Canopus had newly come
out; he said: "Thou shalt give me thy heart, with which thou dost sit in
plenty, thou shalt take my heart,--my heart,--with which I am
desperately hungry. That I might also be full, like thee. For, I hunger.
For, thou seemest to be satisfied (with food); hence thou art not small.
For, I am hungry. Thou shalt give me thy stomach, with which thou art
satisfied. Thou shalt take my stomach, that thou mayst also hunger. Give
thou me also thy arm, thou shalt take my arm, with which I do not kill.
For, I miss my aim. Thou shalt give me thy arm. For, my arm which is
here, I miss my aim with it." He desired that the arrow might hit the
springbok for him; hence, he wished the Star to give him the Star's arm,
while the Star took his arm, with which he missed his aim.

He shut his mouth, he moved away, he sat down; while he felt that he
wished to sit and sharpen an arrow.

<span class="small">\[1. I think that it was all the springbok.\]</span>

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: !Ko-G!nuing-Tara, Wife Of The Dawn's-Heart Star, Jupiter.](sbf12.md)

</div>
