<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf12)  [Next](sbf14) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IIIa. Other Myths.

## THE SON OF THE WIND.

The (son of the) Wind was formerly still. And he rolled<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> (a ball) to *!na-ka-ti*. He exclaimed: "O
*!na-ka-ti*! There it goes!" And*!na-ka-ti* exclaimed: "O comrade! There
it goes!" because inq-ka-ti felt that he did not know his (the other
one's) name. Therefore, *!na-ka-ti* said: "O comrade! There it goes!" He
who was the wind, he was the one who said: "O *!na-ka-ti*! There it
goes!

Therefore, *!na-ka-ti* went to question his mother about the other one's
name. He exclaimed: "O our mother! Utter for me comrade who is yonder,
his name; for, comrade utters my name; I do not utter comrade's name. I
would also utter comrade's name, when I am rolling (the ball) to him.
For, I do not utter comrade's name; I would also utter his name, when I
roll (the ball) to him." Therefore,

\[1. Rolled (a ball of) *\|\|kuarri* to him. I think that it must have
been *\|\|kuarri*; for, *\|\|kuarri* is that with which we are rolling
(a ball): when we wish to aim, seeing ourselves, whether a man aims
better than the other people. Therefore, we are rolling (a ball) with
*\|\|kuarri*.

\|\|kuarri is found in our country. They stand in numbers around.
Therefore, the porcupine eats them. We do not eat them; for they are
poison.

2\. The name *!na-ka-ti* *\|hang\#kass'o* was unable to explain. He
thinks that it must have been given by the parents, as *!na-ka-ti* was
still a child. He further stated that the word *!na* is the name of an
insect which resembles the locust. It is large, and also resembles the
*Acridium ruficorne*. It is red. It affects the eyes of the Bushmen.
Their eyes become closed and they writhe with pain on account of the
burning caused by this insect.\]

his mother exclaimed: "I will not utter to thee comrade's name. For,
thou shalt wait; that father may first shelter for us the hut;<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> that father may first strongly shelter the
hut.<span class="small">\[2\]</span> And then I will utter for thee
comrade's name. And thou shalt, when I have uttered for thee comrade's
name, thou must, when I am the one who has uttered for thee comrade's
name, thou must, when I have uttered for thee comrade's name, thou must
scamper away, thou must run home, that thou mayest come into the hut,
whilst thou dost feel that the wind would blow thee away."

Therefore, the child went; they (the two children) went to roll (the
ball) there. Therefore, he (*!na-ka-ti*) again, he went to his mother,
he again, he went to question his mother about the other one's name.

And his mother exclaimed: "*\|erriten-!kuang-!kuang*" it is;
*!gau-!gaubu-ti* it is. He is *\|erriten-!kunag-!kunag*; he is
*!gau-!gaubu-ti*, he is

\|erriten-!kuang-!kuang."

Therefore, *!na-ka-ti* went on account of it. He went to roll (the ball)
there, while he did not utter the other one's name, while he felt that
his mother was the one who had thus spoken to him. She said: "Thou must
not, at first, utter comrade's name. Thou must, at first, be silent,
even if comrade be the one who is uttering thy name. Therefore, thou
shalt, when thou hast uttered comrade's name, thou must run home, while
thou dost feel that the wind would blow thee away."

Therefore, *!na-ka-ti* went on account of it; they went to roll (the
ball) there, while the other was

\[1. They had a hut . . . the hut was small. They probably had a mat
hut.

2\. That is, make a strong screen of bushes for the mat hut.\]

the one who uttered his (*!na-ka-ti*'s) name. While he (*!na-ka-ti*)
felt that he wished that his father should first finish making the
shelter for the hut. And (when) he saw that his father sat down, then he
would, afterwards, utter the Other one's name, when he beheld that his
father had finished sheltering the hut.

Therefore, when he beheld that his father had finished sheltering the
hut, then he exclaimed: "There it goes! O *\|erriten-!kuang-!kuang*!
There it goes *!gau-!gaubu-ti*! There it goes! And he scampered away, he
ran home; while the other one began to lean over, and the other one fell
down. He lay kicking violently upon the vlei.<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> Therefore, the people's huts vanished away,
the wind blew, breaking their (sheltering) bushes, together with the
huts, while the people could not see for the dust. Therefore, his (the
wind's) mother came out of the hut <span class="small">\[2\]</span>
(i.e., of the wind's hut); his mother came, grasping (him), to raise him
up; his mother, grasping (him), set him on his feet. And he was
unwilling, (and) wanted to lie still. His mother, taking hold (of him),
set him on his feet. Therefore, the wind became still; while the wind
had, at first, while he lay, caused the dust to rise.

Therefore, we who are Bushmen, we are wont to say: "The wind seems to be
lying down, for, it does not gently blow (i.e. it blows strongly). For,
when it stands (upright), then it is still, when it stands; for, it
seems to be lying down, when it

\[1. A depression in the ground, sometimes dry, sometimes covered with
coarse grass and rushes, and sometimes filled with water.

2\. Her hut remained standing, while it felt that they themselves were
wind.\]

does in this manner. its knee is that which makes a noise, when it lies
down; for its knee does sound. I had wished that it might gently blow
for us, that we might go out, that we might ascend the place yonder,
that we might behold the river bed yonder standing behind (the hill).
For, we have driven away the springbok from this place. Therefore, the
springbok, have gone to yonder (dry) river bed standing behind (the
hill). For, we have not a little shot the springbok at this place; for,
we have shot, letting the sun set,<span class="small">\[1\]</span> at
the springbok at this place."

<span class="small">\[1. Literally, "having put in the sun."\]</span>

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Wind.](sbf14)

</div>
