<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf18)  [Next](sbf20) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE RESURRECTION OF THE OSTRICH.

The Bushman kills an Ostrich at the Ostrich's eggs; he carries away the
Ostrich to the house. And his wife takes off the Ostrich's short
feathers which were inside the net, because they were bloody; she goes
to place them (on the bushes). They eat the Ostrich meat.

A little whirlwind comes to them; it blows up the Ostrich feathers. A
little Ostrich feather that has blood upon it, it blows up the little
feather into the sky. The little feather falls down out of the sky, it
having whirled round falls down, it goes into the water, it becomes wet
in the water, it is conscious, it lies in the water, it becomes Ostrich
flesh; it gets feathers, it puts on its Wings, it gets its legs, while
it lies in the water. It walks out of the water, it basks in the sun
upon the water's edge, because it is still a young Ostrich. Its feathers
are young feathers (quills); because its feathers are little feathers.
They are black; for a little male Ostrich it is. He dries (his feathers)
lying upon the water's bank, that he may afterwards walk away, when his
little feathers are dried, that he may walk unstiffening his legs. For
he had been in the water; that he may walk strengthening his feet, for
he thinks that his feet must be in (Ostrich's) veldschoens, because his
feet become strong. While he walks strengthening his feet) he lies down,
he hardens his breast, that his breastbone may become bone. He walks
away, he eats young, bushes, because a young Ostrich he is. He swallows
young plants which are small, because a little Ostrich he is. His little
feather it was which became the Ostrich, it was that which the wind blew
up, while the wind was a little whirlwind; he thinks of the place on
which he has scratched; he lets himself grow, that he may first be
grown, that he may afterwards, lying (by the way), go to his house's old
place, where he did die lying there, that he may go to scratch in the
old house,<span class="small">\[1\]</span> while he goes to fetch his
wives. He will add (to the two previous ones)

<span class="small">\[1. Making the new house on the old one.\]</span>

another she Ostrich; because he did die, he will marry three Ostrich
wives. Because his breastbone is bone, he roars, hardening his ribs,
that his ribs may become bone. Then he scratches (out a house), for he
does sleeping (by the way) arrive at the house's place; he roaring calls
the Ostrich wives, that the Ostrich wives may come to him. Therefore he
roaring calls, that he may perceive the she Ostriches come to him; and
he meets them, that he may run round the females; for he had been dead;
he dying left his wives. He will look at his wives' feathers, for his
wives' feathers appear to be fine.

When he has strengthened his flesh, he feels heavy, as he comes, because
his legs are big, his knees are large; he has grown great feathers,
because the quills are those which are great feathers; these feathers
become strong, they are old feathers. Therefore he roars strongly, for
the ribs are big. And he is a grown up Ostrich; his wings' feathers are
long. He thinks that he will scratch, that the females may lay eggs; for
his claws are hard, they want to scratch for he brings the females to
the house's place. The females stand eating. Therefore he goes back, he
scratches, while the she Ostriches eat there. He first goes to scratch
drying the house, because it is damp, that the inside of the house may
dry. The she Ostriches shall look at the house; one she Ostrich, she
lies down to try the house, she tries whether the house seems to be
nice; she first sleeps opposite the house, because the inside of the
house is wet, as the rain has newly fallen. Thus they first lie opposite
the house, they sleep opposite the house. She shall lie, making the
ground inside the house soft; she first lies, making the ground inside
the house soft, that the inside of the house may be dry, that another
female may come and lay an egg in the inside of the house which is dry,
for the earth of the house is wet. She first goes to lie opposite the
house. One other female again comes, She comes to lay another new egg;
she first comes to flap her wings in the house, for two small eggs stand
(there); she again goes to sleep opposite the house. All the females are
those who sleep at the house. He galloping in the dark drives the
females to the house; he shall running take the females to the house;
they all walking arrive at the house. Another female, a different one,
lays another egg; they again flapping their wings peck at it. He drives
the females away; he lies inside the house. These females, following
each other, reach him at the house; these females send him off, they all
lay eggs. He goes, for he goes away to eat. Two wives lie in the house;
another wife also goes with him, they go to eat together; they sleep.
The two wives sleep in the house. They two (the male and female) return
early, they shall early send off the two wives, who had lain in the
house. The wife who had been with him, lays another egg; the wives go,
all the wives, whilst he lies down, that he may sleep at the house. He
will drive away the jackal, when he thinks that the jackal is coming to
the eggs, the jackal will push the eggs. Therefore he takes care of the
eggs, because his children they indeed are. Therefore, he also takes
care of them, that he may drive away the jackal, that the jackal may not
kill his children, that he may kick the jackal with his feet.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Vultures, Their Elder Sister, And Her Husband.](sbf20)

</div>
