<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf15)  [Next](sbf17) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IV. Animal Fables.

## THE HYENA'S REVENGE.

First Version.

The Hyena was the one who went to the Lion's house, then, he deceived
the Lion; while he felt that the Lion had acted grudgingly towards him
about the quagga's flesh; therefore, the Lion came to the Hyena's house,
when the Hyena was boiling there in the Hyena's pot; the Hyena boiled
ostrich flesh in it.

Therefore, the Hyena gave soup to the Lion therefore, the Lion took hold
of the pot, while the pot was hot; the Hyena also grasped the pot with
his, hands; the Hyena said: "O Lion! Allow me to pour soup into the
inside of thy mouth." The Hyena poured soup into the Lion's mouth; then,
he put the mouth of the pot over the Lion's head, while the pot was hot;
the soup was burning the Lion's eyes; the soup also burned the inside of
his mouth. Then, he swallowed hot soup with his throat, he swallowed,
causing himself to die with hot soup he died, while his head was inside
the pot.

The Hyena took up the Hyena's stick, the Hyena was beating him with the
stick, while his head was inside the pot; the Hyena was beating him; the
Hyena struck, cleaving the pot asunder; while the Hyena felt that the
Hyena had deceived him therefore, he came to the Hyena.

The Hyena killed him, with hot soup; while he felt that the pot had
stood upon the fire; he took the pot off from the fire, while he felt
that he intended to burn the Lion to death, with the soup's heat; while
he felt that the Lion had been niggardly towards him about the quagga's
flesh; therefore, he deceived him with the ostrich flesh; while he felt
that he intended to put the Lion's head into the pot; therefore, he
deceived him; while he felt that (he had married a female Hyena, he also
is a male Hyena; therefore, be is a "Decayed Arm",<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> on account of it.

The Lion also marries a Lioness, as the Lion is a male Lion. The Hyena
also marries a female Hyena, as the Hyena is a male Hyena. The leopard
also marries a leopardess, as the leopard is a male leopard. The hunting
leopard<span class="small">\[2\]</span> marries a hunting leopardess, as
the hunting leopard is a male hunting leopard.

\[1. This expression is used to denote a person who acts ungenerously
regarding food.

2\. *Felis jubata*.\]

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hyena's Revenge. Second Version.](sbf17)

</div>
