<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf26)  [Next](sbf28) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE \#NERRU AND HER HUSBAND.<span class="small">\[1\]</span>

A man of the early race formerly married a *\#nerru*.<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> The *\#nerru* put<span
class="small">\[3\]</span> the dusty (i.e. earthy) Bushman rice into a
bag, when her husband had dug out (literally,"had killed") Bushman rice.
She went to wash the Bushman rice; they returned home.

They early went out to seek for food on the morrow, she and (her)
husband; for she was alone(?) with her husband. He was the one who
dug<span class="small">\[4\]</span> out (Bushman rice). Therefore she
was with her husband. Thus she went out to seek for food, on the morrow.
The husband dug out Bushman rice; he put the Bushman rice into the
bag.<span class="small">\[5\]</span> And the husband again dug out other
Bushman rice. He put it in above, put in the Bushman rice on the top of
the morning's Bushman rice. He again arose, he sought for other Bushman
rice. He again found other Bushman rice; he dug out

\[1. think that *\|Xabbi-ang*'s grandmother's grandmother's other
grandmother's mother it must have been who formerly, in this manner,
spoke to her.

2\. The *\#nerru* (now a bird) was formerly a person; therefore, a man
of the early race was the one who married her.

3\. When they are putting Bushman rice into (a bag), when the Bushman
rice has earth with it, they say that they *!ko* Bushman rice.

4\. "To dig with a stick" is here meant.

5\. The man was the one who was putting Bushman rice into the bag, while
the woman was the one who was holding the bag; she was the one who
intended to shake in the Bushman rice. He stood inside the mouth of the
hole, while the wife stood above.\]

(the earth from it). And he again dug it (the rice) out. He put it on
the top (of the other). He put it on the top; and the bag<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> became full.

And he arose, he sought for other Bushman rice. He found other Bushman
rice; he dug but (the earth from) it. He dug it out. And he
exclaimed:"Give me (thy) little kaross,<span class="small">\[2\]</span>
that I may put the Bushman rice upon it." And the wife said:<span
class="small">\[3\]</span> "We are not accustomed to put Bushman rice,
having earth with it, into our back's kaxoss, we who are of the house of
*\#nerru*."<span class="small">\[4\]</span> And he exclaimed: "Give me,
give me the little kaross, that I may put the Bushman rice upon (it)."
And the wife said: "Thou shouldst put the Bushman rice into the ground;
for we are not accustomed to put Bushman rice, having earth with it,
into our back's kaross." And he exclaimed: "Give me, give me the little
kaross, that I may put the Bushman rice upon (it)." And the wife
exclaimed: "Thou shouldst put the Bushman rice into the ground, that
thou mayst cover over the Bushman rice."<span class="small">\[5\]</span>

And he exclaimed: "Give me the kaross, that I may put the Bushman rice
upon (it)!" while he snatched away the kaross. The wife's entrails,

\[1. I think that it seems to have been a springbok sack (i.e. a bag
made of springbok skin).

2\. It is a little kaross. One skin (that is, the skin of one animal)
they call *!koussi*.

3\. She spoke gently (i.e. did not sing here).

4\. I think that their houses must have been numerous; for they were
numerous; for, when they are little birds, they are not a little
numerous.

5\. With other earth.\]

which were upon the little kaross,<span class="small">\[1\]</span>
poured down.<span class="small">\[2\]</span> And he, crying, exclaimed:
"Oh dear! O my wife! What shall I do?" while the wife arose, the wife
said (*i.e.* sang)--

 

"We, who are of the house of *\#nerru*,  
We are not used to put earthy Bushman rice  
(Into) our back's kaross;  
We, who are of the house of *\#nerru*,  
We are not used to put earthy Bushman rice  
(Into) our back's kaross:"

 

while she walked on replacing her entrails. She sang--<span
class="small">\[3\]</span>

 

"We, who are of the house of *\#nerru*,  
We are not used to put earthy Bushman rice  
(Into) our back's kaross:"

 

Therefore, her mother, when sitting,<span class="small">\[4\]</span>
exclaimed: "Look at the place to which (thy) elder sister went to seek
food, for the noise of the wind is that which sounds like a person;"
for, (thy) elder sisters' husbands do not act rightly. Thou dost see
that the noise of the wind is that which sounds like a person, singing
to windward." And her daughter stood up; her daughter looked. She (the
daughter) exclaimed: "(Thy) daughter is the one who falling comes." Then
her mother said: "I wish that ye may see; (thy) elder sisters'
husbands<span class="small">\[6\]</span> do

\[1. I do not know well (about it), for my people were those who spoke
thus; they said that the *\#nerru*'s entrails were formerly upon the
little kaross.

2\. She was sitting down.

3\. She went along singing, as she went away home (to her mother's
home).

4\. She was sitting at home.

5\. Her daughter was the one of whom she spoke, (of) her singing.

6\. I think that she was speaking of her daughter's husband.\]

mad things, as if they do not seem to understand; they marry among us
(literally, 'into us') as if they understood."

Then she ran to meet her daughter; she went to put the little
kaross<span class="small">\[1\]</span> upon her daughter; she, holding,
put her daughter's entrails upon the little kaross; and she bound up her
daughter;<span class="small">\[2\]</span> she slowly conducted her
daughter home; she went to take her daughter into her (the mother's)
hut.

Therefore, she was angry about her daughter; when her daughter's husband
wanted to come to his wife, she was angry. Therefore, her daughter's
husband went back to his own people, when she had said that her
daughter's husband should go back; for, they did not understand.
Therefore, her daughter's husband went back; while they<span
class="small">\[3\]</span> continued to dwell (there).

\[1. Her mother's new little kaross, which had been unused (lit.
"sitting"), and which she had put away.

2\. With the four straps of the *!k'oussi*, formed by the four legs of
the springbok's skin

3\. i.e., the *\#nerru*, many *\#nerru*.\]

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The \#Nerru, As A Bird](sbf28)

</div>
