<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf20)  [Next](sbf22.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DDI-XERRETEN, THE LIONESS, AND THE CHILDREN.

Ddi-Xerreten,<span class="small">\[1\]</span> formerly, when the Lioness
was at the water, dipping up,<span class="small">\[2\]</span> (when) she
had gone to dip<span class="small">\[3\]</span>

\[1. Their elder sister, the Vultures' elder sister.

2\. A man of the early race he was. His head was stone.

3\. I think that she probably dipped up water with a gemsbok's stomach;
for she killed gemsbok.\]

up water there, *Dai-Xerreten* felt that the Lioness was the one who had
gathered together the people's children, because the Lioness felt that
she was an invalid on account of (her) chest; therefore, she gathered
together the people's children, that the children might live with her,
that the children might work for her; for, she was an invalid, and she
could not do hard work.

Therefore, *Dai-Xerreten* went to her house, when she was dipping up
water. *Dai-Xerreten* went in her absence to the house, *Dai-Xerreten*
went to the children, at the house. *Dai-Xerreten* went to the house
reaching the children. *Dai-Xerreten* sat down. And *Dai-Xerreten* said:
"O children sitting here! The fire of your people is that which is at
the top of the ravine which comes down from the top (of the hill)."
Therefore, two children arose, they went away to their own people.

Dai-Xerreten again said: "O children sitting here! The fire of your
people is that which is below the top of the ravine which comes down on
this side (of the hill)." And three children<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> thus went, while they went away to their own
people.

And he again said: "O little child sitting here! Thy people's fire is
that which is below the top of the ravine which comes down on this side
(of the hill)." And the child arose, it thus went, while the child went
away to its own people.

He again said: "O children sitting here! The fire of your people is that
which is below<span class="small">\[2\]</span> the top

\[1. Literally, "children which became three."

2\. because the house is in the ravine (i.e., not where the water flows,
but among the bushes).\]

of the ravine<span class="small">\[1\]</span> which comes down on this
side (of the hill)." And two children arose, they thus went away, while
they went away to their own people.

And he again said: "O children sitting here! Your people's fire is that
which is at the top. of the ravine which comes down from the top (of the
hill)." And two children arose, they thus went away.

And he again said: "O children sitting here! The fire of your people is
that which is at the top of the ravine which comes down from the top (of
the hill)." And three children arose, they thus went away; while they
went away to their own people.

And he again said: "O children sitting here!<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> The fire of your people is that which is at
the top of the ravine which comes down from the top (of the hill)." And
two children arose, they thus went away; while they went away to their
own people; while *Dai-Xerreten* sat waiting for the Lioness.

And the Lioness came from the water, she thus returning came. She came
along looking (at the house); she did not perceive the children. And she
exclaimed: "Why do the children (stammering with rage) children children
children, the children not do so to me? and the children do not play
here, as they are wont to do? It must be this man who sits at the house;
his head resembles *Dai-Xerreten*."<span class="small">\[3\]</span>

And she became angry about it, when she perceived

\[1. He speaks of another ravine.

2\. Her children were not there; for the people's children were those
whom she had.

3\. She recognized him.\]

Dai-Xerreten.<span class="small">\[1\]</span> She exclaimed:
"*Dai-Xerreten* indeed (?) sits here!" She walked up to the house. She
exclaimed: "Where are my children?"<span class="small">\[2\]</span> And
*Dai-Xerreten* said: Our children (they) are not." And the Lioness
exclaimed: "Out on thee! leave off! thou must give me the children!"
*Dai-Xerreten* said: "Our children (they) were not."

And the Lioness caught hold of his head. She exclaimed:
"*Xabbabbu*"<span class="small">\[3\]</span> (growling) to the other
one's head. And she exclaimed: "Oh! Oh dear! Oh dear! Oh dear! Oh dear!
my teeth! This must be why this cursed(?) man's big head came to sit in
front of my house!" While *Dai-Xerreten* said: "I told thee that our
children they were not." The Lioness exclaimed: "Destruction! Thou hast
been the one whose big head came to sit (here)." Our children<span
class="small">\[4\]</span> (they) were not."

And he arose, he returned (home); while the Lioness sat in anger at her
house; because he had come (and) taken away from her the children, who
had been (living) peacefully with her; for she felt that she had done
well towards the children; she did not a little love the children while
she was doing so.

\[1. Because she did not perceive the children.

2\. The narrator's translation of *\|ne \|auwaki !kauken* was "Where are
my children?" but "Give me the children" or "Show me the children" may
be verbally more accurate.

3\. Growling put in the head.

4\. *Dai-Xerreten* was the one who spoke thus.\]

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mason Wasp And His Wife.](sbf22.md)

</div>
