<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf48)  [Next](sbf50) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# !NANNA-SSE SECOND PART.

## FURTHER INFORMATION; PARTICULARLY WITH REGARD TO THE TREATMENT OF BONES.

They (the Bushmen) put the things' bones nicely aside, while they do not
throw them (about).

They put down the bones opposite to the entrance to the hut (the place
which the. hut's mouth faces; they call it "the hut face's
opposite"(?)); and they go they pour down the bones at it. Therefore,
they call it, "The heap of meat bones<span class="small">\[1\]</span>;
while they feel that this is the place to which they go, at which they
pour down the bones; they pour down the bones by the side of a bush (a
little thorn bush), at the place to which they go to put down the bones.

And another person <span class="small">\[who lives opposite\]</span>
gnaws, putting the bones upon an (ostrich) breastbone;<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> he does as follows, when he has finished
gnawing the bones, he takes up the bones, he goes to pour down the bones
at this place.<span class="small">\[3\]</span>

\[1. This heap of bones (springbok, gemsbok, hare, porcupine, etc.) is
called *\|uhaiten* as well as *\|ka*.

2\. The breastbone of an ostrich, used as a dish.

3\. One hut has its own heap of bones; the other man also has the other
man's heap of bones; another man also has his own heap of bones, the
bones of the springbok. which he kills.\]

And when they have boiled other bones, they again gnaw,<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> putting them upon (the ostrich breastbone
dish). When they have finished gnawing the bones, they take up the
ostrich breastbone upon which the bones are, they go to pour down the
bones opposite to the entrance to the other one's hut. The other one
(i.e. the neighbour living opposite) also when he has boiled, takes the
bones which he gnaws, he goes to pour them down, opposite to the
entrance of the other one's hut, (upon) the other one's heap of
bones,<span class="small">\[2\]</span> he goes to pour down the bones
upon it. Another man also does thus, when he has gnawed the bones, he
also goes to pour down the bones opposite to the entrance of the other
one's hut, (upon) the other one's heap of bones.

And, they<span class="small">\[3\]</span> also (do it), a different man
does

\[1. biting off the flesh from the bones. The heap of bones belonging to
the other man who killed the springbok.

2\. Another man (it) is. I think that he has a wife and children. These
children are those for whom he cuts off meat. He cuts meat; he cuts off
for this child (a boy) this piece of meat; he cuts off for this (other)
child (also a boy) this (other) piece of meat while the woman cuts off
meat for the little girl.

3\. The women do not eat (the meat of) the springbok's shoulder blades,
because they show respect for the men's arrows, so that the men may
quietly kill. For, when we miss our aim, the place is not nice; for we
are wont to be ill when we miss our aim; when we shoot destruction to
ourselves, when we are going to be ill. Therefore we become ill.

The springbok are in possession of (invisible) magic arrows (?).
Therefore, we are ill on account of the springbok. Therefore, we do not
allow the little children to play upon the springbok skin. For the
springbok is wont to get into our flesh, and we become ill. And the
springbok is inside of us and we become ill on account of it. Therefore,
we do not play tricks with springbok's bones; for we put the springbok's
bones nicely away, while we feel that the springbok is wont to get into
our flesh. The springbok also possesses things which are magic sticks;
if they stand in us, we, being pierced, fall dead.\]

as follows, he also boils, he also gnaws, putting the bones upon an
ostrich breastbone; he also comes to pour down the bones opposite to the
entrance of the other one's hut.

They also do thus when they cut up a springbok, they also take out the
stomach, as they, cutting open (the springbok), take out the stomach;
they go to shake out the contents of the stomach opposite to the
entrance of the other one's hut; they go to shake out the contents of
the stomach there (upon the other one's heap of bones). They <span
class="small">\[having washed it well\]</span> come to lade blood into
the stomach, they dip up blood with their hand,<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> they lade blood into the stomach with their
hand, while they turn with their band (holding the right hand like a
scoop); they holding, form a tortoise <span
class="small">\[shell\]</span> with their hand. With regard to the blood
which has spilt,<span class="small">\[2\]</span> that which lies upon
the earth, they also take it up (with the earth on which it lies),
together with the bushes<span class="small">\[3\]</span> upon which
there is blood; they go to put them down opposite to the entrance of the
other man's hut (the hut of the man who, killed the springbok).

With regard to the *\|kaoken* bones,<span class="small">\[4\]</span>
from which the children (breaking them) eat out the marrow, they also
collect them together; they go to put them down opposite to the entrance
of the other one's hut.

With regard to the shoulder blade bones, when they have gnawed them,
they put them away in the

\[1. One hand.

2\. It is blood which lies (*lit.* "sits") upon the ground.

3\. They lay the springbok on the bushes.

4\. Springbok's bones.\]

hut;<span class="small">\[1\]</span> because they desire that the dogs
may not crunch them; while they feel that the other man (who shot the
springbok) would miss his aim.

They take to the other man (who shot the springbok) the upper bones of
the fore legs, while they intend that the other man's child shall go
(and) eat out the marrow from them; for the other man was the one who
killed the springbok. Therefore they take to the other man the upper
bones of the fore leg. The shoulder blade bones which they gnaw, they
put away in the sticks of the hut, they are those into which they put
them.

They out off the back of the springbok's neck, they take it to the other
man (who killed the springbok); while they boil the springbok's back,
they gnaw its bones, together with the tail, which they wish the wife to
put away, that the wife may, rubbing, make soft for him bags, that he
may go to get things, when he bartering goes to another man; he goes to
give them to another man, when the wife has rubbed, making soft for him,
springbok skin bags. The wife rubs, making them soft for him; he folds
them up, he lays them into (his own) bag, and he goes to the other man.

They (the man and his wife) go, to give them to the other man; and the
other person (that is, the other man's wife) also gives her (the first
man's wife) *tto*,<span class="small">\[2\]</span> which is red; she
also gives some *\|\|hara* with the *tto*, because the other one (the
first man's wife) gave the other bags.

Then, the man also gives to the other man his own bags, he who is the
man, his own bags. And the

\[1. In a paper published in the *Westminster Review* (New Series, no
cvii, July 1878, ii. "The Mythology and Religious Worship of the Ancient
Japanese"), it is stated that the Japanese used the shoulder blade of a
deer for the purpose of divination; and that Pallas found a similar
practice among the Kirghiz, by whom the shoulder blade of a sheep was
employed.

\[In Staffordshire, also, sixty years ago, the shoulder blade bone of a
sheep was believed to possess the power of fortelling the future--ED.\]

2\. For a little further information regarding *tto* and *\|\|hara* see
IX.--237.\]

other man also gives him arrows; because he (the man who brought the
bags) wishes that the other man may give him in exchange poisoned
arrows, that the other man may give him in exchange poison (i.e.
poisoned arrows). Therefore, the other man gives him in exchange poison.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Treatment of Bones by the Narrator's Grandfather, Tsatsi.](sbf50)

</div>
