<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf57)  [Next](sbf59) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE THUNDERSTORM.

When the rain fell upon us at night, I did thus, while the rain fell, I
lay, playing the "goura",<span class="small">\[1\]</span> like

<span class="small">\[1. A description of this musical instrument will
be found on p. 100 of "The Native Races of South Africa", by the late
Mr. G. W. Stow (London, 1905), and a picture of it in the preceding
plate (fig. 8).\]</span>

\|\|kunn.<span class="small">\[1\]</span> And mamma said to me, did I
not see how the rain was lightening; that I did like *\|\|kunn*; did I
not know that *\|\|kunn* was a person who used, if people scolded him,
he used, (when) he was angry with the people, to say to the people,
about it, that the people seemed to think that the rain would fall; but
(on the contrary) the rain would stand still, while the rain did not
fall. The rain used really to stop; when *\|\|kunn* had said that the
rain would not fall.

When mamma rebuked me, I did not listen to her, for, I lay, playing the
"goura", like *\|\|kunn*. And mamma became silent; when she saw that I
did not seem as if I heard her. And mamma lay down; I lay, playing the
"goura".

And the rain did thus, as I lay, playing the "goura", the rain first
seemed to shine into our eyes. And the rain did thus, (when) we were
thinking that it was going to lighten and it seemed as if the rain were
closing our eyes, when it was the light that entered. our eyes; we stood
shutting our eyes, while we felt as if darkness kept our eyes closed.
And when we had not (yet) opened our eyes, the rain gave us things on
account of which our eyes seemed as if they were green; and the rain
lightened, while our eyes felt green.

And the rain, lightening, went over us; and the rain did as follows to a
stone which stood outside, in front of our hut, the rain, lightening,
shivered it.

And mamma exclaimed: "*Ng ng ng ng ng*!" And father questioned mamma, as
to what was the matter

<span class="small">\[1. *\|\|kunn* or "Coos Groot-Oog" was a rain
sorcerer, wbo lived at *!khai \|ku* (also called "Evvicass Pits", on
account of a tree which stands by the Pits).\]</span>

with her; had the rush of the storm<span class="small">\[1\]</span>
reached her that she exclaimed as if in pain? And mamma told father
about it, that ) the thing seemed as if the rain were tearing off her
skin; therefore, she had exclaimed with pain. And mamma said that we had
wished to fall dead; it was our fault that we had not been willing to
obey her when she rebuked us about a very little thing. We had wanted to
see (what would happen) when we did not appear to hear when she rebuked
us.

I had acted thus, when mamma told me to leave off playing the
"goura",--like *\|\|kunn*,--I would not listen; I was the one who saw
that the rain had intended to kill us, on account of my doings.

<span class="small">\[1. The narrator compares this to the wind from a
cannon ball.\]</span>

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cutting Off The Top Of The Little Finger, And Piercing Ears And
Nose.](sbf59)

</div>
