<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf56)  [Next](sbf58) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# HOW \|HANG\#KASS'O'S PET LEVERET WAS KILLED.

\|Xabbi-ang<span class="small">\[1\]</span> killed (my) leveret for me,
and I came crying to her, because I wanted them<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> therefore to seek for (other) leverets; for
they were those who had killed (my) leveret for me. And she soothed

\[1. The narrator's mother.

2\. *i.e.* his mother and his maternal grandmother *\#kammi*.\]

me, about it. Therefore, she told me that the lizard had formerly said:

"For,

I therefore intend to go,

Passing through,

guru-\|na's pass.--

"For,

I therefore intend to go,

Passing through,

\|Xe-!khwai's pass."

 

Tsatsi<span class="small">\[1\]</span> was the one who caught hold of
(and) took up a leveret on the hunting-ground; and, he brought it (home)
alive, he came (and) gave it to me. And I played with it; I set it down,
it ran; I also ran after it. And I went to catch it, and, I came to set
it down. It again ran; and I again ran to catch it; and I went catching
hold of it, I came to set it down. Again, it ran; and, I again ran after
it. And I again caught hold of it; and again, I caught hold of it; and I
came to set it down.

\|Xabbi-ang wished that I (should) leave off playing with the leveret,
that I (should) kill it, that I (should) lay it to roast. I was not
willing to kill the leveret. She wished me to leave off playing with the
leveret, that I (should) kill it, that I might lay it to roast. I was
not willing to kill the leveret, because I felt that nothing acted as
prettily as it did, when it was gently running, gently running along. It
did in this manner (showing the motion of its ears), while it was gently
running along, nothing acted as prettily as it did; and it went to sit
down.

<span class="small">\[1. The narrator's maternal grandfather.\]</span>

Then they told me to fetch water; for I was one who quickly came away
from the water, while I did not go to play at the water. Therefore, I
went to fetch water, when I had tied up the leveret. And I went to fetch
water; then, they killed (my) leveret for me, while I was at the water.
They killed (my) leveret for me; and then I came (and) cried, about it;
because I had thought that they would let (my) leveret alone. For, they
must have been deceiving me; they told me to fetch water, while they
must have intended that they would kill (my) leveret for me, which I had
meant to let alone, so that it might live (on) in peace. They had killed
it for me. Therefore, I came (and) cried, on account of it. They said,
that we should not again get another leveret; when I wanted them to seek
some leverets for me, they said, we should not again get another
leveret.

Therefore, they soothing calmed(?) me with the (story of the) lizard;
while they wished that I might quietly listen to them; when I had shut
my mouth, I might quietly listen to them.<span
class="small">\[1\]</span>

<span class="small">\[1. She (my mother) said (to me), that I should not
play with meat; for we do not play with meat; for we lay meat to roast.
For the leveret is not a little fat; therefore, we kill it, we lay it to
roast, while we do not play with it.\]</span>

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Thunderstorm.](sbf58)

</div>
