<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf61)  [Next](sbf63) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DOINGS AND PRAYERS WHEN CANOPUS AND SIRIUS COME OUT.

The Bushmen perceive Canopus, they say to a child: "Give me yonder piece
of wood, that I may put (the end of) it (in the fire), that I may point
(it) burning (towards) grandmother, for, grandmother carries Bushman
rice; grandmother shall make a little warmth for us; for she coldly
comes out; the sun<span class="small">\[1\]</span> shall warm
grandmother's eye for us."

Sirius comes out; the people call out to one another: Sirius comes
yonder; they say to one another Ye must burn (a stick) for us (towards)
Sirius." They say to one another: "Who was it who saw Sirius?" One man
says to the other: "Our brother saw Sirius." The other man says to him:

<span class="small">\[1. The sun is a little warm, when this star
appears in winter.\]</span>

I saw Sirius."<span class="small">\[1\]</span> The other man says to
him: "I wish thee to burn (a stick) for us (towards) Sirius; that the
sun may shining come out for us; that Sirius may not coldly come out."
The other man (the one who saw Sirius) says to his son: "Bring me the
(small) piece of wood yonder, that I may put (the end of) it (in the
fire), that I may burn (it) towards grandmother; that grandmother may
ascend the sky, like the other one, Canopus."

The child brings him the piece of wood, he (the father) holds (the end
of) it in (the fire). He points (it) burning towards Sirius; he says
that Sirius shall twinkle like Canopus. He sings; he sings (about)
Canopus, he sings (about) Sirius; he points to them with fire,<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> that they may twinkle like each other. He
throws fire at them. He covers himself up entirely (including his head)
in (his) kaross and lies down.

He arises, he sits down; while he does not again lie down; because he
feels that he has worked, putting Sirius into the sun's warmth; so that
Sirius may warmly come out.

The women go out early to seek for Bushman rice; they walk, sunning
their shoulder blades.<span class="small">\[3\]</span>

\[1. *\|\|Ukoa-ggu,* "Canopus," and *!kuttau*, "Sirius," are both female
stars, *\|\|kabbo* says.

2\. With the stick that he had held in the fire, moving it up and down
quickly.

3\. They take one arm out of their kaross, thereby exposing one shoulder
blade to the sun.\]

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Making Of Clay Pots.](sbf63)

</div>
