<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf78)  [Next](sbf80) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DEATH.

The star does in this manner, at the time when our heart falls down,
that is the time when the star also falls down; while the star feels
that our heart falls over.<span class="small">\[1\]</span> Therefore,
the star falls down on account of it. For the stars know the time at
which we die. The star tells the other people who do not know that we
have died.

Therefore, the people act thus, when they have seen a star, when a star
has fallen down, they say: "Behold ye! Why is it that the star falls
down? We shall bear news; for a star falls down. Something which is not
good appears to have occurred at another place; for the star tells us,
that a bad thing has happened at another place."

<span class="small">\[1. As when something which has been standing
upright, falls over on to its side.\]</span>

The hammerkop<span class="small">\[1\]</span> acts in this manner, when
a star has fallen, it comes; when it flies over us, it cries.<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> The people say: "Did ye not hear the
hammerkop, when the star fell? It came to tell us that our person is
dead." The people speak, they say that the hammerkop is not a thing
which deceives, for it would not come to our home, if it did not know;
for, when it knows, then it comes to our home; because it intends to
come and tell us about it, namely, that our person has died.

Therefore, mother and the others used,--if they heard a hammerkop, when
it flew, going over us, to say: "Do thou go (and) plunge in, \* \* \*
for I know that which thou camest to tell me", while mother and the
others said that the story, which it came to tell, should go into the
Orange River's water, where the stars stand in the water. That is the
place where its stories should go in. For mother and the others did not
want to hear the story which it came to tell; for they knew that the
hammerkop does in this manner at the time when a man dies, that is the
time at which it comes to us, it tells us about it, that the man has
died. For, mother and the others used to say,

\[1. Of this bird, the *Seopus umbrella*, or *Hammerkop*, the following
description is given in "The Birds of South Africa" by E.L. Layard, Cape
Town, 1867, p. 312.

"The "*Hammerkop*" (literally, Hammerhead) is found throughout the
colony, and all the way to the Zambezi, frequenting ponds, marshes,
rivers, and lakes. It is a strange, weird bird, flitting about with
great activity in the dusk of the evening, and preying upon frogs, small
fish, &c. At times, when two or three are feeding in the same small
pool, they will execute a singular dance, skipping round one another,
opening and closing their wings, and performing strange antics.

2\. *Yak!* or *Yaak!* is the bird's cry, which it repeats twice.\]

that the hammerkop is a thing which lives at that water in which we see
all things. Therefore, it knows what has happened; while it is aware
that it lives at the water which is like a pool, in which we see all
things; the things which are in the sky we see in the water, while we
stand by the water's edge. We see all things, the stars look like fires
which burn.

When it is night, when another man walks across, we see him, as he walks
passing the water. It seems as if it were noonday, when he walks by the
water. We see him clearly. The place seems as if it were midday as we
see him walking along. Therefore, mother and the others said, that, when
the hammerkop has espied in the water a person who has died, even though
it be at a distance, when it knows that (he) is our relative, it flies
away from this water, it flies to us, because it intends to go to tell
us about it, that our relative has died. (It) and the star are those who
tell us about it when we have not heard the news; for they are those who
tell us about it, and when we have heard the hammerkop, we also perceive
the star, we afterwards hear the news, when we have just perceived them;
and we hear the news, when they have acted in this manner towards us.

For, mother and the others used to tell us about it, that girls are
those whom the Rain carries off; and the girls remain at that water, to
which the Rain had taken them, girls with whom the Rain is angry. The
Rain lightens, killing them; they become stars, while their appearance
has been changed. They become stars. For, mother and the others used to
tell us about it, that a girl, when the Rain has carried her off,
becomes like a flower<span class="small">\[1\]</span> which grows in the
water.

We who do not know are apt (?) to do thus when we perceive them, as they
stand in the water, when we see that they are so beautiful; we think, 'I
will go (and) take the flowers which are standing in the water. For they
are not a little beautiful.' Mother and the others said to us about it,
that the flower--when it saw that we went towards it,--would disappear
in the water. We should think, 'The flowers which were standing here,
where are they? Why is it that I do not perceive them at the place where
they stood, here?' It would disappear in the water, when it saw that we
went towards it; we should not perceive it, for it would go into the
water.

Therefore, mother and the others said to--as about it, that we ought not
to go to the flowers which we see standing in the water, even if we see
their beauty. For, they are girls whom the Rain has taken away, they
resemble flowers; for (they) are the water's wives, and we look at them,
leaving them alone. For we (should) also be like them (in) what they do.

Therefore, mother and the others do in this manner with regard to their
Bushman women, they are not willing to allow them to walk about, when
the Rain comes; for they are afraid that the Rain also intends,
lightening, to kill them. For the Rain is a thing which does in this
manner when it rains

<span class="small">\[1. *\#kamme-*ang's mother, *\|abbe-ttu*, was the
one who formerly told mamma about the flower which grows in the water;
she said to mamma about it, that mamma seemed to think that she would
not also become a flower, if she did not fear the Rain.\]</span>

here, it smells our scent, it lightens out of the place where it rains.
It lightens, killing us at this place; therefore, mother and the others
told us about it, that when the Rain falls upon us (and) we walk passing
through the Rain, if we see that the Rain lightens in the sky we must
quickly look towards the place where the Rain lightens; the Rain, which
intended to kill us by stealth. It will do in this manner, even if its
thunderbolts<span class="small">\[1\]</span> have come near us, (if) we
look towards (the place where it has lightened), we look, making its
thunderbolts turn back from us; for our eye also shines like its
thunderbolts. Therefore, it also appears to f ear our eye, when it feels
that we quickly look towards it. Therefore, it passes over us on account
of it; while it feels that it respects our eye which shines upon it.
Therefore, it goes over us; it goes to sit on the ground yonder, while
it does not kill us.

<span class="small">\[1. Black, pointed, shining stones, which only come
from the sky when it lightens. They disturb the ground where they fall.
They are called *!khwa !kweiten* (the Rain's thunderbolts).\]</span>

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Relations Of Wind, Moon, And Cloud To Human Beings After
Death.](sbf80)

</div>
