<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf74)  [Next](sbf76) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# \|\|HARA AND TTO.

\|\|hara<span class="small">\[1\]</span> is black; the people <span
class="small">\[having mixed it with fat\]</span> anoint their heads
with it; while *tto* is red, and the people rub their bodies with it,
when they have pounded it; they pound it, pound it, pound it, they rub
their bodies with it. They pound *\|\|hara*, they anoint their heads,
when they have first

<span class="small">\[1. A certain stone which is said to be both hard
and soft.\]</span>

pounded the *tto*; they first rub their bodies with *tto*. And they
pound *\|\|hara,* they anoint their heads. They anoint their heads very
nicely, while they wish that their head's hair may descend (i.e., grow
long). And it becomes abundant on account of it; because they have
anointed their heads, wishing that the hair may grow downwards, that
their heads may become black with blackness, while their heads are not a
little black.

And they return, when they come away from the other man, while they
return to their home; when they have told the other person (the woman)
about it, that the other person shall prepare <span
class="small">\[More\]</span> *\|\|hara* for them, as well as *tto*. For
he (the man) also goes, (his) wife will go to dress bags for him, bags
which he will also bring to the other man; while the other (man's wife)
will also put aside *\|\|hara* for him, when the other (man) collects
*\|\|hara*. And the other (man) comes to put aside *\|\|hara* for him;
while she <span class="small">\[the wife of the man who brought the
bags\]</span> also dresses (and) puts away bags for the other; for, she
has told the other (woman) that the other must also bring her *\|\|hara*
and *tto*; for she has been to the other, and she will not be coming
(soon again) to the other, for, the other must go to her; the other must
go to receive the bags, when the other takes *tto* to her. Therefore,
the other one also does so; she takes to the other *tto* and *\|\|hara*.

\|\|hara sparkles; therefore, our heads shimmer, on account of it; while
they feel that they sparkle, they shimmer. Therefore, the Bushmen are
wont to say, when the old women are talking there: "That man, he is a
handsome young man, on account of his head, which is surpassingly
beautiful with the *\|\|*hara's blackness." They say, "Handsome young
man" to him, "His head is surpassingly beautiful; for, his head is like
the *!khi* tree.<span class="small">\[1\]</span>

It is a tree which is in our country; it is the *!khi* tree; it is
large; (it) is a great tree. They are not a little abundant in our
country: the *\|\|Ukerri* tree and the *khi*.

<span class="small">\[1. The *!khi* tree bears berries; and has no
thorns.\]</span>

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Tto Is Obtained.](sbf76)

</div>
