<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf77)  [Next](sbf79) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# A BUSHMAN, BECOMING FAINT FROM THE SUN'S HEAT WHEN RETURNING HOME, THROWS EARTH INTO THE AIR, THAT THOSE AT HOME MAY SEE THE DUST AND COME TO HELP HIM.<span class="small">\[1\]</span>

A man is wont, when returning home, when he feels as if he should not
reach home, he throws up earth (into the air), because he wishes that
the, people at home may perceive the dust.

And the person who is looking out,<span class="small">\[2\]</span>
standing up to look out,--because she feels that the sun is not a little
hot,--she stands up, she looks

\[1. Dying is that on account of which a person throws up earth (into
the air).

2\. (It) is the man's wife; while she feels that (her) husband has not
returned; for, she sees that all the (other) people have returned
home.\]

around.<span class="small">\[1\]</span> And, as she stands looking
around, she perceives the dust, she exclaims: "A person seems to be
throwing up earth there!"

And the people run, run out<span class="small">\[2\]</span> of the
house, exclaiming: "His heart is that on account of which he throws up
earth. Ye must run quickly, that ye may go to give him water quickly;
for, (it) is his heart; the sun is killing him; (it) is his heart; ye
must quickly go to give him water." While the people feel that all the
people run to the man. They go, pouring (water), to cool the man with
water.

And he first sits up,<span class="small">\[3\]</span> to remove the
darkness from his face; for, the sun's darkness resembles night.

These are not women's doings; for, men's doings they are.

They (the Bushmen) feel that they chase<span class="small">\[4\]</span>
things, chase the springbok; and it happens thus when they are tired by
running, the sun is killing them

\[1. While she feels that the old man (her father) was the one who said:
"My child! (?) thou art not standing up that thou mightst look around
seeking for (thy) husband. The sun is really(?) very hot, for it did
scorch me as I walked hither; as if it were not still morning, the sun
did scorch me."

2\. While they feel that they are numerous.

3\. He was lying down, on account of his heart.

4\. (To) run after a (wounded) springbok, to run after a springbok which
we have shot. A wounded springbok they call: "a wounded thing(?)." A
springbok, which is not wounded, they call: "a living springbok."

People who are strong to bear the sun('s heat), they are those who chase
the living (i.e. unwounded) springbok; they run after them through the
sun, and the springbok vomit on account of it. And they turn the
springbok, chasing, take the springbok to the house.\]

when they are tired. Then, they go staggering along, also (from)
fatigue. The fatigue goes out, and they become cool. Then, they go
staggering along, while they go along becoming cool, when they were
previously hot; while they feel that they still perspire. Therefore,
they go along staggering, widle they do not feel as if they should reach
home; therefore, they go to sit down; they throw up earth (into the
air); throw up earth for the people at home, while they wish that the
people at home may perceive the dust.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Death.](sbf79)

</div>
