<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf83)  [Next](sbf85) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 4. \|XUE AS WATER AND AS OTHER THINGS. IN HIS OWN FORM, HE RUBS FIRE AND DIES.

\|Xue was water; and the water was (in) the shadow of the tree. And the
wood pigeons ate the fruit of the *\|kui*. And *\|Xue* was a lizard<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> and lay in the dead leaves of the *\|kui*.
And (he) saw the wood pigeons, and was water<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> And the wood pigeons saw the water, and
settled upon the water's edge. And *\|Xue* worked large grass, like
reeds, and it took hold of a wood pigeon. And the wood pigeons came to
drink (lit. to eat) water, and the grass came near, and bit the wood
pigeon's bill, and the wood pigeon cried out; and the other wood pigeons
flew away.

And *\|Xue* was *\|Xue* and rose up, and took hold of the wood pigeon,
and plucked out the wood pigeon's feathers, and put the wood pigeon's
feathers in his head, and lay upon the ground. And the water vanished,
and he was and put the wood pigeon's feathers in his head, and lay upon
the ground. And (he) put the wood pigeon's body into the hot embers, and
lay down. And continued to lie down, and arose, and went to take out the
wood pigeon's body from the fire.

And (he) ate the wood pigeon, and heard Ovahereró, and arose. And went
to the Ovahereró, and the Ovahereró saw him. And he hid himself on the
ground. The Ovahereró came to search for him, to search for him, (and)
did not see him. For (he) was little, and was a *\|nu-erre*;<span
class="small">\[4\]</span> and a little Omuhereró boy saw the
*\|nu-erre* upon a bush, and

\[1. This lizard (called also *ggoru* and *nggoru* by my *!kung*
informants and *\|hai-@pua* by *\|hang\#kass'o*) appears to be the
comnion Gecko.

2\. (He) was not a large (piece of) water, but (?) was a little water, a
water hole.

3\. *\|Xue* was a grass which is (called) *go*, and (is) small; and bit
the wood pigeon. Large grass, which is (called) reeds, took hold of the
wood pigeon; and was *\|Xue*.

4\. A (certain) little bird.\]

he saw the Ovahereró, and cried out.<span class="small">\[1\]</span> And
was the Bushman's eye water and fell upon the ground. And he said:
"Ye-he! Ye-he! Ye-he!" And the Omuhereró heard, and sought for him,
sought for him, sought f or him, and did not see him, and (he, *\|Xue*)
flew away.

And (he, *\|Xue*)<span class="small">\[2\]</span> flew, coming to his
mother's country, and saw his father, and was not a *\|nu-erre* but was
*\|Xue*, and died.<span class="small">\[3\]</span> And his father went
to him, and came to look at him, and he was dead. And his father went
away, and he was not dead, and was and rose up. He called to his father:
"My father! O!" and his father called to him, and said: "My child! O!"
and he called to his father once, and cried out: "*\#no! \#no!*" and
came to his mother's country.

And his father saw him and stealthily approached him. And he heard his
father. And (he) saw his father, and died; and was a lizard, and lay
down, lay down upon the ground.

And his father saw him, and said: "It is my child, *\|Xue*! for it is
not another person, but is my child; and (he) saw me, and died. And (he)
was rubbing sticks (to make) fire<span class="small">\[4\]</span>; and
saw me, and died; and is not another person, but is my child, and is
*\|Xue*. For, I went (?) away to my country, and did not see my child;
and to-day,

\[1. And (he) cried: "*Tsuai! tsuai ! tsuai!*" (Two) Ovahereró children
saw him; for be was a *\|nu-erre*.

2\. *\|Xue* was a *\|nu-erre*, and cried out. He was not one
*\|nu-erre*; but was many *\|nu-erre*.

3\. He was <span class="small">\[now\]</span> not many *\|nu-erre*, bat
was one *\|nu-erre*, and went to his mother's country.

4\. He carried over his shoulder a little bag, the skin of an antelope,
a female antelope's skin.\]

I saw my child, and my child was rubbing fire, little sticks' fire;<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> and my child rubbed fire, and saw me, and
died. And is *\|Xue*; and is not another person, but is *\|Xue*. I am
afraid of my child, for my child is dead.

"I go to my country; and my country is far away, and (during) many moons
I go to my country, (and) do not see my country; my country is far
distant. And, to-day, I see my child, for my child is and makes fire,
little sticks' fire, and eats *\|shana*,<span class="small">\[2\]</span>
and rubs fire, and his hands hurt (him), and he cries, and sees me, and
dies; for I am *\|Xe-\|\|n'u* and my child, *\|Xue*, sees me, and dies;
and I am afraid of my child. I go away to my country, my country that(?)
is far distant.

"And my child is another person; I see my child. And (I) wear in my head
wood pigeons' feathers; and my child saw me, my head with wood pigeons'
feathers, many wood pigeon feathers, for they(?) were two wood pigeons.
And, to-day, I am afraid of my child, and (I) go to my (own) country."

And (he) went to his (own) country; the name of his country is
*\|\|noa*; it is a mountain, a large mountain. And he went away to his
(own) country.

\[1. The tree's name was *\|n'au-\|kumm*; and (he had) two sticks; the
fire stick (i.e., the one which he held in his hands) was long, small,
and long, like a reed. The other (fire) stick lay on the ground; for he
had laid (it) the other stick upon grass; he rubbed fire, the fire fell
upon the grass; and he took up the fire (i.e., the grass), he blew the
fire.

2\. *Tshana* is the name of a tall fruit-bearing tree. The fruit of it
is eaten raw.\]

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prayer To The Young Moon.](sbf85)

</div>
