<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbf85)  [Next](sbf87) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Specimens of Bushman Folklore*, by W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE TREATMENT OF THIEVES.

If a *!kung* woman steals, her father and her mother being (still)
there, we take hold of her, we give her to her mother and her father;
and they all go away from their place. Her stolen thing, we take it, we
run, we give (it) to the other person, run to give to the other person
the other person's thing. And we say to the other person: "My wife stole
your thing which is here; your nice thing here, my wife stole. And I
have given (back ) my wife to her father and her mother. For, my wife
stole the nice thing here."

And the other person hears, and objects (saying):

"No; kill thy wife." And, we hear, (and) object (saying): "No; I do not
listen to you, and will not kill my wife; for, my wife has gone away,
has gone to her father and her mother; and is far away; and has gone to
her country; and I will not kill my wife."

And the others cry, and we hear; and our hearts ache, and we go away; we
say to the other people: "We go away; come, that I may kill my wife,
kill my father-in-law, kill my mother-in-law, kill my. . ."<span
class="small">\[1\]</span>

On the day that the woman took the thing, we see the thing, we take the
thing. The woman says to us: "My husband, look at my nice thing, here,
which I stole."<span class="small">\[2\]</span> And we hear; and we say:

\[1. Another relation.

2\. A *!kung* woman is not afraid.\]

"My wife, give me thy thing, that I may look (at it)." And (we) persuade
her; and she takes (it) and gives (it) to us. And we take (it), and put
(it) into our bag; and she cries (saying): "Give me my thing, oh dear!
My husband! give me my thing, oh dear!" And we refuse (saying): "No, my
wife, I will not listen to thee; for, the other person would kill me;
and I will give the other person the other person's thing. My wife! I
will not listen to thee, for thou dost (try to) persuade me (in
vain)."<span class="small">\[1\]</span>

If a woman steals another person's thing, (and) returns to her husband,
(and) her husband sees the other person's thing, his heart aches, and be
kills her; he altogether kills his wife.<span class="small">\[2\]</span>

Another man (*i.e.*, his father) says to him: "No; do not quite kill thy
wife."<span class="small">\[3\]</span> And, he objects (saying): "No; I
object to stealing; and my heart aches; and I will kill my wife; leave
off talking to me; to-day ye must fear me."

A female child, if her mother is dead and the female child is an only
child, goes to another person's hut. Another day, if she steals, the
other person into whose hut she went (to live) takes her, (and) gives
her to the other person, the other (from

\[1. Should the father be dead, and the mother alive, the woman, who
stole, is still taken and given back to the latter. And, should she be
an old offender, the mother is said to give her, through a son, to
another person, to be burned to death.

2\. He shoots with an arrow, killing his wife; he shoots, killing his
wife with a *\|nubbo* (a particular kind of arrow).

3\. Meaning, that he may beat her.\]

whom she stole, the other people kill her altogether; (they) put her in
a hut, and burn, killing her with fire; and she dies altogether; and the
other people return home.

They say to the people, to the people who gave them the girl who stole,
they, (who) killed the girl, they say: "We have burning, killed the girl
with fire, put the girl into a hut, and burning killed the girl. Leave
off reproaching us about the girl." And the. other people object
(saying): "No; we are not scolding you; for, we object (to stealing);
for this<span class="small">\[1\]</span> girl stole; and we do not scold
you; for, we hear, and our hearts are glad."

If a man steals, we kill (him), we shoot, killing him (with)
arrows,<span class="small">\[2\]</span> and do not put him into the
fire; but, kill him altogether with arrows. It is only a woman (whom) we
burn, burn, putting (her) into the fire.

If a child steals, we merely scold the child;<span
class="small">\[3\]</span> and do not kill the child.

Another day, when the child has grown up, if it steals, we object, we
kill the child;<span class="small">\[4\]</span> give the child to other
persons, and they kill it altogether.

\[1. We fear her name, and do not utter her name; (but) merely mention
her.

We fear the people whom we kill, on account of their spirits.

2\. Many arrows, not a single arrow; the arrows of many persons; many
persons shoot at him.

3\. For, we respect the stealing of a little child.

4\. We fear its name, and call it "child". Those persons whom we kill
altogether, we fear their names; we do not utter their names.\]

If another woman comes into our hut (and) her child steals a thing of
ours, (if) her child eats our food, (and) we see, we take it, and we
take its mother, we give them to other people,<span
class="small">\[1\]</span> (and) the other people put them into the
fire, and burn, burn, killing them with fire; (and) return (and) say to
us: "We have, burning, killed the two people with fire." We hear; we
say: "Yes; we object to stealing." And (we) are silent.<span
class="small">\[2\]</span> And they say: "We have burnt the two persons;
ye must not scold (us)." Our hearts are glad,<span
class="small">\[3\]</span> and we sing. And (we) say to them: "We . . .
object to stealing; and fear stealing; and do not steal." And those<span
class="small">\[4\]</span> (who killed the woman) hear; and (one) says:
"Yes."<span class="small">\[5\]</span>

And we give them a male elephant's tusk; and they go away to their home.
And, another day, they give (it) to the Makoba. And the Makoba give them
one bull, with Indian Hemp; and they give to us; and we kill, and eat
(it) up; and they return to their home; and we speak nicely to them
(saying): "Return ye to your dwelling; give us Indian Hemp; do not give
us the bull alone; we object to one thing (only); we do not eat one
thing; for, we eat two things." And they hear, and assent (to us); and
they return to their home.

And we eat up the bull; and they say to us:

\[1. (They) are not strangers, but, are our other people (of the same
place).

2\. It is not many of us, but, one of us (who) speaks to him (to the
other person).

3\. Our many hearts are glad.

4\. They (are) many.

5\. Many other people listen, displeased; and one person assents, and
says: "Yes."\]

"Ye have eaten up the bull; give us an elephant's tusk." And we hear;
and our hearts are glad. The sun arises, and we return to our
dwelling.<span class="small">\[1\]</span> And come, telling the other
people who are at our dwelling--our people--we say to them: "Give ye an
elephant's tusk to the people." And the others, who are our people,
hear; and we give them Indian Hemp.

<span class="small">\[1. When we have eaten up the bull, (we) go to
their dwelling, to seek Indian Hemp; and they give us Indian
Hemp.\]</span>

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Four Pieces of Wood Called \|Xu, Used for Divining
Purposes.](sbf87)

</div>
