[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](aat02)  [Next](aat04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. THE MAKING OF DAYLIGHT (ACHOMAWI).

In the beginning it was always dark. Darkness was a woman, who had two
daughters, and came from the eastward to gamble with Wildcat. She
reached Wildcat's house at night, and after supper began to talk about
gambling, saying, "I never came here before. I came to gamble." The
others present advised Wildcat to play: so all the preparations were
made, and, sitting on either side of the fire, they began to play.
Darkness bet her two daughters against all the people which Wildcat had.
Darkness wanted Wildcat to bet her husband, Chicken-Hawk, but she did
not wish to. Finally, on Coyote's advice, she bet him as chief first.
Then they began to play, Coyote helping to sing. He thought the game was
going favorably, and that Wildcat would win the two girls, and

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

that he would get them for wives. But just as she almost won, Darkness
beat her, and, taking Coyote, broke him in two and threw him outside.
Darkness then threatened to "stay dark all the time" unless Wildcat
would bet her husband, as Darkness wanted him for a husband for her
daughters. Wildcat refused, and bet other people in the house. All but
three offered themselves to be bet. These were Rabbit, Weasel, and
Caterpillar. Finally all were lost to Darkness but these; and then
Caterpillar said, "Bet me," and he came near where Wildcat sat. They
were gambling with a small slippery thing like ice, instead of the usual
gambling-bone. Caterpillar began to sing, and to win. Pretty soon all
but one of Darkness' counters were gone, and she began to be afraid. She
was afraid of the smooth gambling-stick. Caterpillar told her to sit
still, as she was moving about nervously. Suddenly he slid the
gambling-stick across at her, and, entering her body, it caused her to
burst. Then Caterpillar took her body and threw it outside.

The two girls were sitting there crying. One of them was going to
gamble. She told Caterpillar to deal, but he refused. So she began, and
won until Caterpillar had only one counter left. Then he began to win,
and finally killed her just as he had her mother. He then threw her body
outside. Only the youngest sister was left. Caterpillar told her not to
cry, as he was not crying, although all his people were lost. They
played and played, and, as before, Caterpillar killed her by the same
trick. Then Caterpillar said, "In after time, people will say that I was
the one who won my people back."

Still, however, it was dark. So Lizard set to work to try to make light.
He went over to Big-Lizard's house, and took a light with him. He told
Big-Lizard all about what had happened, and told him that he and
Caterpillar and Rabbit were the only ones left. Then Lizard put on his
cap and began to dance. His cap was made of a grizzly-bear's head.
Rabbit was talking, singing, while Lizard was dancing near the
house-post. By and by it began to grow light. Lizard made daylight come
by dancing. Rabbit said, "That is what people will say; that is what
people must say, 'Daylight is coming."' Lizard's grandmother was sitting
there, and she sang, "Daylight is coming, daylight is coming!" Then she
made a mistake, and sang about a man. Lizard was angry, and said, "You
are always thinking about men." His grandmother answered, "I meant to
sing properly, but my teeth are all gone, and so I made a mistake."
Lizard then told Rabbit to go out and see where light was coming. He
went up and looked, and, looking to the east, saw the dawn and heard the
birds singing. He came back and said, "I did not see anything." By and
by he went up again, after Lizard had danced some more. This time
daylight had come. All over the world people woke up, and made a noise.
Then Lizard stopped dancing. He told people to open the doors, to build
a fire and go out. It was

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

spring-time, and sunflowers were ripening. All the people came out and
talked about Lizard's having made the light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Hawk-Man (Achomawi)](aat04)
