[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](aat07)  [Next](aat09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 7. BLUEJAY AND LIZARD AND THE GRIZZLY-BEARS (ACHOMAWI).

Some Grizzly-Bears lived in a sweat-house near where Bluejay and Lizard
lived. These latter had all kinds of food stored in bags of tule. The
Grizzly-Bears had only acorns, and used to have to go to the other house
to get salmon and meat. A Grizzly-Bear went over at sundown and sat
down, saying, "I was sent over for scraps;" then Bluejay would say, "All
right, get out some salmon," and Lizard would give Grizzly-Bear a large
pile of it. When he got back home, the others would say, "They always
give us a lot." In the morning another Grizzly went, and came back with
a huge basket of pine-nuts; and in the evening then another would go, to
get a lot of sunflower-seeds. In this way Bluejay and Lizard gave away
all the food they had, and began to get hungry. Lizard, however, had
been afraid that this would happen, so he had hidden ten salmon under
his pillow while Bluejay had gone after wood one day. When all the rest
of the food was gone, Lizard produced this reserve supply, and the two
lived on this for a time. The Grizzly-Bears had saved much of the food
they had begged, and feasted while the others were starving. The
Grizzly-Bears hoped the others would die.

Bluejay soon got very weak, but Lizard was still able to get about. One
day Lizard covered up the coals with ashes in their house, closed the
smoke-hole, and, taking his knife, crept over to the house where the
Grizzly-Bears were, all asleep. Lizard looked in and saw all the food
they had there in storage. Then he went into the house, picked out the

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

largest Grizzly-Bear, crawled into his anus, and cut out his heart. He
brought the heart out, then skinned the body of the bear, the others
meanwhile sleeping on. Lizard baked the liver quickly in the ashes, and
ate it, then, leaning a pole up against the door, he walked on this, so
that the Grizzly-Bears could not see his tracks. He took all the
Grizzly-Bear meat home with him, and one basket of acorns. He found
Bluejay almost dead; but he cooked some meat, and gave him some, and,
after getting a little stronger, he was able to eat a great deal; and
the two ate nearly all night.

In the morning the Grizzly-Bears woke up, and missed one of their
number, but thought he had merely gone out of the house for a time. So
they were not worried, but built a fire and sweated. Lizard and Bluejay
kept quiet in their house, and did not move out. Every night Lizard did
the same thing, killing one of the Bears until he had killed four of
them,--two on each side of the door as they slept. The Grizzly-Bears did
not suspect what the trouble was, for they thought both Lizard and
Bluejay were dead. Thus Lizard and Bluejay lived through the winter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. Silver-Fox And Coyote (Achomawi)](aat09)
