[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf01054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIDQC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 1*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1776\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion. Part IX.

From this impartial though imperfect survey of the progress of
Christianity, it may perhaps seem probable, that the number of its
proselytes has been excessively magnified by fear on the one side, and
by devotion on the other. According to the irreproachable testimony of
Origen,  <span id="fr_1669"></span>[183](#fn_1668) the proportion of the
faithful was very inconsiderable, when compared with the multitude of an
unbelieving world; but, as we are left without any distinct information,
it is impossible to determine, and it is difficult even to conjecture,
the real numbers of the primitive Christians. The most favorable
calculation, however, that can be deduced from the examples of Antioch
and of Rome, will not permit us to imagine that more than a themselves
under the banner of the cross before the important conversion of
Constantine. But their habits of faith, of zeal, and of union, seemed to
multiply their numbers; and the same causes which contributed to their
future increase, served to render their actual strength more apparent
and more formidable.

Such is the constitution of civil society, that whilst a few persons are
distinguished by riches, by honors, and by knowledge, the body of the
people is condemned to obscurity, ignorance and poverty. The Christian
religion, which addressed itself to the whole human race, must
consequently collect a far greater number of proselytes from the lower
than from the superior ranks of life. This innocent and natural
circumstance has been improved into a very odious imputation, which
seems to be less strenuously denied by the apologists, than it is urged
by the adversaries, of the faith; that the new sect of Christians was
almost entirely composed of the dregs of the populace, of peasants and
mechanics, of boys and women, of beggars and slaves, the last of whom
might sometimes introduce the missionaries into the rich and noble
families to which they belonged. These obscure teachers (such was the
charge of malice and infidelity) are as mute in public as they are
loquacious and dogmatical in private. Whilst they cautiously avoid the
dangerous encounter of philosophers, they mingle with the rude and
illiterate crowd, and insinuate themselves into those minds, whom their
age, their sex, or their education, has the best disposed to receive the
impression of superstitious terrors.  <span
id="fr_1670"></span>[184](#fn_1669)

This unfavorable picture, though not devoid of a faint resemblance,
betrays, by its dark coloring and distorted features, the pencil of an
enemy. As the humble faith of Christ diffused itself through the world,
it was embraced by several persons who derived some consequence from the
advantages of nature or fortune. Aristides, who presented an eloquent
apology to the emperor Hadrian, was an Athenian philosopher.  <span
id="fr_1671"></span>[185](#fn_1670) Justin Martyr had sought divine
knowledge in the schools of Zeno, of Aristotle, of Pythagoras, and of
Plato, before he fortunately was accosted by the old man, or rather the
angel, who turned his attention to the study of the Jewish prophets.
 <span id="fr_1672"></span>[186](#fn_1671) Clemens of Alexandria had
acquired much various reading in the Greek, and Tertullian in the Latin,
language. Julius Africanus and Origen possessed a very considerable
share of the learning of their times; and although the style of Cyprian
is very different from that of Lactantius, we might almost discover that
both those writers had been public teachers of rhetoric. Even the study
of philosophy was at length introduced among the Christians, but it was
not always productive of the most salutary effects; knowledge was as
often the parent of heresy as of devotion, and the description which was
designed for the followers of Artemon, may, with equal propriety, be
applied to the various sects that resisted the successors of the
apostles. "They presume to alter the Holy Scriptures, to abandon the
ancient rule of faith, and to form their opinions according to the
subtile precepts of logic. The science of the church is neglected for
the study of geometry, and they lose sight of heaven while they are
employed in measuring the earth. Euclid is perpetually in their hands.
Aristotle and Theophrastus are the objects of their admiration; and they
express an uncommon reverence for the works of Galen. Their errors are
derived from the abuse of the arts and sciences of the infidels, and
they corrupt the simplicity of the gospel by the refinements of human
reason."  <span id="fr_1673"></span>[187](#fn_1672)

Nor can it be affirmed with truth, that the advantages of birth and
fortune were always separated from the profession of Christianity.
Several Roman citizens were brought before the tribunal of Pliny, and he
soon discovered, that a great number of persons of every order of men in
Bithynia had deserted the religion of their ancestors.  <span
id="fr_1674"></span>[188](#fn_1673) His unsuspected testimony may, in
this instance, obtain more credit than the bold challenge of Tertullian,
when he addresses himself to the fears as well as the humanity of the
proconsul of Africa, by assuring him, that if he persists in his cruel
intentions, he must decimate Carthage, and that he will find among the
guilty many persons of his own rank, senators and matrons of nobles'
extraction, and the friends or relations of his most intimate friends.
 <span id="fr_1675"></span>[189](#fn_1674) It appears, however, that
about forty years afterwards the emperor Valerian was persuaded of the
truth of this assertion, since in one of his rescripts he evidently
supposes, that senators, Roman knights, and ladies of quality, were
engaged in the Christian sect.  <span
id="fr_1676"></span>[190](#fn_1675) The church still continued to
increase its outward splendor as it lost its internal purity; and, in
the reign of Diocletian, the palace, the courts of justice, and even the
army, concealed a multitude of Christians, who endeavored to reconcile
the interests of the present with those of a future life.

And yet these exceptions are either too few in number, or too recent in
time, entirely to remove the imputation of ignorance and obscurity which
has been so arrogantly cast on the first proselytes of Christianity.
 <span id="fr_1677"></span>[\*\_0119](#fn_1676) Instead of employing in
our defence the fictions of later ages, it will be more prudent to
convert the occasion of scandal into a subject of edification. Our
serious thoughts will suggest to us, that the apostles themselves were
chosen by Providence among the fishermen of Galilee, and that the lower
we depress the temporal condition of the first Christians, the more
reason we shall find to admire their merit and success. It is incumbent
on us diligently to remember, that the kingdom of heaven was promised to
the poor in spirit, and that minds afflicted by calamity and the
contempt of mankind, cheerfully listen to the divine promise of future
happiness; while, on the contrary, the fortunate are satisfied with the
possession of this world; and the wise abuse in doubt and dispute their
vain superiority of reason and knowledge.

We stand in need of such reflections to comfort us for the loss of some
illustrious characters, which in our eyes might have seemed the most
worthy of the heavenly present. The names of Seneca, of the elder and
the younger Pliny, of Tacitus, of Plutarch, of Galen, of the slave
Epictetus, and of the emperor Marcus Antoninus, adorn the age in which
they flourished, and exalt the dignity of human nature. They filled with
glory their respective stations, either in active or contemplative life;
their excellent understandings were improved by study; Philosophy had
purified their minds from the prejudices of the popular superstition;
and their days were spent in the pursuit of truth and the practice of
virtue. Yet all these sages (it is no less an object of surprise than of
concern) overlooked or rejected the perfection of the Christian system.
Their language or their silence equally discover their contempt for the
growing sect, which in their time had diffused itself over the Roman
empire. Those among them who condescended to mention the Christians,
consider them only as obstinate and perverse enthusiasts, who exacted an
implicit submission to their mysterious doctrines, without being able to
produce a single argument that could engage the attention of men of
sense and learning.  <span id="fr_1678"></span>[191](#fn_1677)

It is at least doubtful whether any of these philosophers perused the
apologies  <span id="fr_1679"></span>[\*\_0120](#fn_1678) which the
primitive Christians repeatedly published in behalf of themselves and of
their religion; but it is much to be lamented that such a cause was not
defended by abler advocates. They expose with superfluous with and
eloquence the extravagance of Polytheism. They interest our compassion
by displaying the innocence and sufferings of their injured brethren.
But when they would demonstrate the divine origin of Christianity, they
insist much more strongly on the predictions which announced, than on
the miracles which accompanied, the appearance of the Messiah. Their
favorite argument might serve to edify a Christian or to convert a Jew,
since both the one and the other acknowledge the authority of those
prophecies, and both are obliged, with devout reverence, to search for
their sense and their accomplishment. But this mode of persuasion loses
much of its weight and influence, when it is addressed to those who
neither understand nor respect the Mosaic dispensation and the prophetic
style.  <span id="fr_1680"></span>[192](#fn_1679) In the unskilful hands
of Justin and of the succeeding apologists, the sublime meaning of the
Hebrew oracles evaporates in distant types, affected conceits, and cold
allegories; and even their authenticity was rendered suspicious to an
unenlightened Gentile, by the mixture of pious forgeries, which, under
the names of Orpheus, Hermes, and the Sibyls,  <span
id="fr_1681"></span>[193](#fn_1680) were obtruded on him as of equal
value with the genuine inspirations of Heaven. The adoption of fraud and
sophistry in the defence of revelation too often reminds us of the
injudicious conduct of those poets who load their invulnerable heroes
with a useless weight of cumbersome and brittle armor.

But how shall we excuse the supine inattention of the Pagan and
philosophic world, to those evidences which were represented by the hand
of Omnipotence, not to their reason, but to their senses? During the age
of Christ, of his apostles, and of their first disciples, the doctrine
which they preached was confirmed by innumerable prodigies. The lame
walked, the blind saw, the sick were healed, the dead were raised,
daemons were expelled, and the laws of Nature were frequently suspended
for the benefit of the church. But the sages of Greece and Rome turned
aside from the awful spectacle, and, pursuing the ordinary occupations
of life and study, appeared unconscious of any alterations in the moral
or physical government of the world. Under the reign of Tiberius, the
whole earth,  <span id="fr_1682"></span>[194](#fn_1681) or at least a
celebrated province of the Roman empire,  <span
id="fr_1683"></span>[195](#fn_1682) was involved in a preternatural
darkness of three hours. Even this miraculous event, which ought to have
excited the wonder, the curiosity, and the devotion of mankind, passed
without notice in an age of science and history.  <span
id="fr_1684"></span>[196](#fn_1683) It happened during the lifetime of
Seneca and the elder Pliny, who must have experienced the immediate
effects, or received the earliest intelligence, of the prodigy. Each of
these philosophers, in a laborious work, has recorded all the great
phenomena of Nature, earthquakes, meteors comets, and eclipses, which
his indefatigable curiosity could collect.  <span
id="fr_1685"></span>[197](#fn_1684) Both the one and the other have
omitted to mention the greatest phenomenon to which the mortal eye has
been witness since the creation of the globe. A distinct chapter of
Pliny  <span id="fr_1686"></span>[198](#fn_1685) is designed for
eclipses of an extraordinary nature and unusual duration; but he
contents himself with describing the singular defect of light which
followed the murder of Caesar, when, during the greatest part of a year,
the orb of the sun appeared pale and without splendor. The season of
obscurity, which cannot surely be compared with the preternatural
darkness of the Passion, had been already celebrated by most of the
poets  <span id="fr_1687"></span>[199](#fn_1686) and historians of that
memorable age.  <span id="fr_1688"></span>[200](#fn_1687)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1668"></span>[183](daf01055.htm#fr_1669) Origen contra
Celsum, l. viii. p. 424.

<span id="fn_1669"></span>[184](daf01055.htm#fr_1670) Minucius Felix, c.
8, with Wowerus's notes. Celsus ap. Origen, l. iii. p. 138, 142. Julian
ap. Cyril. l. vi. p. 206, edit. Spanheim.

<span id="fn_1670"></span>[185](daf01055.htm#fr_1671) Euseb. Hist.
Eccles. iv. 3. Hieronym. Epist. 83.

<span id="fn_1671"></span>[186](daf01055.htm#fr_1672) The story is
prettily told in Justin's Dialogues. Tillemont, (Mem Ecclesiast. tom.
ii. p. 384,) who relates it after him is sure that the old man was a
disguised angel.

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[187](daf01055.htm#fr_1673) Eusebius, v. 28.
It may be hoped, that none, except the heretics, gave occasion to the
complaint of Celsus, (ap. Origen, l. ii. p. 77,) that the Christians
were perpetually correcting and altering their Gospels.

Note: Origen states in reply, that he knows of none who had altered the
Gospels except the Marcionites, the Valentinians, and perhaps some
followers of Lucanus. - M.

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[188](daf01055.htm#fr_1674) Plin. Epist. x.
97. Fuerunt alii similis amentiae, cives Romani - - Multi enim omnis
aetatis, omnis ordinis, utriusque sexus, etiam vocuntur in periculum et
vocabuntur.

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[189](daf01055.htm#fr_1675) Tertullian ad
Scapulum. Yet even his rhetoric rises no higher than to claim a tenth
part of Carthage.

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[190](daf01055.htm#fr_1676) Cyprian. Epist.
70.

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[\*\_0119](daf01055.htm#fr_1677) This
incomplete enumeration ought to be increased by the names of several
Pagans converted at the dawn of Christianity, and whose conversion
weakens the reproach which the historian appears to support. Such are,
the Proconsul Sergius Paulus, converted at Paphos, (Acts xiii. 7 - 12.)
Dionysius, member of the Areopagus, converted with several others, al
Athens, (Acts xvii. 34;) several persons at the court of Nero, (Philip.
iv 22;) Erastus, receiver at Corinth, (Rom. xvi.23;) some Asiarchs,
(Acts xix. 31) As to the philosophers, we may add Tatian, Athenagoras,
Theophilus of Antioch, Hegesippus, Melito, Miltiades, Pantaenus,
Ammenius, all distinguished for their genius and learning. - G.

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[191](daf01055.htm#fr_1678) Dr. Lardner, in
his first and second volumes of Jewish and Christian testimonies,
collects and illustrates those of Pliny the younger, of Tacitus, of
Galen, of Marcus Antoninus, and perhaps of Epictetus, (for it is
doubtful whether that philosopher means to speak of the Christians.) The
new sect is totally unnoticed by Seneca, the elder Pliny, and Plutarch.

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[\*\_0120](daf01055.htm#fr_1679) The emperors
Hadrian, Antoninus &c., read with astonishment the apologies of Justin
Martyr, of Aristides, of Melito, &c. (See St. Hieron. ad mag. orat.
Orosius, lviii. c. 13.) Eusebius says expressly, that the cause of
Christianity was defended before the senate, in a very elegant
discourse, by Apollonius the Martyr. - G.

Gibbon, in his severer spirit of criticism, may have questioned the
authority of Jerome and Eusebius. There are some difficulties about
Apollonius, which Heinichen (note in loc. Eusebii) would solve, by
suppose lag him to have been, as Jerome states, a senator. - M.

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[192](daf01055.htm#fr_1680) If the famous
prophecy of the Seventy Weeks had been alleged to a Roman philosopher,
would he not have replied in the words of Cicero, "Quae tandem ista
auguratio est, annorum potius quam aut raensium aut dierum?" De
Divinatione, ii. 30. Observe with what irreverence Lucian, (in
Alexandro, c. 13.) and his friend Celsus ap. Origen, (l. vii. p. 327,)
express themselves concerning the Hebrew prophets.

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[193](daf01055.htm#fr_1681) The philosophers
who derided the more ancient predictions of the Sibyls, would easily
have detected the Jewish and Christian forgeries, which have been so
triumphantly quoted by the fathers, from Justin Martyr to Lactantius.
When the Sibylline verses had performed their appointed task, they, like
the system of the millennium, were quietly laid aside. The Christian
Sybil had unluckily fixed the ruin of Rome for the year 195, A. U. C.
948.

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[194](daf01055.htm#fr_1682) The fathers, as
they are drawn out in battle array by Dom Calmet, (Dissertations sur la
Bible, tom. iii. p. 295 - 308,) seem to cover the whole earth with
darkness, in which they are followed by most of the moderns.

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[195](daf01055.htm#fr_1683) Origen ad Matth.
c. 27, and a few modern critics, Beza, Le Clerc, Lardner, &c., are
desirous of confining it to the land of Judea.

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[196](daf01055.htm#fr_1684) The celebrated
passage of Phlegon is now wisely abandoned. When Tertullian assures the
Pagans that the mention of the prodigy is found in Arcanis (not
Archivis) vestris, (see his Apology, c. 21,) he probably appeals to the
Sibylline verses, which relate it exactly in the words of the Gospel.

Note: According to some learned theologians a misunderstanding of the
text in the Gospel has given rise to this mistake, which has employed
and wearied so many laborious commentators, though Origen had already
taken the pains to preinform them. The expression does not mean, they
assert, an eclipse, but any kind of obscurity occasioned in the
atmosphere, whether by clouds or any other cause. As this obscuration of
the sun rarely took place in Palestine, where in the middle of April the
sky was usually clear, it assumed, in the eyes of the Jews and
Christians, an importance conformable to the received notion, that the
sun concealed at midday was a sinister presage. See Amos viii. 9, 10.
The word is often taken in this sense by contemporary writers; the
Apocalypse says the sun was concealed, when speaking of an obscuration
caused by smoke and dust. (Revel. ix. 2.) Moreover, the Hebrew word
ophal, which in the LXX. answers to the Greek, signifies any darkness;
and the Evangelists, who have modelled the sense of their expressions by
those of the LXX., must have taken it in the same latitude. This
darkening of the sky usually precedes earthquakes. (Matt. xxvii. 51.)
The Heathen authors furnish us a number of examples, of which a
miraculous explanation was given at the time. See Ovid. ii. v. 33, l.
xv. v. 785. Pliny, Hist. Nat. l. ii. c 30. Wetstein has collected all
these examples in his edition of the New Testament.

We need not, then, be astonished at the silence of the Pagan authors
concerning a phenomenon which did not extend beyond Jerusalem, and which
might have nothing contrary to the laws of nature; although the
Christians and the Jews may have regarded it as a sinister presage. See
Michaelia Notes on New Testament, v. i. p. 290. Paulus, Commentary on
New Testament, iii. p. 760. - G.

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[197](daf01055.htm#fr_1685) Seneca, Quaest.
Natur. l. i. 15, vi. l. vii. 17. Plin. Hist. Natur. l. ii.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[198](daf01055.htm#fr_1686) Plin. Hist. Natur.
ii. 30.

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[199](daf01055.htm#fr_1687) Virgil. Georgic.
i. 466. Tibullus, l. i. Eleg. v. ver. 75. Ovid Metamorph. xv. 782.
Lucan. Pharsal. i. 540. The last of these poets places this prodigy
before the civil war.

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[200](daf01055.htm#fr_1688) See a public
epistle of M. Antony in Joseph. Antiquit. xiv. 12. Plutarch in Caesar.
p. 471. Appian. Bell. Civil. l. iv. Dion Cassius, l. xlv. p. 431. Julius
Obsequens, c. 128. His little treatise is an abstract of Livy's
prodigies.

End Of Vol. I.
