[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf01001) 
[Next](daf01003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIDQC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 1*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1776\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Preface Of The Author.

It is not my intention to detain the reader by expapiating on the
variety or the importance of the subject, which I have undertaken to
treat; since the merit of the choice would serve to render the weakness
of the execution still more apparent, and still less excusable. But as I
have presumed to lay before the public a first volume only  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) of the History of the Decline and Fall of
the Roman Empire, it will, perhaps, be expected that I should explain,
in a few words, the nature and limits of my general plan.

The memorable series of revolutions, which in the course of about
thirteen centuries gradually undermined, and at length destroyed, the
solid fabric of human greatness, may, with some propriety, be divided
into the three following periods:

I. The first of these periods may be traced from the age of Trajan and
the Antonines, when the Roman monarchy, having attained its full
strength and maturity, began to verge towards its decline; and will
extend to the subversion of the Western Empire, by the barbarians of
Germany and Scythia, the rude ancestors of the most polished nations of
modern Europe. This extraordinary revolution, which subjected Rome to
the power of a Gothic conqueror, was completed about the beginning of
the sixth century.

II\. The second period of the Decline and Fall of Rome may be supposed
to commence with the reign of Justinian, who, by his laws, as well as by
his victories, restored a transient splendor to the Eastern Empire. It
will comprehend the invasion of Italy by the Lombards; the conquest of
the Asiatic and African provinces by the Arabs, who embraced the
religion of Mahomet; the revolt of the Roman people against the feeble
princes of Constantinople; and the elevation of Charlemagne, who, in the
year eight hundred, established the second, or German Empire of the West

III\. The last and longest of these periods includes about six centuries
and a half; from the revival of the Western Empire, till the taking of
Constantinople by the Turks, and the extinction of a degenerate race of
princes, who continued to assume the titles of Caesar and Augustus,
after their dominions were contracted to the limits of a single city; in
which the language, as well as manners, of the ancient Romans, had been
long since forgotten. The writer who should undertake to relate the
events of this period, would find himself obliged to enter into the
general history of the Crusades, as far as they contributed to the ruin
of the Greek Empire; and he would scarcely be able to restrain his
curiosity from making some inquiry into the state of the city of Rome,
during the darkness and confusion of the middle ages.

As I have ventured, perhaps too hastily, to commit to the press a work
which in every sense of the word, deserves the epithet of imperfect. I
consider myself as contracting an engagement to finish, most probably in
a second volume,  <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3) the first of these
memorable periods; and to deliver to the Public the complete History of
the Decline and Fall of Rome, from the age of the Antonines to the
subversion of the Western Empire. With regard to the subsequent periods,
though I may entertain some hopes, I dare not presume to give any
assurances. The execution of the extensive plan which I have described,
would connect the ancient and modern history of the world; but it would
require many years of health, of leisure, and of perseverance.

Bentinck Street, February 1, 1776.

P. S. The entire History, which is now published, of the Decline and
Fall of the Roman Empire in the West, abundantly discharges my
engagements with the Public. Perhaps their favorable opinion may
encourage me to prosecute a work, which, however laborious it may seem,
is the most agreeable occupation of my leisure hours.

Bentinck Street, March 1, 1781.

An Author easily persuades himself that the public opinion is still
favorable to his labors; and I have now embraced the serious resolution
of proceeding to the last period of my original design, and of the Roman
Empire, the taking of Constantinople by the Turks, in the year one
thousand four hundred and fifty-three. The most patient Reader, who
computes that three ponderous  <span id="fr_4"></span>[3](#fn_4) volumes
have been already employed on the events of four centuries, may,
perhaps, be alarmed at the long prospect of nine hundred years. But it
is not my intention to expatiate with the same minuteness on the whole
series of the Byzantine history. At our entrance into this period, the
reign of Justinian, and the conquests of the Mahometans, will deserve
and detain our attention, and the last age of Constantinople (the
Crusades and the Turks) is connected with the revolutions of Modern
Europe. From the seventh to the eleventh century, the obscure interval
will be supplied by a concise narrative of such facts as may still
appear either interesting or important. Bentinck Street, March 1, 1782.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1](daf01002.htm#fr_2) The first volume of the
quarto, which contained the sixteen first chapters.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[2](daf01002.htm#fr_3) The Author, as it
frequently happens, took an inadequate measure of his growing work. The
remainder of the first period has filled two volumes in quarto, being
the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth volumes of the octavo edition.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[3](daf01002.htm#fr_4) The first six volumes of
the octavo edition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface To The First Volume.](daf01003)
