[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc01)  [Next](cc03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# INTRODUCTION

THE AUTHOR of the Koreshan System of Universology (upon the basis of the
law of comparative analogy) announced, in 1870, the discovery of the
cosmogonic form, which he then declared to be cellular; the surface of
the earth being concave, with a curvature of about eight inches to the
mile. This rate of curvation would give a diameter of eight thousand,
and a circumference of twenty-five thousand miles.

Applying the common laws and principles of optics, with perspective
foreshortening, all the phenomena of appearances in optical illusion
were scientifically accounted for, and the earth optically demonstrated
to be concave, although visual appearances seemed to indicate the
contrary.

Upon the assumption that the surface of the earth is convex, there has
been predicated that prodigious fallacy, the Copernican system, which,
according to the admission of its most enthusiastic advocates and
adherents, does not contain a single positive proof of scientific
accuracy.

If we accept the logical deduction of the fallacious Copernican system
of astronomy, we conclude the universe to be illimitable and
incomprehensible, and its cause equally so; therefore, not only would
the universe be forever beyond the reach of the intellectual perspective
of human aspiration and effort, but God himself would be beyond the pale
of our conception, and therefore beyond our adoration.

The Koreshan Cosmogony reduces the universe to Proportionate limits, and
its cause within the comprehension of the human mind. It demonstrates
the

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

possibility of the attainment of man to his supreme, inheritance, the
ultimate dominion of the universe, thus restoring him to the acme of
exaltation,--the throne of the Eternal, whence he had his origin.

The alchemico-organic cosmos (the physical universe) is the ultimate and
therefore the most outward expression of creative power. It is the
language of causation manifest in the form of symbolism. Given a
knowledge of this form with its function, the cause is necessarily
disclosed.

Deity, if this be the term employed to designate the Supreme Source of
being and activity, cannot be comprehended until the structure and
function of the universe are absolutely known; hence mankind is ignorant
of God until his handiwork is accurately deciphered. Yet to know God,
who, though unknown by the world, is not unknowable, is the supreme
demand of all intellectual research and development.

Embraced in the system of which the external cosmic form is the mere
outward cell is its correspondent, the macrocosmic or Grand Man.
Outwardly, this is the visible humanity in the process of development
toward a perfected state, not yet approached only as it was attained to
in the Lord Christ, its germinal beginning, the firstfruits of the
perfected genus.

The alchemico-organic cell is definitely structured. It is the egg from
which the human macrocosm attains its incubation; hence, when humanity
reaches its organic shape it must assume the correspondential organism.
Therefore, if we know universal form as it obtains in the
alchemico-organic cosmos, we can render the language of this form into
that of the legitimate structure of society; for one is the pattern of
the other. Its functions and activities can also be readily translated

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

into the language of societal functions and activities.

Genuine societal fellowship will finally become a structured and
composite unity, evolved through the application of intellectual potency
and direction. It will become the anthropomorphic counterpart of the
alchemico-organic (physical) world. A knowledge of the structure and
function of the alchemico-organic cosmos constitutes the basis of a
structured theology, which is essential to the organic unity and
perpetuity of the human race.

It does not follow, because a fallacious theological system has
maintained the world in a state of offensive and defensive belligerency,
anarchy, and chaos, that a true knowledge of God and his relation to man
and man's relations to him is not essential to genuine human perfection
and happiness. In the emphasis of the contrast, regarding the end to be
attained, between the genuine (the Koreshan) and the fallacious (the
Copernican) system of cosmogony, we insist that all the labor of
investigation, the time, and the wealth expended in the Copernican
fallacy have had no specific purpose.

Why do we care to know whether the earth moves or is stationary? If the
universe be illimitable, it is equally incomprehensible. Why, then,
should humanity waste its potencies in the investigation of that which
it has already pronounced incomprehensible, unknown, unthinkable,
because illimitable? We sought to know the exact form of the universe
because we knew it to be the language of cause; and knowing the effect,
we assured ourselves of the cause, that through conscious knowledge we
might enter into and become its power.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

The interest of the Koreshan mind in the acquisition of universal
knowledge resides in the fact that through it we become intellectually
instrumental in the organization of the social fabric, and thus acquire
social and individual perfection, thence universal and individual
immortality. We learn to know of the form and function of the
alchemico-organic cosmos, that we may insure the construction of the
organo-vital cosmic organism.

The perfection of the individual structure depends upon the perfection
of the Grand Man. The perfection of the human macrocosm (the Grand Man)
depends upon the application of a few fundamental principles,
revolutionary and sweeping in their influence. The principles of
equilibrium are as essential to the institution and perpetuity of human
happiness as they are to the eternal stability of the cosmic structure,
the basis of which knowledge is found in the shape of the surface of the
earth as geometrically confirmed in the application of the
Rectilineator.

As the astral nucleus of the alchemico-organic cosmos is so related in
form and function to the circumference containing it, as to receive the
convergence of all "energies" <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)
\[substances\], and radiate

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

them equitably to all parts of the cosmic structure; and as the heart of
the vidual body, the seat of the commerce of the body, is the center of
collection and distribution, hence society must be so organically
structured as to be able to collect and distribute the products of
Nature, coupled with industry and sustained by the application of
economic law. The attainment of a knowledge of this law is founded upon
a knowledge of the alchemico-organic cosmos.

It is so vastly important, in view of all these facts, for the world to
possess a knowledge of the contour of the earth's surface, that we
devoted the work of many months to mechanical application, for the
purpose of giving to the world some simple mechanical proofs of what we
have known and taught for \[many\] years.

Man's knowledge of man is his knowledge of God; not man as he is in his
segregate state, but as he will be when the two forms (male and female)
unite in the integralism of his biunity, of which the Son of God was the
archetype. The Lord was Jehovah manifest in his human perfection.

To know the Lord Christ absolutely is to be in the consciousness of
Deity; and to become like him is to sit upon the throne of his glory.
This knowledge is so related to the structured alchemico-organic
macrocosm, that to know of the earth's concavity and its relation to
universal form is to know God; while to believe in the earth's convexity
is to deny him and all his works. All that is opposed to Koreshanity is
antichrist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[14:1](cc02.htm#fr_0.md) Energy is not a substance,
but simply the work of the two qualities which could not engage in work
were there not two constant states of the two. The term energy applies
equally to matter and spirit. Matter and spirit, or matter and its
essence, could not be active but through their relationship; and both
are active by virtue of their conjoined effort as counter-parts in the
processes of the perpetuity of creation. The term energy means in work;
when matter is active it is in work, and the phenomenon of motion is the
energy of matter. When its co-ordinate spirit or essence is in motion it
is in work; therefore, we have the in-work or the energy of spirit. It
requires these three to constitute a constantly active primate cycle of
being.--**Koresh** in **Flaming Sword**, Vol. XIX, No. 16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Cellular Cosmogony](cc03.md)
