[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc06)  [Next](cc08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Universal Form and Function Are Persistent

WE HAVE SHOWN the sphere to comprise the outlines and limitation of
universal form. All convergent lines from the circumferences of the
sphere determine toward and terminate in the center, which must
necessarily constitute the focal point of centripetal flow--the central
point of contact of all material things. The physical universe being the
formulated expression of mind, the astral center of the physical
universe must comprise the analogical correspondent of the astral center
of the mind of the universe.

The physical universe is proximately moved by the essences of
alchemical, electrical, and magnetic action, which are generated by the
very form and relation of the elements which enter into the constitution
of the great cell or shell of generation. Remotely, it is moved by the
mental potencies that are above and prior in quality to even the
unconscious or material forces; such as physical lumen, calorine,
electricity, magnetism, levity, and gravity.

Universal form and its correlate universal function are persistent,
never having had beginning only so far as the modifications of time (by
the break in continuity) mark the end and the beginning of

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

periods, and denote timic aspect, or that modification of continuity
called time. "In the beginning God created," does not imply more than
the beginning of a specific cycle; and such creation, or recreation, is,
manifest whenever a cycle closes in the beginning of a succeeding one.

If function and form are correlate and persistent properties of
perpetual being, (and there is a sense in which things were not
created,) still the continuity of the universe must depend upon its
recreation or creation in an existent form and function. That is what is
meant by creation.

Atheists, infidels, materialists, and spiritists may continue to rave
and rant at the obduracy of man's adherence to what they may denominate
a "book of fables," it yet remains as an enduring monument of a
never-fading glory of conception as far beyond the intelligence of the
ranters as they are below, in descent, an ancestry from which they
maintain they have degenerated. We mean, of course, the monkey,
chimpanzee, and gorilla, of which modern atheism seems so proud to boast
for ancestral origin.

After thousands of years the Bible remains the bulwark and citadel of
towering strength, unaffected by the onslaughts of its enemies.
Religious systems, founded upon false interpretations of the Scriptures,
may rise and fall, but the truths of the Bible never--they are eternal.

### The Universe Is One Vast System

Koreshanity regards the universe as one vast system, with such a perfect
adjustment of parts as to embrace every department in a combination of
co-operative unity and procedure, not merely as

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

pertaining to the solar and stellar realms, embracing the earth
inhabited by man, but inclusive of mineral arrangements, and vegetable,
animal, and human life, Man, both as to his individual and universal
being, is the archetype of the cosmic structure and function. He is both
origin and product of the integral co-ordination of universal mode and
motion.

The mind of man, inhabiting his organic form, is the positive pole of
constructive potency, and the material cosmos has proceeded from his
voluntary purpose and co-ordinate involuntary consociation. The laws of
construction, with the potential and kinetic essences through which the
depositions of circumferences are formulated and maintained, and primary
and subsidiary centers pivoted, focalized, supplied, and regulated,
correspond to the laws of organic unity consociating mind and body.

The universe is the great ovum of integral incubation. In-cube-ation is
the modification of the lines and forms of the cube and sphere, adjusted
to the purposes of use in the integral economy. The chick is incubated
(hatched) from the egg, the infant is incubated in the matrix. Humanity
as a whole is incubated within the great cell or ovum of universal life
and not (contrary to the universal law of development) on the outside of
an uneconomic adjustment and compilation of matter, as men throughout
the world of boasted civilization have been blindly taught.

The forms of the incubated are but the modified adjustments of
curvilinear and rectilinear motions and modes; or, as applied to man, he
is the cell doubled upon itself, and the laws of mental and organic life
correspond, in him, to the laws of motion and arrangement in the
functions and emplacements of the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

physical cosmos. The unique and complex cell, with its correlation of
circumference and center, is the expressed or evoluted form of integral
being, and the forms and laws of this comical integrality are the
pattern of the integral government of man.

### Discovery of Koreshan Universology

IN THE WINTER of 1870 I discovered the science of the universe and
coined the word to suit it; namely, Universology. The first time I ever
saw the word was after I had coined it, by compounding it of Latin and
Greek words, the first part being Latin, and the last part the Greek
*logos*, word or discourse. I do not say that the word might not have
been previously framed and employed. I do not know when Stephen Pearl
Andrews first employed the term; but I do know that I was not conscious
of any use of it until after my application of the word to my science.

In the discovery of universal science (I might say in the revelation to
me of what, up to that time, had been a mystery to the world at large) I
found the universe to be a composite whole, an integralism having been
in perpetual existence in the past, and must be. in perpetual existence
in the future. I discovered the earth to be stationary, a macrocosmic
and composite shell or rind, circumferential to the atmospheres, and the
solar, lunar, and stellar manifestations within this common rind or
composite and concave sphere.

The universe is a fixity from more points of view than one. It is
creation from God who dwells in it, and derives his functional powers
through his inherent

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

relativity to the integralism of the universe of which he is a part--an
intellectual part, individual and recurrently personal. The formation of
the universe is discovered to be cellular and therefore concave, not
upon the basis of hypothesis, but upon the actual and positive
demonstration by three systems of geometrical calculation, including
optics and mechanics.

When the "scientific" world and the world generally discard the
speculative and hypothetical methods of arriving at conclusions, and
begin to reason from demonstrated rather than from hypothetical
premises, they will begin to awake to some startling facts, and to
realize the astounding absurdity of any and all conclusions predicated
upon the guesses of men ignorant of the first principles of the origin
of life and the destiny of the human mind.

The most advanced thinkers of the times are seeking the origin of life.
This is ignorance seeking light but finding none, because the keys of
knowledge have been taken from the world by the doctors of the world,
under the influence of scholastic and classic cult. No wonder that the
question is being agitated in the scholastic circles! The subject could
not be promulgated for years from the Guiding Star Publishing House
without awakening interest and discussion.

### The Perfect Man Is the Archetype of the Physical Universe

The description of creation given in the firsts chapter of Genesis was
never intended primarily as a° presentment of the physical cosmogony,
but as the creation of the man himself, which in his most external
manifestation is in the physical form. Thus in this outward degree the
heavens comprise the various regions of the mind, while the body
constitutes the'.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

earth. This, however, applies only to the integral man, and not to the
so called humanity who have not attained, through the restoration, to
the image and likeness of the Gods. While the genesis of man is
described in the first chapter of the Hebrew Book, it is also true that
the perfectly structured and integral man is the archetype and microcosm
of the physical universe; and when the comprehension of the one is
reached, then also is that of the other.

The physical sun is the center of the physical universe, and the earth
is its crust, shell, pediment, or rind. As the sun is composed of light
and heat as its primary substances, so the mind correspondingly is
composed of the affectional (love, or desire) substance, and its
accompanying wisdom and intellection. These two principles and
substances are the primal substances of being; the one is the heat, the
other is the light of the mind; and these two substances extend and
exert their influences in the body to effect and perpetuate its
substance and form, with all the accompanying phenomena.

The activities of the mind, so far as they relate to the organic
structure of the body, proceed from the conjunction and unity of the two
primary activities and substances of mind. These substances and
activities eventuate in the formate solidarity of the organic natural
structure, through the formation of another substantial force; namely,
the substance of gravity. Weight substance, or as it may be technically
called, gravic substance, is the first product of the union of light and
heat, and is the first law of form.

As one of the fundamental principles of knowledge, we here reiterate
that the law of gravity is the first law of formation or creation, and
is the product

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

of the union of light and heat; and that the body is the product of love
and wisdom, the two corresponding substances of mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Koreshan Principles of Optics](cc08)
