[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc07)  [Next](cc09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Koreshan Principles of Optics

IN CONSIDERING the objections against the present astronomical
hypothesis about to engage the reader's attention, we would first invite
a consideration of the principles of optics as enunciated through the
pages of Koreshan literature, and especially to the fact that visual
substance generated in the gray matter of the cerebrum and cerebellum
has more to do with the function of sight than the motion of extraneous
physical force. Therefore, while studying this objection, the reader
will remember that in our presentation of the inconsistencies of the
Copernican system, we are also presenting the modern astronomer's views
of the action of physical substance.

Vision, according to the present conception, radiates from any given
center of the substance called light, and penetrates the pupil of the
eye, making its impression upon the retina, whence the impression is
conveyed through the optic nerve, commissure, and. tract, to the
cortical area of vision in the gray matter of the cerebrum.

Every radiation of substance from the sun or any of the stars enters our
atmosphere at some angle of deflection; the angle of refraction being
proportionate to the divergence of the ray from the central or vertical
one. In observing any star except the star vertical to the point of
observation, it is observed

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

through an angle of refraction at the point where the substance enters
the atmosphere.

No living being--supposing for the sake of the argument that a ray of
light penetrated our atmosphere from the sun or stars--could possibly
determine the angle of refraction without knowing the distance of the
limit of the atmosphere from the point of observation. The depth of the
atmosphere is conceded by all astronomers to be only approximately
determined; and no two astronomers are agreed as to the atmospheric
depth.

Any man can positively know that the angle of refraction cannot be
determined without a knowledge of the ray of incidence, and that if the
angle of refraction is not known, the direction of a star observed
through the ray cannot be determined.

It is positively known that no angle of refraction of any given ray of
light from an objective source beyond the atmosphere, can be determined
unless the exact depth of the atmosphere is absolutely known to the
fraction of an inch.

In observing a star, either with the unaided eye or with a telescope, at
an objective point divergent from the vertical direction, if the
atmosphere were forty-five miles in depth, to the fraction of an inch,
the angle of refraction could be determined, had we an exact knowledge
of the difference in the tenuity of the atmosphere and of the ether
beyond.

If we could determine the angle of refraction we could determine the
direction. If the atmosphere were just ninety miles in depth, as some
astronomers affirm, then from that knowledge--were it absolute--we could
determine the direction.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

### Problems That Demand Explanation

If the atmosphere were forty-five miles in depth, the amplitude of the
arc of its curvation could be accurately determined and the degree of
refraction equally known. The depth of the atmosphere, whether
forty-five, ninety, or five hundred miles deep, must be positively known
before the amplitude of its arc can be known, and before the amount of
radiatory deflection can be determined.

We know that astronomers, in making observations, pay no attention to
any refraction at the supposed summit of the atmosphere. We also know
that in works on physics and civil engineering, it is claimed that
allowance is made for what is supposed to be the refraction of the
atmosphere.

If the atmosphere refracts three inches to the mile, in an observation
made along a horizontal line, how much does it refract at any given
direction from the horizontal to the vertical? If observation is made of
a star at or near the horizon, and the first mile shows a deviation of
three inches, what will be the amount of deviation at any uncertain
distance of forty-five, ninety, or five hundred miles? All of these
estimates have been made by various observers and calculators.

If the earth curvates eight inches to the mile, it is estimated, on a
calculation made at a ratio inversely to the square of the distance,
that at the distance of three miles the deviation from the direction of
the optical tangent is about seventy-two inches, or six feet. If the
atmosphere refracts an optical line three inches to the mile, then at
the distance of three miles--by the application of the same law--the
second mile would be nine inches, and the third mile twenty-seven
inches.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

If the third mile affords a deviation of twenty-seven inches from the
tangent of the rectiline, making the calculation upon the basis of the
inverse ratio of the square of the distance to the uncertain limitation,
which may be forty-five, ninety, or five hundred miles, (as yet
undetermined by any of the astronomers,) what will be the amount of
deviation at the unknown and uncertain point--the limitation of the
atmosphere? This is the question to which the Koreshan Cosmogonist
demands an answer, and to which the investigating world also demands an
answer.

These considerations entering as factors into the problems of astronomy,
demand some explanations regarding the fact that the astronomers do come
to correct conclusions. Upon the basis of the ordinary calculation of
the earth's curvation, or even a simple divergence of an optical line
from a rectiline, supposing the divergence at the objective end of a
telescope twenty feet in length to be only an eighty-one millionth of an
inch, what would be the direction and location of a star trillions of
miles distant?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Koreshan Cosmogony in Contrast with Modern Astronomy](cc09.md)
