[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc08)  [Next](cc10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Koreshan Cosmogony in Contrast with Modern Astronomy

WE HAVE SHOWN the true character of cosmogonic form, and have placed
this revelation in contrast with the uncertain Copernican system of
astronomy. We have devoted much energy and effort to bring the questions
of Koreshan Universology prominently before the people for public
discussion. In this effort we have been held up to insolent ridicule

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and most bitter persecution, consonant with the invariable rule to which
every innovation upon prevailing public sentiment is subject. We would
not be worthy of consideration if our doctrines were not important
enough to excite the animosity of the sentiment in both the secular and
religious phases of thought which our system assails.

We have pushed our claims to a knowledge of cosmology until the
advocates of the spurious "sciences" begin to feel their insecurity, and
the necessity for defending their right to the title of "scientist" and
"scientific." So long as the "scientific" world rested in absolute
security upon the ignorance of the laity, it felt no necessity for the
discussion of the question of the Koreshan Cosmogony; but our
persistence in the advocacy of the truth, in contrast with the audacious
assumptions of the Copernican advocates, incites a growing uneasiness
regarding the stability of an astronomy which has nothing but assumption
upon which to rest its claims to acceptation.

The whole batch of assumption and absurdity called modern science is
assaulted by the consistent and determined purpose of the apostles of
Koreshan Universology. We know that when our system is considered of
enough consequence to receive candid notice from thinking men, and when
the advocates of the prevailing system of astronomy begin to comprehend
the fact that their premises, which they confess to be mere assumptions,
are being analyzed by honest investigators, and are known to be
worthless as foundations for the building of the superstructure of

science, they will be compelled to make an open defense of their
untenable position.

The Copernican system of astronomy had its rise in the dark age; and
there is not an astronomer of note who does not know and confess that
there is nothing but assumption for its foundation. It is responsible
for the agnosticism so much in evidence, and for the attitude of that
stupendous farce, the "higher criticism." There is not a phenomenon
manifest that is not easily and rationally explained and accounted for
from the standpoint of Koreshan Universology, whether belonging to the
domain of physical or psychical manifestation; and per contra, there are
no phenomena, either psychic or physical, rationally accounted for on
the basis of the modern system of so called science.

### Darwinism Is a Fair Sample of Modern Scientific Conclusions

Says Darwin in "Animals and Plants," (Vol. I, page 9): "In scientific
investigations it is permitted to invent any hypothesis, and if it
explains various large and independent classes of facts, it rises to the
rank of a well-grounded theory."

It is to this absurd proposition that most of our "scientific" theories,
if not all of them, owe their existence. He further says, that "The
undulations of ether and even its existence are hypothetical, yet every
one now admits the undulatory theory of light."

We agree with Darwin that the undulatory theory of light is a mere
hypothesis; that is, a mere guess; but we deny his statement that "every
one now admits the undulatory theory of light"

Darwinism, as Darwin himself affirms, is predicated

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

entirely upon "scientific" guesses; and these, he declares, constitute
the basis of all scientific claims. Speaking of natural selection, he
says: "Now, this hypothesis may be tested,--and this seems to me to be
the only fair and legitimate manner of considering the whole
question,--by trying whether it explains several large and independent
classes of facts; such as the geological succession of organic beings,
their distribution in past and present times, and their mutual
affinities and homologies. If the principle of natural selection does
explain these and other large bodies of facts, it ought to be received."

"Please accept my theories," says the eminent "scientist," "because I
can explain many things upon my hypothesis." The Koreshan scientists
might beg the question and say, please accept our theory of
Universology, because there is not one thing that we cannot explain
scientifically upon our premise. But we ask no man to accept anything on
the basis of a mere hypothesis. A knowledge of the construction of the
universe and its functions, with the laws and principles of life
depending upon such knowledge, is too important a matter to be left to
mere conjecture--mere hypothesis.

No conclusion is certain which is not founded upon and grounded in a
positively demonstrated premise. It is for this reason that the Koreshan
System stands out distinct and unique. It predicates nothing upon
guesswork; its first step in the discussion of any proposition is the
correct establishment and proof of its premise. Darwinism is a fair
sample of the processes by which modern scientific conclusions are
invariably reached.

 

<span id="img_05800"></span>

[![DIAGRAM No. 1. Illustrating the Vanishing Point of Space Between
Parallel Railway Tracks.](tn/05800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05800.jpg.md)  
DIAGRAM No. 1. Illustrating the Vanishing Point of Space Between
Parallel Railway Tracks.  

<span id="img_05801"></span>

[![DIAGRAM No. 2. Showing Same Perspective Effect With One Rail Above
the Other.](tn/05801.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05801.jpg.md)  
DIAGRAM No. 2. Showing Same Perspective Effect With One Rail Above the
Other.  

<span id="img_05802"></span>

[![DIAGRAM No. 3. Showing the Vanishing Point or Horizon of Geolinear
Surface, With Upper Rail Removed.](tn/05802.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05802.jpg.md)  
DIAGRAM No. 3. Showing the Vanishing Point or Horizon of Geolinear
Surface, With Upper Rail Removed.  

 

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### Facts and Appearances Differentiated

Let us take the principle of optics in its application to the definition
of the phenomenon of the rotundity of the earth, as an illustration of
correct reasoning from an established premise, as followed by the
logician of the Koreshan School of Science. We herewith accompany our
argument with diagrammatic illustrations of the principles involved in
the argument.

Two lines may be extended parallel with each other, as in the case of
the two rails of a railroad track. The diagrams represent certain known
facts in optics, which we declare shall not be overruled, set aside, nor
ignored for the purpose of sustaining an unwarrantable "scientific"
theory. If any man is too lazy to reason, or too mean to investigate
another's reasoning, we do not expect to make any impression; or if he
is so wedded to a theory because his grandfather believed in it that he
will not change his opinion for the truth's sake, he will naturally pass
this argument by; but for the honest man there is only one alternative.

The two lines, *a f*, extending the length of [diagram 1](#img_05800.md),
may be taken to represent the tracks of a railroad, five feet apart. In
the major premise of this proposition are involved the facts as they
*are*, not as they *appear*. The measurement of the space at both ends
of the track shows that the rails at each end are just five feet apart.
There is no element of assumption in this part of the premise. We wish
to thoroughly impress upon the student the fact, that so far we have not
had to "assume something." The rails are straight and parallel, and five
feet apart. These are facts of practical and certain measurement.

From B to *c* in either direction the track indicates

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

one mile; (the entire length of the diagram representing two miles;) in
observing the distance from B to *c*, either way, the track *appears* to
narrow down to a vanishing point at *c*. This appearance is the minor
premise. Let it be remembered that the minor premise involves a fact,
but that fact is an appearance, involved in which are certain optical
laws which we will apply logically in another part of this argument.

Do not forget the fact that we are arguing from premises that are proven
to be true, and that we differ from the ordinary "scientific" logician,
in that we work from a demonstrated premise--not from an assumption.

The purpose of this part of the argument is to show the reason for an
appearance which is in direct opposition to the fact. Why does the space
five feet wide at F F appear as a point at *c*? Note the dotted lines
beginning at S S and extending to the arrow; they make a comparatively
long picture upon the surface indicated by the arrow: Note the dotted
lines beginning at F F and extending to the surface marked retina. These
lines vanish at the point upon the surface thus marked; for this reason
they *appear* to come to a point at *c*.

If we take this appearance as a fact, we are led into an interminable
labyrinth of difficulties. The "scientist" establishes his
[assumptions](errata.htm#1.md)upon these appearances, ignoring the facts
and laws of optics. The objects *e d* are in fact at *e d*, as
represented in [diagram 1](#img_05800.md), but they appear to be at *c*.

We are to distinguish the facts of *reality* from the facts of
*appearance*, and show the character of the appearances, and how these
appearances have led the short-sighted "scientists" into their aggregate
of

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

errors, which they delight to call by the title of science. Thus far
there is no element of assumption; we assume nothing.

### The Law of Foreshortening Ignored by Modern Astronomers

We have shown that space is annihilated in appearance by the law of
distal perspective; that foreshortening is an inevitable law of optics,
and we hold that these laws are totally ignored by every so called
scientific astronomer. The pseudo scientists shall not continue to foist
their fallacious systems of astronomy upon a deluded public without a
perpetual protest.

It will be remembered that [diagram 1](#img_05800.md) represents the point
of observation at B, from which the objective point is seen at c, but
which in reality is at F F. The line D D D, extending to *c*, is not
what it appears to be from the outlook or visual point at B. The
apparent line at *c*; which appears to be only a line, is the entire
breadth of five feet--the distance across the track at F F. If a middle
rail extend midway between the two rails of the track it will be seen
the entire length of the line, or nearly so, and seem to blend with the
two other rails at *c*; the five feet have vanished to a mere point at
*c*, therefore a space five feet wide appears like a mere line.

The broader the space in perspective, the more rapidly it vanishes by
distal extense, as shown in comparison with the middle rail; and the
narrower the space, the less rapidly it vanishes by distal extense. This
principle belongs more exclusively to the effect on the retina itself. A
balloon in passing out of visual range appears to diminish rapidly for
the first few miles, after which it remains in view for

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

a long time as a mere speck. These facts will have their application
during the course of this argument.

We subjoin a [second diagram](#img_05801.md). Here we have two lines as in
[diagram 1](#img_05800.md), but we will employ them to represent parallel
lines, one above the other instead of side by side, as in the first
instance. The line A A appears to rise to B B, and the line C C appears
to drop to B B, if viewed from the point D. The points A A and C C are
visible, but they are seen as if at B B. Now, is there any man capable
of thinking, who will be such an obstinate ass as to take this
*appearance* as the *fact*, after the phenomenon has been pointed out to
him?

### Principles of Optics Applied to Geodetic Observation

We have studied the phenomena of appearance in these principles of
optics, and will now proceed to make an application of them to geodetic
observation, keeping logically to the premise, never swerving from the
established law of Koreshanity; namely, that assumption is no basis for
the establishment of truth.

We subjoin the [third diagram](#img_05802.md). In this we take the lower
line of the [second diagram](#img_05801.md), A A; we observe the points A A
from the point D, but the principle of perspective or distal
foreshortening causes the objects to appear at the points B B. This is
not due to refraction, but it is due to distal foreshortening; the space
from A to K has contracted and foreshortened to the point B. This law is
operative and applies to all space whether in the atmosphere, ethereal,
or on the surface of the earth, terrestrial.

If the line A A in [diagram 3](#img_05802.md) represented a flat surface, a
convex surface, or a concave surface, the phenomenon would be
practically the same; a convexity or concavity of only eight inches to
the mile

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

would not appreciably affect the optical illusion. If the so called
scientist is asked the question, Why does the earth viewed from a
balloon look like a bowl? he will tell you it is because of atmospheric
refraction.

If the laws of refraction will operate in an atmosphere of uniform
density to distort the vision, what may we not expect regarding
phenomena related to objects claimed to be outside our atmosphere? If
the point D, in diagram 3, is two feet above the line A A, at the
distance of less than a mile the object at A on the lower line will be
seen at B, in either direction. The law is the same whether the altitude
be two feet and a half, five hundred feet, three miles, or any distance.
A less or greater altitude could not change the principle nor alter the
character of the phenomenon.

The cross-piece at P is seen at A, but *appears* to be at B, because the
standard, A P, is foreshortened down the two feet and a half. We have
thus far shown certain facts, and optical phenomena connected with these
facts. We have assumed nothing regarding the facts or the phenomena. We
have interpreted the phenomena by defining the laws upon which they
depend, and we challenge all the scientific men in the world to point
out one inaccuracy either in the facts as presented and pertaining to
the reality of the relation of the lines, or the facts of the optical
phenomena.

### Our Minor Proposition

We are now prepared to state a minor proposition. Lines or surfaces
separated by narrow or broad spaces (extended parallel with each other
and viewed in perspective) will appear to approach each other
proportionate to their distance from each other and length

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

of perspective. Let the surface of the earth be taken as one of these
surfaces, and extend a line over this surface; that is, a visual or
optical line. If we stand twenty feet above the surface of the earth and
look toward the horizon, the horizon is seen on a level with the eye.

If a roof could be extended parallel to the surface of the earth twenty
feet above our lookout (forty feet above the earth), the two surfaces
would appear to approach each other; the lower surface would seem to
*rise* to a level with the eye, and the upper surface would appear to
drop to a level with the eye;--that is, providing the two planes are
extended the necessary distance.

If we remove the upper surface or plane, the lower plane will appear to
rise to a level with the eye, just the same as when the upper plane
occupied its position. It would not be occasioned either by refraction
or convexity, but would be due to the operation of the principle of
foreshortening. How a man can observe this phenomenon and attribute it
to anything but its true cause, and call himself scientific, is one of
the enigmas of this so called enlightened age.

We have practically shown that the apparent rotundity or convexity of
the earth is due to the optical illusion created by foreshortening. When
it is assumed that the earth is convex, and in this assumption the
simplest laws of optics are set aside and ignored, shall we quietly
submit to the imposition and allow the world to continue in ignorance of
the laws of cosmogonic form, or shall we place the facts in opposition
to the assumptions as they obtain and are made to constitute the basis
of scientific conclusions?

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

If a man stands by the side of one of the rails of a railroad track, say
two feet from the rail, his line of vision will meet the rail at a point
determined by the distance in perspective. This we need only state, for
it is a well-known fact. No man will pretend to deny this, unless he be
an absolute ignoramus. Then why should anyone deny the phenomenon as
applied to the extense of any other line or plane?

If the earth were concave, eight inches to the mile, which would be a
practical level and an apparent straight plane, and we should apply the
law of optics as described, in looking along a geolinear surface the
earth would appear to rise in perspective much more rapidly than the
eight inches to the mile would indicate. If we were twenty feet above
the surface of the earth, the earth would rise to meet the line of
vision and would appear to be convex.

The scientific and honest man, before he projects a theory on the basis
of appearance, would submit the appearance to a rigid analysis; he would
prove his premise by the facts, and not ignore the most common
principles and laws of optics as applied to geodesy. Let us demonstrate
our premise, then reason logically, and we are certain of the truth. Let
us assume our premise from mere appearance and then make our theory fit
the premise, and we have just what the scientific world is attempting to
cram down the throats of the credulous and unthinking public.

### Our Sub-major Proposition

Our sub-major proposition is, that a rigid mathematical calculation,
founded upon the mathematical determination of the amount of
foreshortening of the space between any two given parallel lines or
planes

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

in perspective, when applied to the surface of the earth, will determine
the amount and direction of deviation which the surface of the earth
describes, from a line extended from the point of observation to the
vanishing point.

Let two lines be separated by a definite space, and extended parallel to
a distance sufficient to obliterate the space by distal foreshortening.
Extend these lines one mile parallel, a definite space intervening, then
apply the same distance in length with the same space to any other two
lines, and the same results would obtain. The truth of this statement is
obvious to any candid person.

If we make an observation along the side of a line which we suppose to
deviate a few inches one way or the other from a rectiline, and
calculate they difference between the definite foreshortening of the
known lines and space, and the space of the indefinite line, the
difference is the amount of deviation of the unknown line. This will
also determine its direction.

Let this principle be applied to the surface of the earth, and the
demonstration will determine whether the earth is flat, convex, or
concave; also the amount of deviation, if any, from a plane. The claim
that the earth is convex is made upon the mere appearance from optical
effects, without any consideration of the laws of foreshortening, and
the whole system of cosmogony is made to fit this absurdity.

We have pursued this argument from a known fact, and have applied a
knowledge of the laws of optics as related to these facts, to the
appearance of the surface of the earth as under the operation of these
laws. We have shown that the laws of optics prevail and operate in the
one case as in the other.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

\[paragraph continues\] We have shown that the laws of optics are
totally ignored by the "scientist" in his consideration, and that he
attributes an appearance to the application of an imaginary and
impossible operation. It is also demonstrated in this discussion, that
the principle of refraction is used as an argument by the so called
scientist, where the principle of refraction does not enter into the
proposition.

We have accounted for the appearance of rotundity on the basis of the
known principles of foreshortening in perspective, which every sensible
and conscientious man will admit to be obviously true. We have shown,
then, that if the earth were an extended plane for ten thousand miles, a
view from any altitude would give the earth the appearance of a rotund
form, in dimension proportionate to the altitude; the greater the
altitude, the larger the appearance.

We have shown what every honest "scientist" admits; namely, that the
whole system of the Copernican astronomy is predicated upon an
assumption which has no tenable foundation; therefore we are justified
in our challenge of the accuracy of the system of astronomy which now
flourishes under the title of "science." We also assure our readers that
the time has come which the eminent astronomer, Professor Woodhouse, of
Cambridge, England, feared would meet the so called astronomical
profession. He said:

"However perfect our theory may appear, in our estimation, and however
satisfactorily the Newtonian hypothesis may seem to account for all
celestial phenomena, yet we are compelled to admit the astounding truth,
that if our premise be disputed and our facts challenged, the whole
range of astronomy does not

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

contain the proofs of its own accuracy. Startling as this announcement
may appear, it is nevertheless true; and astronomy would indeed be
helpless, were it not for the implied approval of those whose authority
is considered a guarantee of its truth. Should this sole refuge fail us,
all our arguments, all our observations, all our boasted accuracy would
be useless, and the whole science of modern astronomy must fall to the
ground."

We have shown that the principles of optics have been left entirely out
of consideration in the establishment of the Copernican hypothesis, and
that therefore it is not worth one thought as constituting a basis for
cosmogonic conviction.

### The Koreshan General Proposition

We now state our general proposition: The astronomers of note admit that
the whole fabric of hypothesis called astronomy is built upon an assumed
premise of appearance. When a premise is assumed, the conclusion is
necessarily an assumption. It is easy to fit a large aggregation of
facts to any hypothesis; but this does not prove any proposition. An
"hypothesis does not rise to the rank of a well-grounded theory," and
never can so long as that hypothesis is predicated upon a premise that
is itself not proven.

The earth is of some definite form; this form is absolute, but it has
never been fixed in the mind of the thinker, for the reason that, up to
the present time, the "scientific" world is looking for some positive
proof of the earth's rotundity, its revolution on its axis, and its
orbital motion. These have never, so far, been regarded as settled
facts. Because of this uncertainty we claim the right to demand some
better reasons than have ever been adduced for the acceptance of the

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

Copernican system of astronomy, and an examination into the reasons we
have promulgated for a disavowal of present "scientific" claims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An Absolutely Indisputable Premise](cc10.md)
