[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc13)  [Next](cc15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Life Develops and Matures in a Shell, Egg, or Womb; Hence We Are Inside of It

THERE IS EXTANT a theory that the earth is flat.

The arguments employed do not necessarily prove the earth to be concave,
but they do not prove the earth flat. The earth is not necessarily flat
because it is not convex. There are ten thousand arguments at hand to
demonstrate the truth of the concave or cellular theory; and every
argument brought forward by the so called savant to prove the Copernican
theory can be as easily demolished as the one considered.

We deem it important to simply announce the broad statement that all
life develops in a shell, egg, or womb, and that the law of development
in the greater or macrocosmic order does not depart from the universal
law. All natural life develops and matures (to the point of its
liberation from environment) in the egg or womb. The earth, therefore,
is the great womb of natural development, hence we are living in a
shell.

It is one of the modern miracles that the human mind, otherwise
apparently so profound, can in its estimations ignore the law of
foreshortening in the attempt to prove the convex rotundity of the
earth, when it admits the law for all other purposes. It is as difficult
to eradicate an error and impress a truth today as at any period of the
world's history. Human

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

progress advances upon the principle that "Where ignorance is bliss,
’tis folly to be wise."

In the illustration of the railway, it was observed that two rails four
feet apart appeared to narrow down to the dimension of one rail. If the
track or railway be cut in two at the point of vanishing, or at the
point where the two rails appear as one, and all that part between the
observer and the vanishing point be removed, so that the observer looks
against the end of the two rails where they appear as one, there will be
seen no intermediate space; and from mere observation without reflection
it would be denied that two rails existed. Now let us imagine the
observer to be a great scientific (?) teacher, and that he says to
another:

"Do you see that rail yonder in the distance?"

"Yes," is the reply, "what of it?"

"That is a binary rail. I can make it look like two rails some distance
apart."

"How can you do that? I don't believe it," says the incredulous
neighbor.

"Why, just look here. I have an instrument that magnifies distant
objects, and by applying its magnifying power I can separate that into a
double object, and enable you to see two rails. This is proof that the
rail is a binary one. These binary rails are the most curious of all
rails."

Two balloons traversing space on parallel lines fifty feet apart will
reach a point where they seem to blend as one, precisely as two rails
separated by a space of four feet will seem to come together in the
distance and appear as one.

"Do you see that balloon yonder?" says the scientific (?) investigator
to his neighbor.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

"Yes," answers the neighbor.

"That is a binary balloon," continues the scientist. "A binary balloon;
what's that?"

"Why, a binary balloon is one which, when submitted to observation
through a telescope, appears as two balloons. It's a phenomenal balloon.
They are not so numerous as the single balloons, but may be seen under
favorable circumstances."

On the basis of the supposition that space is illimitable, let us
imagine two stars so far distant from the observer as to appear one,
though a million (?) miles distant from each other. The million miles of
space have seemed to vanish to the apparent contraction of the object
which appears but a minute speck in the distance. It must be remembered
that they are separated by a million miles of space.

If an elongated object could extend through that space, covering the
million miles, its diameter as large as the diameter of the two bodies,
it still could not be seen as more than the mere star point. But if it
were a million and two miles at the vanishing point, it could be seen
extending beyond, and enlarging the apparent point. The farther it
receded in the perspective, the longer it would have to be made to be
observed as a point.

### Apparent Contraction of Space

Some years ago we were in conversation with an active and thinking mind,
one familiar with the astronomical idea of the resolution of a star into
binary and multiplex forms,--which the telescope is capable of
effecting. In reply to our remark that at any distance beyond the
vanishing point of a given

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

space,--such as the four foot space between the tracks of a
railroad,--objects must be outside the four foot limit, and that the
further the distance was extended the farther apart they must be to be
seen as if at the median line between the rails, he said:

"You do not pretend to say that two trees so far apart can be seen,"
marking the position on a diagram before us, "as one tree, do you?"

"This is precisely what we do say," we answered.

If the astronomers, instead of calling two stars (which they believe to
be separated by millions of miles) a binary star, that is, a double
star, would say that the appearance of a star is the result of the
contraction of visual area, the apparent contraction of space so as to
bring two stars to be observed as one astral center, thus ceasing to put
the cart before the horse, this simple proposition would be understood
when applied to terrestrial concerns, and much confusion of mind would
be obviated.

If two stars (separated by a million miles) can be seen from a given
point of observation as one star, it follows that beyond that point two
stars of the same size, to be seen on the same line of observation, must
be farther apart; and the farther distant they are the farther apart
they must be to be observed on this given line, or, so to speak, given
level.

"But," says the inquirer, "what is the Doctor driving at? What is he
trying to prove?"

We reply, we are attempting to make the stupidity of this age awake to
the fact that a pole or a mast must be elongated in inches
proportionably to the square of the distance in miles, to maintain the
top of a succession of poles or masts on an apparent level.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

\[paragraph continues\] We are trying to awaken the mind of so called
civilization to the fact that, as an object recedes in the distance, it
appears to contract at both ends by virtue of the law of foreshortening,
and that that which is usually attributed to convexity of the earth is
really due to diminution of visual area through perspective
foreshortening. *It's all in your eye!*

### Comets Are the Production of the Relations of the Sun's Motion to the Colures

The word comet is derived or Anglicized from the Greek and Latin
*cometas*, and means hair. The comets are productions, of the relations
of the sun's motion to the colures. The colures are the two prime
meridians. The solar and lunar orbits are respectively related to these
meridians. The term colure means docktail, or the tail cut, off. The
points on the equator and at the tropics where the two prime meridians
(the colures) cross, are the principal points on the ecliptic (cutting
off) where cometic "force" is generated.

The comets are composed of cruosic "force," caused by condensation of
substance through the dissipation of the caloric substance at the
opening of the electro-magnetic circuits, which closes the conduits of
solar and lunar "energy." This cut-off substance forms itself (according
to circumstances) into lenticular shapes of various forms, such as
double convex or convexo-convex, double concave or concavo-concave,
piano-concave and piano-.convex, diverging meniscus, and converging
meniscus.

These condensations of substance into lenses through which the sun's
rays pass, sometimes cause refractions of light through them to appear
as long

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

trains, while it is nothing but the sun's diverted rays of light. They
whirl through space in a spiral, approaching nearer the sun, until they
enter the sun's vortex as one of the principal sources of solar supply.

The sun is a helix. Its motion through space--north and south, in that
complex activity which occasions the seasons--is a spiral like that of
an induction wire around the piece of steel in the induced magnet called
the helix, from *helios*, the Greek for sun. While in its passage north
and south the sun reaches its solstitial place at the tropics, its rays
extend to the spherical limit and terminate around the poles in zones or
rings of cruosic force, the motions of which are derived from the
impetus of the sun's motion in its orbit at the solstices.

These rings of aggregated physical substance whirl around the poles at a
rapid rate, and break at that point in either tropic where the sun
enters and departs from his solstitial genuflections and bearings.

They then contract in their circular longitude, and attain the
characteristic lenticular form which the relation of the break to the
motion causes the rings to assume in their longitudinal contraction into
lenses.

After breaking and contracting into lenticular form, they then start out
in the spiral motion and orbit, ultimately falling into the sun, whence
the substance was originally derived. At long intervals the same
continuation of the sun's impetus and derived "energy" produces a
corresponding ring, and another comet of the same order starts out in
the same spiral, and is regarded by the astronomers as the return of the
same comet.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

### The Lunar Function and Form

There can be no more interesting study relative to cosmogony and to
luno-anthropology than that which is offered in lunar (Unction and form.
It is the hylegiacal center which governs the principles of formulative
creation. The lunar sphere is the great menstrual reservoir and channel
of universal fluxion as pertaining both to alchemico-organic activity
and the corresponding principles in the organo-vital sphere of creation.
The moon is queen of the psychic realm, as the sun is king of the
pneumic spheres. In this aspect of their qualities, the sex functions of
moon and sun are viewed from the external or exoteric point of
observation.

As the hylegiacal center and sphere of formulative force the moon holds,
in the solutions of her menstrua, all the elements of transformation
from which the foundations of the universe are laid and its
super-structure established. She is the terminal of the seven planetary
oozings, and the final reservoir of their accumulations. The basis and
resource of her power to rebuild are the seven laminæ or beaten plates
(*rakayia*) of the firmament, rendered stable through the processes of
her depository function.

She is the final product of the action of solar substance upon the
metallic strata contiguous and superimposed one upon another, comprising
the outer rind of the crust of the earth, reflected as an energetic
menstruum and aggregated as the lunar gravo-photosphere beneath the
contiguity of the upper stratum of the oxygen of our atmosphere and the
lower circumference of the atmosphere of hydrogen above us.

The subtle and interior forces of the sun penetrate

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

the inner crust and water of the earth's surface, permeating even the
metallic strata and acting as a disintegrator to the layers of metallic
substance, reducing their surfaces of contiguity to electromagnetic and
levic substances, which proceed, as a complex solution of menstruum,
from seven metallic bases constituting so many circumferences,
formulating in the heavens--as it proceeds from these circumferences
toward the center of the cosmos--the seven planetary spheres.

The direct cause of the aggregation of the seven spheres or planets is
the conjunction of the inflowing spirit-substances, of which there are
seven qualities, with the co-ordinate seven qualities outflowing from
the solar sphere. The moon is the culminating and aggregate product of
the seven; she being the final receptacle of the seven fluxions.

### The Moon's Phases

The waxing and waning of the moon are continuations of the same
phenomena belonging to the planets. The moon is not a direct reflection
of the earth's surface against the contiguity of our present oxygen with
the hydrogen atmosphere above us, but the consecutive storage reflexions
of the various planes of metallic strata responding to the penetration
of solar "energy." We have in the moon a vague but correct outline of
the surface of the earth, implanted by a storage process and viewed by
us as a complex reflexion of the concavity of the earth. We see Europe,
Asia, Africa, North and South America, Oceanica, the waters of the
earth, etc., pictured for our inspection in outline above us.

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

### Eclipses of the Sun and Moon

One of the principal proofs adduced of the globular form of the
astronomical bodies, is the fact that in an eclipse the supposed body
passing between the one eclipsed and the sun forms a circular shadow.
This would be positive proof if there could be adduced no other or
better reason for the phenomenon. That is, if no other equally cogent
reason could be assigned, this might be taken as proof; otherwise it is
no proof.

The sun transmits its radiations in a circular form, as may be
illustrated by the appearance of the rainbow. These radiations strike or
touch the concave strata of the earth's circumference as only a
circumradiation can do, and must therefore, in a reflex action of those
emanations, return to the pivot or center of influx in a circumvergent,
as they passed out in a circumdivergent form.

Ecliptical phenomena, whatsoever may conspire to effect them, must
necessarily conform in contour, in the circumcision or cutting off, to
the circumvergent aspect of the energetic fluxion, whether afferent or
efferent in direction. If it can be determined by what processes the
circuit is closed and the current generated, it can as readily be
determined by what processes the circuit can be opened and the current
eclipsed.

### Purposes of the Ecliptic

Every phenomenon is governed by law operative for some specific purpose.
We therefore study the laws of the ecliptic with the end in view for
which they are instituted. The object of the ecliptic and the operation
of its functions are the conservation of "energy" and

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

the perpetuity of motion. "Except those days should be shortened, there
should no flesh be saved," has direct reference to the application of
the principles which govern the ecliptic in the alchemico-organic world,
as well as those which govern circumcision and the direction of its uses
as a religious rite; and the laws of conservation, operative in the
alchemico-organic, are dependent upon those operative in the
organo-vital, and are related to them as effect to cause.

### Position of the Ecliptic (Cutting Off)

The ecliptic is the line or direction of the sun's yearly course.
According to the Copernican system it is the earth's orbit around the
sun, and therefore the sun's apparent annual motion. The earth is a
shell, with its concave surface occupied. In other words, the surface we
occupy is concave instead of convex, and is comparatively stationary.
That which we call the sun is the projected focus of the occult or
hidden solar center. His motion is helical or spiral from east to west,
moving toward the south, in his gyrations, six months of the year, and
north the other six months.

The limitations of these motions are the two tropics. The sun has no
zenith point north of the tropic of Cancer, nor south of the tropic of
Capricorn. His zenith at the tropic of Cancer is June 21, and at the
tropic of Capricorn, December 21. These are called the solstices,
meaning the standing still of the sun; for at these points the sun
circles the earth without going farther north or south until making a
complete diurnal circle. June 21, the rays of the sun are vertical at
the tropic of Cancer; December 21, they are vertical at the tropic of
Capricorn.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

### Influence of the Motion of the Sun upon the Metallic Laminæ and Surface of the Sphere

In the orbit of the sun there are four prime points or centers; photoic,
scotoic, caloric, and cruosic. These four primary substances and
influences follow one another in the gyre of the solar motion. Their
action is as if there were four gyres successively following one another
in the order of photoic substance (*lumen*, light), caloric substance,
(*thermos*, heat), scotoic substance (the substance of darkness), and
cruosic substance (crystalline or frigid substance) . Four distinct
helices of "energy" are winding their course and exercising their
co-ordinate and antithetical influences upon the surfaces they touch and
the substances they penetrate, day after day, in the perpetual solar
gyre.

Suppose we take the axis, the poles of which are heat and cold; the heat
and cold points or poles being exactly opposite. The tendency of the
gyre of calorine is to perpetually expand as Helios (the sun) winds his
never-ceasing spire. Following this course, twelve hours behind,
cruosine, the freezing substance, or the substance of crystallization,
exerts its contracting force as Helios winds his way.

Here, then, we have the application of the law of pulsation, as regular
as the expansion and contraction of the heart beat in the human body,
and, from the corresponding law in the alchemico-organic domain, to that
operative in the domain of the organo-vital sphere. We are not only
enabled to observe the application of the principles of expansion and
contraction, alternately applied in solar influence through the
penetration of these solar substances, but we also find herein the law
of insulation.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

The radiation of heat is cut off in the direction of the cruosic gyre,
reflected back upon itself, and compelled to take a lengthwise
accelerated course, producing friction, and therefore the generation of
magnetic substance of the terrestrial quality, as contradistinct to that
of celestial origin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Forces and Factors Which Perpetuate Universe](cc15.md)
