[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc21)  [Next](cc23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Objections by Illogical Critics

### Observations on the Gulf of Mexico by the Koreshan Geodetic Staff

THE OBJECTION had been so often urged by illogical critics that tests
upon inland waters were not satisfactory, that it was decided that
observations be made upon the Gulf itself, the conformity of which to
the contour of the earth no sane mind will question. Against the results
of such observations, no subterfuge can be brought to bear. For this
reason also, the air line was surveyed upon the Gulf coast.

Six and one half miles lie between the points of the mainland extending
into the Gulf at Gordon's and Doctor's Passes. These points are long
sand-bars, the

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

elevation of which is equal to the high tide of the Gulf. On the point
at Doctor's Pass a large target 3½ feet square was fixed upon supports;
the top of the target was just 5 feet above low tide.

On March 2, the mounted telescope was taken to Gordon's Pass, and the
visual axis of the instrument was fixed at an elevation of 3½ feet above
low tide. At this altitude above the low tide level, all of the surface
of the target was visible, and the white line of the sandy beach lying
beneath it was distinct. No convexity was observable at this elevation.

On the morning of March 3, at a time when the Gulf was calm, the
observation was repeated. With the telescope fixed 2 feet above the
water level, the target was still visible; the same at 18 inches, and
finally by reclining at the water's edge, with the axis of the
instrument 12 inches above the water's surface, the target was still in
view.

Under the conditions of the last observation, if the water were convex
the horizon would be only 1¼ miles distant, leaving 5¼ miles of the
surface of the Gulf to decline downward,--amounting to 18 1-3 feet. As
the target was only 5 feet above the low tide water level, it would be
13 1-3 feet *below the line of vision*. After deducting nearly one
seventh of this declination to make up for the usual allowance for
refraction, 11 1-3 feet would remain as the amount of depression of the
target below a line extending through the visual axis of the telescope
over the horizon, to the distance of 5½ miles beyond the horizon. All of
these observations were repeated in the afternoon, with the same
results.

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

### Experiments on Naples Bay

A straight reach of 4½ miles was found upon the smooth waters of Naples
Bay. At the most southern extremity a target of white cloth 29x30 inches
was fixed upon an upright with cross-arms; the top of the target stood 2
feet above the high-tide mark, leaving a space of 4 or 5 inches to the
water's surface.

On March 5, at time of high tide, the Staff sailed to the farthest point
northeast from which the target could be seen with the telescope. To the
naked eye, the target was entirely invisible. The horizon seemed to
occult the lower limbs of the belt of mangrove trees constituting the
background of the view.

Over the water at the point of observation, the telescope was fixed at
an altitude of 30 inches above the water, and through it the target
stood out in bold relief. The instrument was then lowered to within 18
inches, with the same observed results. Afterward, at the height of 10
inches above the water, the *entire surface* of the target was still
visible.

Very careful observations were made and repeated with the telescope at
this altitude. The target was clear cut and well defined, and even the
space between the bottom of the target and the water was observable.
Then, to make the test absolutely satisfactory and conclusive, the
telescope was fixed upon the water's surface; with the instrument
*almost touching* the water--indeed, it could not be placed closer
without wetting the lenses--long and careful observations were made.
There could be no mistake; the entire surface of the target could be
seen, with a small dark line of the background appearing beneath it.

The terrestrial eyepiece was then exchanged for

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

the astronomical eyepiece of greater power. The target was increased in
size, and the relations of the target and the water's surface and the
background came out still more noticeably. The object glass is 3 inches
in diameter; the axis of the telescope was 2 inches above the water. On
the basis of convexity, the horizon would be but one half mile away--for
the declination for one half mile is considered to be 2 inches--leaving
4 miles of surface to decline from the horizon point, amounting to 10¾
feet. The target would have to be higher than 10¾ feet above the water
in order to be seen; as it was at an altitude of only two feet, it would
be 8¾ feet below the line of sight.

### Water's Concavity Visible

These are the most satisfactory observations thus far made by the
Geodetic Staff, because the tests were more crucial. The results were
conclusive, as they afforded an *ocular demonstration of the earth's
concavity*. A stake 2 feet in height was placed midway between the
Observing Station and the target, with cross-bar at top of stake.

With the telescope at the same altitude, the cross-bar was observed to
be a little below the top of the tar-get, with the target foreshortened
by perspective to a breadth equal to about one half the length of the
stake. With the visual axis of the telescope 2 inches above the water,
the cross-bar was seen to be in line with the top of the target.

Besides this observation, an absolutely satisfactory view was had of the
water surface itself. With the telescope placed absolutely level, the
water appeared to slope gradually upward to the center of

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

the telescopic field. With the objective end of the telescope placed a
little upward from the true level, and with the water still visible near
the objective end of the instrument, the *actual concavity of the
water*--a mid-way depression--*was clearly observable*.

This midway depression was at the point of the stake with cross-bar
midway between the point of observation and the target, from which
midway depression there was a gradual slope upward to the target. This
view was obtained by the long, terrestrial eye-piece, and also by the
astronomical eyepiece, the concavity through the latter being the more
marked. There could be no mistake as to the concave arc; the. water was
seen to be not convex; it did not appear to be a plane, but concave!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preparations for the Geodetic Survey](cc23)
