[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc32)  [Next](cc34.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

# Copernican Hypothesis in the Schools

LUCIE PAGE BORDEN

THE NOBILITY AND GRANDEUR of the Koreshan premise as it confronts the
world are apparent to those who are able to discern the need of the
hour. The discoveries of modern investigators in the field of research
have only plunged the whole body of so called "scientists" into deeper
darkness. The field of astronomical research has been ploughed, but no
results have been found to compare with the extension of an air-line to
test the contour of the earth's surface and determine in an unmistakable
manner that the famous Copernican hypothesis has been superseded by a
fact that is known.

What has been taught by the Koreshan System during the past thirty-five
years comprises actual knowledge. It does not deal with conjectures nor
find any pleasure in drawing base lines for triangulation, when the
assumption is that the earth revolves in an orbit about the sun. The
conspicuous absence of facts in the old system shows how much time is
wasted in searching the heavens, when the same amount of time put into
the investigation of the earth's shape would show that it had never been
satisfactorily tested until the Koreshan concept was put forth.

To understand the universe is the acme of human desire; for all
questions of conduct would be solved by a comprehension of how much is
involved in life. The discovery of the nineteenth century was made in
1870, when the actual proof of the Cellular Cosmogony was revealed by
the intellect that had become fitted to involve the secrets of creation.
Since that date there

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

has been nothing of much importance to herald. Of course the application
of forces or energies, frankly admitted to be an impenetrable mystery in
their essence, to the uses of life, does go forward without furnishing
any conclusive proofs to guide the world to clearer conceptions of
being. The electric light has not shown the nature of the electric
fluid.

The whole question of putting modern physics into the hands of the young
people in our schools and colleges, does not rest upon an assumption
according to the ideas of modern educators. But when the subject of
electricity is treated, it develops that nothing is known of it, *per
se*. The most that a modern instructor can do is to explain the latest
theory, prefacing his remarks perchance with the statement that nothing
is absolutely known of the matter under discussion.

Chemistry has held a very important place in the college curriculum.
Laboratories have been generously provided to facilitate the study of
what was called a science. It has had to revise all its conclusions and
to renounce its groundwork in the sight of the indestructible atom
removed; and yet, the men who study this branch are not yet willing in
more than a few cases to admit the truth of the "discarded science" of
Alchemy. They are still trying to find out what has been authoritatively
stated by Koreshanity ever since its introduction into the universe of
life.

The same fundamental errors which distinguish chemistry, prevent biology
from reaching its object. The origin of life, either primarily or
proximately, is under discussion daily, without training the mind of the
student to apprehend the facts of existence, because he is not taught to
know God, in whom is life.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The origin and destiny of man are completely
misunderstood, and so long as these points are not clear, neither ethics
nor the various branches which relate to man can make any progress.

Geology is pivoted on the idea, thoroughly inculcated by the exponents
of the Copernican hypothesis; that the earth had a beginning. How far
back that epoch should be placed is a moot point; but the educated men
of this period in the world's history think it was once bereft of the
presence of man, because no human remains are found in certain strata.

Sociology as a science taught in the best colleges is really
non-existent. The pattern for construction is wanting, because the solar
system is not understood. The principle of organic unity shown in the.
cell with its center and environing walls, must be put forward to insure
the orderly activity of society. With the fundamental error in social
construction expunged, the students might be able to grapple with the
labor question and the various branches of economics to some purpose.

Psychology is trying to ferret out the mysteries of modern spiritualism,
and is concerned with the measurement of motory and sensory impulses.
These are all necessary in their places, but the subject of the soul and
the rapport between spirit, soul, and body, are too vast in their
bearing to be put aside; yet the nature of the soul is still unknown.

Metaphysics has no conception of the beautiful truths that are brought
to light in the study of the brain under the instruction of Koreshanity,
whose Founder has shown the intricate harmonies of cell and fibre, as
used in the correlated organs of the mind.

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

The above are some of the reasons why modern education is defective in
its instructions. The theorizing of the past has been put up in labeled
packages to confuse the mind of the student. If nothing were taught
without a groundwork of facts, the mind would not be furnished with old
rubbish like an attic or lumber room. Education is the greatest possible
attainment of life. It should never be disparaged; but that text-books
should exist built upon theories and conjectures is a shame in a
progressive age.

END

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Advertisements](cc34.md)
