[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hec57)  [Next](hec59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HWRKOI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hymns of the Eastern Church*, by J.M. Neale, \[1884\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

### <span style="font-family: Lucida Blackletter, Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif; font-weight: bold;">S. Joseph of the Studium</span>

The *third period* of Greek Hymnology opens with its most voluminous
writer, S. Joseph of the Studium. A Sicilian by birth, he left his
native country on its occupation by the Mahometans in 830, and went to
Thessalonica, where he embraced the monastic life. Thence he removed to
Constantinople, but, in the second Iconoclastic persecution, he seems to
have felt no vocation for confessorship, and went to Rome. Taken by
pirates, he was for some years a slave in Crete, where he converted many
to the Faith; and having obtained his liberty, and returned to the
Imperial City, he stood high in the favour, first

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

of S. Ignatius, then of Photius, whom he accompanied into exile. On the
death of that great man he was recalled, and gave himself up entirely to
Hymnology. A legend, connected with his death, is related of him. A
citizen of Constantinople betook himself to the church of S. Theodore in
the hope of obtaining some benefit from the intercessions of that
martyr. He waited three days in vain; then, just as he was about to
leave the church in despair, S. Theodore appeared. "I," said the vision,
"and the other Saints, whom the poet Joseph has celebrated in his
Canons, have been attending his soul to Paradise: hence my absence from
my church." The Eastern Communion celebrates him on the 3rd of April.
But of the innumerable compositions of this most laborious writer, it
would be impossible to find many which, to Western taste, give the least
sanction to the position which he

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

holds in the East. The insufferable tediousness consequent on the
necessity of filling eight Odes with the praises of a Saint of whom
nothing, beyond the fact of his martyrdom, is known, and doing this
sixty or seventy different times,—the verbiage, the bombast, the
trappings with which Scriptural simplicity is *elevated* to the taste of
a corrupt Court, are each and all scarcely to be paralleled. He is by
far the most prolific of the hymn-writers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sunday of the Prodigal Son. (Septuagesima.)](hec59)
