[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hec50)  [Next](hec52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HWRKOI/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Hymns of the Eastern Church*, by J.M. Neale, \[1884\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

### CANON FOR APOCREOS.

by Theodore of the Studium

*Apocreos* is our Sexagesima, and is so called, because meat is not
eaten beyond it. The Synaxarion (which will explain the following poem)
begins thus:

"<span class="smallcaps">On this day, we commemorate the second and
impartial Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ</span>.

*Stichos*. When He, the Judge of all things, sits to doom,  
         Oh grant that I may hear his joyful Come!'

This commemoration the most Divine Fathers set after the two parables"
(*i.e.*, the Gospels of

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

the two preceding Sundays, The Pharisee and Publican, and the Prodigal
Son) "lest any one, learning from them the mercy of <span
class="smallcaps">God</span>, should live carelessly, and say, 'God is
merciful, and whenever I wish to relinquish sin, it will be in my power
to accomplish my purpose.' They therefore here commemorated that fearful
day, that, by the consideration of death, and the expectation of the
dreadful things that shall hereafter be, they might terrify men of
negligent life, and bring them back again to virtue, and might teach
them not simply to put confidence in <span
class="smallcaps">God's</span> mercy, considered by itself, but to
remember also that the Judge is just, and will render to every man
according to his works."

As the Eastern Church has no such season as Advent, this commemoration
becomes more peculiarly appropriate. The Canon that follows is
unfortunate in provoking a comparison with the unapproachable

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

majesty of the *Dies Iræ*. Yet during the four hundred years by which it
anticipated that Sequence, it was undoubtedly the grandest Judgment-hymn
of the Church. Its faults are those of most of the class: it eddies
round and round the subject, without making way,—its different portions
have no very close connexion with each other,—and its length is
accompanied by considerable tautology. Yet, in spite of these defects,
it is impossible to deny that the great common-places of Death and
Judgment are very nobly set forth in this poem. On account of its
length, I give the first three and last Odes only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon for Apocreos. Ode I](hec52.md)
