[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE LAST OF THE VOUDOOS

### by Lafcadio Hearn

from An American miscellany, vol. II, (1924)  
originally published in Harper's weekly, November 7th, 1885

In the death of Jean Montanet, at the age of nearly a hundred years, New
Orleans lost, at the end of August, the most extraordinary African
character that ever gained celebrity within her limits. Jean Montanet,
or Jean La Ficelle, or Jean Latanié, or Jean Racine, or Jean Grisgris,
or Jean Macaque, or Jean Bayou, or "Voudoo John," or "Bayou John," or
"Doctor John" might well have been termed "The Last of the Voudoos"; not
that the strange association with which he was affiliated has ceased to
exist with his death, but that he was the last really important figure
of a long line of wizards or witches whose African titles were
recognized, and who exercised an influence over the colored population.
Swarthy occultists will doubtless continue to elect their "queens" and
high-priests through years to come, but the influence of the public
school is gradually dissipating all faith in witchcraft, and no black
hierophant now remains capable of manifesting such mystic knowledge or
of inspiring such respect as Voudoo John exhibited and compelled. There
will never be another "Rose," another "Marie," much less another Jean
Bayou.

It may reasonably be doubted whether any other negro of African birth
who lived in the South had a more extraordinary career than that of Jean
Montanet. He was a native of Senegal, and claimed to have been a
prince's son, in proof of which he was wont to call attention to a
number of parallel scars on his cheek, extending in curves from the edge
of either temple to the corner of the lips. This fact seems to me partly
confirmatory of his statement, as Berenger-Feraud dwells at some length
on the fact that the Bambaras, who are probably the finest negro race in
Senegal, all wear such disfigurations. The scars are made by gashing the
cheeks during infancy, and are considered a sign of race. Three parallel
scars mark the freemen of the tribe; four distinguish their captives or
slaves. Now Jean's face had, I am told, three scars, which would prove
him a free-born Bambara, or at least a member of some free tribe allied
to the Bambaras, and living upon their territory. At all events, Jean
possessed physical characteristics answering to those by which the
French ethnologists in Senegal distinguish the Bambaras. He was of
middle height, very strongly built, with broad shoulders, well-developed
muscles, an inky black skin, retreating forehead, small bright eyes, a
very flat nose, and a woolly beard, gray only during the last few years
of his long life. He had a resonant voice and a very authoritative
manner.

At an early age he was kidnapped by Spanish slavers, who sold him at
some Spanish port, whence he was ultimately shipped to Cuba. His
West-Indian master taught him to be an excellent cook, ultimately became
attached to him, and made him a present of his freedom. Jean soon
afterward engaged on some Spanish vessel as ship's cook, and in the
exercise of this calling voyaged considerably in both hemispheres.
Finally tiring of the sea, he left his ship at New Orleans, and began
life on shore as a cotton-roller. His physical strength gave him
considerable advantage above his fellow-blacks; and his employers also
discovered that he wielded some peculiar occult influence over the
negroes, which made him valuable as an overseer or gang leader. Jean, in
short, possessed the mysterious obi power, the existence of which has
been recognized in most slave-holding communities, and with which many a
West-Indian planter has been compelled by force of circumstances to
effect a compromise. Accordingly Jean was permitted many liberties which
other blacks, although free, would never have presumed to take. Soon it
became rumored that he was a seer of no small powers, and that he could
tell the future by the marks upon bales of cotton. I have never been
able to learn the details of this queer method of telling fortunes; but
Jean became so successful in the exercise of it that thousands of
colored people flocked to him for predictions and counsel, and even
white people, moved by curiosity or by doubt, paid him to prophesy for
them. Finally he became wealthy enough to abandon the levee and purchase
a large tract of property on the Bayou Road, where he built a house. His
land extended from Prieur Street on the Bayou Road as far as Roman,
covering the greater portion of an extensive square, now well built up.
In those days it was a marshy green plain, with a few scattered
habitations.

At his new home Jean continued the practice of fortune-telling, but
combined it with the profession of creole medicine, and of arts still
more mysterious. By-and-by his reputation became so great that he was
able to demand and obtain immense fees. People of both races and both
sexes thronged to see him--many coming even from far-away creole towns
in the parishes, and well-dressed women, closely veiled, often knocked
at his door. Parties paid from ten to twenty dollars for advice, for
herb medicines, for recipes to make the hair grow, for cataplasms
supposed to possess mysterious virtues, but really made with scraps of
shoe-leather triturated into paste, for advice what ticket to buy in the
Havana Lottery, for aid to recover stolen goods, for love powers, for
counsel in family troubles, for charms by which to obtain revenge upon
an enemy. Once Jean received a fee of fifty dollars for a potion. "It
was water," he said to a creole confidant, "with some common herbs
boiled in it. I hurt nobody; but if folks want to give me fifty dollars,
I take the fifty dollars every time!" His office furniture consisted of
a table, a chair, a picture of the Virgin Mary, an elephant's tusk, some
shells which he said were African shells and enabled him to read the
future, and a pack of cards in each of which a small hole had been
burned. About his person he always carried two small bones wrapped
around with a black string, which bones he really appeared to revere as
fetiches. Wax candles were burned during his performances; and as he
bought a whole box of them every few days during "flush times," one can
imagine how large the number of his clients must have been. They poured
money into his hands so generously that he became worth at least
$50,000!

Then, indeed, did this possible son of a Bambara prince begin to live
more grandly than any black potentate of Senegal. He had his carriage
and pair, worthy of a planter, and his blooded saddle-horse, which he
rode well, attired in a gaudy Spanish costume, and seated upon an
elaborately decorated Mexican saddle. At home, where he ate and drank
only the best--scorning claret worth less than a dollar the *litre*--he
continued to find his simple furniture good enough for him; but he had
at least fifteen wives--a harem worthy of Boubakar-Segou. White folks
might have called them by a less honorific name, but Jean declared them
his legitimate spouses according to African ritual. One of the curious
features in modern slavery was the ownership of blacks by freedmen of
their own color, and these negro slave-holders were usually savage and
merciless masters. Jean was not; but it was by right of slave purchase
that he obtained most of his wives, who bore him children in great
multitude. Finally he managed to woo and win a white woman of the lowest
class, who might have been, after a fashion, the Sultana-Validé of this
Seraglio. On grand occasions Jean used to distribute largess among the
colored population of his neighborhood in the shape of food--bowls of
*gombo* or dishes of *jimbalaya*. He did it for popularity's sake in
those days, perhaps; but in after-years, during the great epidemics, he
did it for charity, even when so much reduced in circumstances that he
was himself obliged to cook the food to be given away.

But Jean's greatness did not fail to entail certain cares. He did not
know what to do with his money. He had no faith in banks, and had seen
too much of the darker side of life to have much faith in human nature.
For many years he kept his money under-ground, burying or taking it up
at night only, occasionally concealing large sums so well that he could
never find them again himself; and now, after many years, people still
believe there are treasures entombed somewhere in the neighborhood of
Prieur Street and Bayou Road. All business negotiations of a serious
character caused him much worry, and as he found many willing to take
advantage of his ignorance, he probably felt small remorse for certain
questionable actions of his own. He was notoriously bad pay, and part of
his property was seized at last to cover a debt. Then, in an evil hour,
he asked a man without scruples to teach him how to write, believing
that financial misfortunes were mostly due to ignorance of the alphabet.
After he had learned to write his name, he was innocent enough one day
to place his signature by request at the bottom of a blank sheet of
paper, and, lo! his real estate passed from his possession in some
horribly mysterious way. Still he had some money left, and made heroic
efforts to retrieve his fortunes. He bought other property, and he
invested desperately in lottery tickets. The lottery craze finally came
upon him, and had far more to do with his ultimate ruin than his losses
in the grocery, the shoemaker's shop, and other establishments into
which he had put several thousand dollars as the silent partner of
people who cheated him. He might certainly have continued to make a good
living, since people still sent for him to cure them with his herbs, or
went to see him to have their fortunes told; but all his earnings were
wasted in tempting fortune. After a score of seizures and a long
succession of evictions, he was at last obliged to seek hospitality from
some of his numerous children; and of all he had once owned nothing
remained to him but his African shells, his elephant's tusk, and the
sewing-machine table that had served him to tell fortunes and to burn
wax candles upon. Even these, I think, were attached a day or two before
his death, which occurred at the house of his daughter by the white
wife, an intelligent mulatto with many children of her own.

Jean's ideas of religion were primitive in the extreme. The conversion
of the chief tribes of Senegal to Islam occurred in recent years, and it
is probable that at the time he was captured by slavers his people were
still in a condition little above gross fetichism. If during his years
of servitude in a Catholic colony he had imbibed some notions of Romish
Christianity, it is certain at least that the Christian ideas were
always subordinated to the African--just as the image of the Virgin Mary
was used by him merely as an auxiliary fetich in his witchcraft, and was
considered as possessing much less power than the "elephant's toof." He
was in many respects a humbug; but he may have sincerely believed in the
efficacy of certain superstitious rites of his own. He stated that he
had a Master whom he was bound to obey; that he could read the will of
this Master in the twinkling of the stars; and often of clear nights the
neighbors used to watch him standing alone at some street corner staring
at the welkin, pulling his woolly beard, and talking in an unknown
language to some imaginary being. Whenever Jean indulged in this freak,
people knew that he needed money badly, and would probably try to borrow
a dollar or two from some one in the vicinity next day.

Testimony to his remarkable skill in the use of herbs could be gathered
from nearly every one now living who became well acquainted with him.
During the epidemic of 1878, which uprooted the old belief in the total
immunity of negroes and colored people from yellow fever, two of Jean's
children were "taken down." "I have no money," he said, "but I can cure
my children," which he proceeded to do with the aid of some weeds
plucked from the edge of the Prieur Street gutters. One of the herbs, I
am told, was what our creoles call the "parasol." "The children were
playing on the *banquette* next day," said my informant.

Montanet, even in the most unlucky part of his career, retained the
superstitious reverence of colored people in all parts of the city. When
he made his appearance even on the American side of Canal Street to
doctor some sick person, there was always much subdued excitement among
the colored folks, who whispered and stared a great deal, but were
careful not to raise their voices when they said, "Dar's Hoodoo John!"
That an unlettered African slave should have been able to achieve what
Jean Bayou achieved in a civilized city, and to earn the wealth and the
reputation that he enjoyed during many years of his life, might be cited
as a singular evidence of modern popular credulity, but it is also proof
that Jean was not an ordinary man in point of natural intelligence.

(End.)
