[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Paganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twp05)  [Next](twp07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

# IV. THE WITCH-PERSECUTION AT BONN.

An undated letter <span id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21) from the pastor
(Duren) of the village of Alfter, near Bonn, to Count Werner of Salm
thus describes the persecution in that city:

Those burned are mostly male witches of the sort described. There must
be half the city implicated: for already professors, law-students,
pastors, canons, vicars, and monks have here been arrested and burned.
His Princely Grace has seventy wards <span id="fr_22"></span>[3](#fn_22)
who are to become pastors, one of whom, eminent as a musician, was
yesterday arrested; two others were sought for, but have fled. The
Chancellor and his wife and the

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

Private Secretary's wife are already executed. On the eve of Out Lady's
Day there was executed here a maiden of nineteen who bore the name of
being the fairest and the most blameless of all the city, and who from
her childhood had been brought up by the Bishop himself A canon of the
cathedral, named Rotenhahn, I saw beheaded and burned. Children of three
or four years have devils for their paramours. Students and boys of
noble birth, of nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen years,
have here been burned. In fine, things are in such a pitiful state that
one does not know with what people one may talk and associate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[18:1](twp05.htm#fr_20) Johann Weyer was a
German physician, who in 1563 put forth a book attacking the
witch-persecution. Loos had been influenced by this and was looked on as
Weyer's disciple.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[18:2](twp06.htm#fr_21) At least, the date of
the letter is not given by W. v. Waldbrühl, who prints from it this
extract in his *Naturforschung* and *Hexenglaube*, (Berlin, 1867). He
says only that it had shortly before been found in the Salm archives. It
belongs, doubtless, to the early seventeenth century. Bonn, not then a
university town, was the official residence of the Prince-Archbishops of
Cologne.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[18:3](twp06.htm#fr_22) Boys to be trained for
priests in his seminary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Witch-Persecution in Scotland.](twp07)
