[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Paganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twp06)  [Next](twp08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

# V. THE WITCH-PERSECUTION IN SCOTLAND.

From the contemporary pamphlet *Newes from Scotland*, 1591, as reprinted
in Pitcairn's *Criminal Trials in Scotland*, vol. 1, pt. 2, pp. 215-223.
English.

Within the towne of Trenent, in the kingdome of Scotland, there dwelleth
one David Seaton, who, being deputie bailiffe in the said towne, had a
maid called Geillis Duncane, who used secretlie to absent and lie forth
of hir maister's house every other night: This Geillis Duncane tooke in
hand to helpe all such as were troubled or grieved with anie kinde of
sicknes or infirmitie, and in short space did perfourme many matters
most miraculous; which things, for asmuche as she began to do them upon
a sodaine, having never done the like before, made her maister and
others to be in great admiration, and wondered thereat: by means
whereof, the saide Davide Seaton had his maide in great suspition that
shee did not those things by naturall and lawful waies, but rather
supposed it to bee done by some extraordinarie and unlawfull meanes.
Whereupon, her maister began to grow verie inquisitive, and examined hir
which way and by what means shee was able to performe matters of so
great importance; whereat shee gave him no aunswere: nevertheless, her
maister, to the intent that hee might the better trie and finde out the
truth of the same, did with the help of others torment her with the
torture of the pilliwinkes <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) upon her
fingers, which is a grievous torture; and binding or wrinching her head
with a cord or roape, which is a most cruell torment also; yet would she
not confess anie thing; whereuppon, they suspecting that she had beene
marked by the Devill (as commonly witches are), made diligent search
about her,

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

and found the enemies mark to be in her fore crag, or fore part of her
throate; which being found, she confessed that al her doings was done by
the wicked allurements and entisements of the Devil, and that she did
them by witchcraft. After this her confession, she was committed to
prison, where shee continued a season, where immediately shee accused
these persons following to bee notorious witches, and caused them
forthwith to be apprehended, one after another, viz. Agnes Sampson the
eldest witche of them all, dwelling in Haddington; Agnes Tompson of
Edenbrough <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24); Doctor Fian alias John
Cuningham, master of the schoole at Saltpans in Lowthian, of whose life
and strange acts you shal heare more largely in the end of this
discourse. These were by the saide Geillis Duncane accused, as also
George Motts wife, dwelling in Lowthian; Robert Grierson, skipper; and
Jannet Blandilands; with the potter's wife of Seaton: the smith at the
Brigge Hallis, with innumerable others in those parts, and dwelling in
those bounds aforesaid; of whom some are alreadie executed, the rest
remaine in prison to receive the doome of judgment at the Kinges
Majesties will and pleasure.

The saide Geillis Duncane also caused Ewphame Mecalrean to bee
apprehended, who conspired and performed the death of her godfather, and
who used her art upon a gentleman, being one of the Lordes and Justices
of the Session, for bearing good will to her daughter. Shee also caused
to be apprehended one Barbara Naper, for bewitching to death Archibalde
lait Earle of Angus, who languished to death by witchcraft, and yet the
same was not suspected; but that bee died of so straunge a disease as
the Phisition knewe not how to cure or remedie the same. But of all
other the said witches, these two last before recited, were reputed for
as civill honest women as anie that dwelled within the cittie of
Edenbrough, before they were apprehended. Many other besides were taken
dwelling in Lieth, <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25) who are detayned
in prison untill his Majesties further will and pleasure be knowne . . .
. <span id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_26)

As touching the aforesaide Doctor Fian alias John Cunningham, the
examination of his actes since his apprehension, declareth the great
subteltie of the Divell, and therefore maketh thinges to appeare the
more miraculous; for beeing apprehended by the accusation of the saide
Geillis

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

Duncane aforesaide, who confessed he was their Regester, and that there
was not one man suffered to come to the Divels readinges but onely hee:
the saide Doctor was taken and imprisoned, and used with the accustomed
paine provided for those offences, inflicted upon the rest, as is
aforsaide. First, By thrawing of his head with a rope, whereat be would
confesse nothing. Secondly, Hee was perswaded by faire meanes to
confesse his follies, but that would prevaile as little. Lastly, Hee was
put to the most severe and cruell paine in the worlde, called the
bootes; <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) who after he had received
three strokes, being inquired if he would confesse his damnable actes
and wicked life, his toong would not serve him to speake; in respect
whereof the rest of the witches willed to searche his toong, under which
was founde two pinnes, thrust up into the heade; whereupon the witches
did say, Now is the charme stinted; and shrewed, that those charmed
pinnes were the cause he could not confesse any thing: Then was he
immediately released of the bootes, brought before the King, <span
id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) his confession was taken, and his own hand
willingly set thereunto. . . .  <span id="fr_29"></span>[3](#fn_29)

Thus, all the daie, this Doctor Fian continued very solitarie, and
seemed to have a care of his owne soule, and would call uppon God,
shewing himselfe penitent for his wicked life; nevertheless, the same
night, hee found such meanes that he stole the key of the prison doore
and chamber in which he was, which in the night bee opened and fled

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

awaie to the Saltpans, where hee was alwayes resident, and first
apprehended. Of whose sodaine departure, when the Kings Majestie had
intelligence, hee presently commanded diligent inquirie to bee made for
his apprehension; and for the better effecting thereof, hee sent publike
proclamations into all partes of his lande to the same effect. By
meanes, of whose hot and harde pursuite he was agayn taken, and brought
to prison; and then, being called before the Kings Highnes, hee was
re-examined, as well touching his departure, as also touching all that
had before happened. But this Doctor, notwithstanding that his owne
confession appeareth, remaining in recorde under his owne hande
writting, and the same thereunto fixed in the presence of the Kings
Majestic and sundrie of his Councell, yet did he utterly denie the same.

Whereupon the Kings Majestie, perceiving his stubborne willfulnesse,
conceived and imagined, that in the time of his absence, hee had entered
into newe conference and league with the Devill his maister; and that
bee had beene again newly marked, for the which he was narrowly
searched; but it coulde not in anie waie be founde; yet for more tryall
of him, to make him confesse, bee was commaunded to have a most strange
torment, which was done in this manner following. His nailes upon all
his fingers were riven and pulled off with an instrument called in
Scottish a Turkas, which in England wee call a payre of pincers, and
under every nayle there was thrust in two needels over even up to the
heads. At all which torments notwithstanding, the Doctor never shronke
anie whit; neither woulde he then confesse it the sooner, for all the
tortures inflicted upon him. Then was hee, with all convenient speede,
by commandement, convaied againe to the torment of the bootes, wherein
hee continued a long time, and did abide so many blowes in them, that
his legges were crusht and beaten together as small as might be; and the
bones and flesh so brused, that the blond and marrow spouted forth in
great abundance; whereby, they were made unserviceable for ever. And
notwithstanding all these grievous paines and cruell torments, he would
not confesse anie things; so deeply had the Devill entered into his
heart, that bee utterly denied all that which he before avouched; and
would saie nothing thereunto, but this, that what hee had done and sayde
before, was onely done and sayde, for fear of paynes which he had
endured.

Upon great consideration, therefore, taken by the Kings Majestie and his
Councell, as well for the due execution of justice uppon such detestable
malefactors, as also for example sake, to remayne a terrour

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

to all others heerafter, that shall attempt to deale in the lyke wicked
and ungodlye actions as witchcraft, sorcerie, conjuration, and such
lyke; the saide Doctor Fian was soon after arraigned, condemned and
adjudged by the law to die, and then to be burned according to the lawe
of that lande provided in that behalfe. Whereupon hee was put into a
carte, and beeing first strangled, bee was immediately put into a great
fire, being readie provided for that purpose, and there burned in the
Castle Hill of Edenbrough, on a Saterdaie, in the ende of Januarie last
past, 1591.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[19:1](twp07.htm#fr_23) An instrument of torture
similar to the thumbscrews later in use.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[20:1](twp07.htm#fr_24) Edinburgh.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[20:2](twp07.htm#fr_25) Leith.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[20:3](twp07.htm#fr_26) Then follows an account
of the torture and confession of Agnes Sampson.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[21:1](twp07.htm#fr_27) "The boots, or
*bootikins*," says Pitcairn in his note on this passage, "were chiefly
made use of in extreme cases, such as High Treason, Witchcraft, etc.
This horrid instrument extended from the ankles to the knee, and at each
stroke of a large hammer (which forced the wedges closer), the question
was repeated. In many instances, the bones and flesh of the leg were
crushed and lacerated in a shocking manner before confession was made."

<span id="fn_28"></span>[21:2](twp07.htm#fr_28) The personal interest
taken in these trials by King James is explained by the fact that one of
the crimes which the witches were made to confess was that they had gone
to sea in sieves and there raised the contrary wind which distressed His
Majesty's ship on his return from Denmark, whither he had gone to fetch
his bride. It was, perhaps, the experience thus gained in the
persecution which impelled King James later to compose a book on
witchcraft (*Daemonologie*, Edinburgh, 1597); and which led him, on his
ascent of the English throne in 1603, not only to bring out at London a
fresh edition of this treatise, but to inspire a new and sterner English
statute against the witches. Under this statute of James was carried on
the later witch-persecution in England; and it formed a basis for that
in the colonies.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[21:3](twp07.htm#fr_29) Then follows a summary
of his confession and an account of his commission to a solitary cell.
What is next printed above is alleged to have happened on the morrow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. The Witch-Persecution at Bamberg.](twp08)
