<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gpu05)  [Next](gpu07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16PNW/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Garuda Purana*, by Ernest Wood and S.V. Subrahmanyam, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

#### An Account of the Kinds of Sins which lead to Hell.

1\. Garuḍa said: For what sins do they go on that great Way? Why do they
fall into the Vaitaraṇī? Why do they go to hell? Tell me this, O Keśava.

2\. The Blessed Lord said: 'Those who always delight in wrong deeds, who
turn away from good deeds, go from hell to hell, from misery to misery,
from fear to fear.

3\. The righteous go into the city of the King of Justice by three
gateways, but the sinful go into it only by the road of the southern
gate.

4\. The Vaitaraṇī River is only on this very miserable way. I will tell
you who the sinners are who go by it.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

5-12. Slayers of Brāhmiṇs, drinkers of intoxicants, slayers of owe,
infanticides, murderers of women, destroyers of the embryo, and those
who commit secret sins,

Those who steal the wealth of the teacher, the property of the temple or
of the twice-born; those who take away the possessions of women, and
those who steal the possessions of children;

Those who do not repay their debts; those who misappropriate deposits;
those who betray confidence; and those who kill with poisonous foods;

Those who seize upon the fault and depreciate the merit, who are jealous
of those who have merit, who are attached to the wicked, who are
foolish, who turn away from the company of the good;

Those who despise places of pilgrimage, good men, good actions, teachers
and Shining Ones; those who disparage the Purāṇas, the Vedas, the
Mīmāṁsā, the Nyāya and the Vedānta;

Those who are elated at seeing the miserable, who try to make the happy
wretched, who speak evil words, and are always evil-minded;

Those who do not listen to good counsel nor even to the word of the
Śāstras, who are self-satisfied, who are unbending, who are foolish, who
thinks themselves learned;--

These, and many others, very sinful, devoid of righteousness, certainly
go on the Way of Yama, weeping day and night.

13\. Beaten by the messengers of Yama, they go towards the Vaitaraṇī. I
will tell you what sinners fall into it.

14\. Those who dishonour their mothers, fathers, teachers and preceptors
and the reverend,--these men sink in it.

15\. Those who wickedly abandon their wives, faithful, of good
qualities, of noble birth, and modest, fall into the Vaitaraṇī.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

16\. Those who ascribe evil to the good, possessed of thousands of
merits, and treat them disrespectfully, fall into the Vaitaraṇī.

17\. Who does not fulfil promises made to Brāhmiṇs, and who, having
called them, says, 'There is nothing for you,'--of these two the stay is
continued.

18-24. Who takes away what he gave; who repents of his gifts: who takes
away another's livelihood; who hinders others making gifts;

Who obstructs sacrifices; who prevents the telling of stories; who
removes field-boundaries; who ploughs up pastures;

The Brāhmiṇ who sells liquors, and consorts with a lowcaste woman; who
kills animals for his own gratification, not for the prescribed
sacrifices of the Vedas;

Who has put aside his Brāhmaṇic duties; who eats flesh and drinks
liquor; who is of unbridled nature; who does not study the Śāstras;

The Śūdra who studies the letter of the Vedas, who drinks the milk of
the tawny cow, who wears the sacred thread or consorts with Brāhmiṇ
women;

Who covets the King's wife; who abducts others' wives, who is lustful
towards virgins, and who slanders virtuous women;--

These, and many other fools, fond of treading forbidden paths, anal
abandoning prescribed ditties, fall into the Vaitaraṇī.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

23\. Having come all along the path the sinful reach the abode of Yama,
and having come, by command of Yama, the messengers hurl them into that
river again.

26\. O King of Birds, they then hurl those sinners into the Vaitaraṇī,
which is the foremost among hells.

27\. Who did not make gifts of black cows, nor perform the ceremonies
for those who are in the upper body; having suffered great misery in it,
go to the tree standing on its bank.

28-30. Who give false witness; who perform false duties; who earn by
cheating, and who gain a livelihood by thieving;

Who cut down and destroy big trees, gardens and forests; who neglect
vows and pilgrimages, who destroy the chastity of widows;

The woman who despises her husband and thinks about another,--such and
others at the silk-cotton tree experience much beating.

31\. Those who fall down, through being beaten, the messengers cast into
hells. I will tell you about the sinful who fall into them.

32\. Deniers, those who break the laws of morality, the avaricious,
those attached to sense-objects, hypocrites, the ungrateful,--these
certainly go to hell.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

33\. Those who destroy wells, tanks, ponds, shrines, or people's
houses,--these certainly go to hell.

34\. Those who eat, having neglected their wives, children, servants and
teachers, and having neglected the offerings to the forefathers and the
Shining Ones,--these certainly go to hell.

35\. Those who obstruct roads with posts, with mounds, with timber, with
stones or with thorns,--these certainly go to hell.

36\. Those who, self-indulgent, do not worship Śiva, Śivā, Hari, Sūrya,
Gaṇeśa, the wise, and the good teachers,--these certainly go to hell.

37-38. The Brāhmaṇi who places a harlot on his bed, goes to a low
condition; begetting offspring of a Śudra woman, he is certainly
degraded from the Brāhmiṇ rank:

That wretched twice-born is not worthy of salutation at any time; those
fools who worship him certainly go to hell.

39\. Those who are fond of quarrels, do not give up causing dissension
among Brāhmaṇs and cow-fights but delight in them,--they certainly go to
hell.

40\. Those who, through malignity, commit transgression at the time of
conception, with women who have no other refuge,---these certainly go to
hell.

41\. Those men who, blinded by passion, consort with women in the
monthly courses, on the four days of lunar change, in the day time, in
water, on Śrāddha occasions, these certainly go to hell.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

42\. Those who throw their bodily refuse into fire, into water, in a
garden, in a road, or in a cowpen,--these certainly go to hell.

43\. Those who are makers of swords, and of bows and arrows, and those
who are sellers of them,--these certainly go to hell.

44\. Vaiśyas who are dealers in skins; women who sell their hair; these
who sell poisons;--all these certainly go to hell.

45\. Those who do not compassionate the helpless, who hate the good, who
punish the guiltless;--these certainly go to hell.

46\. Those who do not feed the Brāhmaṇ guests, who have come full of
hope to the house, even though food is cooked;--these certainly go to
hell.

47\. Those who are suspicious of all creatures, and who are cruel to
them, those who deceive all creatures;--these certainly go to hell.

48\. Those who assume observances, and afterwards, with senses
uncontrolled, cast them away again,--these certainly go to hell.

49\. Those who do not respect the teacher who imparts the knowledge of
the Supreme Self, and the tellers of the Purāṇas,--these certainly go to
hell.

50\. Those who betray their friends; those who cut short friendship; and
those who destroy hopes;--these certainly go to hell.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

51\. He who interferes with marriage, processions of the Shining
Ones, <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_53.md) or bands of pilgrims, dwells
in a dreadful hell from which there is no return.

52\. The very sinful man who sets fire to a house, a village or a wood,
is captured by the messengers of Yama and baked in pits of fire.

53\. When his limbs are burnt with fire, he begs for a shady place, and
then is led by the messengers into the forest of sword-like leaves.

54\. When his limbs are cut by its leaves, sharp as swords, then they
say, 'Ah, ha! Sleep comfortably in this cool shade!'

55\. When, afflicted with thirst, he begs for water to drink, then the
messengers give him boiling oil to drink.

56\. Then they say: 'Drink this liquid and eat this food.' As soon as he
drinks it he falls down, burning inside.

57\. Getting up again somehow, he wails piteously. Powerless and
breathless he is unable even to speak.

58\. Thus, it is declared, O Tārkṣya, that there are many torments for
the sinful. Why should I explain them fully, when they are spoken of in
all the Śāstras?

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

59\. Being tortured thus, men and women by thousands are baked in
dreadful hells until the coming of the deluge.

60-62. Having eaten there their undecaying fruits they are born again.
By order of Yama they return to the earth and become unmoving and other
creatures:

Trees, bushes, plants, creepers, rocks and grasses, these are spoken of
as unmoving; enveloped in great delusion,--

Insects, birds, animals and fish;--it is said that there are eighty-four
hundred thousands of fates of birth-fates.

63\. All these evolve thence into the human condition; having come back
from hell they are born in the human kingdom amongst low outcastes, and
even there, by the stains of sin, become very miserable.

64\. Thus they become men and women oozing with leprosy, born blind,
infested with grievous maladies, and bearing the marks of sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[36:1](gpu06.htm#fr_54.md) The images are carried
round the streets on occasions.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. An Account of the Signs of Sins](gpu07.md)

</div>
