<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gpu04)  [Next](gpu06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16PNW/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Garuda Purana*, by Ernest Wood and S.V. Subrahmanyam, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### CHAPTER III.

#### An Account of the Torments of Yama.

1\. Garuḍa said: What are the torments like that the sinful suffers,
having passed along the way of Yama into the abode of Yama? Tell me
this, O Keśava.

2\. The Blessed Lord said: Listen, O Descendant of Vinatā. I will tell
it to you from the beginning to the end. Even at the description of hell
you will tremble.

3\. Four and forty yojanas, O Kāśyapa, beyond the city of Bahubhīti,
lies the great city of the King of Justice.

4-5. The sinful man cries when he hears the mingled wails of 'Oh, Oh,'
and having heard his cry, those who walk about in the city of Yama.

All go to the door-keeper and report it to him. The doorkeeper
Dharmadhwaja, always stands there.

6\. He, having gone to Chitragupta, <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_28)
reports the good and evil deeds. Then Chitragupta tells it to the King
of Justice.

7\. The men who are Deniers, O Tārkshya, and always delight in great
sin; these are all, as is proper, well-known to the King of Justice.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

8\. [Nevertheless](errata.htm#2), he asks Chitragupta about their sins.
Chitragupta, although he is all-knowing, enquires of the Śravaṇas <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_29).

9\. The Śravaṇas are the sons of Brāhmaṇ who wander in heaven, on earth,
and in the nether regions, hear and understand at a distance, and see a
long way off.

10\. Their wives have a similar nature, and are called, distinctively,
Sravanīs. They know accurately all that is done by women.

11\. These report to Chitragupta everything that is said and done,
openly and secretly, by men.

12\. These followers of the King of Justice know accurately all the
virtues and vices of mankind, and the karma born of mind, speech and
body.

13\. Such is the power of these, who have authority over mortals and
immortals. Thus do these truth-speaking Śravaṇas relate the actions of
man.

14\. To the man who pleases them by austerity, charity and truthful
speech, they become benevolent, granting heaven and liberation.

15\. Knowing the wicked actions of the sinful, those truth-speakers,
relating them before the King of Justice, become dispensers of misery.

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

16\. The sun and moon, fire, wind, sky, earth and water, the heart.
Yama, day and night, the two twilights, and Justice--know the actions of
man.

17 The King of Justice, Chitragupta, Śravaṇas, the sun
[and](errata.htm#3) others see fully the sins and merits of the embodied
being.

18\. Then Yama, having assured himself concerning the sins of the
sinful, summons them and shows them his own very terrible form.

19-21. Very sinful people behold the terrifying form of Yama--huge of
body, rod in hand, seated on a buffalo,

Roaring like a cloud at the time of pralaya, like a mountain of
lampblack, terrible with weapons gleaming like lightning, possessing
thirty-two arms,

Extending three yojanas, with eyes like wells, with mouth gaping with
formidable fangs, with red eyes and a long nose.

22\. Even Chitragupta is fearful, attended by Death, Fever and others.
Near to him are all the messengers, resembling Yama, roaring.

23\. Having seen him, the wretch, overcome with fear, cries 'Oh, Oh.'
The sinful soul who made no gifts trembles and cries again.

24\. Then, by command of Yama, Chitragupta speaks to all those sinners,
who are crying, and bewailing their karmas.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

25\. 'O, you sinners, evil-doers, polluted with egoism, injudicious, why
ever did you commit sin?

26\. 'O, you foolish people, why ever did you commit that misery-giving
sin which is born of lust, anger and association with the sinful.

27 'Hitherto you have committed sins with great delight, and thereby are
now destined for torment. It is no use turning your faces away.

28\. 'The sinful actions done by you are very many, and those sins are
the cause of unavoidable misery.

29\. 'It is known that Yama deals equally with the fool and the learned,
the [beggar](errata.htm#4) and the wealthy, the strong and the weak.'

30\. Hearing these words of Chitragupta, the sinful then grieve over
their karmas, and remain silent and motionless.

31\. The King of Justice, seeing them standing motionless like thieves,
has fitting punishment ordered for the sinful.

32\. Then the cruel messengers, having beaten them, say, 'Go along, you
sinner, to the very dreadful terrifying hells.'

33\. The messengers, Prachaṇḍa, Chaṇḍaka <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_30) and others, executors of the sentences of
Yama, having bound them with one noose, lead them towards the hells.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

34\. There is one big tree there, glowing like a blazing fire. It covers
five yojanas and is one yojana in height.

35\. Having bound them on the tree by chains, head downwards, they beat
them. They, for whom there is no rescuer, cry, burning there.

36\. Many sinful ones are hung on that silk-cotton tree, exhausted by
hunger and thirst, and beaten by the messengers of Yama.

37\. 'Oh, forgive my faults'--with suppliant hands, those most. sinful
people, helpless, implore the messengers.

31\. Again and again they are forcibly struck, by the messengers, with
metal rods, with hammers, with iron clubs, with spears, with maces and
with big pestles.

39-40. Thus beaten they become still, swooning away. Then, seeing them
quiet, the servants address them thus:

'O, you sinners, you evildoers, [why ever](errata.htm#5) did you commit
such wicked deeds? You did not even make the easy water and food
offerings at all.

41\. 'You did not give even halt a mouthful of food to the dog or the
crows, nor honour your guests, nor make the water-offering to the
forefathers.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

42\. You did not meditate well upon Yama and Chitragupta, nor repeat
their mantra, along with which torment cannot exist.

43\. You never visited any places of pilgrimage, nor worshipped the
deities. Though living as a householder you did not even express
compassion.

44\. 'You did not do any acts of service. Suffer the fruits of your own
sin! Because you are devoid of righteousness you deserve to be beaten.

45\. 'Forgiveness of faults is done by the Lord Hari <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_31) Īśwara. We only punish miscreants, as we
are ordered.'

46\. Thus having spoken the messengers heat them mercilessly; and on
account of the beating they fall down like glowing charcoal.

47\. In falling their limbs are cut by the sharp leaves, and they cry,
fallen down and bitten by dogs.

48\. Then the mouths of those who are crying are filled with dust by the
messengers; and, being bound with various nooses some are beaten with
hammers.

49\. Some of the sinful are cut with saws, like firewood, and others
thrown flat on the ground, are chopped into pieces with axes.

50\. Some, their bodies half-buried in a pit, are pierced in the head
with arrows. Others, fixed in the middle of a machine, are squeezed like
sugar-cane.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

51\. Some are surrounded closely with blazing charcoal, enwrapped with
torches, and smelted like a lump of ore.

52\. Some are plunged into heated butter, and others into heated oil,
and like a cake thrown into the frying-pan they are turned about.

53\. Some are thrown in the way, in front of huge maddened elephants,
and some with hands and feet bound are placed head downwards.

54\. Some are thrown into wells; some are hurled from heights; others
plunged into pits full of worms, are eaten away by them.

55\. By the hard beaks of huge flesh-eating crows and vultures they are
pecked in the head, eyes and faces.

56\. Others clamour: 'Give up, give up my wealth, which you owe me. In
the world of Yama I see my wealth being enjoyed by you.'

57\. Thus disputing, the sinful, in the hell-region, are given pieces of
flesh torn off with pincers by the messengers.

58\. Thus quarrelling, they are taken hold of by the messengers, by
order of Yama, and thrown into the dreadful hells, Tāmisra and others,

59\. Hells full of great misery are there,--near to the tree,--in which
there is great misery indescribable in words.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

60\. There are eighty-four lakhs of hells, O Bird, the midst of which
are twenty-one most dreadful of the dreadful.

61-64. Tāmisra, <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_32) Lohaśaṇku, <span
id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_33) Maharauravaśālmalī, <span
id="fr_35"></span>[3](#fn_34) Raurava, <span
id="fr_36"></span>[4](#fn_35) Kuḍmala, <span
id="fr_37"></span>[5](#fn_36) Kālasūtraka, <span
id="fr_38"></span>[6](#fn_37) Pūtimṛittika, <span
id="fr_39"></span>[7](#fn_38)

Saṅghāta, <span id="fr_40"></span>[8](#fn_39) Lohitoda, <span
id="fr_41"></span>[9](#fn_40) Saviṣa, <span
id="fr_42"></span>[10](#fn_41) Sampratāpana, <span
id="fr_43"></span>[11](#fn_42) Mahāniraya, <span
id="fr_44"></span>[12](#fn_43) Kāka, <span
id="fr_45"></span>[13](#fn_44) Ūlu, <span id="fr_46"></span>[14](#fn_45)
Sanjīvana, <span id="fr_47"></span>[15](#fn_46) Mahāpathin, <span
id="fr_48"></span>[16](#fn_47)

Avīchi, <span id="fr_49"></span>[17](#fn_48) Andhatāmisra, <span
id="fr_50"></span>[18](#fn_49) Kumbhīpāka, <span
id="fr_51"></span>[19](#fn_50) Sampratāpana, <span
id="fr_52"></span>[20](#fn_51) and Tapana, <span
id="fr_53"></span>[21](#fn_52)--in all twenty-one,

All formed of various afflictions and diseases of different classes, the
various fruits of sin, and inhabited by multitudes of servants.

65\. The sinful fools, devoid of righteousness, Who have fallen into
these, experience there, until the end of the age, the various torments
of hell.

66\. Men and women suffer the torments of Tāmisra, Andhatāmisra, Raurava
and other hells, which are produced by secret association.

67\. Thus he who was holding a family or gratifying his belly, having
given up both, and being departed, obtains appropriate fruit.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

68\. Having cast off his body, which was nourished at the expense of
other creatures, he goes alone to hell, provisioned with the opposite of
happiness.

69\. The man experiences in a foul hell what is ordained by his fate,
like an invalid who has been robbed of his wealth, the support of his
family.

70: The individual, who was fond of supporting his family by unrighteous
means alone, goes to Andhatāmisra, which is the place of uttermost
darkness.

71\. Having experienced in due order the torments below, he comes here
again, purified.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[21:1](gpu05.htm#fr_29) Name of the being who
records the doings of men.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[22:1](gpu05.htm#fr_30) *Lit*. Listeners.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[24:1](gpu05.htm#fr_31) Both names mean fierce
or violent.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[26:1](gpu05.htm#fr_32) *Lit*. He who takes away
(sins).

<span id="fn_32"></span>[28:1](gpu05.htm#fr_33) Darkness.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[28:2](gpu05.htm#fr_34) Iron spears.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[28:3](gpu05.htm#fr_35) Very terrible
silk-cotton tree.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[28:4](gpu05.htm#fr_36) Terrible.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[28:5](gpu05.htm#fr_37) Blossoming.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[28:6](gpu05.htm#fr_38) The thread of death.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[28:7](gpu05.htm#fr_39) Stinking clay.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[28:8](gpu05.htm#fr_40) Accumulation.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[28:9](gpu05.htm#fr_41) Iron weights.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[28:10](gpu05.htm#fr_42) Poisonous.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[28:11](gpu05.htm#fr_43) Burning.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[28:12](gpu05.htm#fr_44) The great exit.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[28:13](gpu05.htm#fr_45) Crows.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[28:14](gpu05.htm#fr_46) Owls.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[28:15](gpu05.htm#fr_47) Living together.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[28:16](gpu05.htm#fr_48) The great path.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[28:17](gpu05.htm#fr_49) Waveless.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[28:18](gpu05.htm#fr_50) Besetting darkness,

<span id="fn_50"></span>[28:19](gpu05.htm#fr_51) Based like a pot.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[28:20](gpu05.htm#fr_52) Burning.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[28:21](gpu05.htm#fr_53) Hot.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. An Account of the Kinds of Sins which lead to
Hell](gpu06)

</div>
