<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gpu07)  [Next](gpu09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16PNW/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Garuda Purana*, by Ernest Wood and S.V. Subrahmanyam, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

#### The Miseries of Birth of the Sinful.

1\. Garuḍa said:--Tell me, O Keśava, how he who returns from hells is
formed in the womb of the mother, and what miseries he suffers in the
embryonic condition.

2\. Viṣṇu said: I will tell you how the mortal is born when the male and
female elements are bound together by the union of man and woman.

3\. In the middle of the menstruation period, in the three days on which
Indra incurs the sin of Brāmicide, the body of the sinful begins to
form.

4\. The mother of one returning from hell is regarded on the first day
as an outcaste woman, on the second as the murderer of a Brāhmiṇ, and on
the third as a washerwoman.

5\. The creature, in obtaining a body, according to karma, the divine
eye, enters the womb of a woman, which is the receptacle of a man's
seed.

6\. In one night it becomes a lump; by the fifth night round; by the
tenth day like the fruit of the jujube tree, <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_58.md) and after that an egg of flesh.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

7-8. By the first month the head, by the second the arms and other parts
of the body are formed; by the third occurs the formation of nails,
hair, bones, skin, linga and other cavities;

By the fourth the seven bodily fluids; by the fifth hunger and thirst
arise; by the sixth, enveloped by the chorion, it moves to the left of
the womb.

9\. The bodily substances are formed of the foods and liquids of the
mother, and the creature at the time of birth lies in the disgusting
hollow of the loins, amid fœces and urine.

10\. All its limbs bitten constantly by hungry worms, it swoons away
repeatedly through excessive pain, as they are very tender.

11\. Thus enveloped by the womb and bound outside by the sinews, it
feels pain all over its body, caused by the mother's eating many
things--pungent, bitter, hot, salt, sour and acid.

12\. With its head placed in its belly and its back and neck curved, it
is unable to move its limbs,--like a parrot in a cage.

13\. There he remembers, by divine power, the Karma generated in
hundreds of previous births,--and remembering, sobs for a long time,
obtaining not the least happiness.

14\. Having this insight he, with hands put together, bound in seven
bonds, imploring and trembling, adores in plaintive tones Him who placed
him in the womb.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

15\. From the beginning of the seventh month, though he gains
consciousness, he who is in the womb trembles and moves about because of
the parturition winds, like a uterine worm.

16-23. The creature says, "I seek refuge in Viṣṇu; the husband of Śrī,
the supporter of the universe, the destroyer of evil, who is
compassionate to those who come for shelter.

"I am bewildered by Thy magic, as regards body and son and wife; misled
by my egoism I am transmigrating, O Lord.

"I did good and evil actions for the sake of my dependents, and as s
result I am tormented, while they who enjoy the fruits escape.

"If I am released from this womb I will lay myself at Thy feet, and I
will take the means by which I may obtain liberation.

"Fallen into a well of fœces and urine, I am burnt by the fire of the
belly, and anxious to escape from it. When shall I get out?

"In Him alone, who has given me this experience, and is compassionate to
the afflicted, will I seek refuge. Let not this transmigration occur to
me again.

"But no, I wish never to come out of the womb, where misery results from
my sinful actions.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

"Because remaining even here in great misery, bearing the fatigue,
resorting to Thy feet I will keep myself aloof from the worlds of
change."

24\. The Blessed Lord said: He who has thus considered, and has been ten
months in the womb, endowed with insight, while praying, suddenly is
cast out head downwards into birth, by the winds of delivery.

25\. Cast out forcibly, bending down his head, he comes out with anxiety
and painfully breathless and with memory destroyed.

26\. Having fallen on the ground he moves like a worm in excrement. He
is become changed in condition, and cries loudly, deprived of knowledge.

27\. If the state of mind which arises in the womb, during illness, on
the cremation ground, or upon hearing the Purāṇas were permanent--who
would not be liberated from bondage!

28\. When he comes out of the womb, after experiencing his karma, then
verily the man is bewildered by the magic of Viṣṇu.

29\. Then, when he is touched by that magic, powerless, he is unable to
speak. He experiences the miseries of infancy and childhood arising from
dependence.

30\. He is nourished by people who do not understand his wishes, unable
to ward off what is thrust upon him against his desire.

31\. Lain upon a bed unclean and befouled by perspiration, he is unable
to scratch his limbs, to sit, rise or move.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

32\. Mosquitoes, gnats, bugs and other flies bite him, skinless and
weeping and deprived of understanding, just as insects bite little
worms.

33\. In this wise having experienced the miseries of infancy and of
childhood, he reaches youth and acquires evil tendencies.

34\. Then he begins evil brooding, mingling in the company of the
wicked; he hates the scriptures and good men, and becomes lustful.

35\. Seeing a seductive woman, his senses captivated by her
blandishments, infatuated he falls into great darkness, like a moth into
a flame.

36\. The deer, the elephant, the bird, the bee and the fish: these five
are led to destruction by one of the senses; how then shall the
infatuated one not be destroyed, when he enjoys the five kinds of
objects by five senses.

37\. He longs for the unobtainable, and on account of ignorance becomes
angry and sorry, and his pride and anger increase with the growth of his
body.

38\. The lover makes quarrels with rivals, to his own ruin and is
destroyed by those stronger than himself, as one elephant by another.

39\. Who is more sinful than the fool who, attached to sense-objects,
spends in vain the human birth which was difficult to obtain.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

40: After hundreds of lives one obtains human birth on earth; and even
more difficult to obtain is that as a twice-born: and who then only
provides for and pampers the senses, through foolishness lets slip the
nectar from his hand.

41\. Then, having arrived at old age, he is troubled with great
diseases; and, death having come, he goes to a miserable hell, as
before.

42\. Thus held fast in the ever-circling noose of karma, the sinful,
bewildered by my magic, are never released.

43\. Thus I have related to you, O Tārkṣya, how the sinful, deprived of
the sacrifices for the dead, go in hell. What else do you wish to hear?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[46:1](gpu08.htm#fr_59.md) That is, hard.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Babhruvāhana's Sacrament for the Departed
One](gpu09.md)

</div>
