[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](vow07)  [Next](vow09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span id="img_03000"></span> ![](img/03000.jpg)

### PART III.

\*           \*           \*           \*

THOU hast given me admirable instruction, O my most powerful Mother
Isis, concerning the marvellous creation of Souls by God, and I am
filled with wonder; but thou hast not yet shewn me whither souls depart
when set free from bodies. Fain would I contemplate this mystery, and
thank only thee for the initiation.

And Isis said:--Hearken, my son, for thy most necessary enquiry holds an
important place, and may not be neglected. Hear my reply.

O great and marvellous scion of the illustrious Osiris, think not that
souls on quitting the body mix themselves confusedly in the vague
immensity and become dispersed in the universal and infinite spirit,
without power to return into bodies, to preserve their identity, or to
seek again their primeval abode. Water spilt from a vase returns no more
to its place therein, it has no proper locality, it mingles itself with
the mass of waters; but it is not thus with souls, O most wise Horos. I
am

\[initiated

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

initiated into the mysteries of the immortal nature; I walk in the ways
of the truth, and I will reveal all to thee without the least omission.
And first I will tell thee that water, being a body without reason,
composed of myriads of fluid particles, differs from the soul which is,
my son, a personal entity, the royal work of the hands and of the mind
of God, abiding herself in intelligence. That which proceeds from Unity,
and not from multiplicity, cannot mingle with other things, and in order
that the soul may be joined to the body, God subjects this harmonious
union to Necessity.

Souls do not, then, return confusedly, nor by chance, into one and the
same place, but each is despatched into the condition which belongs to
her. And this is deter-mined by that which the soul experiences while
yet she is in the tenement of the body, loaded with a burden contrary to
her nature. Hear: therefore, this comparison, O beloved Horos; suppose
that there should be shut up in the same prison, men, eagles, doves,
swans, hawks, swallows, sparrows, flies, serpents, lions, leopards,
wolves, dogs, hares, oxen, sheep, and certain amphibious animals, such
as seals, hydras, turtles, crocodiles, and that at the same moment all
the creatures should be liberated. All at once would escape; the men
would seek cities and the public places, the eagles the ether, where
nature teaches them to live, the doves the lower air, the hawks the
higher expanse; the swallows would repair to places frequented by men,
the sparrows to the orchards, the swans to districts where they could
sing; the flies would haunt the proximity of the ground as high only as
human exhalations extend, for the property of flies is to live on these
and to flit over the surface of the earth; the lions and leopards would
flee to the mountains, the wolves to the solitudes; the dogs would
follow the track of man;

\[the

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

the hares would betake themselves to the woods, the oxen to the fields
and meadows, the sheep to the pastures; the serpents would seek the
caves of the earth; the seals and the turtles would rejoin their kind in
the shallows and running waters, in order to enjoy, conformably to their
nature, alike the proximity of the shore and of the deep. Each creature
would return, conducted by its own interior discernment, into the abode
befitting it. Even so every soul, whether human or inhabiting the earth
under other conditions, knows whither she ought to go; unless, indeed,
some son of Typhon should pretend that a bull may subsist in the waters
or a turtle in the air. If, then, even when immersed in flesh and blood,
souls do not infringe the law of order, although under penance,--for
union with the body is a penance,--how much more shall they conform
thereto when delivered from their bonds and set at liberty!

Now this most holy law, which extends even unto heaven, is on this wise,
O illustrious child: behold the hierarchy of souls! The expanse between
the empyrean and the moon is occupied by the Gods, the stars, and the
powers of providence. Between the moon and ourselves, my son, is the
abode of the souls. The unmeasured air, which we call the wind, has in
itself an appointed way in which it moves to refresh the earth, as I
shall by and by relate. But this movement of the air upon itself impedes
not the way of the souls, nor does it hinder them from ascending and
descending without obstacle; they flow across the air without mingling
in it, or confounding themselves therewith, as water flows over oil.
This expanse, my son, is divided into four provinces, and into sixty
regions. The first province from the earth upwards comprehends four
regions, and extends as far as certain summits or promontories, which

\[it is

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

it is unable to transcend. The second province comprises eight regions
in which the motions of the winds arise. Be thou attentive, my son, for
thou hearest the ineffable mysteries of the earth, the heavens, and of
the sacred fluid which lies between. <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27)
In the province of the winds fly the birds; above this there is no
moving air nor any creature. But the air with all the beings it contains
distributes itself into all boundaries within its reach, and into the
four quarters of the earth, while the earth cannot lift itself into the
mansions of the air. The third province comprehends sixteen regions
filled with a pure and subtle element. The fourth contains thirty-two
regions, in which the air, wholly subtle and diaphanous, allows itself
to be penetrated by the element of fire. Such is the order which,
without confusion, reigns from depth to height;--to wit, four general
divisions, twelve intervals, sixty regions, and in these dwell the
souls, each according to the nature thereof. They are indeed all of one
substance, but they constitute a hierarchy; and the further any region
is removed from the earth, the loftier is the dignity of the souls which
dwell therein.

And now it remains to be explained to thee, O most glorious Horos, what
souls they are who abide in each of these regions, and this I shall set
forth, beginning by the most exalted.

The expanse which stretches between earth and heaven is divided into
regions, my son Horos, according to measure and harmony. To these
regions our ancestors have given various names; some call them

\[zones

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

zones, others firmaments, others spheres. Therein dwell the souls who
are freed from bodies, and those who have not yet been incorporated. The
stations which they occupy correspond with their dignity. In the upper
region are the divine and royal souls; the baser souls--they who float
over the surface of the earth--are in the lowest sphere, and in the
middle regions are the souls of ordinary degree. Thus, my son, the souls
destined to rule descend from the superior zones, and when they are
delivered from the body, thither they return, or even higher still,
unless indeed they have acted contrary to the dignity of their nature
and to the laws of God. For, if they have transgressed, the Providence
on high causes them to descend into the lower regions according to the
measure of their faults; and in like manner also it conducts other
souls, inferior in power and dignity, from the lower spheres into a more
exalted abode. For on high dwell two ministers of the universal
Providence; one is guardian of the souls, the other is their conductor,
who sends them forth and ordains for them bodies. The first minister
guards them, the second releases or binds them, according to the will of
God.

In this wise the law of equity presides over the changes which take
place above, even as upon earth also it moulds and constructs the
vessels in which the souls are immured. This law is supplemented by two
energies, Memory and Experience. Memory directs in Nature the
preservation and maintenance of all the original types appointed in
heaven; the function of Experience is to provide every soul descending
into generation with a body appropriate thereto; so that passionate
souls should have vigorous bodies; slothful souls sluggard bodies;
active souls active bodies; gentle souls gentle bodies; powerful souls
powerful bodies; cunning

\[souls

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

souls dexterous bodies;--briefly, that every soul should have a
befitting nature. For it is not without just cause that winged creatures
are clothed with feathers; that intelligent creatures are gifted with
finer senses and superior to others; that beasts of the field are
furnished with horns, with tusks, with claws, or other weapons; that
reptiles are endowed with undulating and flexible bodies, and lest the
moisture of their natures should render them feeble, are armed either
with teeth or with pointed scales, so that they are, even less than
others, in peril of death. As for fishes, these timid souls have
allotted to them for a dwelling-place that element in which light is
bereft of its double activity, for in the water, fire neither
illuminates nor burns. Each fish, swimming by the help of his spiny
fins, flies where he wills, and his weakness is protected by the
obscurity of the deep. Thus are souls immured in bodies resembling
themselves; in human shape, those souls who have received reason; in
flying creatures, souls of a wild nature; in beasts, souls without
reason, whose only law is force; in reptiles, deceitful souls, for they
attack not their prey face to face, but by ambush; while fishes enshrine
those timid souls who merit not the enjoyment of other elements.

In every order of animals there are individuals who transgress the laws
of their being.

In what way, my Mother? said Horos.

And Isis answered: In this wise:--A man who acts against reason, a beast
which eludes necessity, a reptile which forgets its cunning, a fish
which loses its timidity, a bird which renounces freedom. Thou hast
heard what was to be said concerning the hierarchy of souls, their
descent, and the creation of bodies.

O my son, in every order of souls there are found a

\[few

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

few royal souls, and of divers characters: some fiery, some cold, some
proud, some gentle, some crafty, some simple, some contemplative, some
active. This diversity belongs to the regions from whence they descend
into bodies. From the royal zone the royal souls go forth, but there are
many royalties; the royalty of spirit, of the flesh, of art, of science,
of the virtues.

And how, said Horos, dost thou name these royalties?

O my son, the king of souls who have hitherto existed is thy father
Osiris; the king of bodies is the prince of each nation, he who governs.
The king of wisdom is the Father of all things; the Initiator is the
thrice great Hermes; over medicine presides Asclepios, the son of
Hephaistos; force and power are under the sway of Osiris, and after him,
under thine, my son. Philosophy depends on Arnebaskenis; poetry, yet
again, on Asclepios, Imouthè's son. So that, if thou thinkest thereon,
thou wilt perceive that there are indeed many royalties and many kings.

But the supreme royalty belongs to the highest region; lesser kingships
correspond to the spheres which bring them forth. Those who issue from
the fiery zone handle fire; those who come from the watery zone frequent
liquid spheres; from the region of art and learning those are born who
devote themselves to art and science; from the region of inactivity,
those who live in ease and idleness. All that is done and said upon
earth has its origin in the heights, from whence all essences are
dispensed with measure and equilibrium; nor is there anything which does
not emanate from above and return thither.

Explain to me this that thou sayest, O my Mother.

\[And

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

And Isis answered:--An evident token of these exchanges has been stamped
on all creatures by most holy Nature. The breath which we indraw from
the upper air we exhale and again inbreathe by means of the lungs within
us which perform this work. And when the way destined to receive our
breath is closed, then no longer do we remain on earth; we depart hence.
Moreover, O my glorious son, there are other accidents by which the
balance of our combination may be destroyed. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28)

What is, then, this combination, O my Mother?

It is the union and admixture of the four elements, whence emanates a
vapour which envelops the soul, penetrates into the body and
communicates to both its own character. Thus are produced varieties
among souls and bodies. If in the composition of a body, fire dominates,
then the soul being already of an ardent nature, receives thereby an
excess of heat which renders it the more energetic and furious, and the
body the more vivacious and active. If the air dominates, the body and
soul of the creature are thereby rendered unstable, errant and restless.
The domination of the water causes the soul to be mild, affable, bland,
sociable, and easily moulded, because water blends and mixes itself
readily with all other things, dissolves them if it be abundant,
moistens and penetrates them if it be less in quantity. A body softened
by too much humidity offers but a weak resistance, a slight malady
disintegrates it, and little by little dissolves its cohesion. Again, if
the earthy element be dominant, the soul is obtuse, because the body
lacks subtlety, nor can she force a way through the density of its
organism. Therefore, the soul remains

\[indrawn

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

indrawn upon herself, borne down by the burden she supports, and the
body is solid, inactive, and heavy, moving only with effort.

But if the elements be all in just equilibrium, then the whole nature is
ardent in its actions, subtle in its motions, fluent in its sensations,
and of a robust constitution. Of the predominance of air and fire birds
are born, whose nature resembles that of the elements which generate
them. Men are endowed with an abundance of fire united with but a little
air, and of water and earth equal parts. This excess of fire becomes
sagacity, seeing that intelligence is indeed a kind of flame, which
consumes not, but which penetrates. The predominance of water and earth
with a sufficient admixture of air and but little fire engenders beasts;
those endued with more fire than the rest are the more courageous. Water
and earth in equal quantities give birth to reptiles, which, being
deprived of fire, have neither courage nor truthfulness, while the
excess of water renders them cold, that of earth, sordid and heavy, and
the lack of air makes all their movements difficult. Much water with but
little earth produces fishes; the absence of fire and air in them causes
their timidity, and disposes them to lie hidden, while the predominance
of water and earth in their nature approximates them by natural affinity
to earth dissolved in water. Moreover, by means of the proportional
increase of the elements composing the body is the body itself
increased, and its development ceases when the full measure is attained.
And so long, my beloved son, as equilibrium is maintained in the
primitive combination and in the vapours arising therefrom, that is, so
long as the normal proportion of fire, air, earth, and water remains
unchanged, the creature continues in

\[health.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

health. But if the elements deviate from the proportion originally
determined--(I speak not now of the growth of activities, nor of that
resulting from a change of order, but of a rupture of equilibrium
whether by addition or diminution of fire or of other elements)--then
malady supervenes. And should air and fire, whose nature is one with
that of the soul itself, prevail in the conflict, then, through the
dominance of those elements, destroyers of the flesh, the creature
abandons its proper state. For the earthy element is the pabulum of the
body, and the water wherewith it is permeated contributes to consolidate
it; but it is the aerial element which confers motion, and the fire
engenders all energies. The vapours produced by the union and
combination of these elements blending with the soul, as it were by
fusion, bear her along with them, and clothe her in their own nature,
whether good or evil. So long as she remains in this natural association
the soul keeps the rank she has attained. But if a change should occur
either in the combination itself or in any of its parts or subdivisions,
the vapours, altering their condition, alter likewise the relations
between soul and body; the fire and air, aspiring upward, draw with them
the soul, their sister, while the watery and terrestrial elements, which
tend earthwards like the body, weigh it down and overwhelm it.

\*           \*           \*           \*

<span id="img_crosssep"></span> ![](img/crosssep.jpg)

 

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

 

<span id="img_04000"></span> ![End of the Virgin of the
World.](img/04000.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[33:1](vow08.htm#fr_27) This hint is enough to
indicate that Isis speaks in metaphorical language. The entire
description should be understood as equally applicable to the macrocosm
and the microcosm, the consciousness of every constituent particle in
man's system being accounted a soul.

A.K.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[37:1](vow08.htm#fr_28) Isis here speaks not as
a Goddess, but as a mortal.

A.K.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I.](vow09)
