[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](vow04)  [Next](vow06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

### *An Introduction*

###### TO THE

### *Virgin of the World*.

THE mystic title of the celebrated Hermetic fragment with which this
volume commences, "Koré Kosmou" that is, the "Kosmic Virgin," is in
itself a revelation of the wonderful identity subsisting between the
ancient wisdom-religion of the old world, and the creed of catholic
Christendom. Koré is the name by which, in the Eleusinian Mysteries,
Persephone the Daughter, or Maiden, was saluted; and it is also--perhaps
only by coincidence--the Greek word for the pupil or apple of the eye.
When, however, we find Isis, the Moon-goddess and Initiatrix, in her
discourse with Horos, mystically identifying the eye with the soul, and
comparing the tunics of the physical organ of vision with the envelopes
of the soul; when, moreover, we reflect that precisely as the eye, by
means of its pupil, is the enlightener and percipient of the body, so is
the soul the illuminating and seeing principle of man, we can hardly
regard this analogy of names as wholly unintentional and uninstructive.
For Koré, or Persephone, the Maiden, is the personified soul, whose
"apostasy," or "descent," from the heavenly sphere into earthly
generation, is the theme of the following Hermetic parable. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) The Greek mysteries dealt

\[only

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

only with two subjects, the first being the drama of the "rape" and
restoration of Persephone the second, that of the incarnation,
martyrdom, and resuscitation of Dionysos-Zagreus. By Persephone was
intended the Soul; and by Dionysos, the Spirit. Hermetic doctrine taught
a fourfold nature both of the Kosmos and of Man; and of this fourfold
nature two elements were deemed immortal and permanent, and two mortal
and transient. The former were the spirit and the soul; the latter, the
lower mind--or sense-body--and the physical organism. The spirit and
soul, respectively male and female, remained throughout all the changes
of metempsychosis the same, indissoluble and incorrupt, but the body and
lower intellect were new in each rebirth, and therefore changeful and
dissoluble. The spirit, or Dionysos, was regarded as of a specially
divine genesis, being the Son of Zeus by the immaculate
Maiden--Koré-Persephoneia, herself the daughter of Demeter, or the
parent and super-mundane Intelligence, addressed in the Mysteries as the
"Mother." <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) But Koré, although thus of
heavenly origin, participates more closely than her Son in an earthly
and terrestrial nature. "Hence," says Proclos, "according to the
theologians who delivered to us the most holy Mysteries, Persephone
abides on high in those dwellings of the Mother which she prepared for
her in inaccessible places, exempt from the sensible world. But she
likewise dwells beneath with Pluto, administering terrestrial concerns,
governing the recesses of the earth, and supplying life to the
extremities of the Kosmos."

Wherefore, considered as the daughter of Zeus and Demeter, Koré is
immaculate and celestial in character; considered as the captive and
consort of Hades, she belongs to the lower world and to the region of
lamentation and dissolution. And, indeed, the Soul possesses the dual
nature thus ascribed to her, for she is in her interior and proper
quality, incorrupt and inviolable--ever virgin--while in her apparent
and relative quality, she is defiled and fallen. In Hermetic fable the
constant emblem of the Soul is Water, or the Sea--*Maria*; and one
salient reason for this comparison is that water, however seemingly
contaminated, yet

\[remains,

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

remains, in its essence, always pure. For the defilement of so-called
foul water really consists in sediments held by it in solution, and
thereby causing it to appear turbid, but this defilement cannot enter
into its integral constitution. So that if the foulest or muddiest water
be distilled, it will leave behind in the cucurbite all its earthy
impurities, and present itself, without loss, clear and lucent in the
recipient alembic. Not, therefore, without cause is the Soul designated
"ever virgin," because in her essential self-hood she is absolutely
immaculate and without taint of sin. And the whole history of the world,
from end to end, is the history of the generation, lapse, sorrows, and
final assumption of this Kosmic virgin. For the soul has two modes or
conditions of being--centrifugal and centripetal. The first is the
condition of her outgoing, her immergence in Matter, or her "fall," and
the grief and subjection which she thereby brings upon herself. This
phase is, in the Jewish Kabbala, represented by Eve. The second
condition is that of her incoming, her emergence from Matter, her
restitution, or glorification in "heaven." This phase is presented to us
in the Christian evangel and Apocalypse under the name of Mary. Hence
the Catholic saying that the "Ave" of Mary reverses the curse of Eva.

In perfect accord with Kabbalistic doctrine, the allegory of the "Koré
Kosmou" thus clearly indicates the nature of the Soul's original
apostacy; "she receded from the prescribed limits; not willing to remain
in the same abode, she moved ceaselessly, and repose seemed
death." <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)

In this phrase we have the parallel to the scene represented in the
Mysteries, where Persephone, wilfully straying from the mansions of
heaven, falls under the power of the Hadean God. This, perhaps the most
occult part of the whole allegory, is but lightly touched in the
fragmentary discourse of Isis, and we cannot, therefore, do better than
to reproduce here the eloquent exposition of Thomas Taylor on the
subject.

"Here, then," he says, "we see the first cause of the Soul's descent,
namely, the abandoning of a life wholly according to the

\[higher

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Higher Intellect,
which is occultly signified by the separation of Proserpina from Ceres.
Afterward, we are told that Jupiter instructs Venus to go to her abode,
and betray Proserpina from her retirement, that Pluto may be enabled to
carry her away; and to prevent any suspicion in the virgin's mind, he
commands Diana and Pallas to go in company. The three Goddesses
arriving, find Proserpina at work on a scarf for her mother; in which
she had embroidered the primitive chaos and the formation of the world.
Now, by Venus, in this part of the narration, we must understand
*desire*, which, even in the celestial regions (for such is the
residence of Proserpina till she is ravished by Pluto), begins silently
and stealthily to creep into the recesses of the Soul. By Minerva we
must conceive the rational power of the Soul, and by Diana, Nature. And,
lastly, the web in which Proserpina had displayed all the fair variety
of the material world, beautifully represents the commencement of the
illusive operations through which the Soul becomes ensnared with the
fascination of imaginative forms. After this, Proserpina, forgetful of
the Mother's commands, is represented as venturing from her retreat
through the treacherous persuasions of Venus. Then we behold her issuing
on to the plain with Minerva and Diana, and attended by a beauteous
train of nymphs, who are evident symbols of the world of generation, and
are, therefore, the proper companions of the Soul about to fall into its
fluctuating realms. Moreover, the design of Proserpina, in venturing
from her retreat, is beautifully significant of her approaching descent;
for she rambles from home for the purpose of gathering flowers, and this
in a lawn replete with the most enchanting variety, and exhaling the
most delicious odours. This is a manifest image of the Soul operating
principally according to the natural and external life, and so becoming
ensnared by the delusive attractions of sensible form. Immediately,
Pluto, forcing his passage through the earth, seizes on Proserpina and
carries her away with him. Well may the Soul, in such a situation,
pathetically exclaim with Proserpina:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

'O male dilecti flores, despectaque Matris  
Consilia; O Veneris deprensæ serius artes!' <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10)

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pluto hurries
Proserpina into the infernal regions: in other words, the Soul is sunk
into the profound depth and darkness of a

\[material

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

material nature. A description of her marriage next succeeds, her union
with the dark tenement of the body."

To this eloquent exposition of Taylor's, it is well to add the
description given in Homer's Hymn to Ceres. Persephone herself speaks:

"We were plucking the pleasant flowers, the beautiful crocus, the iris,
the hyacinth, and the narcissus, which, like the crocus, the wide earth
produced. With joy I was plucking them, when the earth yawned beneath,
and out leaped the strong King, the Many-Receiver, and went bearing me,
deeply sorrowing, under the earth in his golden chariot, and I cried
aloud."

Compare with this Hermetic allegory of the lapse of Persephone and the
manner of it, the Kabbalistic story of the "fall" of Eve.

"And she saw that the tree was good to eat, and fair to the eyes, and
delightful to behold; and she took of the fruit thereof and did eat. . .
. And to the woman He said: I will multiply thy sorrows and thy
conceptions: in sorrow shalt thou bring forth, and thou shalt be under
thy husband's power, and he shall have dominion over thee."

In a note appended to Taylor's Dissertations, Dr. Wilder quotes from
Cocker's Greek Philosophy the following excellent reflections:

"The allegory of the Chariot and Winged Steeds, in Plato's *Phædrus*,
represents the lower or inferior part of man's nature (Adam or the body)
as dragging the Soul down to the earth, and subjecting it to the slavery
of corporeal conditions. Out of these conditions arise numerous evils
that disorder the mind and becloud the reason, for evil is inherent to
the condition of finite and multiform existence into which we have
fallen. The earthly life is a fall. The soul is now dwelling in the
grave which we call the body We resemble those captives chained in a
subterraneous cave,' so poetically described in the seventh book of 'The
Republic'; their backs turned to the light, so that they see but the
shadows of the objects which pass behind them, and 'to these shadows
they attribute a perfect reality.' Their sojourn upon earth is thus a
dark imprisonment in the body, a dreamy exile from their proper home."

Similarly we read, in the "Koré Kosmou," that the souls on

\[learning

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

learning that they were about to be imprisoned in material bodies,
sighed and lamented, lilting to heaven glances of sorrow, and crying
piteously, "O woe and heartrending grief to quit these vast splendors,
this sacred sphere, and all the glories of the blessed republic of the
Gods to be precipitated into these vile and miserable abodes! No longer
shall we behold the divine and luminous heavens!"

Who, in reading this, is not reminded of the pathetic lament of Eve on
quitting the fair "ambrosial bowers" of Paradise? <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11)

From the sad and woful state into which the Virgin thus falls, she is
finally rescued and restored to the supernal abodes. But not until the
coming of the Saviour, represented in the allegory before us under the
name of Osiris--the Man Regenerate. This Redeemer, himself of divine
origin, is in other allegories represented under other names, but the
idea is always luminously defined, and the intention obvious. Osiris is
the Iesous of our Christian doctrine, the supreme Initiate or "Captain
of Salvation." He is represented, together with his Spouse, as in all
things "instructed" and directed by HERMES, famed as the celestial
conductor of souls from the "dark abodes;" the wise and ubiquitous God
in whom the initiate recognises the Genius of the Understanding or
Divine Reason--the *nous* of Platonic doctrine, and the mystic "Spirit
of Christ." Therefore, as the understanding of holy things and the
faculty of their interpretation are the gift of HERMES, the name of this
God is given to all science and revelation of an occult and divine
nature. A "Divine" is, in fact, one who knows the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven; hence S. John the seer, or the "divine," is
especially the "beloved" of Christ. HERMES was regarded as the Messenger
or Angel of the Gods, descending alike to the depths of the Hadean
world, to bring up souls from thence, and ascending up beyond all
heavens that he might fill all things. For the Understanding must search
alike the deeps and the heights; there can be nothing hidden from it,
nor can it attain the fulness of supernal and secret knowledge unless it
first explore the phenomenal and terrestrial. "For that he ascended,
what is it but *because* he also descended first into the lower parts of
the earth?"

With the splendid joyousness and light-hearted humour which
characterised the Greeks, mingling laughter and mirth even with the
mysteries of Religion, and making their sacred allegories

\[human.

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

human and musical as no others of any nation or time, HERMES, the
Diviner and Revealer, was also playfully styled a Thief, and the patron
of thieves. But thereby was secretly indicated the power and skill of
the Understanding in making everything intellectually its own.
Wherefore, in charging HERMES with filching the girdle of Venus, the
tongs of Vulcan, and the thunder of Jove, as well as with stealing and
driving off the cattle of Apollo, it was signified that all good and
noble gifts, even the attributes of the high Gods themselves, are
accessible to the Understanding, and that nothing is withheld from man's
intelligence, if only man have the skill to seek aright.

As the immediate companion of the sun, HERMES is the opener of the gates
of the highest heaven, the revealer of spiritual light and life, the
Mediator between the inner and outer spheres of existence, and the
Initiator into those sacred mysteries, the knowledge of which is life
eternal.

The panoply with which Greek art invests HERMES, is symbolical of the
functions of the Understanding. He has four implements--the rod, the
wings, the sword, and the cap, denoting respectively the science of the
magian, the courage of the adventurer, the will of the hero, and the
discretion of the adept. The initiates of HERMES acknowledge no
authority but the Understanding; they call no man king or master upon
earth; they are true Free-Thinkers and Republicans. "For where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) Hence Lactantius, in his "Divine
Institutions," says:--"Hermes affirms that those who know God are safe
from the attacks of the demon, and that they, are not even subjected to
Fate." Now, the powers of Fate reside in the stars--that is, in the
*astral* sphere, whether Kosmic or micro-Kosmic. And the astral power
was, in Greek fable, typified by Argos, the hundred-eyed genius of the
starry zone, *Panoptes*, the all-seeing giant, whom it was the glory of
HERMES to have outwitted and slain. Of which allegory the meaning is,
that they who have the Hermetic secret are not subject to Fate, but have
passed beyond the thrall of metempsychosis, and have freed themselves
from "ceaseless whirling on the wheel" of Destiny. To know God is to
have overcome death, and the power of death. To know the origin and
secret of delusion is to transcend delusion.

\[The

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The spheres of
delusion, dominated by the sevenfold astral Powers, lie between the Soul
and God. Beyond these spheres are the celestial "Nine Abodes," wherein,
say the Mysteries, Demeter vainly sought the lost Persephone. For from
these abodes she had lapsed into a mundane and material state, and
thereby had fallen under the power of the planetary rulers; that is, of
Fate, personified by Hekate. On the tenth day, therefore, the divine
Drama shows Demeter meeting the Goddess of Doom and Retribution, the
terrible Hekate Triformis--personification of *Karma*--by whom the
"Mother" is told of Persephone's abduction and detention in the Hadean
world. And--we learn--Hekate becomes thereafter the constant attendant
of Persephone. All this is, of course, pregnant with the deepest
significance. Until the Soul falls into Matter, she has no Fate, or
Karma. Fate is the appanage and result of Time and of Manifestation. In
the sevenfold astral spheres the Moon is representative of Fate, and
presents two aspects, the benign and the malignant. Under the benign
aspect the Moon is Artemis, reflecting to the Soul the divine light of
Phœbos; under the malignant aspect she is Hekate the Avenger, dark of
countenance; and three beaded, being swift as a horse, sure as a dog,
and as a lion implacable. She it is who, fleet, sagacious, and pitiless,
hunts guilty souls from birth to birth, and outwits death itself with
unerring justice. To the innocent and chaste soul, therefore, the lunar
power is favorable. Artemis is the patron and protectress of
virgins--that is, of souls undefiled with the traffic of Matter. In this
aspect the Moon is the Initiatrix, Isis the Enlightener, because through
a beneficent Karma, or fate, the soul receives interior illumination,
and the dark recesses of her chamber are lit up by sacred reminiscences.
Hence, in subsequent births, such a soul becomes prophetic and "divine."
But to the corrupt and the evil-hearted the influence of the Moon is
malignant, for to such she assumes the aspect of Hekate, smiting by
night, and terrifying with ghostly omens of misfortune. These souls fear
the lunar power, and in this instinctive dread may be discerned their
secret recognition of the evil fate which they are preparing for
themselves in existences to come. The Tree of Good and Evil, says the
Kabbala, has its root in Malchuth--the Moon.

It has been sometime asserted that the doctrine of Karma is peculiar to
Hindu theology. On the contrary, it is clearly exhibited alike in the
Hebrew, Hellenic, and Christian Mysteries. The Greeks called it Fate;
the Christians know it

\[as

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

as Original Sin. With which sin all mortal men come into the world, and
on account of which all pass under condemnation. Only the "Mother of
God" is exempt from it, the "virgin immaculate," through whose Seed the
world shall be redeemed.

"As the lily among the thorns," sings the Church in the "Office of the
Immaculate Conception," "so is the Beloved among the Daughters of Adam.
Thou art all fair, O Beloved, and the original stain is not in thee: Thy
name, O Mary, is as oil poured out; therefore, the virgins love thee
exceedingly."

If, then, by Persephone or Koré, the "Virgin of the World," we are thus
plainly taught to understand the Soul, we are no less plainly taught to
see in Isis, the Initiatrix or Enlightener. Herself, equally with Koré,
virgin and mother, the Egyptian Isis is, in her philosophical aspect,
identical with the Ephesian Artemis, the Greek personification of the
fructifying and all-nourishing power of Nature. She was regarded as the
"inviolable and perpetual Maid of heaven;" her priests were eunuchs, and
her image in the magnificent temple of Ephesus represented her with many
breasts--πολυμαστὸς. <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) In works of art
Artemis appears variously, as the huntress, accompanied by hounds, and
carrying the implements of the chase; as the Goddess of the Moon,
covered with a long veil reaching to her feet, and her head adorned with
a crescent; or as the many-breasted Mother-Maid, holding a lighted torch
in her hand. The Latins worshipped her under the name of Diana, and it
is as Diana that the Ephesian Artemis is mentioned in the Acts of the
Apostles. Isis had all the attributes ascribed to the lunar divinity of
the Greeks and Romans; and hence, like Artemis and Diana, she was
identified with the occult principle of Nature--that is, Fate, which in
its various aspects and relations was severally viewed as Fortune,
Retribution, Doom, or Destiny; a principle represented, as we have
already seen, by the Kabbalists, under the figure of Malchuth, or the
Moon; and by the Hindu theosophists under the more abstract conception
of Karma. The hounds of Artemis, or

\[Diana,

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Diana, are the
occult powers which hunt down and pursue the soul from birth to birth;
the inevitable, implacable forces of Nature which, following evermore on
the steps of every ego, compel it into the conditions successively
engendered by its actions, as effect by cause. Hence Actæon, presuming
upon Fate, and oblivious of the sanctity and inviolability of this
unchanging law of Karmic Destiny, is torn in pieces by his own dogs, to
wit, his own deeds, which by the decree of the implacable Goddess, turn
upon and rend him. So also, in accordance with this philosophical idea,
those who were initiated into the mysteries of Isis, wore in the public
processions masks representing the heads of dogs. So intimately was the
abstract conception of the moon associated by the ancients with that of
the secret influence and power of Destiny in Nature, that Proclos in his
Commentary upon the *Timæus* says of Diana:--"She presides over the
whole of the generation into natural existence, leads forth into light
all natural reasons, and extends a prolific power from on high even to
the subterranean realms." These words completely describe the Egyptian
Isis, and show us how the moon, occultly viewed as the Karmic power, was
regarded as the cause of continued generation in natural conditions,
pursuing souls even into the Hadean or purgatorial spheres and visiting
upon them the fruition of their past. Hence, too, in the Orphic Hymn to
Nature, that Goddess is identified with Fortune, and represented as
standing with her feet upon a wheel which she continually
turns,--"moving with rapid motion on an eternal wheel." <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) And again, in another Orphic Hymn, Fortune
herself is invoked as Diana. Proclos, in the Commentary to which
reference has already been made, declares that "the moon is the cause of
Nature to mortals, and the self-revealing image of the Fountain of
Nature." "If," says Thomas Taylor, "the reader is desirous of knowing
what we are to understand by the fountain of Nature of which the moon is
the image, let him attend to the following information, derived from a
long and deep study of the ancient theology, for from hence I have
learned that there are many divine fountains contained in the essence of
the Demiurgus of the world; and that among these there are three of a
very distinguished rank, namely, the fountain of souls, or Juno (Hera),
the fountain of virtues, or Minerva (Athena), and the fountain of
nature, or Diana (Artemis). . . . And this information will enable us to
explain the meaning

\[ing of

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

of the following passages in Apuleius, the first of which is in the
beginning of the eleventh book of his *Metamorphoses*, wherein the
divinity of the moon is represented as addressing him in this sublime
manner:--'Behold, Lucius, moved with thy supplications, I am present; I,
who am Nature, the parent of things, mistress of all the elements,
initial progeny of the ages, the highest of the divinities, queen of
departed spirits, the first of the celestials, of Gods and Goddesses the
sole likeness of all; who rule by my nod the luminous heights of the
heavens, the salubrious breezes of the sea, and the woful silences of
the infernal regions, and whose divinity, in itself but one, is
venerated by all the earth, in many characters, various rites, and
different appellations. . . Those who are enlightened by the emerging
rays of the rising sun, the Æthiopians and Aryans, and likewise the
Egyptians, powerful in ancient learning, who reverence my divinity with
ceremonies perfectly appropriate, call me by my true appellation Queen
Isis.' And again, in another place of the same book, he says of the
moon:--'The supernal Gods reverence thee, and those in the realms
beneath do homage to thy divinity. Thou dost make the world to revolve,
and the sun to illumine, thou rulest the universe and treadest on
Tartarus. To thee the stars respond, the deities rejoice, time returns
by thee, the elements give thee service.' For all this easily follows if
we consider it as spoken of the fountain-deity of Nature subsisting in
the Demiurgus, and which is the exemplar of that nature which flourishes
in the lunar orb and throughout the material world."

Thus enlightened as to the office and functions of Isis, we are at no
loss to understand why she is selected by the writer of the following
Hermetic fragment as the exponent of the origin, history, and destiny of
the soul. For she is, in a peculiar sense, the arbiter of the soul's
career in existence, her guardian and overseer. If Demeter, the Divine
Intelligence, be the Mother of Koré, then Isis is her foster-mother, for
no sooner does the soul fall into generation than Isis becomes her
directress and the dispenser of her fate. It is not surprising,
therefore, to find that by some mythologists Isis is identified with
Demeter, and the sufferings of the former modified accordingly, to
harmonise with the allegory of the sorrows of Demeter as set forth in
the Eleusinian Mysteries. But the cause of this confusion is obvious to
those who rightly understand the Hermetic method. Isis, whether as
Artemis (Good Fortune), or as Hekate (Evil Fortune), is the controlling
and illuminating influence of the soul while remaining

\[within

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

within the jurisdiction of Nature and Time; Demeter, the Divine
Intelligence, represents the heavenly fountain or super-mundane source,
whence the soul originally draws her being, and as such, is concerned
directly, not with her exile and wanderings in material conditions, but
with her final recovery from generation and return to the celestial
abodes. Consistently with this idea, Isis is represented sometimes as
the spouse, sometimes as the mother of Osiris, the Saviour of men. For
Osiris is the microcosmic sun, the counterpart in the human system of
the macrocosmic Dionysos or Son of God. So that those authors who
confound Isis with Demeter, equally and quite comprehensibly confound
Osiris with Dionysos, and regard the former as the central figure of the
Bacchic Mysteries. The Hermetic books admit three expressions of Deity:
first, the supreme, abstract, and infinite God, eternally
self-subsistent and unmanifest; secondly, the only-Begotten, the
manifestation of Deity in the universe; thirdly, God in man, the
Redeemer, or Osiris. On one of the walls of the Temple of the Sun at
Philae, and on the gate of that at Medinet-Abou are inscribed these
words:--"He has made all that is, and without Him nothing that is hath
been made," words which, fourteen centuries or more afterwards, were
applied by the writer of S. John's Gospel to the Word of God. The
micro-cosmic Sun, or Osiris, was the image and correspondence of this
macrocosmic Sun; the regenerating principle within the man, begotten by
means of the soul's experience in Time and Generation. And hence the
intimate association between this [regenerating](errata.htm#0) principle
by which the redemption of the individual was effected, and the divine
power in Nature, personified by Isis, whose function it was to minister
to that redemption by the ordination of events and conditions
appropriate to the soul's development. Isis is thus the secret
motive-power of Evolution; Osiris is the ultimate ideal Humanity towards
the realisation of which that Evolution moves.

A.K.

<span id="img_crosssep"></span> ![](img/crosssep.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xix:1](vow05.htm#fr_7) Dr. Wilder, in his
Introduction to the work of Mr. Thomas Taylor, the Platonist, entitled
"Dissertation on the Eleusinian Mysteries," asserts that the name Koré
is also Sanscrit, and that the Hindu goddess Parasu-pani, also called
Gorée, is identical with the Koré-Persephoneia of Hellenic worship.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xx:1](vow05.htm#fr_8) The Spirit, under the name
of *Atman*, is the chief topic of Hindu esoteric philosophy, the
Upanishads being exclusively devoted to it. They ascribe to *Atman* the
qualities of self-subsistence, unity, universality, immutability, and
incorruptibility. It is independent of *Karma*, or acquired character
and destiny, and the full knowledge of it redeems from *Karma* the
personality informed of it. *Atman* is also the all-seeing; and, as the
*Mantras* say, He who recognises the universe in his own *Atman*, and
his own *Atman* in the universe, knows no hatred.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxi:1](vow05.htm#fr_9) I substitute the singular
for the plural number, but this alters nothing in the sense.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxii:1](vow05.htm#fr_10)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

'O flowers fatally clear, and the mother's counsels despised!  
O cruel arts of crafty Venus!'

</div>

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxiv:1](vow05.htm#fr_11) Milton's "Paradise
Lost," Book XI.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxv:1](vow05.htm#fr_12) "Follow no man," said
*John Inglesant's* adviser--"there is nothing in the world of any value
but the Divine Light--follow it."

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxvii:1](vow05.htm#fr_13) The many-breasted
figure which forms the frontispiece of this volume, represents Isis
under this aspect. The black face and hands are, of course, equivalent
to the celebrated Veil, and indicate the inscrutable nature of the
occult influence which directs Destiny; and which, to the uninitiate,
even appears to be blind and fortuitous. The well-known "black virgin"
has the same significance.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xxviii:1](vow05.htm#fr_14) Αεναω στρόφαλιγγι
θοόν ῥύμα δινεύουσα.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I](vow06)
