[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](vow16)  [Next](vow18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PART IX.

AND since we are brought to speak of the relationship and of the
resemblance between men and Gods, behold, O Asclepios, the power and
capacity of man! Even as the Ruler and Father, or to give Him the
loftiest name--

\[God

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God is the creator
of the firmamental Gods, so is man the creator of the Gods who dwell in
temples, pleased with human proximity, and not only themselves
illumined, but illuminating. And this both profits man and strengthens
the Gods. Dost thou marvel, Asclepios? Dost thou lack faith as do many?

*Asclepios*:

I am confounded, O Trismegistos; but yielding myself willingly to thy
words, I judge man to be happy in that he has obtained such felicity.

*Hermes*:

Certes, he deserves admiration, being the greatest of all the Gods! For
the race of the Gods is formed of the purest part of Nature, without
admixture of other elements, and their visible signs are, as it were,
only heads. <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) But the Gods which
mankind makes, possess two natures--one divine, which is the first and
by far the purest, the other belonging to humanity, which is the matter
of which these Gods are composed, so that they have not only heads, but
entire bodies, with all their limbs. Thus mankind, remembering its
nature and its origin, persists in this matter, in the imitation of
Deity, for even as the Father and Lord has made the eternal Gods after
the similitude of Himself, so also has humanity made its Gods in its own
image.

\[*Asclepios*:

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

*Asclepios*:

Dost thou speak of the statues, Trismegistos?

*Hermes*:

Yes, of the statues, Asclepios. See how wanting thou art in faith! Of
what else should I speak but of the statues, so full of life, of
feeling, and of aspiration, which do so many wonderful things; the
prophetic statues which predict the future by bestowing dreams and by
all manner of other ways; which strike us with maladies, or heal our
pains according to our deserts? Art thou not aware, O Asclepios, that
Egypt is the image of heaven, or rather, that it is the projection below
of the order of things above? If the truth must be told, this land is
indeed the temple of the world. Nevertheless--since sages ought to
foresee all things--there is one thing thou must know; a time will come
when it will seem that the Egyptians have adored the Gods so piously in
vain, and that all their holy invocations have been barren and unheeded.
Divinity will quit the earth and return to heaven, forsaking Egypt, its
ancient abode, and leaving the land widowed of religion and bereft of
the presence of the Gods. Strangers will fill the earth, and not only
will sacred things be neglected, but--more dreadful still--religion,
piety, and the adoration of the Gods will be forbidden and punished by
the laws. Then, this earth, hallowed by so many shrines and temples,
will be filled with sepulchres and with the dead. O Egypt! Egypt! there
will remain of thy religions only vague legends which posterity will
refuse to believe; only

\[words

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

words graven upon stones will witness to thy devotion! The Scythian, the
Indian, or some other neighbouring barbarian will possess Egypt!
Divinity will return to heaven; humanity, thus abandoned, will wholly
perish, and Egypt will be left deserted, forsaken of men and of Gods!

To thee I cry, O most sacred River, to thee I announce the coming doom!
waves of blood, polluting thy divine waters, shall overflow thy banks;
the number of the dead shall surpass that of the living; and if, indeed,
a few inhabitants of the land remain, Egyptians by speech, they will in
manners be aliens! Thou weepest, O Asclepios! But yet sadder things than
these will come to pass. Egypt will fall into apostacy, the worst of all
evils. Egypt, once the holy land beloved of the Gods and full of
devotion for their worship, will become the instrument of perversion,
the school of impiety, the type of all violence. Then, filled with
disgust for everything, man will no longer feel either admiration or
love for the world. He will turn away from this beautiful work, the most
perfect alike in the present, the past, and the future. Nor will the
languor and weariness of souls permit anything to remain save disdain of
the whole universe, this immutable work of God, this glorious and
perfect edifice, this manifold synthesis of forms and images, wherein
the will of the Lord, lavish of marvels, has united all things in a
harmonious and single whole, worthy for ever of veneration, of praise
and love! Then darkness will be preferred to light, and death will be
deemed better than life, nor will any man lift his eyes to heaven.

In those days the religious man will be thought mad; the impious man
will be hailed as a sage; savage men

\[will

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

will be deemed valiant; the evil-hearted will be applauded as the best
of men. The Soul, and all that belongs thereto--whether born mortal or
able to attain eternal life--all those things which I have herein
expounded to thee, will be but matters for ridicule, and will be
esteemed foolishness. There will even be peril of death, believe me, for
those who [remain](errata.htm#2) faithful to religion and intelligence.
New rights will be instituted, new laws, nor will there be left one holy
word, one sacred belief, religious and worthy of heaven and of celestial
things. O lamentable separation between the Gods and men! Then there
will remain only evil demons who will mingle themselves with the
miserable human race, their hand will be upon it impelling to all kinds
of wicked enterprise; to war, to rapine, to falsehood, to everything
contrary to the nature of the soul. The earth will no longer be in
equilibrium, the sea will no longer be navigable, in the heavens the
regular course of the stars will be troubled. Every holy voice will be
condemned to silence; the fruits of the earth will become corrupt, and
she will be no more fertile; the very air will sink into lugubrious
torpor. Such will be the old age of the world; irreligion and disorder,
lawlessness, and the confusion of good men.

When all these things shall be accomplished, O Asclepios, then the Lord
and Father, the sovereign God who rules the wide world, beholding the
evil ways and actions of men, will arrest these misfortunes by the
exercise of His divine will and goodness. And, in order to put an end to
error and to the general corruption, He will drown the world with a
deluge or consume it by fire, or destroy it by wars and epidemics, and
thereafter He will restore to it its primitive beauty; so that once more
it shall appear worthy of admiration and worship, and

\[again

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

again a chorus of praise and of blessing shall celebrate Him Who has
created and redeemed so beautiful a work. This re-birth of the world,
this restoration of all good things, this holy and sacred
re-habilitation of Nature will take place when the time shall come which
is appointed by the divine and ever-eternal will of God, without
beginning and always the same.

*Asclepios*:

Indeed, Trismegistos, the nature of God is Will reflected; that is,
absolute goodness and wisdom.

*Hermes*:

O Asclepios, Will is the result of reflection, and to will is itself an
act of willing. For He Who is the fulness of all things and Who
possesses all that He will, wills nothing by caprice. But everything He
wills is good, and He has all that He wills; all that is good He thinks
and wills. Such is God, and the World is the image of His righteousness.

*Asclepios*:

Is the world then good, O Trismegistos?

*Hermes*:

Yes, the world is good, Asclepios, as I will inform thee. Even as God
accords to all beings and to all orders in the world benefits of divers
kinds, such as thought, soul, and life, so likewise the world itself
divides and distributes good things among mortals, changing seasons, the
fruits of the earth, birth, increase, maturity,

\[and

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

and other similar gifts. And thus God is above the summit of heaven, yet
everywhere present and beholding all things. For beyond the heavens is a
sphere without stars, transcending all corporeal things. Between heaven
and earth he reigns who is the dispenser of life, and whom we call Zeus
(Jupiter). Over the earth and the sea he reigns who nourishes all mortal
creatures, the plants and fruit-bearing trees, and whose name is Zeus
Sarapis (Jupiter Plutonius). And those to whom it shall be given to
dominate the earth shall be sent forth and established at the extremity
of Egypt, in a city built towards the west, whither, by sea and by land,
shall flow all the race of mortals.

*Asclepios*:

But where are they now, Trismegistos?

*Hermes*:

They are established in a great city, upon the mountain of Lybia. Enough
of this. <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[70:1](vow17.htm#fr_36) Hermes speaks of the
Stars, and of the Astral Powers, not of the Divine Intelligences. The
whole of this discourse has a hidden and profound meaning, relating to
the human organism, and to the elemental genii, which through man are
individualised. A.K.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[75:1](vow17.htm#fr_37) By "Egypt" is denoted
not only the country of that name, but the physical system generally of
the world, and especially--as in the Hebrew Scriptures--the human body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part X](vow18)
