[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](vow11)  [Next](vow13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

### PART IV.

*Asclepios*:

WHY then, O Trismegistos, was it necessary that man should be placed in
the world, instead of where God is, to dwell with Him in supreme
beatitude?

*Hermes*:

Thy question is natural, O Asclepios, and I pray God to assist me in
replying to it, for everything depends upon His will, especially those
great things which are at this moment the subject of our enquiry;
listen, then, to me, Asclepios. The Lord and Author of all things, whom
we call God, brought forth a second God, visible and sensible; I
describe him thus, not because he himself has sensibility, for this is
not the place to treat such a question, but because he is perceptible to
the senses. Having then produced this unique Being who holds the first
rank among creatures and the second after Himself, He found His
offspring beautiful and filled with all manner of good, and He loved it
as His own child. <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) He willed, then,
that another should be able to contemplate this Being so great and so
perfect whom He had drawn forth from Himself, and to this end He created
man, endowed with reason and intelligence.

\[The

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

The will of God is absolute accomplishment; to will and to do are for
Him the work of the selfsame instant. And, knowing that the essential
could not apprehend all things unless enveloped by the world, He gave to
man a body for a dwelling-place. He willed that man should have two
natures; He united them intimately and blended them in just proportion.

Thus, He formed man of spirit and of body; of an eternal nature and of a
mortal nature, so that, a creature thus constituted, he might, by means
of his double origin, admire and adore that which is celestial and
eternal; cultivate and govern that which is upon the earth. I speak here
of mortal things, not of the two elements subjected to man, to wit,
earth and water, but of things coming from man, which are in him or
depending on him, such as the culture of the soil, the pastures, the
construction of buildings, of ports, navigation, commerce, and those
reciprocal exchanges which are the strongest bond among men. Earth and
water form a part of the world, and this terrestrial part is sustained
by the arts and sciences, without which the world would be imperfect in
the eyes of God. For that which God wills is necessary, and the effect
accompanies His will; nor can it be believed that anything which has
seemed good to Him can cease to seem good to Him, because from the
beginning He knew what should be and what should please Him.

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[54:1](vow12.htm#fr_33) This "second God" is the
Visible Universe, which in most Hermetic writings is spoken of as the
"Son of God"--"the word made flesh."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part V](vow13)
