[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](vow09)  [Next](vow11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PART II.

HEAVEN--God manifest--regulates all bodies.

Their growth and their decline are determined by the sun and the moon.
But He who directs heaven--the soul itself and all that exists in the
world--is very God, the Creator.

From the heights where He reigns descend innumerable influences which
spread themselves throughout the world, into all souls both general and
particular, and into the nature of things.

The world has been prepared by God in order to receive all particular
forms. Realising these forms by

\[means

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

means of Nature, He has updrawn the world to heaven through the four
elements.

Everything is in accordance with the designs of God; but that which
originates from on high has been separated into individualities in the
following manner. The types of all things follow their (representative)
individualities in such way that the type is a whole; the individual is
a part of the type.

Thus the Gods constitute a type, the genii also. Similarly, men, birds,
and all beings which the world contains, constitute types producing
individuals resembling them.

There is yet another type, without sensation, but not without soul. It
consists of those beings which sustain themselves by means of roots
fixed in the earth. Individualities of this type are found everywhere.

Heaven is full of God. The types of which we have spoken have their
habitation extending up to that of the beings whose individualities are
immortal. For the individuality is a part of the type, as, for instance,
man is a part of humanity; and each one follows the character of its
type. Hence it comes that, while all types are imperishable, individuals
are not all imperishable.

Divinity forms a type of which all the individualisations are as
immortal as itself. Among other beings eternity belongs only to the
type; the individual perishes, and is perpetuated only by reproduction.
There are, then, some mortal individualities. Thus man is mortal,
humanity is immortal.

Nevertheless, individuals of all the types mix with all the types. Some
are primitive; others are produced

\[by

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

by these, by God, by genii, by men, and all resemble their respective
types.

For bodies can be formed only by the divine will; individualities cannot
be characterised without the aid of the genii; the education and
training of animals cannot be conducted without man.

All those genii who have forsaken their own type, and become joined in
individuality to an individuality of the divine type, are regarded as
neighbours and associates of the Gods.

The genii who preserve the character of their type, and are properly
called genii, love that which relates to mankind. The human type
resembles, or even surpasses, theirs; for the individuality of the human
is manifold and various, and results from the association mentioned
above. It is the indispensable link between nearly all other
individualities.

The man who has affinity with the Gods through the intelligence which he
shares with them, and through piety, is the neighbour of God. He who has
affinity with the genii approximates himself to them. They who are
satisfied with human mediocrity remain a part of the human type. Other
human individualities will be neighbours of the types or individualities
with which they shall be in affinity.

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part III](vow11.md)
