[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](vow14)  [Next](vow16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### PART VII.

LET us begin to speak of Mind and of other similar things. In the
beginning were God and Hylè--it is thus that the Greeks term the first
matter or substance of the universe. The Spirit was with the universe,
but not in the same manner as with God. The things which constitute the
universe are not God, therefore before their birth they were not in
existence, but they were already contained in that from which they were
produced. For besides and without created things is not only that which
is not yet born, but that also which has no generative fecundity, and
which can bring forth nothing. Everything which has the power of
generating contains in germ all that can be born of it, for it is easy
to that which is brought forth to bear that which shall bring forth. But
the eternal God cannot and never could be born; He is, He has been, He
will be always. The nature of God is to be His own Principle. But
matter, or the nature of the world, and mind, although appearing to be
brought forth from the beginning, possess the power of birth and of
procreation--fecundative energy. For the beginning is in the quality of
Nature, who possesses in herself the potentiality of conception and of
production. She is then, without any foreign intervention, the principle
of creation. It is otherwise with that which possesses only the power of
conception by means of mixing with a second nature. The matrix of the
universe and of all that it contains appears not to have been itself
born, holding however, within it, potentially, all Nature. I call that
the matrix

\[which

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

which contains all things, for they could not have been without a
vehicle to contain them. Everything which exists must exist in some
place (or vehicle), neither qualities nor quantities, nor positions, nor
effects could be distinguished in things having no place and being
nowhere. Thus the world, although not having been born, has in it the
principle of all birth; since it affords all things a fitting matrix for
conception. It is, then, the sum-total of qualities and of matter
susceptible of creation, although not yet created.

Matter, being fecund in all attributes, is able also to engender evil. I
put aside, therefore, O Asclepios and Ammon, the question asked by
many:--"Could not God hinder evil in the nature of things?" There is
absolutely nothing to say to them; but for you I will pursue the
discourse begun, and I will give the explanation. They affirm that God
ought to have preserved the world from evil; now, evil is in the world
as an integral part of it. The sovereign God indeed provided against it
inasmuch as was reasonable and possible, when He bestowed upon humanity
sentiment, knowledge, and intelligence. By these faculties solely, which
place us above other animals, we may escape the snares of evil and vice.
The man who is wise and protected by divine intelligence, knows how to
preserve himself from such immediately he beholds them, and before he
has been entrapped thereby. The foundation of knowledge is supreme
goodness. Spirit governs and gives life to all that is in the world; it
is an instrument employed by the will of the sovereign God. Thus we
ought to comprehend, by intelligence alone, the supreme Intelligible
called God. By Him is directed that secondary sensible God (the
universe), who contains all spaces, all substances, the matter of all
that engenders and produces,--in a word, all that is.

\[As

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

As for the spirit (or Mind), it moves and governs all individual beings
in the world according to the nature which God has assigned to them.
Matter--Hylè, or the *Kosmos*--is the receptacle, the motion, the
replication of everything which God directs, dispensing to each of them
that which is necessary to it, and filling them with spirit according to
their qualities.

The form of the universe is that of a hollow sphere, having in itself
the cause of its quality or of its figure, wholly invisible; if,
choosing any given point of its surface, one should seek to behold its
depths, one would be unable to see anything. It appears visible only by
means of those special forms whose images appear graven upon it, it
shows itself only in effigy; but in reality it is always invisible in
itself. Therefore, the centre, the depths of this sphere--if indeed one
may call it a place--is in Greek named *Hades*, the invisible, from
*eidein*, to see, because the centre of a sphere, cannot be seen from
without. Moreover, the types or formative appearances were called Ideas,
because they are the forms of the Invisible. This interior of the sphere
which the Greeks call Hades, because it is invisible, the Latins name
Hell (Inferno), on account of its profound position. These are the
primordial principles, the first sources, of all things. Everything is
in them, or by them, or comes forth from them.

*Asclepios*:

These principles are, then, O Trismegistos, the universal substance of
all individual appearances?

*Hermes*:

The world nourishes bodies, the spirit nourishes souls. Thought, the
heavenly gift which is the happy privilege

\[of

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

of humanity, nourishes intelligence, but few men only have an
intelligence capable of receiving such a benefit. Thought is a light
which illuminates the intelligence, as the sun illuminates the world.
And even more, for the light of the sun may be intercepted by the moon,
or by the earth when night comes; but when thought has once penetrated
into the human soul, it mingles intimately with her nature, and the
intelligence can never again be obscured by any cloud. Therefore, with
reason, it has been said that the souls of the Gods are intelligences.
As for me, I say not this of all of them, but of the great supernal
Gods.

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VIII](vow16)
