[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](vow21)  [Next](vow23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PART XIV.

*Asclepios*:

O TRISMEGISTOS, what is the part taken in the order of things by Destiny
or Fate? If the heavenly Gods rule the universe, and the mundane deities
control special events, where is the part of Destiny?

\[*Hermes*:

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

*Hermes*:

O Asclepios, Destiny is the necessity which compels all things that
happen, the chain which binds together all events. It is thus the cause
of things, the supreme deity, or rather the second God created by God,
that is the law of all things in heaven and earth established upon
divine ordinances. Destiny and Necessity are bound together
indissolubly: Destiny produces the beginning of all things, Necessity
enforces the effect which ensues from these beginnings. And hence arises
Order--that is, the sequence and disposition of things accomplished in
Time; for nothing is performed without Order. And thus the world is
perfected; for the world is founded on Order, and in Order the universe
consists. Therefore these three, Destiny (which is Fate), Necessity, and
Order, depend absolutely on the will of God Who governs the world by His
divine law and reason. These three principles have no will in
themselves; inflexible and inaccessible to favour as to anger, they are
but the instruments of the eternal Reason, which is immutable,
invariable, unalterable, indissoluble. First comes Destiny, containing,
like newly-sown soil, the germs of future events. Necessity follows,
urging them to their consummation. Lastly, Order maintains the fabric of
things established by Destiny and Necessity. For all this is an
ever-lasting sequence without beginning or end, sustained by its
immutable law in the continuity of eternity. It rises and falls
alternately, and as time rolls onward, that which had disappeared, again
rises uppermost. For such is the condition of the circular movement; all
things are interchained in such wise that neither

\[beginning

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

beginning nor end can be distinguished, and they appear to precede and
follow each other unceasingly. But as for accident and chance, they
pervade all mundane affairs.

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part XV](vow23)
