[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](vow26)  [Next](vow28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PART IV.

THIS discourse ends where it began, with the praise of the Supreme
Being, and afterwards of the most holy kings by whom we obtain peace. So
that having commenced by celebrating the Almighty greatness, it is to
this greatness that we return in terminating our speech. Even as the sun
nourishes all germs, and receives the promise of

\[the

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

the fruits which his rays, like divine hands, gather for the God; even
as these shining hands collect likewise the sweet odours of plants, so
also we, after having begun by the adoration of the Most High and the
effluence of His Wisdom, after having gathered into our souls the
fragrance of these heavenly flowers, must now collect the sweetness of
this sacred harvest which He, with fruitful rains, will bless. But even
if we had ten thousand mouths and ten thousand voices wherewith to
glorify the God of all purity, the Father of Souls, we should yet be
powerless to celebrate Him worthily; for new-born babes cannot, indeed,
rightly extol their father, yet since they do their utmost, they obtain
indulgence. Or rather, the glory of God is seen in this, that He is
superior to all creatures; He is the Beginning, He is the End, the
Midst, and the Continuance of their Praise; in Him they acknowledge
their Parent, all-powerful and infinite.

It is the same also with our king. We, who are his children, love to
extol him; and we ask indulgence of our father, even when, before we
asked, it was granted to us. A father, far from turning away from his
little ones, and from his new-born infants, because of their feebleness,
rejoices to see himself recognised by them. The universal gnosis which
communicates life to all, and enables us to bless God, is itself a gift
of God. For God, being good, has in Himself the fulness of all
perfection; being immortal, He contains in Himself immortal
tranquillity, and His eternal power sends forth into this world a
salutary benediction. In the hierarchy which He contains there are no
differences nor variations; all the beings in Him are wise, the same
providence is in all, the same intelligence governs

\[them,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

them, the same sentiment impels them to mutual goodness, and the same
love produces among them universal harmony.

Therefore, let us bless God and after Him the kings who from Him receive
the sceptre. And having inaugurated the praises of the kings, let us
also glorify piety towards the Supreme. May He instruct us how to bless
Him, and may His aid assist us in this study. May our first and chief
endeavour be to celebrate the fear of God and the praise of the Kings.
For to them is due our gratitude for the fruitful peace which by their
means we enjoy. It is the virtue of the King, and his name only which
obtains peace; he is called King because he advances chief in royalty
and power, and because he reigns by reason and peace. He is above all
barbarian royalties, his very name is a symbol of peace. The name alone
of the King suffices often to repel the foe. His images are as beacons
of safety in the tempest. For the very image of our King procures
victory, confers security, and renders us invulnerable.

<span class="small">\[Patrizzi hesitates to ascribe the fragment
entitled "Asclepios to King Ammon" to the disciple of Hermes, thinking
it unworthy of one who had enjoyed the instructions of so great a man.
Dr. Menard points out that despite the tirade against the Greeks and the
Greek tongue in the first section of this fragment, it was undoubtedly
originally written in that very language, as is proved by the reference
made in the third section to βασιλεύς (the king), and the etymological
derivation of the word from (βαίνειν (to advance), and also by the
allusions to Phidias, and to Eunomios, a musician of Locris, in the
second section. The description of the sun as a charioteer, and the
passing reference to "him who bears the crowns," are also both suggested
by Greek usages. In Egypt the sun was always represented as carried on a
barge or floating raft along the waters of the Nile. Dr. Menard
inclines, therefore, to</span>

\[believe

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

believe that the depreciatory remarks concerning the Greeks must have
been introduced by a fraudulent hand, in order to mislead the reader in
regard to the true origin of the fragment. Dr. Menard is, moreover, of
opinion that the king, or kings spoken of in the fragment, are the
imperial brothers Valens and Valentinian. I venture to differ from this
view, and believe, rather, that the writer, whether indeed the true
Asclepios or not, certainly uses the words "king," "kings," and
"royalties" in an occult sense. For if he intended, as Dr. Menard
supposes, a mere commonplace eulogium on a reigning monarch or
monarchs--whether Ammon, or Valens and his brother--to what purpose
should he set out by declaring his writings to be "truly occult and
containing a hidden sense"? All that is said in the fragment concerning
kingship is perfectly applicable to the mystic Osiris, the nature of
whose royalty has been elsewhere explained. Osiris is the reflection and
counterpart in Man, of the supreme Lord of the Universe, the ideal type
of humanity; hence the soul, or essential ego, presenting itself for
judgment in the spiritual world, is in the Egyptian Ritual of the Dead,
described as "an Osiris." It is to this Osiris, or king within us, our
higher Reason, the true Word of God, that we owe perpetual reverence,
service, and faithful allegiance.

A.K.\]

<span id="img_11300"></span> ![](img/11300.jpg)

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

 

<span id="img_11400"></span> ![End of the Definitions of
Asclepios.](img/11400.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I](vow28)
