[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](vow22)  [Next](vow24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PART XV.

AND now, inasmuch as it is given to man, and inasmuch as God has
permitted, we have spoken concerning everything; it re-mains only,
therefore, that we should bless and pray to God and return to our mortal
cares, having satisfied our minds by treating of sacred things which are
the food of the mind.

\*           \*           \*           \*

Therewith, coming forth from the Sanctuary, they addressed to God their
oraisons, turning themselves to the south, because when the sun begins
to decline, he who would praise the God should direct his gaze thither,
as in like manner, at sunrise, he should look towards the orient. And
even while they pronounced their invocations, Asclepios, in a low voice,
spoke thus:

\[O Tatius,

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

O Tatius, let us ask our father that our prayers may be accompanied with
odours of incense and perfumes.

Trismegistos heard, and was moved.

May the omen be favourable, O Asclepios, he said. It is almost a
sacrilege to burn incense or any other perfume during prayer; He Who is
all and Who contains all, desires nothing. Let us give Him praise and
adoration only; the divinest odours are acts of grace which mortals
render to God.

We give Thee thanks, O Lord Most High, for by Thy grace we have received
the light of Thy knowledge; may Thy Name be adored and venerated, only
Name by which Deity is praised according to the religion of our fathers!
For Thou dost vouchsafe to accord to all of us the ancestral faith,
piety, love, and the most worthy and gracious gifts, in that Thou
bestowest upon us consciousness, reason, and intelligence. By
consciousness we discern Thee, by reason we seek Thee, and intelligence
endows us with the joy of understanding Thee. Saved by Thy divine power,
let us be glad in beholding the manifestation of Thyself; let us be glad
that, from the hour of our sojourn in the body, Thou dost deign to
consecrate us to eternity. The only joy of Man is the knowledge of Thy
majesty. We have known Thee, O magnificent Light, who art apprehended by
Intelligence alone! We have known Thee, O true Way of Life,
inexhaustible Source of all births! We have known Thee, O generative
Plenitude of all Nature, Eternal Permanence! And in this our oraison,
adoring the sanctity of Thy holiness, we ask of Thee only to grant that
we may persevere in the love of Thy knowledge, in such wise that we may
never

\[separate

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

separate ourselves from this manner of life. With which hope being
filled, we go forth to take a pure repast without animal flesh. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42)

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<span id="img_09500"></span> ![](img/09500.jpg)

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

 

<span id="img_09600"></span> ![End of the Treatise on
Initiations](img/09600.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[94:1](vow23.htm#fr_42) The words with which
this Discourse on Initiation ends are full of significance. The key to
the Hermetic Secret is found when the aspirant adopts the Edenic Life:
the life of purity and charity which all mystics--Hebrew, Egyptian,
Buddhist, Greek, Latin, Vedic, with one consent, ascribe to man in the
golden age of his primeval perfection. The first outcome of the Fall, or
Degeneracy, is the shedding of blood and eating of flesh. The license to
kill is the sign-manual of "Paradise Lost." And the first step towards
"Paradise Regained" is taken when man voluntarily returns to the manner
of life indicated by his organism as that alone befitting him, and thus
reunites himself to the harmony of Nature and the Will of God. No man
who follows this path and faithfully keeps to it will fail to find at
length the Gate of Paradise. Not necessarily in a single life-time, for
the process of purification is a long one, and the past experiences of
some men may be such as to shut them out for many lives from the
attainment of the promised land. But, nevertheless, every step
faithfully and firmly trodden, brings them nearer to the goal, every
year of pure life increasingly strengthens the spirit, purges the mind,
liberates the will, and augments their human royalty. On the other hand,
it is idle to seek union with God in the Spirit, while the physical and
magnetic organism remains insurgent against Nature. Harmony must be
established between man and Nature before union can be accomplished
between man and God. For Nature is the manifest God; and if man be not
in perfect charity with that which is visible, how shall he love that
which is invisible? Hermetic doctrine teaches the kinship and solidarity
of all beings, redeemed and glorified in man. For man does not stand
aloof and apart from other creatures, as though he were a fallen angel
dropped from some supernal world upon the earth, but he is the child of
earth, the product of evolution, the elder brother of all conscient
things; their lord and king, but not their tyrant. It is his part to be
to all creatures a Good Destiny; he is the keeper, the redeemer, the
regenerator of the earth. If need be, he may call on his subjects to
serve him as their king, but he may never, without forfeiting his
kingship, maltreat and afflict them. All the children of God, in every
land and age, have abstained from blood, in obedience

\[to

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

to an occult law which asserts itself in the breast of all regenerate
men. The mundane Gods are not averse to blood, for by means of it they
are invigorated and enabled to manifest. For the mundane Gods are the
forces of the astral element in man, which element dominates in the
unregenerate. Therefore, the unregenerate are under the power of the
stars, and subject to illusion. Inasmuch as a man is clean from the
defilement of blood, insomuch he is less liable to be beguiled by the
deceptions of the astral serpent. Therefore, let all who seek the
Hermetic secret, do their utmost to attain to the Hermetic life. If
entire abstinence from all forms of animal food be impossible, let a
lower degree be adopted, admitting the use of the least bloody meats
only--milk, fish, eggs, and the flesh of birds. But in such a case, let
the *intention* of the aspirant be continually united with that of
Nature, willing with firm desire to lead, whenever possible, a yet more
perfect life; so that in a future birth he may be enabled to attain to
it.

A.K.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I](vow24)
