[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](vow23)  [Next](vow25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

# *The Definitions of Asclepios*.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span id="img_09900"></span> ![](img/09900.jpg)

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span id="img_10100"></span> ![](img/10100.jpg)

###### THE

# *DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIOS*.

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

### PART I.

*Asclepios to the King Ammon*.

I ADDRESS to thee, O King, a comprehensive discourse, <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md) which is, as it were, the sum and epitome
of all others. Far from being in accordance with the opinion of the
vulgar, it is wholly adverse thereto. Even to

\[thee,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

thee, it may seem inconsistent with certain of my discourses. My master,
Hermes, who frequently conversed with me, either alone, or in the
presence of Tatios, was wont to say that those who should read my
writings would affirm their doctrine to be quite simple and clear, while
indeed, on the contrary, it is truly occult and contains a hidden sense.
And it has become yet more obscure since the Greeks undertook to
translate it from our language into theirs. This has been a source of
difficulty and perversion of sense. The character of the Egyptian
language, and the energy of the words it uses, enforce the meaning on
the mind. As much then as thou canst, O King, and indeed thou art
all-powerful, prevent this discourse from being translated, lest these
mysteries should reach the Greeks, and their manner of speech, adorned
and elegant in expression, should, perchance, weaken the vigour and
diminish the solemn gravity and force of these words. The Greeks, O
King, have new forms of language for producing argument, and their
philosophy is prodigal of speech. We, on the other hand, employ not
words so much as the great language of facts.

I will begin this discourse by invoking God, the Master of the Universe,
the Creator and the Father, Who contains all, Who is All in One, and One
in All. For the plenitude of all things is Unity, and in Unity; nor is
the one term inferior to the other, since the two are one. Bear in mind
this thought, O King, during the whole of my exposition. Vain is it to
seek to distinguish the All and the One by designating the multitude of
things the All, and not their Plenitude. Such a distinction is
impossible, for the All exists no longer if separated from Unity; and if
Unity exists,

\[it

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

it is in the Totality; now it indeed exists and never ceases to be One,
otherwise the Plenitude would be dissolved.

In the bosom of the earth there are impetuous springs of water and of
fire; such are the three natures of fire, water, and earth, proceeding
from a common origin. Whereby it may be thought that there is one
general fountain of matter, bringing forth all abundantly and receiving
existence from on high. It is thus that heaven and earth are governed by
their creator, that is, by the sun, who causes essence to stream
downwards, and matter to rise upwards, and who draws to himself the
universe, giving all to everything, lavish of the benefits of his
radiance. It is he who distributes beneficent energies not only in
heaven and throughout the air, but upon earth also, and even in the
depths of

the abyss. If there be an intelligible substance, it must be the very
substance of the sun, whose light is the vehicle thereof. But what may
be its constitution and primal fount, he only knows. That by induction
we may understand that which is hidden from our sight, it would be
necessary to be near him and analogous to his nature. But that which he
permits us to behold is no conjecture; it is the splendid vision which
illuminates the universal and supernal world.

In the midst of the universe is the sun established, like the bearer of
the crowns; and even as a skilful driver, he directs and maintains the
chariot of the world, holding it to its course. He keeps fast the reins
of it, even life, soul, spirit, immortality, and birth. He drives it
before him, or, rather, with him. And after this manner he forms all
things, dispensing to immortals eternal permanence. The light, which
from

\[his

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

his outer part streams towards heaven, nourishes the immortal spaces of
the universe. The rest, encircling and illuminating the entirety of the
waters, the earth, and the air, becomes the matrix wherein life
germinates, wherein are initiated all births and metamorphoses,
transforming creatures, as by a spiral motion, and causing them to pass
from one portion of the world to another, from one species to another,
and from one appearance to another; maintaining the equilibrium of their
mutual metamorphoses, as in the creation of greater entities. For the
permanence of bodies consists in transmutation. But immortal forms are
indissoluble, and mortal bodies decompose; such is the difference
between the immortal and the mortal.

This creation of life by the sun is as continuous as his light; nothing
arrests or limits it. Around him, like an army of satellites, are
innumerable choirs of Genii. These dwell in the neighbourhood of the
Immortals, and thence watch over human things. They fulfil the will of
the Gods by means of storms, tempests, transitions of fire, and
earthquakes; likewise by famines and wars, for the punishment of
impiety. For the greatest crime of men is impiety towards the Gods. The
nature of the Gods is to do good, the duty of men is to be pious, the
function of the Genii is to chastise. The Gods do not hold men
responsible for faults committed through mistake or boldness, by that
necessity which belongs to fate, or by ignorance; only iniquity falls
under the weight of their justice.

It is the sun who preserves and nourishes all creatures; and even as the
Ideal World which environs the sensible world fills this last with the
plenitude and universal variety of forms, so also the sun enfolding

\[all

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

all in his light accomplishes everywhere the birth and development of
creatures, and when they fall wearied in the race, gathers them again to
his bosom. Under his orders is the choir of the Genii, or rather the
choirs, for there are many and diverse, and their number corresponds to
that of the stars. Every star has its genii, good and evil by nature, or
rather by their operation, for operation is the essence of the genii. I
n some there is both good and evil operation. All . these Genii preside
over mundane affairs, they shake and overthrow the constitution of
States and of individuals; they imprint their likeness on our souls,
they are present in our nerves, our marrow, our veins, our arteries, and
our very brain-substance, and in the recesses of our viscera. At the
moment when each of us receives life and being, he is taken in charge by
the genii who preside over births, and who are classed beneath the
astral powers. Perpetually they change, not always identical, but
revolving in circles. They permeate by the body two parts of the soul,
that it may receive from each the impress of his own energy. But the
reasonable part of the soul is not subject to the genii; it is designed
for the reception of God, who enlightens it with a sunny ray. Those who
are thus illumined are few in number, and from them the genii abstain;
for neither genii nor gods have any power in the presence of a single
ray of God. But all other men, both soul and body, are directed by
genii, to whom they cleave, and whose operations they affect. But reason
is not like desire, which deceives and misleads. The genii, then, have
the control of mundane things, and our bodies

\[serve

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

serve them as instruments. Now, it is this control which Hermes calls
Destiny. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md)

The Intelligible World is attached to God, the Sensible World to the
Intelligible World, and through these two worlds, the sun conducts the
effluence of God, that is, the creative energy. Around him are the eight
spheres which are bound to him--the sphere of the fixed stars, the six
spheres of the planets, and that which surrounds the earth. To these
spheres the genii are bound, and to the genii, men; and thus are all
beings bound to God, who is the universal Father. The sun is the
creator; the world is the crucible of creation. The Intelligible Essence
rules heaven, heaven directs the gods, under these are classed the
genii, who guide mankind. Such is the divine hierarchy, and such is the
operation which God accomplishes by gods and genii for Himself.
Everything is a part of God, thus God is all. In creating all, He
perpetuates Himself without any intermission, for the energy of God has
no past, and since God is without limits, His creation is without
beginning or end. <span id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45.md)

\[If

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[101:1](vow24.htm#fr_43.md) This discourse, which
usually concludes, not precedes, the "Fragments," is sometimes but
erroneously attributed to Apuleius; see Hargrave Jennings' scholarly and
exhaustive "Introductory Essay" to my Annotated Edition of "The Divine
Pymander."

Robt. H. FRYAR, Bath.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[106:1](vow24.htm#fr_44.md) Asclepios, throughout
this discourse, preaches pure Hermetic doctrine, which discourages all
traffic with elementals, astrals, and other dæmonic influences, whether
beneficent or the reverse, and instructs man rather to seek the grace of
the Holy Spirit, by aspiring evermore inwards and upwards, and abiding
in the reasonable and divine part of his nature.

A.K.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[106:2](vow24.htm#fr_45.md) Compare with this
declaration the opening passage of Section III. in the *Book of Hermes
to Tatios*, and my note thereon. The Divine Olympos, or Mount of
Energies, emits a continuous river of Generation, or "Becoming." And the
equilibrium of Nature is continually maintained by a corresponding
process of perpetual return from Matter to <span id="page_107">p.
107</span> Essence; from Existence to Being. With the right hand ADONAI
projects; with the left He indraws.

The leading idea in the above fragment is the parallelism between Man
and the Universe. The whole Solar System of the Macrocosm, with its
hierarchy of gods and elemental powers, is resumed in the human system
of the Microcosm.

A.K.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II](vow25.md)
