[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](vow36)  [Next](vow38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

### PART II.

ALL things are produced by Nature and Destiny, nor is any place void of
Providence. Providence is the Free Will of the Supreme God; whence two
spontaneous forces, Necessity and Destiny. Destiny is subject to
Providence and to Necessity; and to Destiny are subject the stars.
Therefore, no man can escape from Destiny, nor arm himself against the
action of the stars. For they are the instruments of Destiny; by their
means the will of Destiny is accomplished throughout all Nature and in
human existence. <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md)

\[The

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[142:1](vow37.htm#fr_49.md) I commend the above
fragments to the careful consideration of Hermetists. Many persons find
it difficult to reconcile belief in the "ruling of the stars" with
belief in free will. At first sight it appears unjust and arbitrary that
certain lines of life--even vicious ones--should be indicated by the
"rulers of nativities" as the only lines in which the "native" will
prosper; and they ask incredulously whether it can be rationally
supposed that the "accident" of the day and hour of birth, is, by Divine
Providence, permitted to direct and dominate the whole career of an
intelligent and responsible being. But this objection is superficial,
and the result of incomplete knowledge. For the difficulties of
astrological science, if viewed in the light of Karmic Predestination or
Fate, not only disappear, but give place to the unfoldment of a most
lucid and admirable system of responsible causation. There is but one
hypothesis capable of solving the enigma of Fate, and that hypothesis is
a doctrine common to all the greater schools of thought--Vedic,
Buddhist, Kabbalistic, Hermetic, Platonic,--the hypothesis, to wit, of
multiple existences, or the doctrine of the Metempsychosis. Destiny, in
the view of these philosophies, is not arbitrary, but acquired. Every
man makes his own Fate; and nothing is truer than the saying that
"Character is Destiny." For that which in one existence is Will, becomes
in the next Fate. By the hands of men themselves, then, are their natal
lines cast, whether in pleasant and virtuous, or in painful and <span
id="page_143">p. 143</span> vicious paths. For in what manner soever an
ego conducts itself in one existence, by that conduct, by that order of
thought and habit it builds for itself its destiny in a future
existence. And the ego is enchained by these pre-natal influences, and
by them irresistibly compelled into a new nativity at the time of such
conjunction of planets and signs as oblige it into certain courses, or
incline it strongly thereto. Hence "Destiny," or Karma, is said by
Hermes to "determine the position of the stars." And if the course so
defined be evil, and the ruling such as to favour chiefly vicious
propensities, the afflicted ego, even though assuredly reaping the just
effects of its own demerit, is not left without a remedy. For the ego
may oppose its will to the stellar ruling, and heroically adopt a course
opposed to the direction of the natal influences. Thereby, indeed, the
ego may bring itself under a curse for such period as those influences
have power, for, as Hermes tells us, "no man can escape from Destiny,
nor preserve himself from the action of the stars;" but at the same
time, the will thus exerted will reverse the planetary affinities
acquired, and give a new "set" to the current of the Karmic
predestination, so that the ruling signs of the next nativity will be
favourable to virtue and to a loftier state. But the "stars" and
"stellar influences" which are thus the "instruments of Destiny" are
immediately microcosmic, and only mediately macrocosmic. (For the full
exposition and interpretation of this important subject, the reader is
referred to "*Astrology Theologized*," now about to be republished in
the present series of Occult Reprints, by ROBT. H. FRYAR, Bath.)

A.K.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part III](vow38.md)
