[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](vow38)  [Next](vow40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

### PART IV.

THE soul is then an incorporeal essence; if she had a body she would be
unable to preserve herself, for every body has need of breath and of
life which consists in order. Wherever there is birth there is fluxion.
To "become" presupposes magnitude, that is augmentation; augmentation
involves diminution, which, in turn, brings about destruction. That
which receives the form of life participates in being by means of the
soul. In order to produce existence, it is necessary to exist; existence
I define to be a reasonable becoming and participation in intelligent
life. Life constitutes the creature, intelligence renders it reasonable,
the body makes it mortal. The soul is then incorporeal, and possesses an
immutable force. Can an intelligent creature exist without a living
essence? Can he be rational if an intelligent essence does not maintain
in him rational life? If intelligence does not manifest itself in all
creatures, it is on account of the constitution of the body in regard to
harmony. If heat dominates in the constitution thereof, the creature is
volatile and ardent; if cold dominates, it is heavy and slow. Nature
distributes the elements of the body according to a law of harmony. This
harmonic combination has three forms:--the hot, the cold, and the
temperate. Conjunction is established according to stellar influence.
The soul appropriates the body destined to her, and causes it to live by
the operation of nature. Nature assimilates the harmony of bodies to the
disposition of the stars, and the combination of their elements to the
harmony of the stars; so that there may be reciprocal sympathy. For the
purpose of stellar harmony is to engender sympathies in agreement with
Destiny.

\[The

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part V](vow40.md)
