[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](vow39)  [Next](vow41.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

### PART V.

THE soul is then, O Ammon, an essence having its end in itself,
receiving from the beginning the life prepared for her, and attracting
to herself, as a material, a certain reason endowed with passion and
desire. Passion is a matter; if it enters into accord with the
intelligent part of the soul, it becomes courage, and does not yield to
fear. Desire also is a matter; in association with the rational part of
the soul, it becomes aspiration and yields not to voluptuousness. For
reason enlightens the blindness of desire. When the faculties of the
soul are thus co-ordinated under the supremacy of reason, they produce
justice. The government of the faculties of the soul belongs to the
Intellectual Principle which subsists in itself in its provident reason,
having for authority its own reason. It governs all like a magistrate;
its provident reason serves it as counsellor. The reason of this
Principle is the cognizance of the reasons which furnish the image of
rationality to the irrational; an image relatively obscure when compared
with reason, but rational when compared to the irrational, as an echo
compared to a voice, or the light of the moon compared to that of the
sun. Passion and desire are ordained according to a certain reason; they
mutually attract each other, and establish between them a circulatory
current of thought. Every soul is immortal, and always in movement. For
we have seen that movements proceed either from energies or from bodies.
We have seen, also, that the soul, being incorporeal, proceeds not from
any matter, but from an essence incorporeal

\[poreal

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

itself. Everything that is born is necessarily produced by some other
thing. Two movements necessarily accompany everything the generation of
which involves decay; that of the soul which moves it, and that of the
body which augments, diminishes, and decomposes it, in decomposing
itself. It is thus that I define the movement of perishable bodies. But
the soul is perpetually in motion, without cessation she moves and
produces movement. Thus every soul is immortal and always in motion,
moved by her own activity. There are three species in souls: divine,
human, and irrational. The divine soul abides in a divine form, it is
therein that she has her energy; therein she moves and acts. When this
soul separates herself from mortal creatures, she forsakes her
irrational parts and enters into the divine form; and, as she is always
in motion, she is borne along in the universal movement. The human soul
has also something divine, but she is bound to irrational elements
desire and passion; these elements are undying, because they are
energies; but they are energies of mortal bodies, therefore they are
removed from the divine part of the soul, which inhabits the divine
form. When this divine part enters into a mortal body and meets therein
these irrational elements, she becomes, by means of their presence, a
human soul. The soul of animals is composed of passion and desire,
therefore the animals are called brutes, because their soul is deprived
of reason. The fourth species in soul, that possessed by inanimate
creatures, is placed outside the bodies actuated. This soul moves in the
divine form, and impels it passively. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50.md)

\[The

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[147:1](vow40.htm#fr_50.md) The above fragment
appears to me extremely obscure and unsatisfactory. I include it in the
series of Hermetic writings because it is quoted as such by Stobæus, but
it certainly needs much interpretation and explanation, if it be indeed
genuine.

A.K.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VI](vow41.md)
