[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc15)  [Next](cc17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 7.

*Bartolomé Las Casas*.

<span class="smallcaps">Born</span> 1474; died 1566.

"One of the most remarkable men of the sixteenth century" \[128: 206\].
"Las Casas was the brightest star of this small constellation \[the
early Spanish-Americans\]. With the eye of a seer he saw, and, in the
words of a prophet, he foretold the judgment that would fall on Spain
for the horrors perpetrated on the wretched aborigines" \[119: 706\] .

"Bartolomé de las Casas was born in Seville in 1474. His family, one of
the noblest in Spain, was of French origin, descended from the Viscounts
of Limoges. They were already in Spain before the thirteenth century,
and played a distinguished part in the conquest of Seville from the
Moors by Ferdinand III of Castile, in 1252. From that time forward
members of the family were to be found in positions of trust, and among
their marked traits of character were invincible courage and spotless
integrity. By birth and training Bartolomé was an aristocrat to the very
tips of his fingers" \[89: 437\].

Las Casas went to Hispaniola and settled on an estate in that island in
1502.

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Little is known of his first occupation there, except that he seems to
have been more or less concerned in money-making, like all the other
settlers. About 1510 he was ordained as a priest. He fulfilled three or
four vocations, being an eager man of business, a laborious and accurate
historian, a great reformer, a great philanthropist and a vigorous
ecclesiastic \[98:2\].

He was eloquent, acute, truthful, bold, self-sacrificing, pious
\[98:3\].

His was one of the lives that are beyond biography, and require a
history to

</div>

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

be written in order to illustrate them. His career affords, perhaps, a
solitary instance of a man who, being neither a conqueror, a discoverer
nor an inventor, has, by the pure force of benevolence, become so
notable a figure that large portions of history cannot be written, or at
least cannot be understood, without the narrative of his deeds and
efforts being made one of the principal threads upon which the history
is strung. In early American history Las Casas is, undoubtedly, the
principal figure. He has been justly called "the Great Apostle of the
Indies" \[98:289\].

He was a person of such immense ability and strength of character that
in whatever age of the world he had lived he would undoubtedly have been
one of its foremost men. As a man of business he had rare executive
power. He was a great diplomatist and an eloquent preacher, a man of
titanic energy, ardent but self-controlled, of unconquerable tenacity,
warm-hearted and tender, calm in his judgments, shrewdly humorous,
absolutely fearless and absolutely true. He made many and bitter
enemies, and some of them were unscrupulous enough; but I believe no one
has ever accused him of any worse sin than extreme fervor of
temperament. His wrath would rise to a white heat and indeed there was
occasion enough for it. He was also very apt to call a spade a spade,
and to proclaim unpleasant truths with pungent emphasis \[89:439\].

By the year 1510 the slavery of the Indians, under the names
repartimentos and encomiendas, had become deplorably cruel. An Indian's
life was counted of no value. It was cheaper to work an Indian to death
and get another than to take care of him, and accordingly the slaves
were worked to death without mercy. From time to time they rose in
rebellion, then they were "slaughtered by the hundreds, burned alive,
impaled on sharp stakes, torn to pieces by bloodhounds" \[89:443\].

Las Casas was by natural endowment a many-sided man, who looked at human
affairs from various points of view. Under other circumstances he need
not necessarily have developed into a philanthropist, though any career
into which he might have been drawn could not have failed to be
honorable and noble. At first he seems to have been what one might call
worldly-minded. But the most interesting thing about him we shall find
to be his steady intellectual and spiritual development; from year to
year he rose to higher and higher planes of thought and feeling. He was
at first a slave-owner, like the rest, and had seen no harm in it. But
from the first his kindly, sympathetic nature asserted itself, and his
treatment of his slaves was such that they loved him. He was a man of
striking and easily distinguishable aspect, and the Indians in. general,
who fled from the sight of a white man, came soon to recognize him as a
friend who could always be trusted \[89: 448\].

</div>

About 1512–13 Velasquez conquered Cuba, reducing the natives to slavery.
Las Casas presently followed him into the island, and received from him
a half interest in a large village of Indians. He entered into
possession as a mere matter of course, and settled down in the island.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

We come now to the definite fact which, if it can be relied upon as
having happened as told, proves (along with the facts of his life) that
Las Casas was a case of Cosmic Consciousness. Not only so, but it would
seem—from his supreme physical and mental vigor, prolonged to a great
age, from his splendid moral nature, from his intellect, said to be
proved by his writings to be first-class, from his personal magnetism
and from his high spiritual endowments—that this man stands among the
supreme examples of those who have been endowed with this splendid
faculty.

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

It was the duty of Las Casas to say mass, and now and then to preach,
and in thinking of his sermon for Pentecost, 1514, he opened his Bible,
and his eyes alighted upon these verses, in the thirty-fourth chapter of
Ecclesiasticus:

"The Most High is not pleased with the offerings of the wicked; neither
is he pacified for sin by the multitude of sacrifices.

"The bread of the needy is their life; he that defraudeth him thereof is
a man of blood.

"He that taketh away his neighbor's living slayeth him; and he that
defraudeth the laborer of his hire is a shedder of blood."

As he read these words a light from heaven seemed to shine upon Las
Casas. The scales fell from his eyes. He saw that the system of slavery
was wrong in principle \[89:450\].

</div>

At this time Las Casas was forty years of age. Fiske goes on to tell how
for fifty-two more years he lived one of the most active, beautiful and
beneficent of lives, dying at last "in Madrid, after a few days'
illness, at the age of ninety-two. In all this long and arduous
life—except for a moment, perhaps, on the crushing news of the
destruction of his colony upon the Pearl Coast—we find no record of work
interrupted by sickness, and to the very last his sight was not dim nor
his natural force abated" \[89: 481\].

Fiske concludes:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

In contemplating such a life as that of Las Casas all words of eulogy
seem weak and frivolous. The historian can only bow in reverent awe
before a figure which is in some respects the most beautiful and sublime
in the annals of Christianity since the apostolic age. When now and then
in the course of the centuries God's providence brings such a life into
this world, the memory of it must be cherished by mankind as one of its
most precious and sacred possessions. For the thoughts, the words, the
deeds of such a man, there is no death. The sphere of their influence
goes on widening forever. They bud, they blossom, they bear fruit, from
age to age \[89: 482\].

</div>

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

As Las Casas wrote, evidence more or less decisive on the point here
raised should be found under his own hand. But most of his compositions
were short and were occupied with special and current topics; the work
in which (if at all) he may have touched upon the supposed event in his
personal history is his "Historia General de las Indias," and this,
unfortunately, has never been printed.

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

At his death he left it to the convent of San Gregorio, at Valladolid,
with directions that it should not be printed for forty years, nor be
seen during that time by any layman or member of the fraternity. . ..
The Royal Academy of History revised the first volume some years since
with a view to the publication of the whole work; but the indiscreet and
imaginative style of the composition, according to Navarrete, and the
consideration that its most important facts were already known through
other channels, induced that body to abandon the design. With deference
to their judgment, it seems to me a mistake. Las Casas, with every
deduction, is one of the great writers of the nation—great from the
important truths which he discerned when none else could see them, and
with the courage with which he proclaimed them to the world. They are
scattered over his history as well as his other writings. They are not,
however, the passages transcribed by Herrara \[128:212\].

</div>

It is a fair inference, from the above remarks, that the writings of Las
Casas have the qualities usually found in those which proceed from
Cosmic Consciousness, such as boldness, originality, unconventionality,
keen insight, sympathy, courage. And over and above these it is quite
possible that were they examined they would be found to contain proof,
by direct statement, that their author possessed the Cosmic Sense.

To sum up: Las Casas was presumably possessed of Cosmic Consciousness,
because:

*a*. Of his unusual health and strength; for this great faculty commonly
occurs in exceptional physical organizations.

*b*. Of his "striking aspect" and of the affection felt for him by the
Indians and others.

*c*. Of his mental growth after the age at which the intellectual and
moral stature is usually complete.

*d*. Of the sudden and immense change that took place in him

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

at the age of forty, when he was past the period of moral evolution
within the compass of the ordinary, self conscious man.

*e*. Because of the intellectual, but especially of the moral, stature
attained by him-higher (it may be safely said) than is ever attained
within the limits of mere self consciousness.

*f*. And because of (if it can be depended upon, and it seems so likely
that it is easy to believe it) the subjective light said to have been
experienced by him about Pentecost, 1514. If this could be shown to be
of the same character as the light that shone within Paul, Mohammed and
others, then it would be certain that Las Casas possessed the Cosmic
Sense. Even as the case stands there is little doubt of it. It must not
be forgotten that the (supposed) subjective light was the immediate
forerunner of Las Casas’ spiritual new birth, nor that this latter
occurred at the characteristic time of year—while he was thinking of his
sermon for Pentecost—therefore towards the end of May or early in June.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8. John Yepes (Called St. John of the Cross)](cc17)
