[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc16)  [Next](cc18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 8.

*John Yepes* (*Called St. John of the Cross*).

<span class="smallcaps">Born</span> 1542; died 1591.

John Yepes was born at Fontibere, near Avila, in old Castile, on the
twenty-fourth of June, 1542. His father died when he was a child, and
his mother was left poor. He studied at the College of Jesuits. At
twenty-one years of age he took the religious habit among the Carmelite
Friars at Medina. His religious zeal continually increased. When he
arrived at Salamanca, in order to commence his higher studies, the
austerities which he practiced were excessive. At twenty-five years of
age he was promoted to the priesthood. At the age of about thirty, or
perhaps between that age and thirty-three, he passed through a period of
"interior trouble of mind, scruples and a disrelish of spiritual
exercises; . . . the devils assaulted him with violent temptations; . .
. the most terrible of all these pains was that of scrupulosity and
interior

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

desolation, in which he seemed to see hell open, ready to swallow him
up" \[31: 552\].

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

After some time certain rays of light, comfort and divine sweetness
scattered these mists and translated the soul of the servant of God into
a paradise of interior delights and heavenly sweetness \[31:552\].

</div>

He had another period of depression, followed by still more perfect
illumination and happiness.

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

A certain brightness darted from his countenance on many
occasions—especially when he came from the altar or from prayer. It is
said that a heavenly light at times shone from his countenance
\[31:554\].

</div>

He enjoyed the happiness characteristic of the Cosmic Conscious state.
Butler quotes him as saying: "The soul of one who serves God always
swims in joy, always keeps a holiday, is always in her palace of
jubilation, ever singing with fresh ardor and fresh pleasure a new song
of joy and love" \[31: 557\].

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Two hours before he died he repeated aloud the Miserere psalm with his
brethren; then he desired one to read him part of the book of Canticles,
appearing himself in transports of joy. He at length cried out: "*Glory
be to God!*" pressed the crucifix on his breast, and, after some time,
said: "*Lord, into thy hands I commend my soul*," with which words he
calmly died, fourteenth of December, 1591, at the age of forty-nine
\[31: 558\].

</div>

For originating, or adhering to, some monastic forms he was, in 1578,
imprisoned for some months, and it was during this time, at the age of
thirty-six, that he entered Cosmic Consciousness.

On the fifteenth of August, 1578, he had been eight months in prison. On
the twenty-fourth of June the same year he was thirty-six years of age.

Illumination occurred when he was in prison and apparently (but the
record is not clear on this point) a very few months before the
fifteenth of August. All available evidence considered, it seems about
certain that illumination took place in spring or early summer, and that
Yepes was within a month or two (before or after) of his thirty-sixth
birthday at the time \[112: 108\].

It was in the same year, after illumination \[112: 141\], that he began
to write.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

The phenomenon of the subjective light seems to have manifested itself
with unusual intensity in this case.

Others are said to have seen it. Also it is said to have lighted him
about the monastery. These latter statements doubtless rest upon
exaggeration or confusion such as is found in the description of the
same phenomenon in Paul's case. It is curious, too, that in the case of
John Yepes, partial blindness, lasting some days, followed, and was
evidently in some way connected with the subjective light.

In the case of Paul the blindness was more marked and lasted longer. It
would seem that the centric disturbance which must coexist with the
subjective light may be so great as to leave the optic centre, for a
time, incapable of reacting under its ordinary stimulus. It seems clear
that both in the case of Paul and in that of Yepes the change that gave
rise to the blindness was centric. One of Yepes' biographers describes
the phenomenon of the light itself and its effects upon his eyes in the
following words:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

His cell became filled with light seen by the bodily eye. One night the
friar who kept him went as usual to see that his prisoner was safe, and
witnessed the heavenly light with which the cell was flooded. He did not
stop to consider it, but hurried to the prior, thinking that some one in
the house had keys to open the doors of the prison. The prior, with two
religious went at once to the prison, but on his entering the room
through which the prison was approached the light vanished. The prior,
however, entered the cell, and, finding it dark, opened the lantern with
which he had provided himself, and asked the prisoner who had given him
light. St. John answered him, and said that no one in the house had done
so, that no one could do it and that there was neither candle nor lamp
in the cell. The prior made no reply and went away, thinking that the
gaoler had made a mistake.

St. John, at a later time, told one of his brethren that the heavenly
light, which God so mercifully sent him, lasted the night through, and
that it filled his soul with joy and made the night pass away as if it
were but a moment. When his imprisonment was drawing to its close he
heard our Lord say to him, as it were out of the soft light that was
around him, <span
style="font-family: Lucida Blackletter, Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif; font-weight: bold;">"John,
I am here; be not afraid; I will set thee free"</span> \[112:108\].

A few moments later, while making his escape from the prison of the
monastery, it is said that he had a repetition of the experience as
follows:

He saw a wonderful light, out of which came a voice, <span
style="font-family: Lucida Blackletter, Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif; font-weight: bold;">"follow
me."</span> He followed, and the light moved before him towards the wall
which was on the bank, and then, he knew not how, he found himself on
the summit of it without

</div>

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

effort or fatigue. He descended into the street, and then the light
vanished. So brilliant was it, that for two or three days afterwards, so
he confessed at a later time, his eyes were weak, as if he had been
looking at the sun in its strength \[112:116\].

</div>

After illumination, and upon the solicitation of persons about him who
saw that he had, as Emerson says, "a new experience," he wrote several
books, the object of which was to convey to others a knowledge of the
new life that had come to him, and, if possible, to convey something of
that new life itself. The following extracts are chosen because they
exhibit with some clearness the mental status and attitude of the man
John Yepes after illumination, and so contribute toward a picture of
Cosmic Consciousness

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

It is clearly necessary for the soul,[\*](cc17.htm#an_145-1) aiming at
its own supernatural transformation, to be in darkness and far removed
from all that relates to its natural condition, the sensual and rational
parts. The supernatural is that which transcends nature, and, therefore,
that which is natural remains below. Inasmuch as this union and
transformation are not cognizable by sense or any human power, the soul
must be completely and voluntarily empty of all that can enter into it,
of every affection and inclination, so far as it concerns itself
\[203:71\].

On this road,[\*](cc17.htm#an_145-2) therefore, to abandon one's own way
is to enter on the true way, or, to speak more correctly, to pass
onwards to the goal; and to forsake one's own way is to enter on that
which has none, namely, God. For the soul that attains to this state has
no ways or methods of its own, neither does it nor can it lean upon
anything of the kind. I mean ways of understanding, perceiving, or
feeling, though it has *all ways at the same
time*,[\*](cc17.htm#an_145-3) as one who possessing nothing, yet
possesseth everything. For the soul courageously resolved on passing,
interiorly and exteriorly, beyond the limits of its own nature, enters
illimitably within the supernatural, which has no measure,

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_145-1">\*</span> This is the doctrine of the suppression
and effacement of thought, and the subjection of desire taught by Hindu
illuminati from the time of Buddha until to-day—a doctrine undoubtedly
resting on actual experience \[154: 68 and 56: 164 et seq.\].

N. B.—The author of the Bhagavatgita is not given in this volume as a
case of Cosmic Consciousness for the reason that nothing is known of his
personality. The Divine Lay, itself, however, carries on its face the
proof that he was so—in it Krishna is the Cosmic Sense, and the speeches
of Krishna the utterances of Cosmic Consciousness.

<span id="an_145-2">\*</span> Method of attainment of Cosmic
Consciousness and general description of it.

<span id="an_145-3">\*</span> *All ways at the same time:* Carpenter
tries to express this experience as follows: "What is the exact nature
of this mood—of this illuminant splendor? All I can say is, there seems
to be a vision possible to man as from some more universal standpoint,
free from the obscurity and localism which especially connect themselves
with the passing clouds of desire, fear and all ordinary thought and
emotion—in that sense another

</div>

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

and separate faculty; and as vision always means a sense of light, so
here is a sense of inward light, unconnected of course with the mortal
eye, but bringing to the eye of the mind the impression that it *sees*
and by means of a medium which washes, as it were, the *interior*
surfaces of all objects and things and persons—how can I express it?—and
yet this is most defective, for the sense is a sense that one is those
objects and things and persons that one perceives (and the whole
universe)—a sense in which sight and touch and hearing are all fused in
identity" \[62\].

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

but contains all measure imminently within itself. To arrive there is to
depart hence, going away, out of oneself, as far as possible from this
vile state to that which is the highest of all. Therefore, rising above
all that may be known and understood, temporally and spiritually, the
soul must earnestly desire to reach that which in this life cannot be
known, and which the heart cannot conceive; and, leaving behind all
actual and possible taste and feeling of sense and spirit, must desire
earnestly to arrive at that which transcends all sense and all feeling.
In order that the soul may be free and unembarrassed for this end it
must in no wise attach itself—as I shall presently explain when I treat
of this point—to anything it may receive in the sense or spirit, but
esteem such as of much less importance. For the more importance the soul
attributes to what it understands, feels and imagines, and the greater
the estimation it holds it in, whether it be spiritual or not, the more
it detracts from the supreme good, and the greater will be its delay in
attaining to it. On the other hand, the less that it esteems all that it
may have in comparison with the supreme good, the more does it magnify
and esteem the supreme good, and consequently the greater the progress
towards it. In this way the soul draws nearer and nearer to the divine
union, in darkness, by the way of faith, which, though it be also
obscure, yet sends forth a marvellous light. Certainly, if the soul will
\[if it persists in wishing and striving to\] see, it thereby becomes
instantly more blind as to God, than he who should attempt to gaze upon
the sun shining in its strength. On this road, therefore, to have our
own faculties in darkness is to see the light \[203: 74–5\].

The more the soul strives[\*](cc17.htm#an_146-1) to become blind and
annihilated as to all interior and exterior things, the more it will be
filled with faith and love and hope. But this love at times is neither
comprehended nor felt, because it does not establish itself in the
senses with tenderness, but in the soul with fortitude, with greater
courage and resolution than before; though it sometimes overflows into
the senses, and shows itself tender and gentle. In order, then, to
attain to this love, joy and delight which visions effect, it is
necessary that the soul should have fortitude and be fortified, so as to
abide willingly in emptiness and darkness, and to lay the foundation of
its love and delight on what it neither sees nor feels, on what it
cannot see nor feel—namely, on God incomprehensible and supreme. Our way
to Him is therefore, of necessity, in self denial \[203: 202\].

Though it be true,[\*](cc17.htm#an_146-2)  as I have said, that God is
always in every soul, bestowing upon it and preserving to it,

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_146-1">\*</span> So Balzac says that self consciousness,
while glorious for what it has done, is at the same time baneful,
because it precludes man from entering the Cosmic Conscious life, which
leads to the infinite—which alone can explain God \[5: 142\].

<span id="an_146-2">\*</span> The distinction between the self conscious
life even at its best and the life of Cosmic Consciousness.

</div>

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

by His presence, its natural being, yet for all this He does not always
communicate the supernatural life. For this is given only by love and
grace, to which all souls do not attain, and those who do, do not in the
same degree, for some rise to higher degrees of love than others. That
soul, therefore, has greater communion with God which is most advanced
in love—that is, whose will is most conformable to the will of God. And
that soul which has reached perfect conformity and resemblance is
perfectly united with, and 'supernaturally transformed in, God. For
which cause, therefore, as I have already explained, the more the soul
cleaves to created things, relying on its own strength, by habit and
inclination, the less is it disposed for this union, because it does not
completely resign itself into the hands of God, that He may transform it
supernaturally \[203:78\].

At other times, also, the divine light strikes the
soul[\*](cc17.htm#an_147-1) with such force that the darkness is unfelt
and the light unheeded; the soul seems unconscious of all it knows, and
is therefore lost, as it were, in forgetfulness, knowing not where it is
nor what has happened to it, unaware of the lapse of time.

It may and does occur[\*](cc17.htm#an_147-2) that many hours pass while
it is in this state of forgetfulness; all seems but a moment when it
again returns to itself \[203: 127\].

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_147-1">\*</span> "Louis had a well-defined attack of
catalepsy. He remained standing for fifty-nine hours motionless, his
eyes fixed, without speaking or eating, etc." \[5: 127\]. This
experience of Lambert's (Balzac's) belongs to the period of illumination
as in the case of Yepes.

<span id="an_147-2">\*</span> It is probable that a similar experience
in the same circumstances is common though not universal.

</div>

Yepes’ thought is that God is always existent in the human soul, but (in
general) in a passive or sleeping state, or at least outside
consciousness. The soul that knows that God is in it is blessed, but the
soul in which God wakes is that which is supremely blessed. This waking
of God in the soul is what is called in the present volume "Cosmic
Consciousness."

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

O how blessed is that soul[\*](cc17.htm#an_147-3) which is ever
conscious of God reposing and resting within it. . .. He is there, as it
were, asleep in the embraces of the soul and the soul is in general
conscious of His presence and in general delights exceedingly in it. If
He were always awake in the soul the communications of knowledge and
love would be unceasing, and that would be a state of glory. If He
awakes but once, merely opening his eyes, and affects the soul

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_147-3">\*</span> Yepes says: God is always in man, and very
commonly the soul is aware of His (passive) presence. It is as if He
slept in the soul. If He wakes up only once in a man's whole life the
experience of that instant affects the whole of life. If the experience
of that instant should be indefinitely prolonged what soul could bear
it!

</div>

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

so profoundly, what would become of it if He were continually awake
within it \[206: 506\]?

</div>

One of the characteristics of the Cosmic Sense many times touched, and
to be touched, upon is the identification of the person with the
universe and everything in the universe. When Gautama or Plotinus
expresses this fact it is called "Mysticism." When Whitman gives it
voice it is "Yankee bluster." What shall we call it when a simple,
humble-minded Spanish monk of the sixteenth century says of it in such
plain language as the following?

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

The heavens are mine, the earth is mine, and the nations are
mine![\*](cc17.htm#an_148-1) mine are the just, and the sinners are
mine; mine are the angels and the Mother of God; all things are mine,
God himself is mine and for me, because Christ is mine and all for me.
What dost thou then ask for, what dost thou seek for, O my soul? All is
thine—all is for thee. Do not take less nor rest with the crumbs which
fall from the table of thy father. Go forth and exult in thy glory, hide
thyself in it, and rejoice, and thou shalt obtain all the desires of thy
heart \[206:607\].

Visions of incorporeal substances,[\*](cc17.htm#an_148-2)  as of angels
and of souls, are neither frequent nor natural in this earthly life, and
still less so is the vision of the divine essence, which is peculiar to
the blessed, unless it be communicated transiently by a dispensation of
God, or by conservation of our natural life and condition, and the
abstraction of the spirit; as was perhaps the case of St. Paul when he
heard the unutterable secrets in the third heaven. "Whether in the
body," saith he, "I know not, or out of the body, I know not; God
knoweth." It is clear from the words of the apostle that he was carried
out of himself, by the act of God, as to his natural existence \[203:
198–9\].

Knowledge of pure truth requires, for its proper explanation, that God
should hold the hand and wield the pen of the writer. Keep in mind, my
dear reader, that these matters are beyond all
words.[\*](cc17.htm#an_148-3) But as my purpose is not to discuss them
but to teach and direct the soul through them to the divine union, it
will be enough if I speak of them

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_148-1">\*</span> So Whitman tells us: "As if one fit to own
things could not at pleasure enter upon all and incorporate them into
himself or herself" \[193:214\]. And again: "What do you suppose I would
intimate to you in a hundred ways but that man or woman is as good as
God? And that there is no God any more divine than yourself" \[193:
299\].

<span id="an_148-2">\*</span> The Cosmic vision compared in a few common
sense words with more ordinary "visions" of, for instance, angels and
spirits, in which Yepes seems to have little faith.

<span id="an_148-3">\*</span> "Beyond all words." This is the universal
experience.

</div>

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

concisely within certain limits, so far as my subject requires
it.[\*](cc17.htm#an_149-1) This kind of vision is not the same with the
intellectual visions of bodily things. It consists in comprehending or
seeing with the understanding the truths of God, or of things or
concerning things which are, have been, or will be. It is most like to
the spirit of prophecy, as I shall perhaps hereafter explain. This kind
of knowledge is twofold: one relates to the Creator, the other to
creatures. And though both kinds are most full of sweetness, the delight
produced by that which relates to God is not to be compared with aught
beside; and there are neither words nor language to describe it, for it
is the knowledge of God himself and his delights \[203: 205\].

In so far as this becomes pure contemplation, the soul sees clearly that
it cannot describe it otherwise than in general terms which the
abundance of delight and happiness forces from it. And though at times,
when this knowledge is vouchsafed to the soul, words are uttered, yet
the soul knows full well that it has in nowise expressed what it felt,
because it is conscious that there are no words of adequate
signification \[203:206\].

This divine knowledge concerning God[\*](cc17.htm#an_149-2) never
relates to particular things, because it is conversant with the Highest,
and therefore cannot be explained unless when it is extended to some
truth less than God,[\*](cc17.htm#an_149-3) which is capable of being
described; but this general knowledge is ineffable. It is only a soul in
union with God that is capable of this profound loving knowledge, for it
is itself that union. This knowledge consists in a certain contact of
the soul with the Divinity, and it is God Himself who is then felt and
tasted, though not manifestly and distinctly, as it will be in glory.
But this touch of knowledge and sweetness is so strong and so profound
that it penetrates into the inmost substance of the soul, and the devil
cannot interfere with it, nor produce anything like it—because there is
nothing else comparable with it—nor infuse any sweetness or delight
which shall at all resemble it. This knowledge savors, in some measure,
of the divine essence and of everlasting life, and the devil has no
power to simulate anything so great \[203: 207\].

Such is the sweetness of deep delight of these touches of
God,[\*](cc17.htm#an_149-4) that one of them is more than a recompense
for all the sufferings of this life, however great their number \[203:
208\].

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_149-1">\*</span> An attempt to indicate the radical
difference between the knowledge which belongs to the self conscious
mind and the consciousness of truth proper to the Cosmic Conscious mind.
To indicate also the joy of Cosmic Consciousness and the impossibility
of expressing in the only language we have (the language of self
consciousness) either what is seen or what is felt in the Cosmic
Conscious state. "When I undertake," says Whitman, "to tell the best I
find I cannot, my tongue is ineffectual on its pivots, my breath will
not be obedient to its organs, I become a dumb man" \[193: 179\].

<span id="an_149-2">\*</span> Compare Behmen: "Spiritual knowledge
cannot be communicated from one intellect to another, but must be sought
for in the spirit of God" \[97: 56\].

<span id="an_149-3">\*</span> And Whitman's dicta: "Wisdom is of the
soul; cannot be passed from one having it to another not having it"
\[193: 123\].

<span id="an_149-4">\*</span> "For I reckon that the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed to usward" \[19: 8: 18\].

</div>

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

These images, thus imprinted on the soul, produce *whenever they are
adverted to*,[\*](cc17.htm#an_150-1) the divine effects of love,
sweetness, and light, sometimes more, sometimes less, for that is the
end for which they are impressed. He with whom God thus deals receives a
great gift, for he has a mine of blessings within himself. The images
which produce such effects as these are vividly grounded in the
spiritual memory \[203:275\].

The way of proficients, which is also called the illuminative
way,[\*](cc17.htm#an_150-2) or the way of infused contemplation, wherein
God himself teaches and refreshes the soul without meditation or any
active efforts that itself may deliberately make \[203:55–6\]. I went
forth out of myself, out of my low conceptions and lukewarm love, out of
my scanty and poor sense of God, without being hindered by the flesh or
the devil. I went forth out of the scanty works and ways of my own to
those of God; that is, my understanding went forth out of itself, and
from human became divine. My will went forth out of itself, becoming
divine; for now united with the divine love, it loves no more with its
former scanty powers and circumscribed capacity, but with the energy and
pureness of the divine spirit \[203: 67\].

Now this is nothing else but the supernatural
light[\*](cc17.htm#an_150-3) giving light to the understanding, so that
the human understanding becomes divine, made one with the divine. In the
same way divine love inflames the will so that it becomes nothing less
than divine, loving in a divine way, united and made one with the divine
will and the divine love. The memory is affected in like manner; all the
desires and affections also are changed divinely according to God. Thus
the soul will be of heaven, heavenly, divine rather than human \[204:
111\].

It was a happy lot for the soul[\*](cc17.htm#an_150-4) when God in this
night put all its household to sleep—that is, all the powers, passions,
affections, and desires of the sensual and spiritual soul, that it may
attain to the spiritual union of the perfect love of God
"unobserved"—that is, unhindered, by them, because they were all asleep
and mortified in that night. O how happy must the soul then be when it
can escape from the house of its sensuality! None can understand it, I
think, except that soul which has experienced it \[204:113\]. It is,
therefore, plain that no distinct object whatever that pleases the will
can be God; and for that reason, if it is to be united with Him, it must
empty itself, cast away every disorderly affection of the desire, every
satisfaction it may distinctly have, high and low, temporal and
spiritual, so that, purified and cleansed from all unruly satisfactions,
joys

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_150-1">\*</span> *Whenever they are adverted to:* Compare
Bacon:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"So am I as the rich, whose blessed key  
 Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,  
 The which he will not every hour survey,  
 For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.  
                                           \[176: 52\].

</div>

<span id="an_150-2">\*</span> He tells of the passage from self
consciousness to Cosmic Consciousness and what it is like to be in the
latter condition.

<span id="an_150-3">\*</span> As Dante says, this is being
"transhumanized into a God" \[72: 4\].

<span id="an_150-4">\*</span> Further allusions to the necessary
subjugation or even obliteration of the old self conscious mind before
the cosmic conscious mind can emerge.

</div>

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

and desires, it may be wholly occupied, with all its affections, in
loving God \[204:534\].

This abyss of wisdom now so exalts and elevates the soul—orderly
disposing it for the science of love—that it makes it not only
understand how mean are all created things in relation to the supreme
wisdom and divine knowledge, but also how low, defective, and, in a
certain sense, improper, are all the words and phrases by which in this
life we discuss divine things and how utterly impossible by any natural
means, however profoundly and learnedly we may speak, to understand and
see them as they are, except in the light of mystical theology. And so
the soul in the light thereof, discerning this truth, namely, that it
cannot reach it, and still less explain it by the terms of ordinary
speech, justly calls it secret \[204: 126\].

The spirit is now so strong, and has so subdued the flesh, and makes so
little of it, that it is as regardless of it as a tree is of one of its
leaves. It seeks not for consolation or sweetness
either[\*](cc17.htm#an_151-1) in God or elsewhere, neither does it pray
for God's gifts through any motive of self interest, or its own
satisfaction. For all it cares for now is how it shall please God and
serve Him in some measure in return for His goodness and for the graces
it has received, and this at any and every cost \[204: 134\].

But if we speak of that light of glory which in this, the soul's
embrace, God sometimes produces within it, and which is a certain
spiritual communion wherein He causes it to behold and enjoy at the same
time the abyss of delight and riches which He has laid up within it,
there is no language to express any degree of it. As the sun when it
shines upon the sea illumes its great depths and reveals the pearls and
gold and precious stones therein, so the divine sun of the bridegroom,
turning towards the bride, reveals in a way the riches of her soul, so
that even the angels behold her with amazement \[205: 292\].

I have said that God is pleased with nothing but
love.[\*](cc17.htm#an_151-2) He has need of nothing, and so if He is
pleased with anything it is with the growth of the soul; and as there is
no way in which the soul can grow but in becoming in a manner equal to
Him, for this reason only is He pleased with our love. It is the
property of love to place him who loves on an equality with the object
of his love. Hence the soul, because of its perfect love, is called the
bride of the Son of God, which signifies equality with Him \[205:333\].

Before the soul succeeded in effecting this gift and a surrender of
itself,[\*](cc17.htm#an_151-3) and of all that belongs to it, to the
Beloved, it was entangled in many unprofitable occupations, by which it
sought to please itself and others, and

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_151-1">\*</span> Yepes resembles Buddha and Paul in
despising and contemning the old self conscious life. Jesus and Whitman
reached a higher level—they saw that all life is good, all divine.

<span id="an_151-2">\*</span> "What do you suppose," says Whitman, "I
would intimate to you in a hundred ways but that man or woman is as good
as God and that there is no God any more divine than yourself" \[193:
299\].

<span id="an_151-3">\*</span> Antecedent self conscious state. Compare
Whitman: "Trippers and askers surround me, people I meet, the effect
upon me of my early life or the ward and city I live in, or the nation,
the latest dates, discoveries, inventions, societies, authors old and
new, my

</div>

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

dinner, dress, associates, looks, compliments, dues, the real or fancied
indifference of some man or woman I love, the sickness of one of my
folks or of myself, or ill doing, or loss or lack of money, or
depressions or exaltations, battles, the horrors of fratricidal war, the
fever of doubtful news, the fitful events; these come to me days and
nights and go from me again, but they are not the *Me* myself" \[193:
31–2\].

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

it may be said that its occupations at this time were as many as its
habits of imperfection \[205: 236\].

It is not without some unwillingness that I enter at the request of
others upon the explanation of the four stanzas,[\*](cc17.htm#an_152-1)
because they relate to matters so interior and spiritual as to baffle
the powers of language \[206:407\]. All I say falls far short of that
which passes in this intimate union of the soul with God. That love
still more perfect and complete in the same state of transformation
\[206:408\].

I entered, but I knew not where,[\*](cc17.htm#an_152-2) and there I
stood not knowing, all science transcending.

I knew not where I entered, for when I stood within, not knowing where I
was, I heard great things. What I heard I will not tell; I was there as
one who knew not, all science transcending.

Of peace and devotion[\*](cc17.htm#an_152-3) the knowledge was perfect,
in solitude profound; the right way was clear, but so secret was it,
that I stood babbling, all science transcending.

I stood enraptured in ecstasy, beside myself, and in my every sense no
sense remained. My spirit was endowed with understanding, understanding
nought, all science transcending.

The higher I ascended the less I understood. It is the dark cloud
illumining the night. Therefore he who understands knows nothing, ever
all science transcending.

He who really ascends so high annihilates himself, and all his previous
knowledge seems ever less and less; his knowledge so increases that he
knoweth nothing, all science transcending.

This knowing that knows nothing is so potent in its might that the
prudent in their reasoning never can defeat it; for their wisdom never
reaches to the understanding that understandeth nothing, all science
transcending.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_152-1">\*</span> Expressions by which he tries to suggest
mental states that cannot be represented by language.

<span id="an_152-2">\*</span> In this short poem John Yepes has tried to
state the essential facts of the entrance into the Cosmic Conscious
state. He says he entered it, but (having so done) he did not know where
he was. He heard great things, but will not (cannot?) relate what. He
found (in that state) perfect peace and knowledge.

<span id="an_152-3">\*</span> "Swiftly arose and spread around me the
*peace* and *knowledge* that pass all the arguments of the earth" \[193:
32\].

The right way (the right course of action), too, was clear (Whitman says
the new sense "held his feet" \[193:32\]. Yepes, like Whitman and all
the rest, became filled with joy. He then goes on to describe Nirvâna,
even to the use of the word "annihilation."

Finally he pronounces the word which all the illuminati utter each in
his own way. He says this profound wisdom consists in a *sense of the
essence of God*. It is the Cosmic Sense—a sense, intuition, or
consciousness of the Cosmos. The birth of the faculty which alone can
comprehend God. It is that new birth through which only can a man see
the kingdom of God.

</div>

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

This sovereign wisdom is of an excellence so high that no faculty nor
science can ever unto it attain. He who shall overcome himself by the
knowledge which knows nothing will always rise, all science
transcending.

And if you would listen, this sovereign wisdom doth consist in a sense
profound of the essence of God: it is an act of His compassion, to leave
us, nought understanding, all science transcending \[208:624–5\].

</div>

#### SUMMARY

*a*. In the case of John Yepes the subjective light seems to have been
present and even unusually intense, although there may be some confusion
in the report of it.

*b*. Moral elevation was strongly marked.

*c*. Intellectual illumination well but not perhaps as strikingly as in
some other cases.

*d*. His sense of immortality is so perfect that it does not occur to
him to discuss it as a separate question or as a question at all. He has
simply become God, a God, or a part of God, and he would no more think
of discussing his immortality than he would think of discussing that of
God.

*e*. Of course he lost (if he ever had it) all fear of death. Death is
simply nothing to him. It is a matter that does not concern him in the
least.

*f*. The instantaneousness of the change from self consciousness to
Cosmic Consciousness in his prison in the spring or early summer of the
year 1578, when he was thirty-six years old, seems to be clear from
Lewis' narrative.

*g*. The change in the appearance of the person illumined called in the
gospels "transfiguration"—seems to have been well marked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9. Francis Bacon](cc18)
