[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc21)  [Next](cc23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 13.

*Walt Whitman*.

##### I.

<span class="smallcaps">Born</span> 1819; died 1892.

In each of these instances of so-called Cosmic Consciousness it would be
proper to give a fairly exhaustive account of the external life of the
man as well as of his teaching, since the one does, and ought to be
shown to, corroborate the other. It would not, however, be possible to
do this and still keep the argument within reasonable limits.
Fortunately, too, it is not absolutely necessary; most of the men in
question being so well known. Also it may be said that the present
volume is intended not so much to teach anything as to show that there
exists a certain lesson to be learned and to indicate where it may be
studied. This volume is not so much a road as a finger post on a road.
Its greatest value (if it have any) will be to lead to the serious study
of certain men of an exceptional type; not one or the other of them, but
as a group and from a particular standpoint. While it is necessary,
then, to say a few words about Walt Whitman here, it will be well for
the reader to be far from satisfied with these but to seek elsewhere a
much more complete statement of the life and thought of this remarkable
man. The following brief description is taken from the writer's "Life of
Whitman" \[38\], written in the summer of 1880, while he was visiting
the author. Walt Whitman was then sixty-one years of age:

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

At first sight he looks much older, so that he is often supposed to be
seventy or even eighty. He is six feet in height, and quite straight. He
weighs nearly two hundred pounds. His body and limbs are full-sized and
well proportioned. His head is large and rounded in every direction, the
top a little higher than a semicircle from the front to the back would
make it. Though his face and head give the appearance of being
plentifully supplied with hair, the crown is moderately bald; on the
side and back the hair is long, very fine, and nearly snow white. The
eyebrows are highly arched, so that it is a long distance from the eye
to the centre of the eyebrow (this is the facial feature that strikes
one most at first sight). The eyes themselves are light blue, not
large—indeed, in proportion to the head and face they seem rather small;
they are dull and heavy, not expressive—what expression they have is
kindness, composure, suavity. The eyelids are full, the upper commonly
droops nearly half over the globe of the eye. The nose is broad, strong,
and quite straight; it is full-sized, but not large in proportion to the
rest of the face; it does not descend straight from the forehead, but
dips down somewhat between the eyes with a long sweep. The mouth is
full-sized, the lips full. The sides and lower part of the face are
covered with a fine white beard, which is long enough to come down a
little on the breast. The upper lip bears a heavy moustache. The ear is
very large, especially long from above downwards, heavy and remarkably
handsome. I believe all the poet's senses are exceptionally acute, his
hearing especially so; no sound or modulation of sound perceptible to
others escapes him, and he seems to hear many things that to ordinary
folk are inaudible. I have heard him speak of hearing the grass grow and
the trees coming out in leaf. His cheeks are round and smooth. His face
has no lines expressive of care, or weariness, or age—it is the white
hair and beard, and his feebleness in walking (due to paralysis) that
make him appear old. The habitual expression of his face is repose, but
there is a well-marked firmness and decision. I have never seen his
look, even momentarily, express contempt, or any vicious feeling. I have
never known him to sneer at any person or thing, or to manifest

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

in any way or degree either alarm or apprehension, though he has in my
presence been placed in circumstances that would have caused both in
most men. His complexion is peculiar—a bright maroon tint, which,
contrasting with his white hair and beard, makes an impression very
striking. His body is not white like that of all others whom I have seen
of the English or Teutonic stock—it has a delicate but well-marked rose
color. All his features are large and massive, but so proportioned as
not to look heavy. His face is the noblest I have ever seen.

No description can give any idea of the extraordinary physical
attractiveness of the man. I do not speak now of the affection of
friends and of those who are much with him, but of the magnetism
exercised by him upon people who merely see him for a few minutes or
pass him on the street. An intimate friend of the author's, after
knowing Walt Whitman a few days, said in a letter: "As for myself, it
seems to me now that I have always known him and loved him."

And in another letter, written from a town where the poet had been
staying for a few days, the same person says: "Do you know every one who
met him here seems to love him?"

The following is the experience of a person well known to the present
writer: He called on Walt Whitman and spent an hour at his home in
Camden, in the autumn of 1877. He had never seen the poet before, but he
had been profoundly reading his works for some years. He said that Walt
Whitman only spoke to him about a hundred words altogether, and these
quite ordinary and commonplace; that he did not realize anything
peculiar while with him, but shortly after leaving a state of mental
exaltation set in, which he could only describe by comparing to slight
intoxication by champagne, or to falling in love, and this exaltation,
he said, lasted at least six weeks in a clearly marked degree, so that,
for at least that length of time, he was plainly different from his
ordinary self. Neither, he said, did it then or since pass away, though
it ceased to be felt as something new and strange, but became a
permanent element in his life, a strong and living force (as he
described it), making for purity and happiness. I may add

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

that this person's whole life has been changed by that contact—his
temper, character, entire spiritual being, outer life, conversation,
etc., elevated and purified in an extraordinary degree. He tells me that
at first he used often to speak to friends and acquaintances of his
feeling for Walt Whitman and the "Leaves," but after a time he found
that he could not make himself understood, and that some even thought
his mental balance impaired. He gradually learned to keep silence upon
the subject, but the feeling did not abate, nor its influence upon his
life grow less.

Walt Whitman's dress was always extremely plain. He usually wore in
pleasant weather a light gray suit of good woolen cloth. The only thing
peculiar about his dress was that he had no necktie at any time, and
always wore shirts with very large turndown collars, the button at the
neck some five or six inches lower than usual, so that the throat and
upper part of the breast were exposed. In all other respects he dressed
in a substantial, neat, plain, common way. Everything he wore and
everything about him was always scrupulously clean. His clothes might
(and often did) show signs of wear, or they might be torn or have holes
worn in them, but they never looked soiled. Indeed, an exquisite aroma
of cleanliness has always been one of the special features of the man;
it has always belonged to his clothes, his breath, his whole body, his
eating and drinking, his conversation, and no one could know him for an
hour without seeing that it penetrated his mind and life, and was in
fact the expression of a purity which was physical as much as moral and
moral as much as physical.

Walt Whitman, in my talks with him at that time, always disclaimed any
lofty intention in himself or his poems. If you accepted his
explanations they were simple and commonplace. But when you came to
think about these explanations, and to enter into the spirit of them,
you found that the simple and commonplace with him included the ideal
and the spiritual. So it may be said that neither he nor his writings
are growths of the ideal from the real, but are the actual real lifted
up into the ideal. With Walt Whitman his body, his outward life, his
inward spiritual existence and his poetry were all one; in every respect
each tallied

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

the other, and any one of them could always be inferred from any other.
He said to me one day (I forget now in what connection): "I have
imagined a life which should be that of the average man in average
circumstances, and still grand, heroic." There is no doubt that such an
ideal had been constantly before his mind, and that all he did, said,
wrote, thought and felt, had been and were, from moment to moment,
molded upon it. His manner was curiously calm and self-contained. He
seldom became excited in conversation, or at all events seldom showed
excitement; he rarely raised his voice or used any gestures. I never
knew him to be in a bad temper. He seemed always pleased with those
about him. He did not generally wait for a formal introduction; upon
meeting any person for the first time he very likely stepped forward,
held out his hand (either left or right, whichever happened to be
disengaged), and the person and he were acquainted at once. People could
not tell why they liked him. They said there was something attractive
about him; that he had a great deal of personal magnetism, or made some
other vague explanation that meant nothing. One very clever musical
person, who spent a couple of days in my house while Walt Whitman was
there, said to me on going away: "I know what it is; it is his wonderful
voice that makes it so pleasant to be with him." I said: "Yes, perhaps
it is; but where did his voice get that charm?'

Though he would sometimes not touch a book for a week, he generally
spent a part (though not a large part) of each day in reading. Perhaps
he would read on an average a couple of hours a day. He seldom read any
book deliberately through, and there was no more (apparent) system about
his reading than in anything else that he did; that is to say, there was
no system about it at all. If he sat in the library an hour, he would
have half a dozen to a dozen volumes about him, on the table, on chairs
and on the floor. He seemed to read a few pages here and a few pages
there, and pass from place to place, from volume to volume, doubtless
pursuing some clue or thread of his own. Sometimes (though very seldom)
he would get sufficiently interested in a volume to read it all. I think
he read almost, if not quite the whole,

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

of Renouf's "Egypt," and Bruschbey's "Egypt," but these cases were
exceptional. In his way of reading he dipped into histories, essays,
metaphysical, religious and scientific treatises, novels and
poetry—though I think he read less poetry than anything else. He read no
language but English, yet I believe he knew a great deal more French,
German and Spanish than he would own to. But if you took his own word
for it, he knew very little of any subject.

His favorite occupation seemed to be strolling or sauntering about
outdoors by himself, looking at the grass, the trees, the flowers, the
vistas of light, the varying aspects of the sky, and listening to the
birds, the crickets, the tree-frogs, the wind in the trees, and all the
hundreds of natural sounds. It was evident that these things gave him a
feeling of pleasure far beyond what they give to ordinary people. Until
I knew the man it had not occurred to me that anyone could derive so
much absolute happiness and ample fulfilment from these things as he
evidently did. He himself never spoke of all this pleasure. I dare say
he hardly thought of it, but anyone who watched him could see plainly
that in his case it was real and deep.

He had a way of singing, generally in an undertone, wherever he was or
whatever he was doing, when alone. You would hear him the first thing in
the morning while he was taking his bath and dressing (he would then
perhaps sing out in full, ballads or martial songs), and a large part of
the time that he sauntered outdoors during the day he sang, usually
tunes without words, or a formless recitative. Sometimes he would recite
poetry, generally, I think, from Shakespeare or Homer, once in a while
from Bryant or others. He spent very little time in writing. It is
probable that he never did give much time to that occupation. He wrote
few private letters. While he was with us he would write a letter to a
Canadian paper, about his travels, his condition, and his latest doings
and thoughts, and get fifty or a hundred copies and send them to his
friends and relations, especially the girls and young folks, and make
that do for correspondence. Almost

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

all his writing was done with a pencil in a sort of loose book that he
carried in his breast pocket. The book consisted of a few sheets of good
white paper, folded and fastened with a pin or two. He said he had tried
all sorts of note-books and he liked that kind best. The literary work
that he did was done at all sorts of times, and generally on his knee,
impromptu, and often outdoors. Even in a room with the usual
conveniences for writing he did not use a table; he put a book on his
knee, or held it in his left hand, laid his paper upon it and wrote so.
His handwriting was clear and plain, every letter being perfectly
formed.

He was very fond of flowers, either wild or cultivated; would often
gather and arrange an immense bouquet of them for the dinner-table, for
the room where he sat, or for his bed-room; wore a bud or just-started
rose, or perhaps a geranium, pinned to the lapel of his coat, a great
part of the time; did not seem to have much preference for one kind over
any other; liked all sorts. I think he admired lilacs and sunflowers
just as much as roses. Perhaps, indeed, no man who ever lived liked so
many things and disliked so few as Walt Whitman. All natural objects
seemed to have a charm for him; all sights and sounds, outdoors and
indoors, seemed to please him. He appeared to like (and I believe he did
like) all the men, women and children he saw (though I never knew him to
say that he liked anyone), but each who knew him felt that he liked him
or her, and that he liked others also. He was in this and in everything
entirely natural and unconventional. When he did express a preference
for any person (which was very seldom) he would indicate it in some
indirect way; for instance, I have known him to say: "Goodbye, my love,"
to a young married lady he had only seen a few times.

He was especially fond of children, and all children liked and trusted
him at once. Often the little ones, if tired out and fretful, the moment
he took them up and caressed them, would cease crying, and perhaps go to
sleep in his arms. One day several ladies, the poet and myself, attended
a picnic given to hundreds of poor children in London. I lost sight of
my friend for perhaps an

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

hour, and when I found him again he was sitting in a quiet nook by the
river side, with a rosy-faced child of four or five years old, tired out
and sound asleep in his lap.

For young and old his touch had a charm that cannot be de. scribed, and
if it could the description would not be believed except by those who
knew him either personally or through "Leaves of Grass." This charm
(physiological more than psychological), if understood would explain the
whole mystery of the man, and how he produced such effects not only upon
the well, but among the sick and wounded.

It is certain, also, perhaps contrary to what I have given, that there
is another phase, and a very real one, to the basis of his character. An
elderly gentleman I talked with (he is a portrait painter and a distant
relative of the poet), who was much with him, particularly through the
years of his middle age and later (1845 to 1870), tells me that Walt
Whitman, in the elements of his character, had deepest sternness and
hauteur, not easily aroused, but coming forth at times, and then well
understood by those who knew him best as something not to be trifled
with. The gentleman alluded to (he is a reader and thorough accepter of
"Leaves of Grass") agrees with me in my delineation of his benevolence,
evenness and tolerant optimism, yet insists that at the inner framework
of the poet there has always been, as he expresses it, "a combination of
hot blood and fighting qualities." He says my outline applies more
especially to his later years; that Walt Whitman has gradually brought
to the front the attributes I dwell upon, and given them control. His
theory is, in almost his own words, that there are two natures in Walt
Whitman. The one is of immense suavity, self-control, a mysticism like
the occasional fits of Socrates, and a pervading Christ-like
benevolence, tenderness and sympathy (the sentiment of the intaglio
frontispiece portrait, which I showed him, and he said he had seen
exactly that look "in the old man," and more than once during 1863–’64,
though he never observed it before or since). But these qualities,
though he has enthroned them and for many years governed his life by
them, are duplicated by far sterner ones. No doubt

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

he has mastered the latter, but he has them. How could Walt Whitman
(said my interlocutor) have taken the attitude toward evil, and things
evil, which is behind every page of his utterance in "Leaves of Grass"
from first to last—so different on that subject from every writer known,
new or old—unless he enfolded all that evil within him.

Then there was another side to the picture—the indispensable exception
that proved the rule. This man, the sight of whom excited such
extraordinary affection, whose voice had for most of those who heard it
such a wonderful charm, whose touch possessed a power which no words can
express—in rare instances, this man, like the magnet, repelled as well
as attracted. As there were those who instinctively loved him, so there
were others, here and there, who instinctively disliked him. As his
poetic utterances were so ridiculous to many, even his personal
appearance, in not a few cases, aroused equally sarcastic remark. His
large figure, his red face, his copious beard, his loose and free
attire, his rolling and unusually ample shirt-collar, without necktie
and always wide open at the throat, all met at times with jeers and
explosive laughter.

He did not talk much. Sometimes, while remaining cheery and
good-natured, he would speak very little all day. His conversation, when
he did talk, was at all times easy and unconstrained. I never knew him
to argue or dispute, and he never spoke about money. He always
justified, sometimes playfully, sometimes quite seriously, those who
spoke harshly of himself or his writings, and I often thought he even
took pleasure in those sharp criticisms, slanders and the opposition of
enemies. He said that his critics were quite right, that behind what his
friends saw he was not at all what he seemed, and that, from the point
of view of his foes, his book deserved all the hard things they could
say of it—and that he himself undoubtedly deserved them and plenty more.

When I first knew Walt Whitman I used to think that he watched himself,
and did not allow his tongue to give expression to feelings of
fretfulness, antipathy, complaint and remonstrance.

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

It did not occur to me as possible that these mental states could be
absent in him. After long observation, however, and talking to others
who had known him for many years, I satisfied myself that such absence
or unconsciousness was entirely real. His deep, clear and earnest voice
made a good part, though not all, of the charm of the simplest things he
said—a voice not characteristic of any special nationality or dialect.
If he said (as he sometimes would involuntarily on stepping to the door
and looking out), "Oh, the beautiful sky!" or, "Oh, the beautiful
grass!" the words produced the effect of sweet music.

He said, one day, while talking about some fine scenery and the desire
to go and see it (and he himself was very fond of new scenery): "After
all, the great lesson is that no special natural sights—not Alps,
Niagara, Yosemite or anything else—is more grand or. more beautiful than
the ordinary sunrise and sunset, earth and sky, the common trees and
grass." Properly understood, I believe this suggests the central
teaching of his writings and life—namely, that the commonplace is the
grandest of all things; that the exceptional in any line is no finer,
better or more beautiful than the usual, and that what is really wanting
is not that we should possess something we have not at present, but that
our eyes should be opened to see and our hearts to feel what we all
have.

He never spoke deprecatingly of any nationality or class of men, or time
in the world's history, or feudalism, or against any trades or
occupations—not even against any animals, insects, plants or inanimate
things, nor any of the laws of nature, or any of the results of those
laws, such as illness, deformity or death. He never complained or
grumbled either at the weather, pain, illness or at anything else. He
never in conversation, in any company, or under any circumstances, used
language that could be thought indelicate (of course he has used
language in his poems which has been thought indelicate, but none that
is so). In fact, I have never known of his uttering a word or a
sentiment which might not be published without any prejudice to his
fame. He never swore; he could not very well, since as far as I know he
never spoke in anger, and apparently never was angry. He never

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

exhibited fear, and I do not believe he ever felt it. His conversation,
mainly toned low, was always agreeable and usually instructive. He never
made compliments, very seldom apologized, used the common forms of
civility, such as "if you please" and "thank you," quite sparingly,
usually made a smile or a nod answer for them. He was, in my experience
of him, not given to speculating on abstract questions (though I have
heard others say that there were no subjects in which he so much
delighted) . He never gossiped. He seldom talked about private people,
even to say something good of them, except to answer a question or
remark, and then he always gave what he said a turn favorable to the
person spoken of.

His conversation, speaking generally, was of current affairs, work of
the day, political and historical news, European as well as American, a
little of books, much of the aspects of nature—as scenery, the stars,
birds, flowers and trees. He read the newspapers regularly, liked good
descriptions and reminiscences. He did not, on the whole, talk much
anyhow. His manner was invariably calm and simple, belonged to itself
alone, and could not be fully described or conveyed.

##### II.

Walt Whitman is the best, most perfect, example the world has so far had
of the Cosmic Sense, first because he is the man in whom the new faculty
has been, probably, most perfectly developed, and especially because he
is, par excellence, the man who in modern times has written distinctly
and at large from the point of view of Cosmic Consciousness, and who
also has referred to its facts and phenomena more plainly and fully than
any other writer either ancient or modern.

He tells us plainly, though not as fully as could be wished, of the
moment when he attained illumination, and again towards the end of his
life of its passing away. Not that it is to be supposed that he had the
Cosmic Sense continuously, for years, but that it came less and less
frequently as age advanced, probably lasted

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

less and less long at a time, and decreased in vividness and intensity.

Moreover, in the case of Whitman, we have means of knowing the man
thoroughly from youth till death—both before and after illumination—and
so (better than in any other. case, except, perhaps, that of Balzac) can
compare the fully developed man with his earlier self. The line of
demarcation (between the two Whitmans) is perfectly drawn.

On the one hand the Whitman of the forties, writing tales and essays
(such as "Death in a School-room," 1841; "Wild Frank's Return," id.;
"Bervance, or Father and Son," id.; "The Tomb Blossoms," 1842; "The Last
of the Sacred Army," id.; "The Child Ghost, a Story of the Last
Loyalist," id.; "The Angel of Tears," id.; "Revenge and Requital," 1845;
"A Dialogue," id.,; etc.), which even his present splendid fame cannot
galvanize into life; on the other the Whitman of the fifties, writing
the first (1855) edition of the "Leaves."

We expect and always find a difference between the early and mature
writings of the same man. What an interval, for instance, between
Shelley's romances and the "Cenci"; between Macaulay's earliest essays
and the history. But here is some. thing quite apart from those and
similar cases. We can trace a gradual evolution of aptitude and power
from "Zastrozzi" to "Epipsychidion," from Macaulay's "Milton" to his
"Massacre of Glencoe." But in the case of Whitman (as in that of Balzac)
writings of absolutely no value were *immediately* followed (and, at
least in Whitman's case without practice or study) by pages across each
of which in letters of ethereal fire are written the words ETERNAL LIFE;
pages covered not only by a masterpiece but by such vital sentences as
have not been written ten times in the history of the race. It is upon
this instantaneous evolution of the *Titan* from the *Man*, this
profound mystery of the attainment of the splendor and power of the
kingdom of heaven, that this present volume seeks to throw light.

And it is interesting to remark here that Whitman seems to have had as
little idea as had Gautama, Paul or Mohammed what

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

it vas that gave him the mental power, the moral elevation and the
perennial joyousness which are among the characteristics of the state to
which he attained and which seem to have been to him subjects of
continual wonder. "Wandering amazed," he says, "at my own lightness and
glee" \[193: 36\].

Let us see, now, what Whitman says about this new sense which must have
come to him in June, 1853 or 1854, at the age, that is, of thirty-four
or thirty-five. The first direct mention of it is on page 15 of the 1855
edition of the "Leaves" \[191: 15\]. That is to say, it is upon the
third page of his first writing after this new faculty had come to
him—for the long preface in this volume was written after the body of
the book. The lines are found essentially unaltered in every subsequent
edition. In the current (1891–92) edition they are upon page 32.

As given here the quotation is from the 1855 edition, as it is important
to get as near the man at the time of writing the words as possible. He
says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

I believe in you my soul, . . . the other I am must not abase itself to
you,  
And you must not be abased to the other.  
Loaf with me on the grass, . . . loose the stop from your throat,  
Not words, not music or rhyme I want, . . . not custom or lecture, not
even the best,  
Only the lull I like, the hum of your valved voice. I mind how we lay in
June, such a transparent summer morning;  
You settled your head athwart my hips and gently turned over upon me,  
And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged your tongue to my
bare-stript heart.  
And reached till you felt my beard, and reached till you held my feet.  
Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and joy and knowledge that
pass all the art and argument of the earth;  
And I know that the hand of God is the elder hand of my own,  
And I know that the spirit of God is the eldest brother of my own, <span
id="page_228">p. 228</span>  
And that all the men ever born are also my brothers, . . . and the women
my sisters and lovers,  
And that a kelson of creation is love.[\*](cc22.htm#an_227-1)

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_227-1">\*</span> The new experience came in June, probably
in 1853, when he had just entered upon his thirty-fifth year. It would
seem that he was at first in doubt what it meant, then became satisfied
and said: I believe in its teaching. Although, however, it is so divine,
the other I am (the old self) must not be abased to it, neither must it
(the new self) ever be overridden by the more basic organs and
faculties. He goes on: Stay with me, loaf with me on the grass, instruct
me, speak out what you mean, what is in you, no matter about speaking
musically, or poetically, or according to the rules, or even using the
best language, but just use your own words in your own way. He then
turns back to tell of the exact occurrence. The illumination (or
whatever it was, came to him or upon him one June morning, and took

</div>

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

(though gently) absolute possession of him, at least for the time.

Henceforth, he says, his life received its inspiration from the
newcomer, the new self, whose tongue, as he expresses it, was plunged to
his bare-stripped heart.

His outward life, also, became subject to the dictation of the new
self—*it held his feet*. Finally he tells in brief of the change wrought
in his mind and heart by the birth within him of the new faculty. He
says he was filled all at once with peace and joy and knowledge
transcending all the art and argument of the earth. He attained that
point of view from which alone can a human being see something of God
("which alone," says Balzac, "can explain God;" which point, unless he
attains, "he cannot," says Jesus, "see the kingdom of God"). And he sums
up the account by the statement that God is his close friend, that all
the men and women ever born are his brothers and sisters and lovers and
that the whole creation is built and rests upon love.

</div>

Add now to this the following four lines \[192: 207\], written at
another time but certainly referring to the same or to a similar
experience:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

As in a swoon, one instant,  
Another sun, ineffable full-dazzles me,  
And all the orbs I knew, and brighter, unknown orbs;  
One instant of the future land, Heaven's land.[\*](cc22.htm#an_228-1)

</div>

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_228-1">\*</span> So Dante: "Day seemed to be added to day
as if he who is able had adorned the heavens with another sun."

</div>

At the same time and in the same connection consider this passage:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Hast never come to thee an hour,  
A sudden gleam divine, precipitating, bursting all these bubbles,
fashions, wealth?  
These eager business aims—books, politics, arts, amours,  
To utter nothingness \[193: 218\]?

</div>

</div>

For the purpose now of aiding to bring before the mind of the earnest
reader (and any other has little business with this book) a hint, a
suggestion (for what more is it possible to give here?) of what this
Cosmic Consciousness is, it may be well to quote from a prose work of
Whitman's certain passages that seem to throw light on the subject.
Speaking of the people, he says: "The rare, cosmical, artist mind, lit
with the infinite, alone confronts his manifold and oceanic qualities"
\[195: 215\]. Again: "There is yet, to whoever is eligible among us, the
prophetic vision, the joy of being tossed in the brave turmoil of these
times

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —the promulgation
and the path, obedient, lowly reverent to the voice, the gesture of the
god, or holy ghost, which others see not, hear not" \[195: 227\]. Once
more: "The thought of identity. . . . Miracle of miracles, beyond
statement, most spiritual and vaguest of earth's dreams, yet hardest
basic fact, and only entrance to all facts. In such devout hours, in the
midst of the significant wonders of heaven and earth (significant only
because of the *Me* in the centre), creeds; conventions, fall away and
become of no account before this simple idea. Under the luminousness of
real vision, it alone takes possession, takes value. Like the shadowy
dwarf in the fable, once liberated and looked upon, it expands over the
whole earth and spreads to the roof of heaven" \[195:229\]. Yet another:
"I should say, indeed, that only in the perfect un-contamination and
solitariness of individuality may the spirituality of religion
positively come forth at all. Only here and on such terms, the
meditation, the devout ecstasy, the soaring flight. Only here communion
with the mysteries, the eternal problems, *whence?* *whither?* Alone and
identity and the mood—and the soul emerges, and all statements,
churches, sermons, melt away like vapors. Alone, and silent thought, and
awe, and aspiration—and then the *interior consciousness*, like a
hitherto unseen inscription, in magic ink, beams out its wondrous lines
to the sense. Bibles may convey and priests expound, but it is
exclusively for the noiseless operation of one's isolated *Self* to
enter the pure ether of veneration, reach the divine levels, and commune
with the unutterable" \[195: 233\]. The next passage seems prophetical
of the coming race: "A fitly born and bred race, growing up in right
conditions of outdoor as much as indoor harmony, activity and
development, would probably, from and in those conditions, find it
enough merely *to live*—and would, in their relations to the sky, air,
water, trees, etc., and to the countless common shows, and in the fact
of *life* itself, discover and achieve happiness—with Being suffused
night and day by wholesome ecstasy, surpassing ail the pleasures that
wealth, amusement, and even gratified intellect, erudition, or the sense
of art, can give" \[195: 249\]. And finally, and best of all, the
following: "Lo! *Nature* (the only complete,

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

actual poem) existing calmly in the divine scheme, containing all,
content, careless of the criticisms of a day, or these endless and wordy
chatterers. And to! to the consciousness of the soul, the permanent
identity, the thought, the something, before which the magnitude even of
Democracy, art, literature, etc., dwindles, becomes partial,
measurable—something that fully satisfies (which those do not). That
something is the All and the idea of All, with the accompanying idea of
eternity, and of itself, the soul, buoyant, indestructible, sailing
Space forever, visiting every region, as a ship the sea. And again to!
the pulsations in all matter, all spirit, throbbing forever—the eternal
beats, eternal systole and dyastole of life in things—wherefrom I feel
and know that death is not the ending, as we thought, but rather the
real beginning—and that nothing ever is or can be lost, nor even die,
nor soul nor matter" \[195: 253\]. Here we have brought out strongly the
consciousness of the Cosmos, its life and eternity—and the consciousness
of the equal grandeur and eternity of the individual soul, the one
balancing (equal to) the other. In a word, we have here the expression
(as far, perhaps, as it can be expressed) of what is called in this
volume Cosmic Consciousness.

Those who so far have been endowed with Cosmic Consciousness have been,
almost to a man, carried away and subjugated by it; they have looked
upon it—most of them—as being a preterhuman, more or less supernatural
faculty, separating them from other men. They have almost, if not quite,
always sought to help men, for their moral sense has been inevitably
purified and elevated by the oncoming of the new sense, to an
extraordinary degree; but they have not realized the need, nor,
probably, felt the possibility of using their unusual insight and power
in any systematic manner. That is, *THE MAN* has not mastered, taken
possession of, and used, the new faculty, but has been (on the contrary)
largely or entirely mastered and used by it. This was clearly the case
with Paul, who was led away by the grandeur and glory of the new sense
to underrate the really equal divinity of his previous human faculties.
The same words could with nearly equal truth be applied to the case of
Gautama. The evils that

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

humanity has suffered and is to-day suffering simply because these two
men took this mistaken view—the evils, namely, that have come upon us
through despising "the flesh"—i.e., through despising the so-called
"natural man"—the evils, in fine, that have come from the teaching that
one part of man is good and to be cultivated, while another part is bad
and (if possible) to be extirpated, or, if that is not possible, covered
up and hidden away—the evils that have come upon us from this false view
are entirely incalculable and would sometimes almost tempt us to forget
the even greater benefits bestowed upon the race by the men from whom
the evils specified have come. Not that Gautama and Paul are by any
means entirely responsible for the monasticism and asceticism of their
followers. It is doubtless true, as Lecky \[114: 108\] tells us, that
this movement had already begun. But no one can or will deny that the
influence of these two men in intensifying and directing the passion for
abnegation of pleasure and so-called purity (in other words, in setting
aside the things of the self conscious life in favor of those of the
Cosmic Conscious) was incalculably great.

The evils in question have been clearly seen, lucidly portrayed and
traced back to their predominant source in these great teachers by many
writers. Among the rest Kidd \[108:125f\] has indicated with great force
and truth the immense impulse toward self denial that marked the early
centuries of Christianity; has shown that the impulse in question,
though "irrational," had a meaning deeper than reason; that if the race
is to advance such anti-social instincts are a necessity (though it is
neither necessary nor well that they should often have the force they
possessed in the centuries referred to); that they have their place in
this scheme just as have their complement, the social instincts. What
Kidd does not see is—whence the great teachers derived the insight from
which was born the assurance that so moved them and through them the
world.

This antagonism between the higher and the lower life, between the life
for self and the life for others, between the life of the flesh and the
life of the spirit, between the life of the individual

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

and the life of the race, between the self conscious life and the Cosmic
Conscious life, is, perhaps, the supreme fact of the modern world—giving
to it both motion and stability, just as the opposite forces, the
centrifugal and the centripetal, give both motion and stability in the
sphere of the astral universe. And from this point of view it is clear
why it should be that: Le sort des grands hommes est de passer tour à
tour pour des fous et pour des sages. La gloire est d’etre un de ceux
que choisit successivement l’humanité par les aimer et les haïr \[138:
182\].

It may be that Walt Whitman is the first man who, having Cosmic
Consciousness very fully developed, has deliberately set himself against
being thus mastered by it, determining, on the contrary, to subdue it
and make it the servant along with simple consciousness, self
consciousness and the rest of the united, individual SELF. He saw, what
neither Gautama nor Paul saw, what Jesus saw, though not so clearly as
he, that though this faculty is truly Godlike, yet it is no more
supernatural or preternatural than sight, hearing, taste, feeling, or
any other, and he consequently refused to give it unlimited sway, and
would not allow it to tyrannize over the rest. He believes in it, but he
says the other self, the old self, must not abase itself to the new;
neither must the new be encroached upon or limited by the old; he will
see that they live as friendly co-workers together. And it may here be
said that whoever does not realize this last clause will never fully
understand the "Leaves."

The next reference made by Walt Whitman to Cosmic Consciousness, to be
noted here, is in a poem called the "Prayer of Columbus" \[193: 323\], a
few words on the history of which will be in order. It was written about
1874–5, when the condition of the poor, sick, neglected spiritual
explorer was strikingly similar to that of the heroic geographical
explorer shipwrecked on the Antillean island in 1503, at which time and
place the prayer is supposed to be offered up. Walt Whitman—a very
common trick with him—used this agreement of circumstance to put his own
words (ostensibly) into the mouth of the other man. The prayer is in
reality, of course, Walt Whitman's own and all the allusions

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

in it are to his own life, work, fortunes—to himself. In it he refers
specifically and pointedly to the present subject matter. Speaking to
God, he says:

Thou knowest my manhood's solemn and visionary meditations.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

O I am sure they really came from Thee,  
The urge, the ardor, the unconquerable will,  
The potent, felt, interior command, stronger than words,  
A message from the Heavens, whispering to me even in sleep,  
These sped me on.

One effort more, my altar this bleak sand;  
That Thou O God my life hast lighted,  
With ray of light, steady, ineffable, vouchsafed of Thee,  
Light rare untellable, lighting the very light,  
Beyond all signs, descriptions, languages;  
For that O God, be it my latest word, here on my knees,  
Old, poor, and paralyzed, I thank Thee.

My hands, my limbs grew nerveless,  
My brain feels rack’d, bewilder’d,  
Let the old timbers part, I will not part,  
I will cling fast to Thee O God, though the waves buffet me, Thee,  
Thee at least I know.

</div>

</div>

At the time of writing these lines Walt Whitman is fifty-five or
fifty-six years of age. For over twenty years he has been guided by this
(seeming) supernatural illumination. He has yielded freely to it and
obeyed its behests as being from God Himself.

He has "loved the earth, sun, animals, despised riches, given alms to
every one that asked, stood up for the stupid and crazy, devoted his
income and labor to others" \[193: 273\], as commanded by the divine
voice and as impelled by the divine impulse, and now for reward he is
poor, sick, paralyzed, despised, neglected, dying. His message to man,
to the delivery of which he has devoted his life, which has been dearer
in his eyes (for man's sake) than wife, children, life itself, is unread
or scoffed and jeered at. What shall he say to God? He says that God
knows him through and through, and that he is willing to leave himself
in God's hands. He says that he does not know men nor his own work, and
so does

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

not judge what men may do with, or say to, the "Leaves." But he says he
does know God, and will cling to him though the waves buffet him. Then
about the inspiration, the illumination, the potent, felt, interior
command stronger than words? He is sure that this comes from God. He has
no doubt. There can be no doubt of that.

He goes on to speak of the ray of light, steady, ineffable, with which
God has lighted his life, and says it is rare, untellable, beyond all
signs, descriptions, languages. And this (be it well remembered) is not
the utterance of wild enthusiasm, but of cold, hard fact by a worn-out
old man on (as he supposed) his deathbed.

This acknowledgment by Whitman of God's goodness recalls forcibly
Bacon's gratitude to God for his "gifts and graces," his circumstances
in the summer of 1621 (both outwardly and inwardly) being as parallel as
they could possibly be with those of Whitman in 1875.

The next direct allusion to Cosmic Consciousness to be noted is embodied
in a poem called "Now Precedent Songs, Farewell" \[193: 403\], written
in June, 1888, when he again, and with good reason, supposed himself
dying. The poem was written as a hasty good-bye to the "Leaves." At the
end of it he refers to his songs and their origin in these words:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

O heaven! what flash and started endless train of all! compared indeed
to that!  
What wretched shred e’en at the best of all!

</div>

He says: Compared to the flash, the divine illumination from which they
had their origin, how poor and worthless his poems are. And it must be
borne in mind that Whitman never had a bad opinion of the "Leaves." He
used to say (in a semi-jocular manner, but fully meaning it all the
same) that none of the fellows (meaning out-and-out admirers), not even
O'Conner, Burroughs or Bucke, thought as highly of them as he did. But
thinking that way of them he could still exclaim how poor they were
compared to the illumination from which they sprang. But he did not die
at that time. He rallied, and again, it seems, from time to time

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

the vision appeared and the voice whispered. Doubtless the vision grew
more dim and the voice less distinct as time passed and the feebleness
of age and sickness advanced upon him. At last, in 1891, at the age of
seventy-two, the "Brahmic Splendor" finally departed, and in those
mystic lines, "To the Sunset Breeze" \[193: 414\], which the Harpers
returned to him as "a mere improvisation," he bids it farewell:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Thou hast O Nature! elements! utterance to my heart beyond the rest—and
this is of them. . . .  
Thou art spiritual, Godly, most of all known to my sense,  
Minister to speak to me, here and now, what word has never told, and
cannot tell,  
Art thou not universal, concrete's distillation?

</div>

</div>

As a man with Cosmic Consciousness *sees* the Cosmic order, and that, as
Paul says, "all things work together for good" <span
id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4) \[19: 8: 28\], so every such man is what is
called "an Optimist," and it may be freely stated that the *knowledge*
of the friendliness of the universe to man is a distinctive mark of the
class of men considered in this volume. That Whitman has this mark needs
saying only to those who have not read him. Again and again in
ever-varying words he says and repeats: "And I say there is in fact no
evil" \[193: 22\]. "Clear and sweet is my soul, and clear and sweet is
all that is not my soul" \[193: 31\]. "Is it lucky to be born?" he asks,
and answers: "It is just as lucky to die" \[193: 34\].

So Dante, in summing up, declares that, seen by the light of the Cosmic
Sense, all is perfect, including that which outside that light is (or
seems) imperfect \[72: 213\].

It is not supposed that in the case of any man so far born has the
Cosmic Sense been constantly present for years, months, or even
weeks—probably not even for days or hardly hours. In many cases it
appears only once and for a few moments only, but that flash is
sufficient to light up (more or less brightly) all the subsequent years
of life. In the greatest cases it may be present for many minutes at a
time and return at intervals of weeks,

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

months or years. Between these extremes there would seem to be a vast
range of greater and less cases.

It has already been stated more than once that while Cosmic
Consciousness is actually present there is a profound change in the
appearance of the subject of it. If one thinks how the countenance is
lit up by ordinary great joy, it will be seen that the change spoken of
must happen. Not only so, but it is within the personal knowledge of the
writer that (at all events, in some cases) a man does not altogether
return (at least permanently) to his old expression and appearance for
months or even years after a period of illumination.

This is as much as to say that the face of a man who had occasional
periods of illumination, extending through years, would wear,
habitually, a more or less exalted and noble expression, and this is
true.

It is, however, of course, while Cosmic Consciousness is actually
present that the change in the aspect of the subject is the greatest.
The following seems to be a description of this change. Either Cosmic
Consciousness was actually present at the hour mentioned or it had been
present immediately before it. The account is by an eye witness—Miss
Helen Price—a lady well known to the person who writes these lines:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

One evening in 1866, while Walt Whitman was stopping with us in New
York, the tea bell had been rung ten minutes or more when he came down
from his room, and we all gathered around the table. I remarked him as
he entered the room; there seemed to be a peculiar brightness and
elation about him, an almost irrepressible joyousness, which shone from
his face and seemed to pervade his whole body. It was the more
noticeable as his ordinary mood was one of quiet, yet cheerful serenity.
I knew he had been working at a new edition of his book, and I hoped if
he had an opportunity he would say something to let us into the secret
of his mysterious joy. Unfortunately most of those at the table were
occupied with some subject of conversation; at every pause I waited
eagerly for him to speak; but no, some one else would begin again, until
I grew almost wild with impatience and vexation. He appeared to listen,
and would even laugh at some of the remarks that were made, yet he did
not utter a single word during the meal; and his face still wore that
singular brightness and delight, as though he had partaken of some
divine elixir. His expression was so remarkable that I might have
doubted my own observation had it not been noticed by another as well as
myself \[38: 32\].

</div>

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

### III.

### SUMMARY.

*a*. The subjective light appeared strongly to Whitman.

*b*. The moral elevation and

*c*. Intellectual illumination were extreme, and in his case stand out
very clearly, since we know the man so well both before and after the
oncoming of the Cosmic Sense.

*d*. In no other man who ever lived was the sense of eternal life so
absolute.

*e*. Fear of death was absent. Neither in health nor in sickness did he
show any sign of it, and there is every reason to believe he did not
feel it.

*f*. He had no sense of sin. This must not be understood as meaning that
he felt himself to be perfect. Whitman realized his own greatness as
clearly and fully as did any of his admirers. He also realized how
immeasurably he was below the ideal which he constantly set up before
himself.

*g*. The change of the self conscious man into the Cosmic Conscious was
instantaneous—occurring at a certain hour of a certain day.

*h*. It occurred at the characteristic age and at the characteristic
time of the year.

*i*. The altered appearance of the man while in the Cosmic Conscious
state was seen and noted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[235:\*](cc22.htm#fr_4) In the passage Paul seems
to limit the statement "to them that love God" (to those who have Cosmic
Consciousness), but what he really intends is doubtless: All things work
together for good; but this is only really seen and known by those who
have been endowed with the Cosmic Sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14. Edward Carpenter](cc23)
