[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc22)  [Next](cc24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 14.

*Edward Carpenter*.

##### I.

<span class="smallcaps">Was</span> born August 29th, 1844, at Brighton,
where he spent his early youth. His father came from Cornwall. He went
for several years to Brighton College, and in 1864 entered Trinity Hall,

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cambridge, where
he obtained a scholarship, graduated in 1868 as tenth wrangler, and
afterwards was elected a fellow of the college. In due course he was
ordained, and for some years acted as curate of St. Edward's Church,
Cambridge, of which at the time Frederic Dennison Maurice was vicar. He
never profoundly believed in the historical accuracy of the Bible. His
father was a Broad Churchman, and brought him up to think for himself.
When quite young he had made up his mind to take orders and stuck to
that notion largely from an idea that the church could be widened from
the inside. Once fairly inside, however, he found it would take a
precious long time. In fine, he soon felt himself so ill at ease that a
complete break with the whole thing became absolutely necessary. He was
in orders from 1869 to 1874.

We find him immediately after this working with approved success in a
new field—that of university extension. He was at this time, from 1874
to 1880, especially known and loved in and about York, Nottingham and
Sheffield.

About the same time he began to study deeply social questions, and
became convinced that society was on a wrong basis and moving in a wrong
direction.

It was early in 1881, as he tells us, when in his thirty-seventh year,
that Carpenter entered into Cosmic Consciousness. The evidence of the
fact is perfectly clear, but it is not within the power of the writer to
give details of illumination in the case beyond those given below. As a
direct result of the oncoming of the Cosmic Sense he practically
resigned his social rank and became a laborer; that is to say, he
procured a few acres of land not many miles from Dronfield, in
Derbyshire, built upon it a small house and lived there with the family
of a working man as one of themselves. Dressing in the common corduroy
of the country side, he took up his spade and worked steadily with the
others. It seemed to him that the manners and habits of the rich were
less noble than those of the poor; that the soul and life of the rich
were less noble. He preferred to live with the comparatively poor and to
be himself comparatively poor, in that respect (not following the
example of, but) participating in the instinct of Gautama. Jesus,

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Paul, Las Casas
and Whitman. He retains his piano, and after his hours of manual toil
will refresh himself with a sonata of Beethoven, for he is an
accomplished and original musician. It is needless to say that he is a
pronounced and advanced socialist—perhaps an anarchist. He is one with
the people, the "common" people (made so numerous, so common, said
Lincoln, because God loves them and likes to see many of them). It is
childish to say (as some have thought and said) that men of this stamp
live as poor men with the poor for the sake of influencing these and as
an example to the rich. They simply live as poor men with the poor, as
laboring men with laborers, because they prefer the life, the manners,
the habits, the surroundings, the personality of these to the life, the
manners, the habits, the surroundings and the personality of the rich.
Occasionally he descends into so-called "good society" (having close and
dear relations there), but does not remain in it for any length of time.
He loves above all things, in himself and others, honesty, candor,
sincerity and simplicity, and he says he finds more of these in the
poor, common, working people than he finds in the rich men and women who
constitute "society."

In 1873 Carpenter published "Narcissus and Other Poems," and in 1875
"Moses: A Drama." He began reading Whitman in 1869, and read the
"Leaves" continuously for ten years thereafter. Whether Carpenter would
have acquired Cosmic Consciousness if he had never read Whitman cannot
perhaps be said, either by himself or by any one else, but there seems
little doubt that the study of the "Leaves" was a material factor
leading up to his illumination. He is not the only man who has been
helped forward by the same agency, and it is probable that in the
world's future many thousand men and women will be in similar manner
helped to the same goal. For (and in this fact is the raison d'être of
the present volume), next to the necessary heredity and the right
constitution (bodily and mental), association with the minds of those
who have passed the boundary into "Specialism" is of supreme importance.
He began to write "Towards Democracy" (the book in which he attempted to
embody the teachings of the

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cosmic Sense)
immediately after his illumination. The first edition, small and thin,
was published in 1883; the second, a good deal enlarged, in 1885; the
third, grown into a stout, handsome volume, in 1892; and the fourth, in
1896. No better book can be read from which to obtain an idea as to what
Cosmic Consciousness is and in what it differs from self consciousness.
Besides "Towards Democracy," Carpenter published, in 1887, "England's
Ideal"; in 1889, "Civilization, its Cause and Cure," and in 1893, "From
Adam's Peak to Elephanta"; all of which are exceedingly well worth
attention.

##### II.

In a letter to the present writer, who had asked for certain facts about
the new sense, he says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

I really do not feel that I can tell you anything without falsifying and
obscuring the matter. I have done my best to write it out in "Towards
Democracy." I have no experience of physical light in this relation. The
perception seems to be one in which all the senses unite into one sense.
In which *you become* the object. But this is unintelligible, mentally
speaking. I do not think the matter can be defined as yet; but I do not
know that there is any harm in writing about it.[\*](cc23.htm#an_240-1)

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_240-1">\*</span> In the Vagasaneyi-Samhita-Upanishad occurs
the following verse: "When, to a man who understands, the *self has
become all things*, what sorrow, what trouble can there be to him who
once beheld that unity" \[150:312\]?

</div>

In another place he has the following clear and explicit passage on the
subject:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Notwithstanding, then, the prevalence of the foot régime (inductive
science) and that the heathen so furiously rage together in their belief
in it, let us suggest that there is in man a divine consciousness as
well as a foot consciousness. For as we saw that the sense of taste may
pass from being a mere local thing on the tip of the tongue to pervading
and becoming synonymous with the health of the whole body; or as the
blue of the sky may be to one person a mere superficial impression of
color, and to another the inspiration of a poem or picture, and to a
third, as to the "God-intoxicated" Arab of the desert, a living presence
like the ancient Dyaus or Zeus—so may not the whole of human
consciousness gradually lift itself from a mere local and temporary
consciousness to a divine and universal? There is in every man a local
consciousness connected with his quite external body; that we know. Are
there not also in every man the making of a universal consciousness?
That there are in us

</div>

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

phases of consciousness which transcend the limit of the bodily senses
is a matter of daily experience; that we perceive and know things which
are not conveyed to us by our bodily eyes and heard by our bodily ears
is certain; that there rise in us waves of consciousness from those
around us—from the people, the race, to which we belong—is also certain.
May there, then, not be in us the makings of a perception and knowledge
which shall not be relative to this body which is here and now, but
which shall be good for all time and everywhere? Does there not exist,
in truth, as we have already hinted, an inner illumination, of which
what we call light in the outer world is the partial expression and
manifestation, by which we can ultimately see things *as they are*,
beholding all creation—the animals, the angels, the plants, the figures
of our friends and all the ranks and races of human kind, in their true
being and order—not by any local act of perception, but by a cosmical
intuition and presence, identifying ourselves with what we see? Does
there not exist a perfected sense of hearing—as of the morning stars
singing together—an understanding of the words that are spoken all
through the universe, the hidden meaning of all things, the word which
is creation itself—a profound and far-pervading sense, of which our
ordinary sense of sound is only the first novitiate and initiation? Do
we not become aware of an inner sense of health and of holiness—the
translation and final outcome of the external sense of taste—which has
power to determine for us absolutely and without any ado, without
argument, and without denial, what is good and appropriate to be done or
suffered in every case that can arise? If there are such powers in man,
then, indeed, an exact science is possible. Short of it there is only a
temporary and phantom science. "Whatsoever is known to us by (direct)
consciousness," says Mill in his "Logic," "is known to us without
possibility of question." What is known by our local and temporary
consciousness *is known for the moment* beyond possibility of question;
what is known by our permanent and universal consciousness is
permanently known beyond possibility of question \[57: 97–8\].

</div>

In a later book, Carpenter has a chapter, "Consciousness Without
Thought" \[56: 153\], written expressly to give to the uninitiated an
idea of what is meant by the words used as the title of the present
volume. Here follows that chapter entire. Those interested in the
subject had better see the book itself, as it contains other chapters
almost equally important. The chapter begins:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

The question is: What is this experience? or rather—since an experience
can really only be known to a person who experiences it—we may ask: What
is the nature of this experience? And in trying to indicate an answer of
some kind to this question I feel considerable diffidence, just for the
very reason (for one) already mentioned—namely, that it is so difficult
or impossible for one person to give a true account of an experience
which has occurred to another.

</div>

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

If I could give the exact words of the teacher, without any bias derived
either from myself or the interpreting friend, the case might be
different; but that I cannot pretend to do; and if I could, the
old-world scientific form in which his thoughts were cast would probably
only prove a stumbling block and a source of confusion, instead of a
help, to the reader. Indeed in the case of the sacred books, where we
have a good deal of accessible and authoritative information, Western
critics, though for the most part agreeing that there is some real
experience underlying, are sadly at variance as to what that experience
may be.

For these reasons I prefer not to attempt or pretend to give the exact
teaching, unbiased, of the Indian Gurus or their experiences, but only
to indicate, so far as I can, in my own words, and in modern
thought-form, what I take to be the direction in which we must look for
this ancient and world-old knowledge which has had so stupendous an
influence in the East, and which indeed is still the main mark of its
difference from the West.

And first let me guard against an error which is likely to arise. It is
very easy to assume, and very frequently assumed, in any case where a
person is credited with the possession of an unusual faculty, that such
person is at once lifted out of our sphere into a supernatural region,
and possesses every faculty of that region. If, for instance, he or she
is, or is supposed to be, clairvoyant, it is assumed that everything is
or ought to be known to them; or if the person has shown what seems a
miraculous power at any time or in any case, it is asked by way of
discredit why he or she did not show a like power at other times or in
other cases. Against all such hasty generalizations it is necessary to
guard ourselves. If there is a higher form of consciousness obtainable
by man than that which he can for the most part claim at present, it is
probable—nay, certain—that it is evolving and will evolve but slowly,
and with many a slip and hesitant pause by the way. In the far past of
man and the animals consciousness of sensation and consciousness of self
have been successively evolved—each of these mighty growths with
innumerable branches and branch-lets continually spreading. At any point
in this vast experience a new growth, a new form of consciousness might
well have seemed miraculous. What could be more marvellous than the
first revealment of the sense of sight, what more inconceivable to those
who had not experienced it, and what more certain than that the first
use of this faculty must have been fraught with delusion and error? Yet
there may be an inner vision which again transcends sight, even as far
as sight transcends touch. It is more than probable that in the hidden
births of time there lurks a consciousness which is not the
consciousness of sensation and which is not the consciousness of self—or
at least which includes and entirely surpasses these—a consciousness in
which the contrast between the ego and the external world, and the
distinction between subject and object, fall away. The part of the world
into which such a consciousness admits us (call it supermundane or
whatever you will) is probably at least as vast and complex as the part
we know, and progress in that region at least equally slow and tentative
and various, laborious, discontinuous and uncertain. There is no sudden
leap out of the back parlor onto Olympus; and the routes, when found,
from one to the other, are long and bewildering in their variety.

</div>

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

And of those who do attain to some portion of this region we are not to
suppose that they are at once demi-gods or infallible. In many cases
indeed the very novelty and strangeness of the experience give rise to
phantasmal trains of delusive speculation. Though we should expect, and
though it is no doubt true on the whole, that what we should call the
higher types of existing humanity are those most likely to come into
possession of any new faculties which may be flying about, yet it is not
always so, and there are cases well recognized, in which persons of
decidedly deficient or warped moral nature attain powers which properly
belong to a higher grade of evolution, and are correspondingly dangerous
thereby.

All this, or a great part of it, the Indian teachers insist on. They
say—and I think this commends the reality of their experience—that there
is nothing abnormal or miraculous about the matter; that the faculties
acquired are on the whole the result of long evolution and training, and
that they have distinct laws and an order of their own. They recognize
the existence of persons of a demoniac faculty, who have acquired powers
of a certain grade without corresponding moral evolution, and they admit
the rarity of the highest phases of consciousness and the fewness of
those at present fitted for its attainment. With these little provisos,
then, established I think we may go on to say that what the Gñáni seeks
and obtains is a new order of consciousness—to which, for want of a
better, we may give the name universal or Cosmic Consciousness, in
contradistinction to the individual or special bodily consciousness with
which we are all familiar. I am not aware that the exact equivalent of
this expression "universal consciousness" is used in the Hindu
philosophy; but the Sat-chit-ánanda Brahm, to which every yogi aspires,
indicates the same idea: "sat," the reality, the all pervading; "chit,"
the knowing, perceiving; "ánanda," the blissful—all these united in one
manifestation of Brahm.

The West seeks the individual consciousness—the enriched mind, ready
perceptions and memories, individual hopes and fears, ambition, loves,
conquests—the self, the local self, in all its phases and forms—and
sorely doubts whether such a thing as an universal consciousness exists.
The East seeks the universal consciousness, and in those cases where its
quest succeeds individual self and life thin away to a mere film, and
are only the shadows cast by the glory revealed beyond.

The individual consciousness takes the form of Thought, which is fluid
and mobile like quicksilver, perpetually in a state of change and unrest
fraught with pain and effort; the other consciousness is not in the form
of Thought. It touches, hears, sees, and is those things which it
perceives—without motion, without change, without effort, without
distinction of subject and object, but with a vast and incredible Joy.

The individual consciousness is specially related to the body. The
organs of the body are in some degree its organs. But the whole body is
only as one,\~ organ of the Cosmic Consciousness. To attain this latter
one must have the power of knowing one's self separate from the body—of
passing into a state of ecstasy, in fact. Without this the Cosmic
Consciousness cannot be experienced. It is said: "There are four main
experiences in initiation—(1) the meeting

</div>

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

with a Guru; (2) the consciousness of Grace or Arul—which may perhaps be
interpreted as the consciousness of a change—even of a physiological
change—working within one; (3) the vision of Siva (God), with which the
knowledge of one's self as distinct from the body is closely connected;
(4) the finding of the universe within." "The wise," it is also said,
"when their thoughts become fixed, perceive within themselves the
Absolute consciousness, which is Sarva sakshi, Witness of all things."

Great have been the disputes among the learned as to the meaning of the
word Nirvâna—whether it indicates a state of no-consciousness or a state
of vastly enhanced consciousness. Probably both views have their
justification; the thing does not admit of definition in the terms of
ordinary language. The important thing to see and admit is that under
cover of this and other similar terms there does exist a real and
recognizable fact (that is, a state of consciousness in some sense),
which has been experienced over and over again, and which to those who
have experienced it in ever so slight a degree has appeared worthy of
lifelong pursuit and devotion. It is easy of course to represent the
thing as a mere word, a theory, a speculation of the dreamy Hindu; but
people do not sacrifice their lives for empty words, nor do mere
philosophical abstractions rule the destinies of continents. No, the
word represents a reality, something very basic and inevitable in human
nature. The question really is not to define the fact—for we cannot do
that—but to get at and experience it. It is interesting at this juncture
to find that modern Western science, which has hitherto—without much
result—been occupying itself with mechanical theories of the universe,
is approaching from its side this idea of the existence of another form
of consciousness. The extraordinary phenomena of hypnotism—which no
doubt are in some degree related to the subject we are discussing, and
which have been recognized for ages in the East—are forcing Western
scientists to assume the existence of the so-called secondary
consciousness in the body. The phenomena seem really inexplicable
without the assumption of a secondary agency of some kind, and it every
day becomes increasingly difficult not to use the word consciousness to
describe it. Let it be understood that I am not for a moment assuming
that this secondary consciousness of the hypnotists is in all respects
identical with the Cosmic Consciousness (or whatever we may call it) of
the Eastern occultists. It may or may not be. The two kinds of
consciousness may cover the same ground, or they may only overlap to a
small extent. That is a question I do not propose to discuss. The point
to which I wish to draw attention is that Western science is envisaging
the possibility of the existence in man of another consciousness of some
kind beside that with whose workings we are familiar. It quotes (A.
Moll) the case of Barkworth, who "can add up long rows of figures while
carrying on a lively discussion, without allowing his attention to be at
all diverted from the discussion"; and asks us how Barkworth can do this
unless he has a secondary consciousness which occupies itself with the
figures while his primary consciousness is in the thick of argument.
Here is a lecturer (F. Myers) who for a whole minute allows his mind to
wander entirely away from the subject in hand, and imagines himself to
be sitting beside a friend in the audience and to be engaged in
conversation with

</div>

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

him, and who wakes up to find himself still on the platform lecturing
away with perfect ease and coherency. What are we to say to such a case
as that./ Here, again, is a pianist who recites a piece of music by
heart, and finds that his recital is actually hindered by allowing his
mind (his primary consciousness) to dwell upon what he is doing. It is
sometimes suggested that the very perfection of the musical performance
shows that it is mechanical or unconscious, but is this a fair
inference? and would it not seem to be a mere contradiction in terms to
speak of an unconscious lecture or an unconscious addition of a row of
figures?

Many actions and processes of the body, e.g., swallowing, are attended
by distinct personal consciousness; many other actions and processes are
quite unperceived by the same; and it might seem reasonable to suppose
that these latter, at any rate, were purely mechanical and devoid of any
mental substratum. But the later developments of hypnotism in the West
have shown—what is well known to the Indian fakirs—that under certain
conditions consciousness of the internal actions and processes of the
body can be obtained; and not only so, but consciousness of events
taking place at a distance from the body and without the ordinary means
of communication.

Thus the idea of another consciousness, in some respects of wider range
than the ordinary one, and having methods of perception of its own, has
been gradually infiltrating itself into Western minds.

There is another idea, which modern science has been familiarizing us
with, and which is bringing us towards the same conception—that, namely,
of the fourth dimension. The supposition that the actual world has four
space-dimensions instead of three makes many things conceivable which
otherwise would be incredible. It makes it conceivable that apparently
separate objects, e.g., distinct people, are really physically united;
that things apparently sundered by enormous distances of space are
really quite close together; that a person or other object might pass in
and out of a closed room without disturbance of walls, doors, or
windows, etc.; and if this fourth dimension were to become a factor of
our consciousness it is obvious that we should have means of knowledge
which to the ordinary sense would appear simply miraculous. There is
much, apparently, to suggest that the consciousness attained to by the
Indian giianis in their degree, and by hypnotic subjects in theirs, is
of this fourth-dimensional order.

As a solid is related to its own surfaces, so, it would appear, is
Cosmic Consciousness related to ordinary consciousness. The phases of
the personal consciousness are but different facets of the other
consciousness; and experiences which seem remote from each other in the
individual are perhaps all equally near in the universal. Space itself,
as we know it, may be practically annihilated in the consciousness of a
larger space of which it is but the superficies; and a person living in
London may not unlikely find that he has a back door opening quite
simply and unceremoniously out in Bombay.

"The true quality of the soul," said the Guru one day, "is that of
space, by which it is at rest, everywhere.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

Cf. Whitman: "Dazzling and tremendous, how quick the sunrise would kill
me, if I could not now and always send sunrise out of me. We also ascend
dazzling and tremendous as the sun."

</div>

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

But this space (Akása) within the soul is far above the ordinary
material space. The whole of the latter, including all the suns and
stars, appears to you then as it were but an atom of the former"—and
here he held up his fingers as though crumbling a speck of dust between
them.

"At rest everywhere," "Indifference," "Equality." This was one of the
most remarkable parts of the Guru's teaching. Though (for family
reasons) maintaining many of the observances of caste himself, and
though holding and teaching that for the mass of the people caste rules
were quite necessary, he never ceased to insist that when the time came
for a man (or woman) to be "emancipated" all these rules must drop aside
as of no importance—all distinction of castes, classes, all sense of
superiority or self-goodness—of right and wrong even—and the most
absolute sense of equality must prevail towards everyone, and
determination in its expression. Certainly it was remarkable (though I
knew that the sacred books contained it) to find this germinal principle
of Western Democracy so vividly active and at work deep down beneath the
innumerable layers of Oriental social life and custom. But so it is; and
nothing shows better the relation between the West and East than this
fact.

This sense of equality, of freedom from regulations and confinements, of
inclusiveness, and of the life that "rests everywhere," belongs, of
course, more to the Cosmic or universal part of a man than to the
individual part. To the latter it is always a stumbling-block and an
offense. It is easy to show that men are not equal, that they cannot be
free, and to point the absurdity of a life that is indifferent and at
rest under all conditions. Nevertheless to the larger consciousness
these are basic facts, which underlie the common life of humanity, and
feed the very individual that denies them.

Thus repeating the proviso that in using such terms as Cosmic and
universal consciousness we do not commit ourselves to the theory that
the instant a man leaves the personal part of him he enters into
absolutely unlimited and universal knowledge, but only into a higher
order of perception—and admitting the intricacy and complexity of the
region so roughly denoted by these terms, and the microscopical
character of our knowledge about it—we may say once more, also as a
roughest generalization, that the quest of the East has been this
universal consciousness, and that of the West the personal or individual
consciousness. As is well known the East has its various sects and
schools of philosophy, with subtle discriminations of qualities,
essences, godheads, devil-hoods, etc., into which I do not propose to
go, and which I should feel myself quite incompetent to deal with.
Leaving all these aside, I will keep simply to these two rough Western
terms, and try to consider further the question of the methods by which
the Eastern student sets himself to obtain the Cosmic state, or such
higher order of consciousness as he does encompass.

</div>

Later \[62\] Carpenter has made still another attempt to explain or at
least indicate the nature of the new sense. He says:

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

I have sometimes been asked questions about "Towards Democracy" which I
found it difficult to answer: and I will try and shape a few thoughts
about it here.[\*](cc23.htm#an_247-1)

Quite a long time ago (say when I was about twenty-five, and living at
Cambridge) I wanted to write some sort of a book which should address
itself very personally and closely to any one who cared to read
it—establish, so to speak, an intimate personal

relation between myself and the reader; and during successive years I
made several attempts to realize this idea—of which beginnings one or
two in verse (one, for instance, I may mention, called "The Angel of
Death and Life") may be found in a little volume entitled "Narcissus and
Other Poems," now well out of print, which I published in 1873. None of
my attempts satisfied me, however, and after a time I began to think the
quest was an unreasonable one—unreasonable because, while it might not
be difficult for anyone with a pliant and sympathetic disposition to
touch certain chords in any given individual that he met, it seemed
impossible to hope that a book—which cannot in any way adapt itself to
the idiosyncrasies of its reader—could find the key of the personalities
into whose hands it might come. For this it would be necessary to
suppose, and to find, an absolutely common ground to all individuals
(all, at any rate, who might have reached a certain stage of thought and
experience), and to write the book on and from that common ground; but
this seemed at that time quite unfeasible.

Years followed, more or less eventful, with flight from Cambridge and
university lectures carried on in the provincial towns, and so forth;
but of much dumbness as regards writing, and inwardly full of extreme
tension and suffering. At last, early in 1881, no doubt as the
culmination and result of struggles and experiences that had been going
on, I became conscious that a mass of material was forming within me,
imperatively demanding expression—though what exactly its expression
would be I could not then have told. I became for the time
overwhelmingly conscious of the disclosure within me of a region
transcending in some sense the ordinary bounds of personality, in the
light of which region my own idiosyncrasies of character—defects,
accomplishments, limitations, or what not—appeared of no importance
whatever—an absolute freedom from mortality, accompanied by an
indescribable calm and joy.

I also immediately saw, or felt, that this region of self existing in me
existed equally (though not always equally consciously) in others. In
regard to it the mere diversities of temperament which ordinarily
distinguish and divide people dropped away and became indifferent, and a
field was opened in which all might meet, in which all were truly equal.
Thus the two words which controlled my thought and expression at that
time became Freedom and

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_247-1">\*</span> It is important to notice that all through
this exposition, as well as in Carpenter's other writings on the same
subject (as whoever has read this book so far will see without further
repetition), his testimony as to the phenomena of Cosmic Consciousness
constantly runs parallel to, is often even identical with, that of the
Suttas, of Behmen, of Yepes, and of other writers of the same class
dealing with this subject (especially, perhaps, the author of the
Bagavat Gita), though it does not appear that he has, and probably he
has not studied these writers.

</div>

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Equality. The necessity for space and time to work this out grew so
strong that in April of that year I threw up my lecturing employment.
Moreover another necessity had come upon me which demanded the latter
step—the necessity, namely, for an open air life and manual work. I
could not finally argue with this any more than with the other; I had to
give in and obey. As it happened, at the time I mentioned I was already
living in a little cottage on a farm (at Bradway, near Sheffield) with a
friend and his family, and doing farm work in the intervals of my
lectures. When I threw up the lecturing I had everything clear before
me. I knocked together a sort of wooden sentinel box in the garden, and
there, or in the fields and the woods, all that spring and summer and on
through the winter, by day and sometimes by night, in sunlight or in
rain, in frost and snow, and all sorts of gray and dull weather, I wrote
"Towards Democracy"—or at any rate the first and longer poem that goes
by that name.

By the end of 1881 this was finished—though it was worked over and
patched a little in the early part of 1882; and I remember feeling then
that, defective and halting and incoherent in expression as it was,
still if it succeeded in rendering even a half the splendor which
inspired it, it would be good, and I need not trouble to write anything
more (which, with due allowance for the said "if," I even now feel was a
true and friendly intimation).

The writing of this and its publication (in 1883) got a load off my mind
which had been weighing on it for years, and I have never since felt
that sense of oppression and anxiety which I had constantly suffered
from before—and which I believe, in its different forms, is a common
experience in the early part of life.

In this first poem were embodied, with considerable alterations and
adaptations, a good number of casual pieces, which I had written (merely
under stress of feeling and without any particular sense of proportion)
during several preceding years. They now found their interpretation
under the steady and clear light of a new mood or state of feeling which
previously had only visited me fitfully and with clouded beams. The
whole of "Towards Democracy"—I may say, speaking broadly and including
the later pieces—had been written under the domination of this mood. I
have tested and measured everything by it; it has been the sun to which
all the images and conceptions and thoughts used have been as material
objects reflecting its light. And perhaps this connects itself with the
fact that it has been so necessary to write in the open air. The more
universal feeling which I sought to convey refused itself from me within
doors; nor could I at any time or by any means persuade the rhythm or
style of expression to render itself up within a room—tending there
always to break back into distinct metrical forms; which, however much I
admire them in certain authors, and think them myself suitable for
certain kinds of work, were not what I wanted and did not express for me
the feeling which I sought to express. This fact (of the necessity of
the open air) is very curious, and I cannot really explain it. I only
know that it is so, quite indubitable and insurmountable. I can feel it
at once, the difference, in merely passing through a doorway—but I
cannot explain it. Always, especially the sky, seemed to

</div>

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

contain for me the key, the inspiration; the sight of it more than
anything gave what I wanted (sometimes like a veritable lightning flash
coming down from it on to my paper—I a mere witness, but agitated with
strange transports).

But if I should be asked—as I have sometimes been asked—What is the
exact nature of this mood, of this illuminant splendor, of which you
speak? I should have to reply that I can give no answer. The whole of
"Towards Democracy" is an endeavor to give it utterance; any mere single
sentence, or direct definition, would be of no use—rather indeed would
tend to obscure by limiting. All I can say is that there seems to be a
vision possible to man, as from some more universal standpoint, free
from the obscurity and localism which specially connect themselves with
the passing clouds of desire, fear, and all ordinary thought and
emotion; in that sense another and separate faculty; and a vision always
means a sense of light, so here is a sense of inward light, unconnected
of course with the mortal eye, but bringing to the eye of the mind the
impression that it *sees*, and by means of the medium which washes, as
it were, the *interior* surfaces of all objects and things and
persons—how can I express it? And yet this is most defective, for the
sense is a sense that one *is* those objects and things and persons that
one perceives (and the whole universe)—a sense in which sight and touch
and hearing are all fused in identity. Nor can the matter be understood
without realizing that the whole faculty is deeply and intimately rooted
in the ultra-moral and emotional nature, and beyond the thought-region
of the brain.

And now with regard to the "I" which occurs so freely in this book. In
this and in other such cases the author is naturally liable to a charge
of egotism, and I personally do not feel disposed to combat any such
charge that may be made. That there are mere egotism and vanity embodied
in these pages I do not for a moment doubt, and that so far as they
exist they mar the expression and purpose of the book I also do not
doubt. But the existence of these things do not affect the real
question: What or who in the main is the "I" spoken of?

To this question I must also frankly own that I can give no answer. I do
not know. That the word is not used in the dramatic sense is all I can
say. The "I" is myself, as well as I could find words to express myself;
but what that self is and what its limits may be—and therefore what the
self of any other person is and what *its* limits may be—I cannot tell.
I have sometimes thought that perhaps the best work one could do—if one
felt at any time enlargements and extensions of one's *ego*—was to
simply record these as faithfully as might be, leaving others—the
scientist and the philosopher—to explain, and feeling confident that
what really existed in oneself would be found to exist either
consciously or in a latent form in other people. And I will say that I
have in these records above all endeavored to be genuine. If I have said
"I, Nature," it was because at the time, at any rate, I felt "I,
Nature"; If I have said "I am equal with the lowest," it was because I
could not express what I felt more directly than by those words. The
value of such statements can only appear by time; if they are
corroborated by others, then they help to form a body of record which
may well be worth investigation, analysis and explanation. If they are
not so corroborated, then they naturally and

</div>

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

properly fall away as mere vagaries of self-deception. I have not the
least doubt that anything which is really genuine will be corroborated.
It seems to me more and more clear that the word "I" has a practically
infinite range of meaning—that the ego covers far more ground than we
usually suppose. At some points we are intensely individual, at others
intensely sympathetic; some of our impressions (as the tickling of a
hair) are of the most momentary character, others (as the sense of
identity) involve long periods of time. Sometimes we are aware of almost
a fusion between our own identity and that of another person. What does
all this mean? Are we really separate individuals, or is individuality
an illusion, or, again, is it only a part of the ego or soul that is
individual and not the whole? Is the ego absolutely one with the body,
or is it only a part of the body, or again is the body but a part of the
self—one of its organs, so to speak, and not the whole man? Or, lastly,
is it perhaps not possible to express the truth by any direct use of
these or other terms of ordinary language? Anyhow, what am I?

These are questions which come all down Time, demanding solution—which
humanity is constantly endeavoring to find an answer to. I do not
pretend to answer them. On the contrary I am sure that not one of the
pieces in "Towards Democracy" has been written with the view of
providing an answer. They have simply been written to express feelings
which insisted on being expressed. Nevertheless it is possible that some
of them—by giving the experiences and affirmations even of one
person—may contribute material towards that answer to these and the like
questions which will one day most assuredly be given. That there is a
region of consciousness removed beyond what we usually call mortality,
into which we humans can yet pass, I practically do not doubt; but
granting that this is a fact, its explanation still remains for
investigation. I have said in these few notes on "Towards Democracy"
nothing about the influence of Whitman—for the same reason that I have
said nothing about the influence of the sun or the winds. These
influences lie too far back and ramify too complexly to be traced. I met
with William Rosetti's little selection from "Leaves of Grass" in 1868
or 1869, and read that and the original editions continuously for ten
years. I never met with any other book (with the exception perhaps of
Beethoven's sonatas) which I could read and re-read as I could this one.
I find it difficult to imagine what my life would have been without it.
"Leaves of Grass" "filtered and fiber’d" my blood; but I do not think I
ever tried to imitate it or its style. Against the inevitable drift out
of the more classic forms of verse into a looser and freer rhythm I
fairly fought, contesting the ground ("kicking against the pricks") inch
by inch during a period of seven years in numerous abortive and mongrel
creations—till in 1881 I was finally compelled into the form (if such it
can be called) of "Towards Democracy." I did not adopt it because it was
an approximation to the form of "Leaves of Grass." Whatever resemblance
there may be between the rhythm, style, thoughts, construction, etc., of
the two books, must, I think, be set down to a deeper similarity of
emotional atmosphere and intention in the two authors—even though that
similarity may have sprung and no doubt largely did spring out of the
personal influence of one upon the other.

</div>

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Anyhow our temperaments, standpoints, antecedents, etc., are so entirely
diverse and opposite that, except for a few points, I can hardly imagine
that there is much real resemblance to be traced. Whitman's
full-blooded, copious, rank, masculine style must always make him one of
the world's great originals—a perennial fountain of health and strength,
moral as well as physical. He has the amplitude of the Earth itself, and
can no more be thought away than a mountain can. He often indeed reminds
me of a great quarry on a mountain side—the great shafts of sunlight and
the shadows, the primitive face of the rock itself, the power and the
daring of the men at work upon it, the tumbled blocks and masses,
materials for endless buildings and the beautiful tufts of weed or
flower on inaccessible ledges—a picture most artistic in its very
incoherence and formlessness. "Towards Democracy" has a milder radiance,
as of the moon compared with the sun—allowing you to glimpse the stars
behind. Tender and meditative, less resolute and altogether less
massive, it has the quality of the fluid and yielding air rather than of
the solid and uncompromising earth.

</div>

All the above passages from the writings of Edward Carpenter are to be
looked upon as utterances of the self conscious mind about Cosmic
Consciousness. In "Towards Democracy" it must be understood that the
Cosmic Sense itself speaks; sometimes about itself, sometimes about
nature, man, etc., from the point of view of itself. As for instance:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Lo! What mortal eye hath not seen nor ear
heard—[\*](cc23.htm#an_251-1)  
All sorrow finished—the deep, deep ocean of joy opening within—the
surface sparkling.  
The myriad-formed disclosed, each one and all, all things that are,
transfigured—  
Being filled with joy, hardly touching the ground, reaching cross-shaped
with outstretched arms to the stars, along of the mountains and the
forests, habitation of innumeral creatures, singing, joy unending—  
As the sun on a dull morning breaking through the clouds—so from behind
the sun another sun, from within the body another body—these shattered
falling—  
Lo! now at last or yet awhile in due time to behold that which ye have
so long sought—  
O eyes, no wonder you are intent \[61: 200\].

That day—the day of deliverance—shall come to you in what place you know
not; it shall come but you know not the time.[\*](cc23.htm#an_251-2)

</div>

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_251-1">\*</span> A suggestion of what the Cosmic Sense
shows him.

<span id="an_251-2">\*</span> As it came to him so shall it come to
others.

</div>

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

In the pulpit while you are preaching[\*](cc23.htm#an_252-1) the sermon,
behold! Suddenly the ties and bands—in the cradle, in the coffin,
cerements and swathing-clothes—shall drop off;  
In the prison One shall come; and the chains which are stronger than
iron, the fetters harder than steel, shall dissolve—you shall go free
forever.  
In the sick room, amid life-long suffering and tears and weariness,
there shall be a sound of wings—and you shall know that the end is
near—  
(O loved one arise, come gently with me—be not too eager—lest joy itself
should undo you.)  
In the field with the plow and the chain-harrow; by the side of your
horse in the stall;  
In the brothel amid indecency and idleness and repairing your and your
companions’ dresses;  
In the midst of fashionable life, in making and receiving morning calls,
in idleness, and arranging knick-knacks in your drawing-room—even there
who knows?  
It shall duly, at the appointed hour, come \[61: 231\].

</div>

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_252-1">\*</span> Almost literally true of Las Casas.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

There is no peace except where I am,[\*](cc23.htm#an_252-2) saith the
Lord—  
Though you have health—that which is called health—yet without me it is
only the fair covering of disease;  
Though you have love, yet if I be not between and around the lovers, is
their love only torment and unrest;  
Though you have wealth and friends and home—all these shall come and
go—there is nothing stable or secure, which shall not be taken away. But
I alone remain—I do not change,  
As space spreads everywhere, and all things move and change within it,
but it moves not nor changes,  
So I am the space within the soul, of which the space without is but the
similitude and mental image;  
Comest thou to inhabit me, thou hast the entrance to all life—death
shall no longer divide thee from whom thou lovest.  
I am the sun that shines upon all creatures from within—gazest thou upon
me thou shalt be filled with joy eternal.  
Be not deceived. Soon this outer world shall drop off—thou shalt slough
it away as a man sloughs his mortal body.  
Learn even now to spread thy wings in that other world—the world of
equality—to swim in the ocean, my child, of me and my love.  
(Ah! have I not taught thee by the semblance of this outer world, by its
alienations and deaths and mortal sufferings—all for this?  
For joy, ah! joy unutterable!) \[61:343–4\].

</div>

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_252-2">\*</span> The Cosmic Sense speaks.

</div>

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

#### III.

#### SUMMARY.

*a*. Illumination occurred at the characteristic age—in the
thirty-seventh year.

*b*. And in the characteristic season—in the spring.

*c*. There was a sense of "inward light," but not strictly the usual
experience of subjective light.

*d*. There was the usual sudden intellectual illumination,

*e*. And the usual sudden moral elevation.

*f*. His life was absolutely governed henceforth by the new light that
had dawned upon him—"it held his feet."

*g*. He lost, absolutely, upon illumination, the sense of sin.

*h*. He clearly saw himself to be immortal.

*i*. But the best proof of Cosmic Consciousness in his case is his
description thereof, which could only be drawn (as he tells us it was)
from his own experience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1. The Twilight](cc24)
