[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc23)  [Next](cc25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

# PART V.

## ADDITIONAL—SOME OF THEM LESSER, IMPERFECT AND DOUBTFUL INSTANCES

### CHAPTER 1.

*The Twilight*.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> main purpose of this Fifth Part is to
illustrate the inevitable fact that granted that there is such a mental
faculty as Cosmic Consciousness and that it has been brought forth, as
were the others, by gradual evolution, there must exist minds on all
intermediate planes between mere self consciousness and the fullest
Cosmic Consciousness so far produced by the onward and upward march of
the race.

If we think of the oncoming of the Cosmic Sense as the rising of a sun
in the individual life it becomes clear, carrying out the analogy as we
may probably do without fear of material error, that between the
comparative darkness of the night of mere self consciousness and the
light of the day which is Cosmic Consciousness there must exist an
interval of what may fairly be called twilight—a region in which the sun
of the Cosmic Sense will give more or less light, although not yet risen
and perhaps never to rise in the life of that person. This twilight is
often distinctly traceable (as in the case of Dante and Behmen) in lives
that later become fully illumined. After momentary illumination, too, in
the lesser cases a glow is left lasting for years, as if the sun, after
appearing for a few moments above the horizon, remained immediately
below it, very slowly descending, like the physical sun in northern
latitudes about the time of the summer solstice. In another class of
cases the individual spiritual life may be compared

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

to a winter day within the arctic circle. The sun slowly approaches the
horizon, its path slanting gradually upward until the fiery ball nearly
touches the earth's rim, passes slowly along the southeast, south,
southwest, lighting the landscape but never showing its dazzling
face—effecting a genuine illumination but without rising—yielding a glow
which is in strong contrast to the darkness of night but which is yet
infinitely short (in splendor and especially in fructifying power) of
that of the direct solar rays. Such a case was one of the most
noteworthy in this Fifth Part, that, namely, of Richard Jefferies.

To-day innumerable men and women must be living in this twilight.
Undoubtedly many cases of so-called conversion are simply instances of,
generally sudden, spiritual ascent from the average self conscious level
into the region of greater or less splendor, according to the altitude
reached, which lies between that and Cosmic Consciousness. And if
Carlyle's opinion \[59: 150\], which is in full accord with what we know
of mental evolution—that "conversion," namely, "was not known to the
ancients but has come to light for the first time in our modern era," be
accepted, does this not clearly indicate a gradual spiritual ascent of a
vast section of the human mind? Cases of conversion occurring in the
young are not here noticed. These are probably generally, if not always,
cases of more or less sudden spiritual ascent within the region strictly
belonging to self consciousness and do not therefore concern us. But
cases of so-called conversion occurring at thirty or thirty-five years
of age (such as that of C. G. Finney, chapter 13, infra) are in
themselves more striking phenomena and are doubtless always, or nearly
always, instances of ascent into the region which lies beyond the limits
of the ordinary self conscious mind.

One word may be said in this place to guard against a possible
suspicion. In the reporting of no case was the reporter (the person
having the experience) prompted by word or sign. Every one of the
following reports (as is manifestly true of those which are included in
Part IV) is given absolutely spontaneously and nearly always without any
knowledge of the phenomena belonging to

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

other cases, and certainly without being influenced in narration by a
knowledge of other cases. In view of the extraordinary uniformity of the
accounts given (as far as these go) it is important that this fact
should be clearly realized.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2. Moses](cc25)
