[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc26)  [Next](cc28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

### CHAPTER 4.

*Isaiah*.

<span class="smallcaps">Had</span> "the greatest of the Hebrew prophets"
the Cosmic Sense I It does not seem unlikely. As Isaiah lived and wrote
for thirty-nine years after his "vision" it might easily be that he was
something over thirty years of age at that time—that is to say, in the
year of the death of Uzziah, B.C. 740. The vision itself, as he
describes it, suggests illumination—the oncoming of Cosmic
Consciousness. Isaiah writes:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

In the year that King Uzziah died I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne,
high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. Above him stood the
seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and
with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly. And one cried
unto another, and said, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of hosts; the whole
earth is full of his glory. And the foundations of the threshold were
moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with
smoke. Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of
unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. Then
flew one of the seraphim unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which
he had taken with the tongs from off the altar: and he touched my mouth
with it and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is
taken away, and thy sin purged. And I heard the voice of the Lord,
saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then I said, Here am
I; send me \[Isaiah: 6: 1–8\].[\*](cc27.htm#an_261-1)

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_261-1">\*</span> The chief points to be noticed are: (1) He
saw God. (2) He saw that God ii the Cosmos. (3) The expression "the
house was filled with smoke" ought (if the hypothesis is correct) rather
to read "with light" or ''with flame," since it should refer to the
subjective light; but it seems doubtful whether the Hebrew word Ashan
ever means "light" or "flame." If, however, it is connected
philologically with the Sanskrit Arman it ought to be capable of bearing
an analogous interpretation. (4) He loses the sense of sin.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5. The Case of Lî R](cc28)
