[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc29)  [Next](cc31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

### CHAPTER 7.

*Roger Bacon*.

1214–1294 (?).

<span class="smallcaps">Neither</span> this nor any other man should be
classed among the members of the new race because he had an
extraordinary wit, for some of the greatest human intellects are clearly
outside Cosmic Consciousness; neither would any extraordinary
development of this faculty alone lead a man into it. It is not, then,
because of his intelligence, extraordinary as this seems to have been,
that the question, Was Roger Bacon a case of Cosmic Consciousness? is
raised here. On the other hand, unfortunately, no details, such as
instantaneous illumination or the subjective light, have come down to us
as having existed in this case. All we have are references of Bacon's to
a certain "Master Peter," from whom he received extraordinary assistance
in his philosophical work. And the question is, Does not this Master
Peter bear the same relation to Bacon that Christ bore to Paul, Beatrice
to Dante, Seraphita to Balzac, Gabriel to Mohammed? For we must never
forget the essential quality of the Cosmic Conscious mind.

This, then, according to Charles \[58\], is the way matters stood
between Bacon and Master Peter. Let each judge for himself who or what
Master Peter may have been. Charles has been speaking of the
intellectual stir and life of the time, and goes on: "In the midst of it
all under what flag shall the Oxford student fight? What master shall he
choose among so many illustrious doctors? He contemplates at its most
brilliant focus this science of which his contemporaries are so proud,
and the sentiment he feels is not enthusiasm but scorn. He listens to
the most eloquent voices, but for master he chooses not an Alexander of
Hales, or an Albert, but an obscure person of whom history knows
nothing. This apparent renaissance seems to him a veritable decadence.
To him these Dominicans and Franciscans are ignorant men when compared
with Robert de Lincoln and his friends, and the moderns

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

generally barbarians as contrasted with the Greeks and the Arabs.
Experience, he thinks, is worth more than all the writings of Aristotle,
and a little grammar and mathematics more useful than all the
metaphysics of the schools. So he applied himself passionately to these
disdained sciences. He learns Arabic, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldee—four
languages—in an age in which Albert knew only one of them and in which
St. Thomas is glad to use the bad translations of William de Morbeke. He
reads with avidity the books of the ancients, studies mathematics,
alchemy, optics. Before reforming the education of his age he
reconstructs his own education, and to this end associates himself with
mathematicians and obscure savants in preference to the most renowned
philosophers. Alexander de Hales inspires him with nothing but scorn.
Albert, in his eyes, is ignorant and presumptuous, and his influence
fatal to the epoch over which its dominance extends. William of Auvergne
alone merits respect. The friends whom he values are less celebrated
persons—William of Shirwood, according to him, much more learned than
Albert; Campano de Novarre, mathematician and arithmetician; Nicolas,
tutor of Amansy de Montfort; John of London, believed by Jeff to be John
Peckham, and, above all, the most unknown, according to him, the most
learned of the men of that time, him whom he venerates as his master,
admires as the living example of true science and whom he names 'Master
Peter.'

"If we judge by the portrait Bacon has drawn of him, this is a singular
person. Master Peter is a solitary, as careful to avoid renown as others
to seek it; taking pains to veil and hide his science from men, and who
refuses men the truth which they are not worthy to receive. Master Peter
does not belong to any of the powerful church orders of the day; he does
not teach, and desires neither students nor admirers; he shuns the
importunity of the vulgar. He is proud, and to his disdain of the crowd
he unites an immense faith in himself. He lives isolated, content with
the mental wealth he has, which he could multiply many times if he
desired so to do. Did he deign to fill a professor's chair the whole
world would come to Paris to hear him; should he be willing to

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

attach himself to some sovereign no treasury could pay the value of his
marvellous science. But he despises the mass made up of madmen tainted
with the subtleties of law, charlatans who by their sophisms dishonor
philosophy, render medicine ridiculous and falsify theology itself. The
most clear-sighted of them are blind, or should they make vain efforts
to use their eyes the truth dazzles them. They are like bats in the
twilight—the less light there is the better they see. He alone looks
face to face at the radiant sun. Hidden in a retreat which gives him
security with silence, Master Peter leaves to others long discourses and
the war of words to give himself up to the study of chemistry, the
natural sciences, mathematics, medicine, and, above all, experience, of
which he alone in this age realizes the importance. His disciple salutes
him by the name of 'Master of Experience,' which replaces in his case
the ambitious and sonorous titles of the other doctors.

"Experience reveals to him the secrets of nature, the curative art,
celestial phenomena and their relation to those of earth; he disdains
nothing and does not shrink from applying science to the realities of
the common earth; he would blush if he found a layman, an old woman, a
soldier or a peasant better informed than himself in matters that
concern each.

"To cast and forge metals, to manipulate silver, gold and all
minerals, <span id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_6) to invent deadly
instruments of war, new arms, to make a science of agriculture and of
the labor of the rustic, not to neglect surveying nor the art of
building, to seek with diligence the basis of truth hidden even under
the charms of the sorcerer, under the impostures and artifices of
jugglers—this is the work to which he has devoted his life. He has
examined all, learned all, separated everywhere the true from the false,
and through the void and sterile wilderness has discovered a practicable
route. Is it desired to hasten the progress of science 2 Here is the
only man equal to the task. Should he make up his mind to divulge his
secrets, kings and princes would crown him with honors and gifts,

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

and in an expedition against the infidel he would render more service to
St. Louis than half—yes, than all—his army. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7)

"It is from this great unknown, this undiscovered genius, whose name has
remained unregistered in the history of science, that (according to him)
Bacon learned languages, astronomy, mathematics, experimental science,
everything, in fact, that he knew. Compared with this Master Peter, the
students, professors, writers, masters, thinkers of the universities
were dull, lumpish, insensate \[compare Paul, Bacon, Behmen, Mohammed;
it is indeed the universal testimony that when the Cosmic Sense appears
the wisdom of self consciousness is reduced to dust and ashes\]. The
piety of Bacon toward his unknown master ought to rescue this latter
from the obscurity in which he is buried, but it seems impossible to
identify him among the infinite number of savants of the same name who
are to be found in the catalogues" \[58:14 et seq.\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[271:\*](cc30.htm#fr_6) "In the labor of engines
and trades and the labor of fields I find the developments, and find the
eternal meanings" \[193: 169\].

<span id="fn_7"></span>[272:\*](cc30.htm#fr_7) The above account of
Master Peter is collected by Charles from Bacon's "Opus Tertium," "Opus
Minus," his "De Septem Peccatis," and other works.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8. Blaise Pascal](cc31)
