[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc43)  [Next](cc45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 21.

*The Case of H. B. in His Own Words*.

"<span class="smallcaps">My</span> early home was one of quite narrow
limitations. I did not find myself among books, though such was my
desire for them that nothing else had any attractions for me. My mental
activity must have been noticeable, as I can now see it, in comparison
with that of others about me. I never found much pleasure in the
ordinary amusements of boyhood. I preferred to be alone, and in summer I
loved most of all to be in the woods. I found companionship in the
trees; they seemed nearer to me than human beings. I used to talk to
them, and think they said something to me. All my life the woods have
thus drawn me to themselves, and now, if I could, I would live among the
trees. All my life I have loved to be alone and still do. Whether,
according to Byron's dictum, I am 'a wild beast or a God' I will not
stop to guess. It is also true that I love the society of congenial
spirits in domestic and general life.

"I soon learned that men regulated their intercourse with each other by
conventional rules and not by what I now understand as spiritual laws,
but which I could not then name and could not understand, though I felt
their presence, as Wordsworth felt 'an outward presence' in nature.

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

"The shocks that my spiritual consciousness experienced as I came in
contact with rough men were such as no language can reach. There has
been a gradual development of this perception, or spiritual vision, all
through life. I early began to inquire how things came to be as they
are, and that is what I am now trying to do. As things look to me now, I
must always regard it as a misfortune that I was born into the
atmosphere of the Calvinistic theology. I lived for a score of years
under the shadow of that black cloud—years which might have otherwise
been spent in healthy growth. This theology I tried to accept
intellectually because everybody about me did; but my soul never
endorsed it. At the age of forty I was quite free from the dwarfing
influence of such a line of thought, and since then have breathed
freely.

"What I am I owe mostly to books. I have been but little in contact with
men who could have taught me and given me strength. A year or two at an
academy and twenty weeks in college is all I have known in those
directions. As I came out from the shadow of that dark theology I
chanced to hear Emerson. I then got his books. I have been a close
student of them for fifty years. I owe more to him than to, I almost
might say, all other men beside. Next I found my way to Darwin. Mine was
the only copy of the 'Origin of Species' to be found in my community for
ten years.

"The first real mental illumination I remember to have experienced was
when I saw that the universe exists in each of its individual atoms—that
is, the universe is the result of a few simple processes infinitely
repeated. When a drop of water has been mathematically measured, every
principle will have been used which would be called for in the
measurement of the heavens. All life on the globe is sustained by
digestion and assimilation; when by voluntary and traumatic action these
stop death follows. The history of an individual mind is the history of
the race. Know one thing in its properties and relations and you will
know all things. All crystallography is in one grain of sand, all animal
life in one insect, all vegetable in a single bud. I was then about
forty.

"My next was when I saw there was no boundary line between

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

vegetable and animal life, and hence no beginning nor end to either. The
first of these experiences came to me long before I found what Thales
said on this point. These statements are perhaps enough to indicate the
direction in which my intellect has developed.

"Whatever calm delights have come to me through the intellect the true
grandeur of my days has been found in the atmosphere of the moral
sentiment—a grandeur which reduces all material happenings to the value
of toys. I felt this when a boy as an overshadowing presence that was
constantly drawing me away from all that seemed to make up the life of
those about me—drawing me away I knew not how or whither. What I then
saw dimly, or as 'through a glass darkly,' now shines all about me with
a brightness exceeding that of the sun. In its light I see that love and
justice cannot be limited by what, in the poverty of our ignorance, we
call time and space. Hence all the thinking and all the teaching that
has been done in the world, founded in our ideas of time and space, are
blown away like chaff, or are consumed like 'wood, hay and stubble.'

"I was nearly sixty when I came to see that what is true at any time and
in any place is also true at all times and in all places, or, what we
call law, found anywhere will be found everywhere, though men may give
it different names. What men call gravity holds in mental no less than
in physical phenomena, and all physical phenomena, at their best, are
dull and murky till they come up into spiritual life. As an illustration
that every law has its universality take the familiar law or principle
that action and reaction are equal. What is this but reaping the
whirlwind after one has sown the wind, or how does that natural law
differ from this teaching: 'Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also
reap?' Are they aught but different strains in the great cosmic melody?

"Soon after I began to understand the paradoxical teachings of Jesus, as
when he declared that 'he that would save his life must lose it and he
that would lose it (for Jesus’ sake) alone shall find it.' The same in
Paul, 'as having nothing yet possessing all things.' From this it was
but a step to a knowledge of the central

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

principle of all spiritual life—namely, the giving of one's self for
others.

"About ten years ago, at the age of sixty, I found myself tormented with
that question with which intelligence has wrestled since there was any
of that commodity in the earth—namely, the beginning of things. When in
deep agony, a side light was flashed upon my soul, with almost blinding
suddenness—'If you could find a beginning, would not that beginning be
itself an end?' Hence, if you could find one end of things, would not
that show you that there must also be another end? What! an end of all
things, beyond which there could be only blankness, as there must have
been before things began to be, if they did begin. No! 'There was no
beginning and there can be no end!' Since that moment's experience I
have not been troubled as to the immortality of the soul, and I now
think I never shall be again.

"Five years ago I had an experience which has proved more fruitful to me
perhaps than all others combined. I had a fall, striking on my head. I
lost consciousness. In regaining possession of myself I passed through
all the experiences of the race! In the first stage I simply was aware
of the fact that I was something; what that was, I neither knew nor
cared to know. I did not know what knowing was. I was calm, blissfully
happy, and to me there was no past nor any future. There was to me no
time, no place, no anything, save that tiny speck of
consciousness—myself. As there was nothing to note duration—that stage
might have been in duration incomprehensible. At any rate, such was its
lesson to me.

"This stage of blissful existence was ended by my discovering that there
was something about me which was not myself. I began to see and seeing I
began to reason, and so I at length found my objective world. As in the
previous stage, I had no use for time, and so, to me, there was none.
This stage might have lasted an eternity, so far as I took note of it. I
was busy in studying myself first, and then the things about me, and so
the infinite peace of my first experience was broken up.

"Unable to think otherwise, I concluded that what I saw must

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

be like myself, and so I began my acquaintance with this outer world by
transferring to its objects what I found in myself. This stage lasted in
my experience from the moment I saw things about me to the dawn of
experimental science. I then became acquainted with the beginning of all
knowledge and especially of all religion. Of course, self consciousness
soon returned and I came back into my old world again. Since that hour
my experience has seemed more than that of all my previous life. Nothing
is now any longer dim or obscure. My spiritual expansion has been rapid
in these three or four past years. I live in the world, but I seem to
myself not of it!

"I enjoy what I must call spiritual vision. No sooner does the intellect
seize upon a fact than I see it in its spiritual relations, no less than
in its material, only much more clearly. The perfection of mathematics
is simply a demonstration of the spiritual truth that God cannot lie.

"Natural phenomena are but the shadows of the spirit from which they
spring, as the human face changes under the influence of love, hatred or
fear. Color in nature, which washes all things in its warm waves, shows
us what spiritual love would do if once let loose in the world. The
Bible is simply a picture, which I see with infinite clearness. This
vision seems to extend to the atom-dance in nature, no less than through
all laws, all knowledge, all science, all history and all religion.

"You set me a hard task when you bid me give 'the difference I perceive
in myself' since these experiences. I find no language in which I can
tell of the things in this realm where I now am. I have not even
discovered an alphabet. When, O when, shall I be able to reveal its
poetry? I see everywhere and in every object unceasing motion, and in
that motion a creative force forever and forever repeating and
re-repeating the same simple process as to infinity. Through all nature
the grand rhythms roll and heaven and earth are filled with the melody.
Men are but boys chasing shadows. The spiritual significance of the
world none seem to see—the infinite simplicity of its processes none
care to understand."

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

#### SUMMARY.

This seems to the editor to be probably, though not certainly, a true
case of Cosmic Consciousness, in which the cosmic plane was reached
gradually, and not as usually happens per saltum. If it is not that,
then it is a case of gradual ascent to the extreme limit of the self
conscious mind. In any case, the experience of H. B. is interesting and
instructive and well deserves a place in this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22. R. P. S.](cc45)
