[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc53)  [Next](cc55) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 31.

*Case of J. W. W., Largely in His Own Words*.

<span class="smallcaps">He</span> was born August 11th, 1853. The date
of his illumination was January 20th, 1885. He is an architect. He has
always been an earnest man, anxious to know the right and to do it.
After the momentary attainment of Cosmic Consciousness he became still
more bent upon pursuing the same path. Before his illumination he was an
agnostic and sceptic, as the annexed autobiographic sketch will show.
Not only did he not believe but he had no hope. After illumination he
never again doubted the infinite beneficence of the central and
over-ruling power of the universe. Although in this case the Cosmic
Sense came for a moment only and then passed away, probably for the
remainder of life, yet was the man by it incredibly ennobled. That seems
the best term for the change that took place in him. Though not a
Buddha, a Christ or a Whitman, he was, from that time, clearly superior
to the average man. In proof of which statement the fact may be cited
that a number of the best young men of his town sought him out and
constituted him, under the name of "Master," their spiritual leader.
These men have, as the present writer can personally testify, for years
tendered this man their personal affection and reverence for no other
reason than that they saw clearly in him a superior spiritual nature,
which superiority was never detected or suspected in him until after the
oncoming of the Cosmic Sense

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

in 1885. J. W. W. has since his illumination devoted his life to the
intellectual and moral elevation of himself and his friends.

Here follows an autobiographic sketch, written for the purpose of
showing in what manner and under what circumstances he entered into the
new life. The pages were not written for this book nor at the
instigation of the writer of it. They were, in fact, written before the
present writer knew J. W. W., and forthat reason are all the more
valuable in this place. Neither were they written to illustrate or
support any theory. J. W. W. had and has no theory on the subject. All
he knows, or perhaps cares to know, in this connection is that he at
that moment entered into relation with a higher form of life, and
learned, as Paul says, "unspeakable things"—such things, at all events,
as were and are of quite unspeakable importance to him, any doubt of the
truth of which things has been, and (as he thinks) always will be,
entirely out of the question.

J. W. W., then, addressing his intimate friends, the young and
middle-aged men mentioned above, who surround him, and, as said, call
him "Master," spoke as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

To-day, the 20th of January, 1890, is the anniversary of my mother's
death, five years ago. I have decided to celebrate it by giving you some
account of circumstances which I have hitherto kept to myself, and
sacred in the recesses of my own heart and memory.

I need not tell you, I think, that my mother's last illness and death
were, by immeasurable odds, the heaviest grief and pain I have ever
known, or shall, probably, ever know. But it is also true that the
memory of them is for all time my most precious and priceless
possession.

That period was the supreme moment of my life and its deepest
experience. In ordinary life we live only on the surface of things, our
attention distracted endlessly by the shallowest illusions and baubles.

We discuss with a light heart, and very much at our own ease, the great
problems we have been discussing lately in the college (of immortality
and the infinite goodness), but are not deeply concerned in them, and
care but little what their solutions may be.

But a great bereavement strips the scales from our eyes and compels us,
in the intense solitude of our own souls, to gaze into the unfathomable
depths in which we float and to question their vast and solemn meanings.
It comes upon us clothed in thick darkness and mystery, and pierces our
hearts with unutterable agony and grief, but it may be that the darkest
hours of its visitation, the supreme moment itself, may also prove a
revelation to our souls of the

</div>

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Highest and bring us into the very presence of the Infinite Love and
Tenderness.

For myself I cannot doubt that this was my own experience. To speak of
it is to profane it. I am unworthy to so much as hint at it. But it has
been the comfort of my life ever since.

Alas, for the years that have followed! One momentary glimpse into the
ineffable brightness, followed by gathering clouds and darkness, painful
stumblings and wide errors, unsupported by any recognizable spiritual
aid or presence, the heavens deaf and careless to my most earnest
prayers and agonizings, nay, even slighting them, so far as appeared.
But through it all, like the steadfast shining of a clear star, the
memory of that sacred time has remained deep in my heart, and I have
never really doubted for a moment that an Infinite Wisdom and Love
*does* encircle all our lives—tender, pitying and sympathizing. We may
pass our lives without ever realizing it, doubting it, nay, flatly
denying it. But it is *there;* and he to whom the vision has ever come
at all, though in the briefest transient flash of momentary
consciousness, can never again forget it, though his whole after path
may be enveloped in darkness and he himself may fall into gross error
and backsliding.

I received the ordinary orthodox training of the Presbyterian Church. I
was baptized and was a regular attendant at church and Sunday school
till well on in my teens.

I attribute at least equal importance, in the formative elements of my
religious training, to the daily practice at home, while I was a boy, of
family worship. I recall now, as I write, with reverent emotion, the
tender tones of my mother's voice, as it pleaded especially for her only
deeply loved child.

I was always a lover of books, and I was not far in my teens before I
began to learn something of the opposition between the teaching of
science and many of the beliefs I had been taught. This discovery was a
gradual one, and I will only give a brief outline of the position in
which I was ultimately landed.

I learned that the first chapter of Genesis was, at least, a very crude
statement of the actual fact. At one time I was an ardent and
enthusiastic student of Hugh Miller's books and rested content with the
reconciliation he sought to establish between the teaching of his
beloved science, Geology, and the Biblical record. But I had to give it
up when I came to read and study Darwin's and other books and to
acquaint myself with the most recent geological discoveries. I remember
well the enthusiasm with which I copied in writing Professor Huxley's
famous address to the Geological Section of the British Association, in
which he traced the pedigree of the horse to its progenitors in the
Eocene period and the clear evidence of its evolution.

Darwinism demolished for me the Biblical account of creation, the
authority of the Bible and the account it gives of the origin of evil
and the fall of man. This last clearly involves the whole theological
superstructure based upon it, including the so-called scheme of
redemption and the doctrine of the atonement. The legends of the flood,
the tower of Babel, the dispersion of man and the origin of different
languages were minor matters of comparatively trifling importance.

I remember the delight with which I read Tyndall's book on "Heat as a

</div>

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Mode of Motion," and re-read it again and again. I read, too, his
lectures on "Sound." These were my introduction to physics, from which I
learned the great doctrines of the conservation and correlation of
forces, as I had previously learned to realize in some degree the unity
and uniformity of nature. In presence of such majestic and august
conceptions the ordinary ideas of prayer and miracles seemed childish. I
remember reading Tyndall's "Fragments of Science" and feeling this yet
more strongly. I came in time to abandon the habit of prayer entirely.

One cannot read much in physiological science without serious reflection
on the nature of consciousness, the relation between mind and physical
structure and the bearings of all this on the belief in personal
immortality. It has always seemed clear to me that the only logical
outcome of the considerations put forward by science are flatly and
altogether opposed to such belief.

To sum up: Science destroyed for me all belief in the Biblical legends
of the creation and the fall of man, etc., and in the doctrine of the
atonement, and at least gravely questioned all narratives of miracle,
the probability of answer to prayer and the idea of personal
immortality. The whole idea, too, of the divine incarnation of Christ on
our insignificant atom of a world seemed out of keeping with the august
spectacle of the infinite universe and its immeasurable duration. But my
reading was never exclusively scientific, and my thoughts accordingly
were always modified by other considerations.

I learned something of Descartes, Kant, Fichte, Schelling, Hegel and
Spinoza. What the effect of it all was upon me it is impossible for me
now to analyze or to tell. But let a man once get fairly into his head
the teaching of Kant that time and space only exist as the condition of
our consciousness, and the discussion of immortality will seem
irrelevant—he will feel the very basis of his speculations crumble
beneath his feet. From my earliest youth I have acknowledged two
masters, to whom I continually turned and whom I have studied with
ever-fresh interest and delight—Carlyle and Emerson—two widely different
men but fundamentally alike in the absolute honesty and sincerity of
their teaching, their noble and heroic character, and their steady,
life-long consecration to the service of the highest. Both of them
rejected the materialistic conception of the world, which they regarded
as spiritual in its essence, and each believed in his own way in a
divine purpose—Emerson with genial and growing optimism, Carlyle with an
accompanying Hebraic sense of the mystery and terror of evil.

But neither from Carlyle nor Emerson will a student. derive any firm
conviction on the subject of individual immortality. Carlyle preferred
to leave it a mystery, about which nothing can be definitely said with
true assurance, but about which much may be hoped. Emerson, in the main,
really believed it, but may be quoted on both sides of the subject. "The
questions we lust to have answered are," he declared, "a confession of
sin." He preached an unconditional submission and trust. Believe with
all your heart and soul that all is well and ask no questions. If it is
best that you should continue you will do so; if not, you should not
wish it. And the whole subject, he believed, belongs to a much higher
plane than that on which it is usually discussed.

</div>

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

It is fifteen years since I carefully studied Tennyson, and especially
his "In Memoriam." His arguments, however, seemed to me unconvincing
though powerful. I came to prize the two volumes I had of Browning's
selections, but could not give complete adhesion to his views either. My
judgment was suspended with a leaning of the heart to the "Larger Hope."
George Macdonald did me great and growing service, though I could never
accept all his conclusions nor admire greatly his logic. On the other
hand, the logic of George Eliot's creed seemed to me faultless, and her
sympathy with opposite views complete. And her rigid and faithful
devotion to truth and fact alone seemed to me to be rewarded in her art.
George Macdonald's creations as a rule seem ghostly abstractions. George
Eliot's are *alive;* prick them and they bleed. But the melancholy which
her books create is undeniable, and the *heart* instinctively revolts
from her creed. Matthew Arnold did me immense service by his theological
books, and opened the Bible for me again as a book of living interest.
But his famous axiom that miracles do not happen, and his elimination of
the supernatural element, are unmistakable. But a careful study of
Isaiah, with the help of his notes, gave me a clue to a higher view, in
my judgment, than the one he himself arrived at. He, too, deprecates the
ascription of personality to God, and so does away with the impulse to
pray. For who can pray to a "stream of tendency"? Here, again, however,
the light which he throws upon the character and teaching of St. Paul
helps one also to realize better the teaching of Paul himself, which is
higher than that of the critic. Ruskin believed in these things, but his
authority is weakened by the evangelical teaching which he himself in
time discarded. The great masters seemed to me inconclusive. The whole
value of Dante's teaching is vitiated by his false and horrible
presentations of eternal punishment. Shakespeare holds himself aloof
from the subject, and his opinions do not lie on the surface. Goethe I
believed to more explicitly teach the efficacy of prayer and individual
immortality than he actually did. I had long had a slight knowledge of
and much curiosity about Whitman, and twelve months before my mother
died I read for the first time complete copies of "Leaves of Grass" and
"Specimen Days," and felt the deep thrill of contact with a mighty
spirit. And it seemed a great thing that he, of all men, taught the
doctrine of immortality with quite new emphasis and authority.

The foregoing are only very crude and sketchy outlines of the
intellectual gropings, questionings, studies and complex, many-sided
experiences and difficulties of many years. But they will help you to
partially understand my position at the time I write of.

*And now to my narrative:* I will not trouble you with any particulars
which do not seem to me necessary for my purpose. And these I will give
as briefly as is consistent with the clearness and right coloring of the
picture I want to present. I feel, however, that I must, at the outset,
make a disclaimer. I do not want you to judge of my character as a son
from my devotion to my mother on her deathbed. As a matter of fact I was
never in the true sense "a good son." I have too many grave faults and
strong opposing idiosyncrasies for that. And I have innumerable bitter
memories of harshness, temper, selfish

</div>

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

want of consideration and sympathy, things left undone that I ought to
have done and things done that I ought to have left undone. They are
past recall or expiation now, and I can only pray and strive for a
better nature in future.

It is perhaps hardly necessary to speak of my mother. She was not
without faults or weaknesses either. She had *good* qualities in an
exceptional degree that I need not analyze or speak of. But it is
necessary for my purpose that I should refer to what was her ruling
passion—a deep, constant, absorbing and self-sacrificing love for her
only son. Every one knows something of the sacred depths of a mother's
love. But very few can sound their profound abysses as it has been my
lot to do.

Many circumstances threw us more together than is usual. For one thing,
my father was much from home. My own tastes and pursuits kept me more
closely at home than is the case with most young men. Our natures, too,
were similar in many ways. Naturally I was in many things my mother's
confidant. Her sufferings and declining strength made her more and more
dependent upon me and knit our hearts together more closely as time went
on.

She suffered excruciating pains at times. She became lame and lost the
power to stand. If my father was at home he would carry her upstairs at
night to bed; if not, she crept to the foot of the stairs and pulled
herself up step by step. But on no account would she let me carry her,
fearing that I might strain or hurt myself. But eventually she *had* to
allow me, and after that I always carried her upstairs.

She was always poorly in the morning and suffered great internal pain. I
used to regularly take her up a cup of tea to breakfast, but she ate
next to nothing.

Some eighteen months before she died she told me that she believed she
suffered from an internal cancer. I had long urged her to let me call in
a doctor, and I now insisted upon it.

For a long time she would not allow it, but finally yielded, and Dr. R.
was called in. She seemed more bright and cheerful after his visit. She
told me that his verdict was that it was *not* a cancer, but the facts
which led her to think it was were the results of her rheumatism. It was
a happy relief to me, and I dismissed altogether the dreadful ideas
which had weighed like lead upon my heart. As a matter of fact it *was*
a cancer, and my mother soon came to *know* it without a shadow of
doubt. But in her self-sacrificing regard for me she kept all knowledge
back from me, and in the weary, painful and gloomy months that followed
I lived in absolute ignorance of the real facts of the case. Perhaps it
was better so. I really believe that if I *had* known, the dreadful
knowledge would have killed me. As it was I was supported by groundless
hopes. And even *so*, the pain of it and the daily strain on my heart
and mind were almost more than I could bear, and their effects have
remained with me ever since.

I will say as little as possible of that time. I will only note her
visibly declining strength, the solitude and many miseries of her lot,
her absorbing and endless solicitude for me, her complete indifference
to self and her constant

</div>

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

spirit of loving self-sacrifice and a love in *both* our hearts that
grew more tender and profound as we realized more and more the coming
and inevitable end. The countless heartaches and pains of those days
only revealed more clearly the depth and strength of a love which was
mightier than all adverse circumstances, even death itself.

So the days and weeks and months dragged on in ever-deepening gloom,
till the fateful month of January, 1885. As my mother's strength became
less and less her time for going to bed grew earlier, from ten to
half-past nine, to nine, to half-past eight, to eight. It pained me
excessively to note this, and every night after she had gone I felt
unspeakably sad and wretched as I thought of the future. I could not
bear to part with her. I used to keep her as long as possible, joke with
her and do my best to cheer her as well as myself. But her weariness
getting too great she would often lose patience and say, with pathetic
entreaty, "Willie, *do* take me," "Why don't you take me?" or "Willie,
*do* let me go." After that there was nothing for it but to take her at
once.

On the 9th of January, 1885, I went to a birthday party. I was far from
well, and I had no heart for it, but I went to tea, came home at eight
to take my mother to bed (for the last time it turned out) and went
back, not returning till between one and two. During the night I was
awakened by my mother knocking at the wall. She felt faint, she said,
and asked me to bring her a glass of water. I asked if I should make
tea, and she said she preferred water, which I got her. I grieve to say
that I was altogether harsh, unsympathetic and ungracious. I ought to
have *known* that she needed more, and without a moment's thought for
myself should have got it. She thanked me with her usual tenderness and
I went to bed again.

Next morning when I took her tea it all came out. During the night she
had crept out of bed and fainted on the floor. On recovery she had
managed with much painful effort to get into bed again. She would not
disturb or trouble me, knowing what she did, but felt compelled at last
to rouse me and ask for a glass of water. Fancy it! Cold water! and
rendered with unsympathetic grumbling at that. I have never forgiven
myself for my far worse than stupidity and callousness. My mother,
however, in her sweet, serene charity and loving kindness forgave me
from the first.

I will not go into details of the illness that followed. She did not get
up that day, though serenely cheerful, hopeful and loving. My father
came home in the afternoon and she seemed a little better, but at night
grew worse and slightly delirious. Early next morning (Sunday) I brought
the doctor, and I learned for the first time, what others knew, that she
had been really suffering from cancer all the time and that recovery was
impossible, though the inevitable end might possibly be averted for a
time. It was a horrible blow to me. I hunted up a nurse and was in
constant attendance on her myself till the end came—nine days after.

On Sunday, Monday and Tuesday she continued to improve, and my heart
grew lighter and more cheerful. Then she began to grow worse and went
step by step down, *down* into the Valley of the Shadow.

I will pass on rapidly to the closing scenes. But I must note first the
following

</div>

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

traits of my mother's behavior: An utter and complete forgetfulness of
self, unfailing love and charity to all, serene cheerfulness and even
gaiety, exerting herself always to cheer *me* with bright and loving
smiles and consoling, hopeful words. This, of course, only while she was
able. At night she always grew delirious, of which, more anon.

I am sorry to give you painful details, and I only do so where it is
necessary for my ultimate purpose. But I am compelled to give you some
details of closing scenes.

The night but one before she died was the most horrible night I ever
spent. As usual, in such wasting diseases, the waste of the body, after
devastating the muscular system, attacks the *nervous* system. When this
stage is reached the patient enters on a period of horrible unrest and
weariness, passionately longing for rest and incessantly and vainly
seeking it by a change of position. Every night, in the delirium of her
illness, she felt something of this weariness and would, at the close of
the day, call on me, in the old familiar words, "Willie, *do* take me
upstairs; do take me." On this particular night, similar cries rang in
my ears the whole horrible night long—"Willie, do take me," "Do let me
go," "Why don't you let me go?" The words pierced my heart. I *knew*
that the rest she sought could only come in death, and my heart was hot
in angry rebellion. I *could not let* her go. Fate was too much for me.
But it was an unspeakable cruel fate, and every faculty in me rose in
passionate protest and resentment. I changed her position again and
again, adjusted and smoothed her pillow, and for a few brief moments she
would lie quiet. Then again the old, incessant, heart-piercing cries,
"Willie, *do* let me go," "*Do* take me," "*Why* don't you let me go?"
And so, again and again, through the whole length of the horrible night.

Next day she was quieter. The doctor said it was only a question of
hours. In the afternoon she seemed utterly exhausted and for a time we
thought she was dying. My father, Mrs. D. (the nurse) and I stood
looking on in momentary expectation of the end. I was quite tired out,
heart and body, sullen and resentful. It was of a piece with the whole
horrible thing that she should die *thus*, without any sign or leave
taking. But it was not to be so and she revived again. About seven
o'clock that night I was alone with her. She was unconscious. I kneeled
at her bedside, my face down on the bed. My brain felt *scorched* and
the whole thing a horrible nightmare. It was no longer my mother lying
there but a ghastly automaton, I myself an automaton, both alike driven
in a vast world *machine*, remorseless, brainless and heartless,
crushing all before it. Later on, my father, coming upstairs, must have
been alarmed about me and compelled me to go an errand, which he
declared absolutely necessary. I think it probable that my going out for
a short time saved my reason. Late at night my father drove me to bed. I
refused. I *could* not go, or lose any of the precious time now left me
with my mother, but I agreed ultimately to go for two hours at most, if
he would rouse me sooner in case of change. Very reluctantly I went, but
I was quite spent and I slept soundly till six, my father letting me
sleep on. I at once hastened to the room and stayed there till the end,
about one o'clock.

</div>

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

My mother was apparently the same, but weaker. She welcomed me with the
sweet old smile, and responded always, as before, with loving kisses to
mine. She was quite conscious but too weak to speak. The morning dragged
on till noon, when I heard Mr. T. in the kitchen with my father. I asked
her if she would like him to come up, and she nodded a pleased
expression of her wish. He came and prayed at her bedside, my mother
following it all with full appreciation, her head supported by my arm,
shaking with the extreme palsy of coming death. She tried to express her
thanks and followed him with grateful eyes as he left the room. Later,
about one o'clock, my father and the nurse went downstairs. Mrs. D.
remained, but I asked her to go, too, and leave me alone with my mother.
I then asked mother if she would like me to pray with her. I had never
done so, but I fancied that she wished it, and she assented with evident
satisfaction. Standing at the foot of the bed I prayed briefly to God,
our Father, to mercifully release my mother from her suffering and take
her to Himself and guide and help me in the lonely path that lay before
me. I then turned away a minute or two to the window. Looking around, I
saw instantly that the last change had come. I hastened to moisten her
lips, but her tongue was rigid. I went to the top of the stair and
called to my father. He hastened up and was just in time to catch the
last futile attempt at breath. In an access of strong emotion I cried
out: "Thanks be to God, that giveth us the victory," and it seemed to my
excited fancy that my mother's spirit nodded assent. It seemed to me for
the moment that I stood in the very presence of the Infinite Love and
felt it through my being.

I went downstairs and told Mrs. D. and the nurse that all was over, and
they went upstairs to render the last sad offices. I came into *this
room* (the room in which this paper was read) and gave myself up to a
long, heavy fit of sobbing—sobbing, however, no longer of grief, but of
great *relief*, recognition of the mighty *comfort* that had come into
my heart and of resigned and loving *farewell*.

During the days that followed and until after the funeral I felt a great
calm and peace of mind and heart, a peace of mind which I venture to say
was no other than "the peace of God that passeth all understanding." It
passed away, but the memory of it remained. Grief and the sense of
irrecoverable loss had their natural course, and I spent many weeks of
sleeplessness and tears.

I have no hope that my words will convey more than a poor fraction of
the real facts. At best I can only sketch these in rudest outline. But I
will ask you to consider a few of the most prominent in the narrative I
have given you.

Remember what I have said of the spiritual questionings of many years
and their results. Consider how my mother's long and frightful suffering
revealed and strengthened as nothing else could, not only the sweet and
lovable qualities of her heart and mind and the strength of the hope and
faith which sustained her through it all, but also the length and
breadth and depth of her wonderful self-sacrificing love for *me*, which
grew only stronger, deeper and more tender as she advanced further into
the shadow of our inevitable parting. And when the last stroke fell upon
her and she was confined to her bed never

</div>

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

to rise again, think how grateful and sweet to me were those days of
slight improvement, when I was privileged to attend her constantly and
show her, as I never could before, the reality and depth of my
responding love and receive her entire forgiveness for all the
thoughtlessness and wrongdoing of the past and her heartfelt blessing.
And hastening on to the closing scene: Think of the horrible night, when
her incessant cries rang out to me to "let her go," and *I knew that it
meant* let her go to the last rest of death, and my heart stood out in
passionate resentment and protest against a cruel and merciless fate.
Think of that scene next day, when her strength seemed gone and we
watched for the end and I felt, with sullen resentment, that it was only
of a piece with all the rest that she should die *thus*, without any
sign or leave taking, in the presence of comparative aliens, not of her
own household, while *I*, her son, born of her body, bone of her bone
and flesh of her flesh, the one person whom she loved with all the
mighty love of her great heart, stood as an outsider beyond her
consciousness. Think of the hour that evening when, with scorched brain,
I felt through and through my being the dreadful significance of the
materialistic creed, that we were mere automatic parts of a vast
machine, brainless, heartless, merciless and cruel. Think of the
providence by which restoring and healing sleep was granted me to make
me capable of a truer vision. Think of the tender grace of our next
morning's communion, my mother's full consciousness and the sweet tokens
of her undying love. Think of the providence which led Mr. T. to come
within an hour of the end and offer up solemn prayer, in which my mother
could join with full appreciation in company with my father and myself.
Think of the fitness of the arrangement by which, at the last moment, my
mother and I were left alone, as she would have wished. Think of the
divine training by which my rebellious heart was bowed into acquiescence
and resignation. Think of the course by which my antagonism and
scepticism were laid low, and I was led, with my mother's pleased
concurrence, *at last* to "let her go" and to call audibly on the Divine
Father of all to take her to Himself. And think how *immediately* the
prayer was answered and God revealed himself to me and I felt through
all my being, in the moment of her death, the presence of the Infinite
Love, the Divine Comforter, soothing me with a strange and ineffable
peace.

Human words are poor instruments for the expression of such realities.
But beyond the touch of all possible argument, despite the apparent
experiences of my life since and my backslidings, I knew that a divine
providence was at work in my hour of utmost need summing up the long
gropings and processes of the past, and despite all earthly darknesses
and sin illumining all my future course with an infinite hope.

I no longer trouble myself with the difficulties raised by metaphysics
and philosophy about the personality of God, for, however that may be, I
know that there is that in Him to which I may address myself as to a
loving friend and father. I no longer trouble myself with the
discussions about God's providence and the contrary evidences of life
and experiences, for I have seen His providence visibly at work, summing
up in a crowning experience the processes of long years, in events which
were entirely natural in their order and course,

</div>

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

but were also visibly *super*natural and miraculous, too. I no longer
trouble myself with doubts about *God's love*, and the contrary
evidences furnished by the world's sin and endless miseries, for in the
midst of the heaviest grief of my own life I *have seen* an ineffable
tenderness and love revealed, which crowned and justified the sufferings
which preceded it, and illumined much that lay dark and mysterious in
the past. However this poor outline may strike *you*, I *know* that the
actual facts were more fit and beautiful than any earthly poet could
have conceived in his most gracious and tender mood. I no longer trouble
myself with the current discussions about immortality, for I know that
my mother is secure and that all is well with her, for, unworthy as I
am, I have *myself seen* the ineffable glory of the love which received
her when she was taken from me.

</div>

#### SUMMARY.

*a*. J. W. W.'s narrative makes it quite clear that he had the
earnestness of mind and desire for spiritual growth which, as we have
seen, seem to be prerequisites to illumination.

*b*. His age, upon the occurrence of this last, was thirty-one and a
half years.

*c*. There was no experience of subjective light.

*d*. Intellectual illumination was well marked.

*e*. And moral exaltation still more so.

*f*. Although he does not give details (perhaps could not do so), it is
clear that he experienced something very near akin to the. Cosmic
vision, if he did not even see the Brahmic Splendor itself.

*g*. The "peace and knowledge" spoken of by Whitman and referred to by
all the cases as one of the chief results of the attainment of
Nirvâna—the Cosmic Sense—came to J. W. W. un. mistakably,
instantaneously.

*h*. The strict parallelism of this case with all the others given will
be recognized by every careful reader.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32. Case of J. William Lloyd, in His Own Words](cc55)
