<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lang Fairy Books](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](yefb00)  [Next](yefb02) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Yellow Fairy Book*, by Andrew Lang, \[1889\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f00"></span>

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

PREFACE

The Editor thinks that children will readily forgive him for publishing
another Fairy Book.  We have had the Blue, the Red, the Green, and here
is the Yellow.  If children are pleased, and they are so kind as to say
that they are pleased, the Editor does not care very much for what other
people may say.  Now, there is one gentleman who seems to think that it
is not quite right to print so many fairy tales, with pictures, and to
publish them in red and blue covers.  He is named Mr. G. Laurence Gomme,
and he is president of a learned body called the Folk Lore Society. 
Once a year he makes his address to his subjects, of whom the Editor is
one, and Mr. Joseph Jacobs (who has published many delightful fairy
tales with pretty pictures) <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) is
another.  Fancy, then, the dismay of Mr. Jacobs, and of the Editor, when
they heard their president say that he did not think it very nice in
them to publish fairy books, above all, red, green, and blue fairy
books!   They said that they did not see any harm in it, and they were
ready to 'put themselves on their country,' and be tried by a jury of
children.  And, indeed, they still see no harm in what they have done;
nay, like Father William in the poem, they are ready 'to do it again and
again.'

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

Where is the harm? The truth is that the Folk Lore Society—made up of
the most clever, learned, and beautiful men and women of the country—is
fond of studying the history and geography of Fairy Land.  This is
contained in very old tales, such as country people tell, and savages:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

'Little Sioux and little Crow,  
 Little frosty Eskimo.'

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> These people are
thought to know most about fairyland and its inhabitants.  But, in the
Yellow Fairy Book, and the rest, are many tales by persons who are
neither savages nor rustics, such as Madame D'Aulnoy and Herr Hans
Christian Andersen.  The Folk Lore Society, or its president, say that
*their* tales are not so true as the rest, and should not be published
with the rest.  But *we* say that all the stories which are pleasant to
read are quite true enough for us; so here they are, with pictures by
Mr. Ford, and we do not think that either the pictures or the stories
are likely to mislead children.

As to whether there are really any fairies or not, that is a difficult
question.  Professor Huxley thinks there are none.  The Editor never saw
any himself, but he knows several people who have seen them—in the
Highlands—and heard their music.  If ever you are in Nether Lochaber, go
to the Fairy Hill, and you may hear the music yourself, as grown-up
people have done, but you must goon a fine day.  Again, if there are
really no fairies, why do people believe in them, all over the world? 
The ancient Greeks believed, so did the old Egyptians, and the Hindoos,
and the Red Indians, and is it likely, if there are no fairies, that so
many different peoples would have seen and heard them?  The Rev. Mr.
Baring-Gould saw several fairies when he was a boy, and was travelling
in the land of the Troubadours.  For these reasons,

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

the Editor thinks that there are certainly fairies, but they never do
anyone any harm; and, in England, they have been frightened away by
smoke and schoolmasters.  As to Giants, they have died out, but real
Dwarfs are common in the forests of Africa.  Probably a good many
stories not perfectly true have been told about fairies, but such
stories have also been told about Napoleon, Claverhouse, Julius Caesar,
and Joan of Arc, all of whom certainly existed.  A wise child will,
therefore, remember that, if he grows up and becomes a member of the
Folk Lore Society, *all* the tales in this book were not offered to him
as absolutely truthful, but were printed merely for his entertainment. 
The exact facts he can learn later, or he can leave them alone.

There are Russian, German, French, Icelandic, Red Indian, and other
stories here.  They were translated by Miss Cheape, Miss Alma, and Miss
Thyra Alleyne, Miss Sellar, Mr. Craigie (he did the Icelandic tales),
Miss Blackley, Mrs. Dent, and Mrs. Lang, but the Red Indian stories are
copied from English versions published by the Smithsonian Bureau of
Ethnology, in America.  Mr. Ford did the pictures, and it is hoped that
children will find the book not less pleasing than those which have
already been submitted to their consideration.  The Editor cannot say
'good-bye' without advising them, as they pursue their studies, to read
*The Rose and the Ring*, by the late Mr. Thackeray, with pictures by the
author.  This book he thinks quite indispensable in every child's
library, and parents should be urged to purchase it at the first
opportunity, as without it no education is complete.

A. LANG.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[ix:1](yefb01.htm#fr_0) You may buy them from Mr.
Nutt, in the Strand.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](yefb02)

</div>
