[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc44008)  [Next](cc44010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 44: Hebrews*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 4:1-2

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise
being left *us* of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to
come short of it.

<span id="x.i-p3"></span>**1.** Timeamus ergo ne derelicta promissione
introeundi in requiem ejus videatur quispiam nostrum esse frustratus.

<span id="x.i-p4"></span>**2.** For unto us was the gospel preached, as
well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being
mixed with faith in them that heard *it*

<span id="x.i-p5"></span>**2.** Nobis enim annuntiata est promissio
quemadmodum et illis; at illis nihil profuit sermo auditus, quia non
fuit cum fide conjunctus in iis qui audierant.

<span id="x.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p7"></span><span id="x.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p8"></span>**1.** *Let us therefore fear,* *etc.* He
concludes that there was reason to fear lest the Jews to whom he was
writing should be deprived of the blessing offered to them; and then he
says, *lest anyone,* intimating that it was his anxious desire to lead
them, one and all, to God; for it is the duty of a good shepherd, in
watching over the whole flock so to care for every sheep that no one may
be lost; nay, we ought also so to feel for one another that every one
should fear for his neighbors as well as for himself

<span id="x.i-p9"></span>But the fear which is here recommended is not
that which shakes the confidence of faith but such as fills us with such
concern that we grow not torpid with indifference. Let us then fear, not
that we ought to tremble or to entertain distrust as though uncertain as
to the issue, but lest we be unfaithful to God’s grace.

<span id="x.i-p10"></span>By saying *Lest we be disappointed of the
promise left us,* he intimates that no one comes short of it except he
who by rejecting grace has first renounced the promise; for God is so
far from repenting to do us good that he ceases not to bestow his gifts
except when we despise his calling. The illative *therefore,* or *then*
means that by the fall of others we are taught humility and watchfulness
according to what Paul also says,

<span id="x.i-p11"></span>“These through unbelief have fallen; be not
thou then high ­ minded, but fear.”  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66)  
(<span id="x.i-p13.2"></span>[Ro
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020)<span id="x.i-p13.2"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p14"></span><span id="x.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p15"></span>**2.** *For to us,* *etc.* He reminds us that
the doctrine by which God invites us to himself at this day is the same
with that which he formerly delivered to the fathers; and why did he say
this? That we may know that the calling of God will in no degree be more
profitable to us than it was to them, except we make it sure by faith.
This, then, he concedes, that the Gospel is indeed preached to us;
 <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) but lest we should vainly glory,
he immediately adds that the unbelieving whom God had formerly favored
with the participation of so great blessings, yet received from them no
fruit, and that therefore we also shall be destitute of his blessing
unless we receive it by faith. He repeats the word *hear* for this end,
that we may know that hearing is useless except the word addressed to us
be by faith received.

<span id="x.i-p17"></span>But we must here observe the connection
between the word and faith. It is such that faith is not to be separated
from the word, and that the word separated from faith can confer no
good; not indeed that the efficacy or power of the word depends on us;
for were the whole world false, he who cannot lie would still never
cease to be true, but the word never puts forth its power in us except
when faith gives it an entrance. It is indeed the power of God unto
salvation, but only to those who believe. (<span
id="x.i-p17.1"></span>[Ro 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span
id="x.i-p17.1"></span>.) There is in it revealed the righteousness of
God, but it is from faith to faith. Thus it is that the word of God is
always efficacious and saving to men, when viewed in itself or in its
own nature; but no fruit will be found except by those who believe.

<span id="x.i-p18"></span>As to a former statement, when I said that
there is no faith where the word is wanting, and that those who make
such a divorce wholly extinguish faith and reduce it to nothing, the
subject is worthy of special notice. For it hence appears evident that
faith cannot exist in any but in the children of God, to whom alone the
promise of adoption is offered. For what sort of faith have devils, to
whom no salvation is promised? And what sort of faith have all the
ungodly who are ignorant of the word? The hearing must ever precede
faith, and that indeed that we may know that God speaks and not men.

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 4:3-10

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>**3.** For we which have believed do enter
into rest, as he said, As I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter
into my rest: although the works were finished from the foundation of
the world.

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Ingredimur enim in ejus requiem
postquam credidimus: sicut dixit, Itaque juravi in ira mea, si
introibunt in requiem meam; tametsi operibus a creatione mundi
perfectis.

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span>**4.** For he spake in a certain place of the
seventh *day* on this wise, And God did rest the seventh day from all
his works.

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span>**4.** Dixit enim alicubi sic de die septimo,
Et requievit Deus septimo die ab omnibus operibus suis:

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span>**5.** And in this *place* again, If they
shall enter into my rest.

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span>**5.** Et in hoc rursum, Si introibunt in
requiem meam.

<span id="x.ii-p8"></span>**6.** Seeing therefore it remaineth that some
must enter therein, and they to whom it was first preached entered not
in because of unbelief:

<span id="x.ii-p9"></span>**6.** Quando igitur reliquum fit ut quidam
ingrediantur in ipsam, et quibus prius evangelizatum fuit, non intrarunt
propter incredulitatem:

<span id="x.ii-p10"></span>**7.** Again, he limiteth a certain day,
saying in David, To day, after so long a time; as it is said, To day if
ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

<span id="x.ii-p11"></span>**7.** Rursum quendam praeficit diem
hodiernuum in David dicens post tantum temporis (quemadmodum dictum est)
Hodie si vocem ejus audieritis, ne obduretis corda vestra:

<span id="x.ii-p12"></span>**8.** For if Jesus had given them rest, then
would he not afterward have spoken of another day.

<span id="x.ii-p13"></span>**8.** Nam si Iesus requiem illis
praestitisset, non de alia loqueretur post illos dies.

<span id="x.ii-p14"></span>**9.** There remaineth therefore a rest to
the people of God.

<span id="x.ii-p15"></span>**9.** Ergo relinquitur sabbathismus populo
Dei.

<span id="x.ii-p16"></span>**10.** For he that is entered into his rest,
he also hath ceased from his own works, as God *did* from his.

<span id="x.ii-p17"></span>**10.** Nam qui ingreditur in requiem ejus,
requievit et ipse ab operibus propriis quemadmodum a suis Deus.

<span id="x.ii-p18"></span> 

<span id="x.ii-p19"></span><span id="x.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p20"></span>He now begins to embellish the passage which
he had quoted from David. He has hitherto taken it, as they say,
according to the letter, that is, in its literal sense; but he now
amplifies and decorates it; and thus he rather alludes to than explains
the words of David. This sort of decoration Paul employed in <span
id="x.ii-p20.1"></span>[Ro 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)<span
id="x.ii-p20.1"></span>, in referring to these words of Moses, “Say not,
who shall ascend into heaven!” *etc.* Nor is it indeed anything
unsuitable, in accommodating Scripture to a subject in hand, to
illustrate by figurative terms what is more simply delivered. However,
the sum of the whole is this, that what God threatens in the Psalm as to
the loss of his rest, applies also to us, inasmuch as he invites us also
at this day to a rest.

<span id="x.ii-p21"></span>The chief difficulty of this passage arises
from this, that it is perverted by many. The Apostle had no other thing
in view by declaring that there is a rest for us, than to rouse us to
desire it, and also to make us to fear, lest we should be shut out of it
through unbelief He however teaches us at the same time, that the rest
into which an entrance is now open to us, is far more valuable than that
in the land of Canaan. But let us now come to particulars.

<span id="x.ii-p22"></span>**3.** *For we which have believed do enter
into rest,* or, *for we enter into the rest after we have believed,
etc.* It is an argument from what is contrary. Unbelief alone shuts us
out; then faith alone opens an entrance. We must indeed bear in mind
what he has already stated, that God being angry with the unbelieving,
had sworn that they should not partake of that blessing. Then they enter
in where unbelief does not hinder, provided only that God invites them.
But by speaking in the first person he allures them with greater
sweetness, separating them from aliens.

<span id="x.ii-p23"></span>*Although the works,* *etc.* To define what
our rest is, he reminds us of what Moses relates, that God having
finished the creation of the world, immediately rested from his works
and he finally concludes, that the true rest of the faithful, which is
to continue forever, will be when they shall rest as God did.  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) And doubtless as the highest happiness of
man is to be united to his God, so ought to be his ultimate end to which
he ought to refer all his thoughts and actions. This he proves, because
God who is said to have rested, declared a long time after that he would
not give his rest to the unbelieving; he would have so declared to no
purpose, had he not intended that the faithful should rest after his own
example. Hence he says, *It remaineth that some must enter in:* for if
not to enter in is the punishment of unbelief, then an entrance, as it
has been said, is open to believers.

<span id="x.ii-p28"></span><span id="x.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p29"></span>**7.** But there is some more difficulty in
what he immediately subjoins, that there is another today appointed for
us in the Psalm, because the former people had been excluded; but the
words of David (as it may be said) seem to express no such thing, and
mean only this, that God punished the unbelief of the people by refusing
to them the possession of the land. To this I answer, that the inference
is correct, that to us is offered what was denied to them; for the Holy
Spirit reminds and warns us, that we may not do the same thing so as to
incur the same punishment. For how does the matter stand? Were nothing
at this day promised, how could this warning be suitable, “Take heed
lest the same thing happen to you as to the fathers.” Rightly then does
the Apostle say, that as the fathers’ unbelief deprived them of the
promised possession, the promise is renewed to their children, so that
they may possess what had been neglected by their fathers.

<span id="x.ii-p30"></span><span id="x.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p31"></span>**8.** *For if Jesus had given them rest,*
or, *had obtained rest for them, etc.* He meant not to deny but that
David understood by rest the land of Canaan, into which Joshua conducted
the people; but he denies this to be the final rest to which the
faithful aspire, and which we have also in common with the faithful of
that age; for it is certain that they looked higher than to that land;
nay, the land of Canaan was not otherwise so much valued except for this
reason, because it was an image and a symbol of the spiritual
inheritance. When, therefore, they obtained possession of it, they ought
not to have rested as though they had attained to the summit of their
wishes, but on the contrary to meditate on what was spiritual as by it
suggested. They to whom David addressed the Psalm were in possession of
that land, but they were reminded of the duty of seeking a better rest.

<span id="x.ii-p32"></span>We then see how the land of Canaan was a
rest; it was indeed but evanescent, beyond which it was the duty of the
faithful to advance. In this sense the Apostle denies that that rest was
given by Joshua; for the people under his guidance entered the promised
land for this end, that they might with greater alacrity advance forward
towards heaven.

<span id="x.ii-p33"></span>And we may hence easily learn the difference
between us and them; for though the same end is designed for both, yet
they had, as added to them, external types to guide them; not so have
we, nor have we indeed any need of them, for the naked truth itself is
set before our eyes. Though our salvation is as yet in hope, yet as to
the truth, it leads directly to heaven; nor does Christ extend his hand
to us, that he may conduct us by the circuitous course of types and
figures, but that he may withdraw us from the world and raise us up to
heaven. Now that the Apostle separates the shadow from the substance, he
did so for this reason, — because he had to do with the Jews, who were
too much attached to external things.

<span id="x.ii-p34"></span>He draws the conclusion, that there is a
sabbathizing reserved for Gods people, that is, a spiritual rest; to
which God daily invites us.

<span id="x.ii-p35"></span><span id="x.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p36"></span>**10.** *For he that is entered into his
rest,* or, *For he who has rested, etc.* This is a definition of that
perpetual Sabbath in which there is the highest felicity, when there
will be a likeness between men and God, to whom they will be united. For
whatever the philosophers may have ever said of the chief good, it was
nothing but cold and vain, for they confined man to himself, while it is
necessary for us to go out of ourselves to find happiness. The chief
good of man is nothing else but union with God; this is attained when we
are formed according to him as our exemplar.

<span id="x.ii-p37"></span>Now this conformation the Apostle teaches us
takes place when we rest from our works. It hence at length follows,
that man becomes happy by self­denial. For what else is to cease from
our works, but to mortify our flesh, when a man renounces himself that
he may live to God? For here we must always begin, when we speak of a
godly and holy life, that man being in a manner dead to himself, should
allow God to live in him, that he should abstain from his own works, so
as to give place to God to work. We must indeed confess, that then only
is our life rightly formed when it becomes subject to God. But through
inbred corruption this is never the case, until we rest from our own
works; nay, such is the opposition between God’s government and our
corrupt affections, that he cannot work in us until we rest. But though
the completion of this rest cannot be attained in this life, yet we
ought ever to strive for it.  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) Thus
believers enter it but on this condition, — that by running they may
continually go forward.

<span id="x.ii-p39"></span>But I doubt not but that the Apostle
designedly alluded to the Sabbath in order to reclaim the Jews from its
external observances; for in no other way could its abrogation be
understood, except by the knowledge of its spiritual design. He then
treats of two things together; for by extolling the excellency of grace,
he stimulates us to receive it by faith, and in the meantime he shows us
in passing what is the true design of the Sabbath, lest the Jews should
be foolishly attached to the outward rite. Of its abrogation indeed he
does expressly speak, for this is not his subject, but by teaching them
that the rite had a reference to something else, he gradually withdraws
them from their superstitious notions. For he who understands that the
main object of the precept was not external rest or earthly worship,
immediately perceives, by looking on Christ, that the external rite was
abolished by his coming; for when the body appears, the shadows
immediately vanish away. Then our first business always is, to teach
that Christ is the end of the Law.

<span id="x.iii"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 4:11-13

<span id="x.iii-p2"></span>**11.** Let us labor therefore to enter into
that rest, lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief.

<span id="x.iii-p3"></span>**11.** Studeamus ergo ingredi illam requiem,
nequis eodem cadat incredulitatis exemplo.

<span id="x.iii-p4"></span>**12.** For the word of God *is* quick, and
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and
*is* a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

<span id="x.iii-p5"></span>**12.** Vivus enim sermo Dei et efficax, et
penetrantior quovis gladio utrinque scindente, et pertingens usque ad
divisionem animae et spiritus, compagumque et medullaarum, et discretor
cogitationum et intentionum cordis.

<span id="x.iii-p6"></span>**13.** Neither is there any creature that is
not manifest in his sight: but all things *are* naked and opened unto
the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

<span id="x.iii-p7"></span>**13.** Nec ulla est creatura quae non
appareat coram ipso, imo omnia nuda et resupina in oculis ejus com quo
nobis est ratio.

<span id="x.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="x.iii-p9"></span><span id="x.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p10"></span>Having pointed out the goal to which we are
to advance, he exhorts us to pursue our course, which we do, when we
habituate ourselves to self­denial. And as he compares entering into
rest to a straight course, he sets falling in opposition to it, and thus
he continues the metaphor in both clauses, at the same time he alludes
to the history given by Moses of those who fell in the wilderness,
because they were rebellious against God. (<span
id="x.iii-p10.1"></span>[Nu 26:65](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#065)<span
id="x.iii-p10.1"></span>.) Hence he says, *after the same example,*
signifying as though the punishment for unbelief and obstinacy is there
set before us as in a picture; nor is there indeed a doubt but that a
similar end awaits us, if there be found in us the same unbelief.

<span id="x.iii-p11"></span>Then, “to fall” means to perish; or to speak
more plainly, it is to fall, not as to sin, but as a punishment for it.
But the figure corresponds as well with the word to “enter”, as with the
sad overthrow of the fathers, by whose example he intended to terrify
the Jews.

<span id="x.iii-p12"></span><span id="x.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p13"></span>**12.** *For the word of God is quick,* or
*living, etc.* What he says here of the efficacy or power of the word,
he says it, that they might know, that it could not be despised with
impunity, as though he had said, “Whenever the Lord addresses us by his
word, he deals seriously with us, in order that he may touch all our
inmost thoughts and feelings; and so there is no part of our soul which
ought not to be roused.”  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70)

<span id="x.iii-p15"></span>But before we proceed further, we must
inquire whether the Apostle speaks of the effect of the word generally,
or refers only to the faithful.

<span id="x.iii-p16"></span>It indeed appears evident, that the word of
God is not equally efficacious in all. For in the elect it exerts its
own power, when humbled by a true knowledge of themselves, they flee to
the grace of Christ; and this is never the case, except when it
penetrates into the innermost heart. For hypocrisy must be sifted, which
has marvelous and extremely winding recesses in the hearts of men; and
then we must not be slightly pricked or torn, but be thoroughly wounded,
that being prostrate under a sense of eternal death, we may be taught to
die to ourselves. In short, we shall never be renewed in the whole mind,
which Paul requires, (<span id="x.iii-p16.1"></span>[Eph
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023)<span id="x.iii-p16.1"></span>,)
until our old man be slain by the edge of the spiritual sword. Hence
Paul says in another place, (<span id="x.iii-p16.2"></span>[Php
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017)<span id="x.iii-p16.2"></span>,)
that the faithful are offered as a sacrifice to God by the Gospel; for
they cannot otherwise be brought to obey God than by having, as it were,
their own will slain; nor can they otherwise receive the light of God’s
wisdom, than by having the wisdom of the flesh destroyed. Nothing of
this kind is found in the reprobate; for they either carelessly
disregard God speaking to them, and thus mock him, or clamour against
his truth, and obstinately resist it. In short, as the word of God is a
hammer, so they have a heart like the anvil, so that its hardness repels
its strokes, however powerful they may be. The word of God, then, is far
from being so efficacious towards them as to penetrate into them to *the
dividing of the soul and the spirit.* Hence it appears, that this its
character is to be confined to the faithful only, as they alone are thus
searched to the quick.

<span id="x.iii-p17"></span>The context, however, shows that there is
here a general truth, and which extends also to the reprobate
themselves; for though they are not softened, but set up a brazen and an
iron heart against God’s word, yet they must necessarily be restrained
by their own guilt. They indeed laugh, but it is a sardonic laugh; for
they inwardly feel that they are, as it were, slain; they make evasions
in various ways, so as not to come before God’s tribunal; but though
unwilling, they are yet dragged there by this very word which they
arrogantly deride; so that they may be fitly compared to furious dogs,
which bite and claw the chain by which they are bound, and yet can do
nothing, as they still remain fast bound.

<span id="x.iii-p18"></span>And further, though this effect of the word
may not appear immediately as it were on the first day, yet it will be
found at length by the event, that it has not been preached to any one
in vain. General no doubt is what Christ declares, when he says, When
the Spirit shall come, he will convince the world, (<span
id="x.iii-p18.1"></span>[John 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008),
[John 9:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#000)<span
id="x.iii-p18.1"></span>.) for the Spirit exercises this office by the
preaching, of the Gospel. And lastly, though the word of God does not
always exert its power on man, yet it has it in a manner included in
itself. And the Apostle speaks here of its character and proper office
for this end only, — that we may know that our consciences are summoned
as guilty before God’s tribunal as soon as it sounds in our ears, as
though he had said, “If any one thinks that the air is beaten by an
empty sound when the word of God is preached, he is greatly mistaken;
for it is a living thing and full of hidden power, which leaves nothing
in man untouched.” The sum of the whole then is this, — that as soon as
God opens his sacred mouth, all our faculties ought to be open to
receive his word; for he would not have his word scattered in vain, so
as to disappear or to fall neglected on the ground, but he would have it
effectually to constrain the consciences of men, so as to bring them
under his authority; and that he has put power in his word for this
purpose, that it may scrutinize all the parts of the soul, search the
thoughts, discern the affections, and in a word show itself to be the
judge.

<span id="x.iii-p19"></span>But here a new question arises, “Is this
word to be understood of the Law or of the Gospel?” Those who think that
the Apostle speaks of the Law bring these testimonies of Paul, — that it
is the ministration of death, (<span id="x.iii-p19.1"></span>[2 Cor.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)<span id="x.iii-p19.1"></span>,)
that it is the letter which killeth, that it worketh nothing but wrath,
(<span id="x.iii-p19.2"></span>[Ro
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015)<span id="x.iii-p19.2"></span>,)
and similar passages. But here the Apostle points out also its different
effects; for, as we have said, there is a certain vivifying killing of
the soul, which is effected by the Gospel. Let us then know that the
Apostle speaks generally of the truth of God, when he says, that it is
living and efficacious. So Paul testifies, when he declares, that by his
preaching there went forth an odor of death unto death to the
unbelieving, but of life unto life to believers, (<span
id="x.iii-p19.3"></span>[2Co 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span
id="x.iii-p19.3"></span>,) so that God never speaks in vain; he draws
some to salvation, others he drives into ruin. This is the power of
binding and loosing which the Lord conferred on his Apostles. (<span
id="x.iii-p19.4"></span>[Mt 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span
id="x.iii-p19.4"></span>.) And, indeed, he never promises to us
salvation in Christ, without denouncing, on the other hand, vengeance on
unbelievers; who by rejecting Christ bring death on themselves.  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71)

<span id="x.iii-p21"></span>It must be further noticed, that the Apostle
speaks of God’s word, which is brought to us by the ministry of men. For
delirious and even dangerous are those notions, that though the internal
word is efficacious, yet that which proceeds from the mouth of man is
lifeless and destitute of all power. I indeed admit that the power does
not proceed from the tongue of man, nor exists in mere sound, but that
the whole power is to be ascribed altogether to the Holy Spirit; there
is, however, nothing in this to hinder the Spirit from putting forth his
power in the word preached. For God, as he speaks not by himself, but by
men, dwells carefully on this point, so that his truth may not be
objected to in contempt, because men are its ministers. So Paul, by
saying, that the Gospel is the power of God, (<span
id="x.iii-p21.1"></span>[Ro 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span
id="x.iii-p21.1"></span>.) designedly adorned with this distinction his
own preaching, though he saw that it was slandered by some and despised
by others. And when in another place, (<span id="x.iii-p21.2"></span>[Ro
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008)<span id="x.iii-p21.2"></span>,)
he teaches us that salvation is conferred by the doctrine of faith, he
expressly says that it was the doctrine which was preached. We indeed
find that God ever commends the truth administered to us by men, in
order to induce us to receive it with reverence.

<span id="x.iii-p22"></span>Now, by calling the word *quick* or living
he must be understood as referring to men; which appears still clearer
by the second word, *powerful,* for he shows what sort of life it
possesses, when he expressly says that it is efficacious; for the
Apostle’s object was to teach us what the word is to us.  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) The *sword* is a metaphorical word often
used in Scripture; but the Apostle not content with a simple comparison,
says, that God’s word is *sharper than any sword,* even than a sword
that cuts on both sides, or *two­edged*; for at that time swords were in
common use, which were blunt on one side, and sharp on the other.
*Piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit,* or *to
the dividing of the soul and spirit, etc.* The word *soul* means often
the same with *spirit;* but when they occur together, the first includes
all the affections, and the second means what they call the intellectual
faculty. So Paul, writing to the Thessalonians, uses the words, when he
prays God to keep their spirit, and soul, and body blameless until the
coming of Christ, (<span id="x.iii-p23.2"></span>[1Th
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span id="x.iii-p23.2"></span>,)
he meant no other thing, but that they might continue pure and chaste in
mind, and will, and outward actions. Also Isaiah means the same when he
says,

<span id="x.iii-p24"></span>“My soul desired thee in the night; I sought
thee with my spirit.” (<span id="x.iii-p24.1"></span>[Isa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009)<span id="x.iii-p24.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.iii-p25"></span>What he doubtless intends to show is, that
he was so intent on seeking God, that he applied his whole mind and his
whole heart. I know that some give a different explanation; but all the
sound­minded, as I expect, will assent to this view.

<span id="x.iii-p26"></span>Now, to come to the passage before us, it is
said that God’s word *pierces,* or reaches to the dividing of soul and
spirit, that is, it examines the whole soul of man; for it searches his
thoughts and scrutinizes his will with all its desires. And then he adds
*the joints and marrow,* intimating that there is nothing so hard or
strong in man, nothing so hidden, that the powerful word cannot pervade
it.  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) Paul declares the same when he
says, that prophecy avails to reprove and to judge men, so that the
secrets of the heart may come, to light. (<span
id="x.iii-p27.1"></span>[1Co
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024)<span id="x.iii-p27.1"></span>.)
And as it is Christ’s office to uncover and bring to light the thoughts
from the recesses of the heart, this he does for the most part by the
Gospel.

<span id="x.iii-p28"></span>Hence God’s word is a *discerner,*
(κριτικὸς, one that has power to discern,) for it brings the light of
knowledge to the mind of man as it were from a labyrinth, where it was
held before entangled. There is indeed no thicker darkness than that of
unbelief, and hypocrisy is a horrible blindness; but God’s word scatters
this darkness and chases away this hypocrisy. Hence the separating or
discerning which the Apostle mentions; for the vices, hid under the
false appearance of virtues, begin then to be known, the varnish being
wiped away. And if the reprobate remain for a time in their hidden
recesses, yet they find at length that God’s word has penetrated there
also, so that they cannot escape God’s judgment. Hence their clamour and
also their fury, for were they not smitten by the word, they would not
thus betray their madness, but they would seek to elude the word, or by
evasion to escape from its power, or to pass it by unnoticed; but these
things God does not allow them to do. Whenever then they slander God’s
word, or become enraged against it, they show that they feel within its
power, however unwillingly and reluctantly.  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74)

<span id="x.iii-p30"></span><span id="x.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p31"></span>**13.** *Neither is there any creature,*
*etc.* The conjunction here, as I think, is causal, and may be rendered
*for;* for in order to confirm this truth, that whatever is hid in man
is discerned and judged by God’s word, he draws an argument from the
nature of God himself. There is no creature, he says, which is hid from
the eyes of God; there is, therefore, nothing so deep in man’s soul,
which cannot be drawn forth into light by that word that resembles its
own author, for as it is God’s office to search the heart, so he
performs this examination by his word.

<span id="x.iii-p32"></span>Interpreters, without considering that God’s
word is like a long staff by which he examines and searches what lies
deep in our hearts, have strangely perverted this passage; and yet they
have not relieved themselves. But all difficulty disappears when we take
this view, — that we ought to obey God’s word in sincerity and with
cordial affection, because God, who knows our hearts, has assigned to
his word the office of penetrating even into our inmost thoughts. The
ambiguous meaning of the last words has also led interpreters astray,
which they have rendered, “Of whom we speak;” but they ought, on the
contrary, to be rendered, *With whom we have to do.* The meaning is,
that it is God who deals with us, or with whom we have a concern; and
that, therefore, we ought not to trifle with him as with a mortal man,
but that whenever his word is set before us, we ought to tremble, for
nothing is hid from him.

<span id="x.iv"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 4:14-16

<span id="x.iv-p2"></span>**14.** Seeing then that we have a great high
priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us
hold fast *our* profession.

<span id="x.iv-p3"></span>**14.** Habentes igitur ponticem magnum qui
coelos ingressus est, Iesum filium Dei, teneamus confessionem.

<span id="x.iv-p4"></span>**15.** For we have not an high priest which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all
points tempted like as *we are, yet* without sin.

<span id="x.iv-p5"></span>**15.** Neque enim habemus pontificem, qui
compati non possit infirmitatibus nostris; sed in omnibus tentatum,
secundum similitudinem, absque peccato.

<span id="x.iv-p6"></span>**16.** Let us therefore come boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in
time of need.

<span id="x.iv-p7"></span>**16.** Accedamus igitur cum ficucia ad
thronum gratiae, ut obtineamus miseericordiam, et gratiam inveniamus in
auxilium opportunum.

<span id="x.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="x.iv-p9"></span><span id="x.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p10"></span>**14.** *Seeing then that we have,* or,
*Having then, etc.* He has been hitherto speaking of Christ’s
apostleship, But he how passes on to his second office. For we have said
that the Son of God sustained a twofold character when he was sent to
us, even that of a teacher and of a priest. The Apostle, therefore,
after having exhorted the Jews obediently to embrace the doctrine of
Christ, now shows what benefit his priesthood has brought to us; and
this is the second of the two points which he handles. And fitly does he
connect the priesthood with the apostleship, since he reminds us that
the design of both is to enable us to come to God. He employs an
inference, *then;* for he had before referred to this great truth, that
Christ is our high priest;  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) but as
the character of the priesthood cannot be known except through teaching,
it was necessary to prepare the way, so as to render men willing to hear
Christ. It now remains, that they who acknowledge Christ as their
teacher, should become teachable disciples, and also learn from his
mouth, and in his school, what is the benefit of his priesthood, and
what is its use and end.

<span id="x.iv-p12"></span>In the first place he says, *Having a great
high priest,*  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) *Jesus Christ, let
us hold fast our profession,* or confession. Confession is here, as
before, to be taken as a metonymy for faith; and as the priesthood
serves to confirm the doctrine, the Apostle hence concludes that there
is no reason to doubt or to waver respecting the faith of the Gospel,
because the Son of God has approved and sanctioned it; for whosoever
regards the doctrine as not confirmed, dishonors the Son of God, and
deprives him of his honor as a priest; nay, such and so great a pledge
ought to render us confident, so as to rely unhesitantly on the Gospel.

<span id="x.iv-p14"></span><span id="x.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p15"></span>**15.** *For we have not,* *etc.* There is in
the name which he mentions, *the Son of God,* such majesty as ought to
constrain us to fear and obey him. But were we to contemplate nothing
but this in Christ, our consciences would not be pacified; for who of us
does not dread the sight of the Son of God, especially when we consider
what our condition is, and when our sins come to mind? The Jews might
have had also another hindrance, for they had been accustomed to the
Levitical priesthood; they saw in that one mortal man, chosen from the
rest, who entered into the sanctuary, that by his prayer he might
reconcile his brethren to God. It is a great thing, when the Mediator,
who can pacify God towards us, is one of ourselves. By this sort of
allurement the Jews might have been ensnared, so as to become ever
attached to the Levitical priesthood, had not the Apostle anticipated
this, and showed that the Son of God not only excelled in glory, but
that he was also endued with equal kindness and compassion towards us.

<span id="x.iv-p16"></span>It is, then, on this subject that he speaks,
when he says that he was *tried by our infirmities,* that he might
condole with us. As to the word sympathy, (συμπαθεία,) I am not disposed
to indulge in refinements; for frivolous, no less than curious, is this
question, “Is Christ now subject to our sorrows?” It was not, indeed,
the Apostle’s object to weary us with such subtleties and vain
speculations, but only to teach us that we have not to go far to seek a
Mediator, since Christ of his own accord extends his hand to us, that we
have no reason to dread the majesty of Christ since he is our brother,
and that there is no cause to fear, lest he, as one unacquainted with
evils, should not be touched by any feelings of humanity, so as to bring
us help, since he took upon him our infirmities, in order that he might
be more inclined to succor us.  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77)

<span id="x.iv-p18"></span>Then the whole discourse of the Apostle
refers to what is apprehended by faith, for he does not speak of what
Christ is in himself, but shows what he is to us. By the *likeness,* he
understands that of nature, by which he intimates that Christ has put on
our flesh, and also its feelings or affections, so that he not only
paroled himself to be real man, but had also been taught by his own
experience to help the miserable; not because the Son of God had need of
such a training, but because we could not otherwise comprehend the care
he feels for our salvation. Whenever, then, we labor under the
infirmities of our flesh, let us remember that the Son of God
experienced the same, in order that he might by his power raise us up,
so that we may not be overwhelmed by them.

<span id="x.iv-p19"></span>But it may be asked, What does he mean by
*infirmities?* The word is indeed taken in various senses. Some
understand by it cold and heat; hunger and other wants of the body; and
also contempt, poverty, and other things of this mind, as in many places
in the writings of Paul, especially in <span id="x.iv-p19.1"></span>[2Co
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010)<span id="x.iv-p19.1"></span>.
But their opinion is more correct who include, together with external
evils, the feelings of the souls such as fear, sorrow, the dread of
death, and similar things.  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78)

<span id="x.iv-p21"></span>And doubtless the restriction, *without sin,*
would not have been added, except he had been speaking of the inward
feelings, which in us are always sinful on account of the depravity of
our nature; but in Christ, who possessed the highest rectitude and
perfect purity, they were free from everything vicious. Poverty, indeed,
and diseases, and those things which are without us, are not to be
counted as sinful. Since, therefore, he speaks of infirmities akin to
sin, there is no doubt but that he refers to the feelings or affections
of the mind, to which our nature is liable, and that on account of its
infirmity. For the condition of the angels is in this respect better
than ours; for they sorrow not, nor fear, nor are they harassed by
variety of cares, nor by the dread of death. These infirmities Christ of
his own accord undertook, and he willingly contended with them, not only
that he might attain a victory over them for us, but also that we may
feel assured that he is present with us whenever we are tried by them.

<span id="x.iv-p22"></span>Thus he not only really became a man, but he
also assumed all the qualities of human nature. There is, however, a
limitation added, *without sin;* for we must ever remember this
difference between Christ’s feelings or affections and ours, that his
feelings were always regulated according to the strict rule of justice,
while ours flow from a turbid fountain, and always partake of the nature
of their source, for they are turbulent and unbridled.  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79)

<span id="x.iv-p28"></span><span id="x.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p29"></span>**16.** *Let us therefore come boldly,* or,
*with confidence, etc.* He draws this conclusion, — that an access to
God is open to all who come to him relying on Christ the Mediator; nay,
he exhorts the faithful to venture without any hesitation to present
themselves before God. And the chief benefit of divine teaching is a
sure confidence in calling on God, as, on the other hand, the whole of
religion falls to the ground, and is lost when this certainty is taken
away from consciences.

<span id="x.iv-p30"></span>It is hence obvious to conclude, that under
the Papacy the light of the Gospel is extinct, for miserable men are
bidden to doubt whether God is propitious to them or is angry with them.
They indeed say that God is to be sought; but the way by which it is
possible to come to him is not pointed out, and the gate is barred by
which alone men can enter. They confess in words that Christ is a
Mediator, but in reality they make the power of his priesthood of none
effect, and deprive him of his honor.

<span id="x.iv-p31"></span>For we must hold this principle, — that
Christ is not really known as a Mediator except all doubt as to our
access to God is removed; otherwise the conclusion here drawn would not
stand, “We have a high priest Who is willing to help us; therefore we
may come bold and without any hesitation to the throne of grace.” And
were we indeed fully persuaded that Christ is of his own accord
stretching forth his hand to us, who of us would not come in perfect
confidence?  <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) It is then true what I
said, that its power is taken away from Christ’s priesthood whenever men
have doubts, and are anxiously seeking for mediators, as though that one
were not sufficient, in whose patronage all they who really trust, as
the Apostle here directs them, have the assurance that their prayers are
heard.

<span id="x.iv-p33"></span>The ground of this assurance is, that the
throne of God is not arrayed in naked majesty to confound us, but is
adorned with a new name, even that of *grace*, which ought ever to be
remembered whenever we shun the presence of God. For the glory of God,
when we contemplate it alone, can produce no other effect than to fill
us with despair; so awful is his throne. The Apostle, then, that he
might remedy our diffidence, and free our minds from all fear and
trembling, adorns it with “grace,” and gives it a name which can allure
us by its sweetness, as though he had said, “Since God has affirmed to
his throne as it were the banner of ‘grace’ and of his paternal love
towards us, there are no reasons why his majesty should drive us away.”
 <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81)

<span id="x.iv-p35"></span>The import of the whole is, that we are to
call upon God without fear, since we know that he is propitious to us,
and that this may be done is owing to the benefit conferred on us by
Christ, as we find from <span id="x.iv-p35.1"></span>[Eph
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012)<span id="x.iv-p35.1"></span>; for
when Christ receives us under his protection and patronage, he covers
with his goodness the majesty of God, which would otherwise be terrible
to us, so that nothing appears there but grace and paternal favor.

<span id="x.iv-p36"></span>*That we may obtain mercy,* etc. This is not
added without great reason; it is for the purpose of encouraging as it
were by name those who feel the need of mercy, lest any one should be
cast down by the sense of his misery, and close up his way by his own
diffidence. This expression, “that we may obtain mercy”, contains
especially this most delightful truth, that all who, relying on the
advocacy of Christ, pray to God, are certain to obtain mercy; yet on the
other hand the Apostle indirectly, or by implication, holds out a
threatening to all who take not this way, and intimates that God will be
inexorable to them, because they disregard the only true way of being
reconciled to him.

<span id="x.iv-p37"></span>He adds, *To help in time of need,* or, for a
seasonable help; that is, if we desire to obtain all things necessary
for our salvation.  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) Now, this
seasonableness refers to the time of calling, according to those words
of Isaiah, which Paul accommodates to the preaching of the Gospel,
“Behold, now is the accepted time,” etc., (<span
id="x.iv-p39.1"></span>[Isa 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)<span
id="x.iv-p39.1"></span>; <span id="x.iv-p39.2"></span>[2Co
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)<span id="x.iv-p39.2"></span>;) for
the Apostle refers to that “today,” during which God speaks to us. If we
defer hearing until tomorrow, when God is speaking to us today, the
unseasonable night will come, when what now may be done can no longer be
done; and we shall in vain knock when the door is closed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc44009.htm#fr_66) <span
id="x.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p12"></span> Calvin renders the last verb “be
disappointed,” (<span id="x.i-p12.1"></span>frustratus,) though the verb
means properly to be behind in time, to be too late; yet it is commonly
used in the sense of falling short of a thing, of being destitute; of
being without. See <span id="x.i-p12.2"></span>[Ro
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span id="x.i-p12.2"></span>;
<span id="x.i-p12.3"></span>[1Co
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007)<span id="x.i-p12.3"></span>; <span
id="x.i-p12.4"></span>[Heb 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015)<span
id="x.i-p12.4"></span>. To “come short” of our version fitly expresses
its meaning here, as adopted by Doddridge and Stuart; or “to fall
short,” as rendered by Macknight.

<span id="x.i-p13"></span>“Seem” is considered by some to be pleonastic.
The verb δοκέω is so no doubt sometimes, but not always; but here
appears to have a special meaning, as the Apostle would have no one to
present even the appearance of neglecting to secure the rest promised. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc44009.htm#fr_67) <span
id="x.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p16"></span> See Appendix O

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc44009.htm#fr_68) <span
id="x.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p24"></span> The general drift of the passage is evident,
yet the construction has been found difficult. Without repeating the
various solutions which have been offered, I shall give what appears to
me the easiest construction, —

<span id="x.ii-p25"></span>**3.** We indeed are entering into the rest
who believe: as he hath said, “So that I sware in my wrath, They shall
by no means enter into my rest,” when yet the works were finished since
the foundation of  
**4.** the world; (for he hath said thus in a certain place of the
seventh day, “And God rested on the seventh day from all his works,”  
**5.** and again in this place, “They shall by no means enter into my  
**6.** rest;”) it then remains therefore that some do enter in because
of unbelief.

<span id="x.ii-p26"></span>The particle ἐπεῖ has created the difficulty,
which I render in the sense of ἔπειτα, then consequently the argument is
simply this: Inasmuch as God had sworn that the unbelieving should not
enter into his rest long after the rest of the sabbath was appointed; it
follows as a necessary consequence that some do enter into it, though
the unbelieving did not enter. The argument turns on the word “rest;” It
was to show that it was not the rest of the Sabbath. The argument in the
next verses turns on the word “today,” in order to show that it was not
the rest of Canaan.

<span id="x.ii-p27"></span>The fourth and fifth verses are only
explanatory of the concluding sentence of the preceding, and therefore
ought to be regarded as parenthetic. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc44009.htm#fr_69) <span
id="x.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p38"></span> Many, like Calvin, have made remarks of this
kind, but they are out of place here; for the rest here mentioned is
clearly the rest in heaven. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc44009.htm#fr_70) <span
id="x.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p14"></span> It has been a matter of dispute whether the
“word” here is Christ, or the Scripture. The fathers as well as later
divines are divided. The former is the opinion of Augustin, Ambrose, and
also of Dr. Owen and Doddridge: and the latter is held by Chrysostom,
Theophylact, and also by Calvin, Beza, Macknight, Scott, Stuart and
Bloomfield. The latter is clearly the most suitable to the words of the
passage. The only difficulty is in verse 13; but there a transition is
evidently made from the word of God to God himself; and thus both are in
remarkable manner connected together. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc44009.htm#fr_71) <span
id="x.iii-p19.5"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p20"></span> See Appendix P.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc44009.htm#fr_72) <span
id="x.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p23"></span> See Appendix Q.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc44009.htm#fr_73) <span
id="x.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p27"></span> The metaphor of a sword is evidently
carried on; the word is like the sword which “penetrates so as to
separate the soul (the animal life) and the spirit, (the immortal part,)
the joints also and the marrows, being even a strict judge of the
thoughts and purposes of the heart.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc44009.htm#fr_74) <span
id="x.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p29"></span> See Appendix R.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc44009.htm#fr_75) <span
id="x.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p11"></span> That is, in the latter part of chapter 2. In
the beginning of chapter 3 he exhorted us to “consider” the apostle and
high priest of our profession, and then proceeded to speak of him as an
apostle. He now returns to the high priesthood, and says that as we have
a great high priest, we ought to hold fast our profession. Such,
according to Calvin, is the connection, and is adopted by Stuart and
Bloomfield. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc44009.htm#fr_76) <span
id="x.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p13"></span> In the Apostle’s time there were many called
high priests, such as the heads of the Levitical courses; but “the great
high priest” meant him who alone had the privilege of entering into the
holy of holies, that is, the high priest, as distinguished from all the
rest. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc44009.htm#fr_77) <span
id="x.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p17"></span> Calvin has followed the Vulg. In rendering
this clause, “who cannot sympathize (<span
id="x.iv-p17.1"></span>compati) with our infirmities.” Our version is
that of Eramus and Beza. The meaning may thus be given, “Who cannot feel
for us in our infirmities.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc44009.htm#fr_78) <span
id="x.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p20"></span> The word “infirmities” is often used
metonymically for things which we are too weak to bear, even trials and
temptations. Christ, our high priest, feels for us in all those straits
and difficulties, whatever they be, which meet us in our course, and
make us feel and know our weaknesses. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc44009.htm#fr_79) <span
id="x.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p23"></span> The common idea of what is here said is,
that Christ though tried and tempted, was not yet guilty of sin, or did
not fall into sin. That he had no sin, that he was without sin, is what
we plainly learn from <span id="x.iv-p23.1"></span>[2Co
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="x.iv-p23.1"></span>;
<span id="x.iv-p23.2"></span>[1Jo
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#005)<span id="x.iv-p23.2"></span>,
etc.; but is this what is taught here? The clause, I conceive, may be
thus rendered, —

<span id="x.iv-p24"></span>“But was in all things tried in like manner
except sin;”

<span id="x.iv-p25"></span>that is, with the exception that he had no
innate sin to contend with. The last words are literally, “in likeness
with the exclusion of sin,” which seems to import that it was a likeness
with the exclusion of sin. But if the words “except (or without) sin” do
not qualify “likeness,” they must be connected with “tried” or tempted,
and thus rendered, —

<span id="x.iv-p26"></span>“But was in like manner tried in all things
without sin;”

<span id="x.iv-p27"></span>that is, without sinning, or falling into
sin. The difference is, that in the one sense Christ had no inward sin
to contend with, and that in the other he withstood temptation without
falling into sin. Both senses are true, and either of them will suit
this passage. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc44009.htm#fr_80) <span
id="x.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p32"></span> “Confidence,” that is, of being heard. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc44009.htm#fr_81) <span
id="x.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p34"></span> The “throne of grace” is evidently in
opposition to the throne of judgment, which especially belongs to a
king. Some of the Greek fathers regarded this as the throne of Christ;
but most commentators consider it to be God’s throne, as Christ is here
represented as a priest and as access to God is ever described as being
through Christ. See <span id="x.iv-p34.1"></span>[Eph
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#018)<span id="x.iv-p34.1"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc44009.htm#fr_82) <span
id="x.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p38"></span> Calvin’s version is, “and find grace for a
seasonable help;” which according to his explanation, means a help
during the season or period of “today.” Doddridge has, “for our
seasonable assistance,” — Macknight, “for the purpose of seasonable
help,” — and Stuart, “and find favor so as to be assisted in time of
need.” Our version seems the best, “and find grace to help in the time
of need.” The address is to those exposed to trials and persecutions;
and the seasonable or opportune help was such as their peculiar
circumstances and wants required. The word εὔκαιρον, is in the Sept. put
for “due season,” or in its time, in <span id="x.iv-p38.1"></span>[Ps
104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027)<span id="x.iv-p38.1"></span>.
The idea of Calvin is that some of the fathers, but is not suitable to
this passage.

<span id="x.iv-p39"></span>“Mercy” is compassion, and “grace” is favor
or benefit received; it means sometimes favor entertained, but here the
effect of favor — a benefit, and this benefit was to be a help in time
of need. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc44010)
