[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc44017)  [Next](cc44019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 44: Hebrews*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix"></span>

<span id="xix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 13

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 13:1-6

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1.** Let brotherly love continue.

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Fraterna charitas maneat.

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span>**2.** Be not forgetful to entertain
strangers: for thereby some have entertained angels unawares.

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Hospitalitatis ne sitis immemores; per
hanc enim quosdam latuit quum recipissent Angelos.

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span>**3.** Remember them that are in bonds, as
bound with them; *and* them which suffer adversity, as being yourselves
also in the body.

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span>**3.** Memores estote vinctorum, tanquam ipsi
quoque sitis in corpore.

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span>**4.** Marriage *is* honourable in all, and
the bed undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

<span id="xix.i-p9"></span>**4.** Honorabile in omnibus conjugium et
thorus impollutus; scortatores auten et adulteros judicabit Deus.

<span id="xix.i-p10"></span>**5.** *Let your* conversation *be* without
covetousness; *and be* content with such things as ye have: for he hath
said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

<span id="xix.i-p11"></span>**5.** Sint mores sine avaritia: contenti
sitis iis quae adsunt; ipse enim dixit, Non te desero, neque te
derelinquo:

<span id="xix.i-p12"></span>**6.** So that we may boldly say, The Lord
*is* my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me.

<span id="xix.i-p13"></span>**6.** Ut fidentes dicamus, Dominus mihi
adjutor, neque timebo quid faciat mihi homo.

<span id="xix.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="xix.i-p15"></span><span id="xix.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p16"></span>**1.** *Let brotherly love,* *etc.* Probably
he gave this command respecting brotherly love, because a secret hatred
arising from the haughtiness of the Jews was threatening to rend the
Churches. But still this precept is generally very needful, for nothing
flows away so easily as love; when everyone thinks of himself more than
he ought, he will allow to others less than he ought; and then many
offenses happen daily which cause separations.  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274)

<span id="xix.i-p18"></span>He calls love *brotherly,* not only to teach
us that we ought to be mutually united together by a peculiar and an
inward feeling of love, but also that we may remember that we cannot be
Christians without being brethren; for he speaks of the love which the
household of faith ought to cultivate one towards another inasmuch as
the Lord has bound them closer together by the common bond of adoption.
It was therefore a good custom in the primitive Church for Christians to
call one another brothers; but now the name as well as the thing itself
is become almost obsolete, except that the monks have appropriated to
themselves the use of it when neglected by others, while at the same
time they show by their discords and intestine factions that they are
the children of the evil one.

<span id="xix.i-p19"></span><span id="xix.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p20"></span>**2.** *Be not forgetful to entertain
strangers,* *etc.* This office of humanity has also nearly ceased to be
properly observed among men; for the ancient hospitality, celebrated in
histories, is unknown to us, and Inns now supply the place of
accommodations for strangers. But he speaks not so much of the practice
of hospitality as observed then by the rich; but he rather commends the
miserable and the needy to be entertained, as at that time many were
fugitives who left their homes for the name of Christ.

<span id="xix.i-p21"></span>And that he might commend this duty the
more, he adds, that angels had sometimes been entertained by those who
thought that they received only men. I doubt not but that this is to be
understood of Abraham and Lot; for having been in the habit of showing
hospitality, they without knowing and thinking of any such thing,
entertained angels; thus their houses were in no common way honored. And
doubtless God proved that hospitality was especially acceptable to him,
when he rendered such a reward to Abraham and to Lot. Were any one to
object and say, that this rarely happened; to this the obvious answer
is, — That not mere angels are received, but Christ himself, when we
receive the poor in his name. In the words in Greek there is a beautiful
alliteration which cannot be set forth in Latin.

<span id="xix.i-p22"></span><span id="xix.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p23"></span>**3.** *Remember them that are in bonds,*
or, *Be mindful of the bound, etc.* There is nothing that can give us a
more genuine feeling of compassion than to put ourselves in the place of
those who are in distress; hence he says, that we ought to think of
those in bonds as though we were bound with them. What follows the first
clause, *As being yourselves also in the body,* is variously explained.
Some take a general view thus, “Ye are also exposed to the same evils,
according to the common lot of humanity;” but others give a more
restricted sense, “As though ye were in their body.” Of neither can I
approve, for I apply the words to the body of the Church, so that the
meaning would be this, “Since ye are members of the same body, it
behooves you to feel in common for each other’s evils, that there may be
nothing disunited among you.”  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275)

<span id="xix.i-p25"></span><span id="xix.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p26"></span>**4.** *Marriage is honourable in all,*
*etc.* Some think this an exhortation to the married to conduct
themselves modestly and in a becoming manner, that the husband should
live with his wife temperately and chastely, and not defile the conjugal
bed by unbeseeming wantonness. Thus a verb is to be understood in the
sense of exhorting, “Let marriage be honorable.” And yet the indicative
*is* would not be unsuitable; for when we hear that marriage is
honorable, it ought to come immediately to our minds that we are to
conduct ourselves in it honorably and becomingly. Others take the
sentence by way of concession in this way, “Though marriage is
honorable, it is yet unlawful to commit fornication”; but this sense, as
all must see, is rigid. I am inclined to think that the Apostle sets
marriage here in opposition to fornication as a remedy for that evil;
and the context plainly shows that this was his meaning; for before he
threatens that the Lord would punish fornicators, he first states what
is the true way of escape, even if we live honourable in a state of
marriage.

<span id="xix.i-p27"></span>Let this then be the main point, that
fornication will not be unpunished, for God will take vengeance on it.
And doubtless as God has blessed the union of man and wife, instituted
by himself, it follows that every other union different from this is by
him condemned and accursed. He therefore denounces punishment not only
on adulterers, but also on fornicators; for both depart from the holy
institution of God; nay, they violate and subvert it by a promiscuous
intercourse, since there is but one legitimate union, sanctioned by the
authority and approval of God. But as promiscuous and vagrant lusts
cannot be restrained without the remedy of marriage, he therefore
commends it by calling it “honorable”.

<span id="xix.i-p28"></span>What he adds, *and the bed undefiled,* has
been stated, as it seems to me, for this end, that the married might
know that everything is not lawful for them, but that the use of the
legitimate bed should be moderate, lest anything contrary to modesty and
chastity be allowed.  <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276)

<span id="xix.i-p33"></span>By saying *in all men,* I understand him to
mean, that there is no order of men prohibited from marriage; for what
God has allowed to mankind universally, is becoming in all without
exception; I mean all who are fit for marriage and feel the need of it.

<span id="xix.i-p34"></span>It was indeed necessary for this subject to
have been distinctly and expressly stated, in order to obviate a
superstition, the seeds of which Satan was probably even then secretly
sowing, even this, — that marriage is a profane thing, or at least far
removed from Christian perfection; for those seducing spirits,
forbidding marriage, who had been foretold by Paul, soon appeared. That
none then might foolishly imagine that marriage is only permitted to the
people in general, but that those who are eminent in the Church ought to
abstain from it, the Apostle takes away every exception; and he does not
teach us that it is conceded as an indulgence, as Jerome sophistically
says, but that it is honourable. It is very strange indeed that those
who introduced the prohibition of marriage into the world, were not
terrified by this so express a declaration; but it was necessary then to
give loose reins to Satan, in order to punish the ingratitude of those
who refused to hear God.

<span id="xix.i-p35"></span><span id="xix.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p36"></span>**5.** *Let your conversation be without
covetousness,* *etc.* While he seeks to correct covetousness, he rightly
and wisely bids us at the same time to be content with our present
things; for it is the true contempt of money, or at least a true
greatness of mind in the right and moderate use of it, when we are
content with what the Lord has given us, whether it be much or little;
for certainly it rarely happens that anything satisfies an avaricious
man; but on the contrary they who are not content with a moderate
portion, always seek more even when they enjoy the greatest affluence.
It was a doctrine which Paul had declared, that he had learned, so as to
know how to abound and how to suffer need. Then he who has set limits to
his desire so as to acquiesce resignedly in his lot, has expelled from
his heart the love of money.  <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277)

<span id="xix.i-p38"></span>*For he has said,* *etc.* Here he quotes two
testimonies; the first is taken, as some think, from the <span
id="xix.i-p38.1"></span>[Jos 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#005)<span
id="xix.i-p38.1"></span> of Joshua, but I am rather of the opinion that
it is a sentence drawn from the common doctrine of Scripture, as though
he had said, “The Lord everywhere promises that he will never be wanting
to us.” He infers from this promise what is found in <span
id="xix.i-p38.2"></span>[Ps 118:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#006)<span
id="xix.i-p38.2"></span>, that we have the power to overcome fear when
we feel assured of God’s help.  <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278)

<span id="xix.i-p40"></span>Here indeed he plucks up the evil by the
very roots, as it is necessary when we seek to free from it the minds of
men. It is certain that the source of covetousness is mistrust; for
whosoever has this fixed in his heart, that he will never be forsaken by
the Lord, will not be immoderately solicitous about present things,
because he will depend on God’s providence. When therefore the Apostle
is seeking to cure us of the disease of covetousness, he wisely calls
our attention to God’s promises, in which he testifies that he will ever
be present with us. He hence infers afterwards that as long as we have
such a helper there is no cause to fear. For in this way it can be that
no depraved desires will importune us; for faith alone is that which can
quiet the minds of men, whose disquietude without it is too well known.

<span id="xix.ii"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 13:7-9

<span id="xix.ii-p2"></span>**7.** Remember them which have the rule
over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God: whose faith follow,
considering the end of *their* conversation.

<span id="xix.ii-p3"></span>**7.** Memores estote praefectorum
vestrorum, qui loquuti sunt vobis sermonem Dei, quorum intuentes exitum
conversationis imitamini fidem.

<span id="xix.ii-p4"></span>**8.** Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and
to day, and for ever.

<span id="xix.ii-p5"></span>**8.** Iesus Christus heri et hodie, idem
etiam in secula.

<span id="xix.ii-p6"></span>**9.** Be not carried about with divers and
strange doctrines. For *it is* a good thing that the heart be
established with grace; not with meats, which have not profited them
that have been occupied therein.

<span id="xix.ii-p7"></span>**9.** Doctrinis variis et peregrinis ne
circunferamini: bonum enim gratia cor confirmari, non cibis, qui nihil
profuerunt iis qui in illis versati sunt.

<span id="xix.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xix.ii-p9"></span><span id="xix.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p10"></span>**7.** *Remember,* *etc.* What follows
refers not so much to morals as to doctrine. He first sets before the
Jews the example of those by whom they had been taught; and he seems
especially to speak of those who had sealed the doctrine delivered by
them by their own blood; for he points out something memorable when he
says, *considering the end of their conversation;* though still there is
no reason why we should not understand this generally of those who had
persevered in the true faith to the end, and had rendered a faithful
testimony to sound doctrine through their whole life as well as in
death. But it was a matter of no small importance, that he set before
them their teachers for imitation; for they who have begotten us in
Christ ought to be to us in the place as it were of fathers. Since then
they had seen them continuing firm and unmoved in the midst of much
persecutions and of various other conflicts, they ought in all reason to
have been deeply moved and affected.  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279)

<span id="xix.ii-p12"></span><span id="xix.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p13"></span>**8.** *Jesus Christ the same,* *etc.* The
only way by which we can persevere in the right faith is to hold to the
foundation, and not in the smallest degree to depart from it; for he who
holds not to Christ knows nothing but mere vanity, though he may
comprehend heaven and earth; for in Christ are included all the
treasures of celestial wisdom. This then is a remarkable passage, from
which we learn that there is no other way of being truly wise than by
fixing all our thoughts on Christ alone.

<span id="xix.ii-p14"></span>Now as he is dealing with the Jews, he
teaches them that Christ had ever possessed the same sovereignty which
he holds at this day; *The same,* he says, *yesterday, and today, and
forever.* By which words he intimates that Christ, who was then made
known in the world, had reigned from the beginning of the world, and
that it is not possible to advance farther when we come to him.
*Yesterday* then comprehends the whole time of the Old Testament; and
that no one might expect a sudden change after a short time, as the
promulgation of the Gospel was then but recent, he declares that Christ
had been lately revealed for this very end, that the knowledge of him
might continue the same for ever.

<span id="xix.ii-p15"></span>It hence appears that the Apostle is not
speaking of the eternal existence of Christ, but of that knowledge of
him which was possessed by the godly in all ages, and was the perpetual
foundation of the Church. It is indeed certain that Christ existed
before he manifested his power; but the question is, what is the subject
of the Apostle. Then I say he refers to quality, so to speak, and not to
essence; for it is not the question, whether he was from eternity with
the Father, but what was the knowledge which men had of him. But the
manifestation of Christ as to its external form and appearance, was
indeed different under the Law from what it is now; yet there is no
reason why the Apostle could not say truly and properly that Christ, as
regarded by the faithful, is always the same.  <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280)

<span id="xix.ii-p17"></span><span id="xix.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p18"></span>**9.** *Diverse doctrines,* *etc.* He
concludes that we ought not to fluctuate, since the truth of Christ, in
which we ought to stand firm, remains fixed and unchangeable. And
doubtless, variety of opinions, every kind of superstition, all
monstrous errors, in a word, all corruptions in religion, arise from
this, that men abide not in Christ alone; for it is not in vain that
Paul teaches us, that Christ is given to us by God to be our wisdom.

<span id="xix.ii-p19"></span>The import then of this passage is that in
order that the truth of God may remain firm in us, we must acquiesce in
Christ alone. We hence conclude that all who are ignorant of Christ are
exposed to all the delusions of Satan; for apart from him there is no
stability of faith, but innumerable tossings here and there. Wonderful
then is the acuteness of the Papists, who have contrived quite a
contrary remedy for driving away errors, even by extinguishing or
burying the knowledge of Christ! But let this warning of the Holy Spirit
be fixed in our hearts, that we shall never be beyond the reach of
danger except we cleave to Christ.

<span id="xix.ii-p20"></span>Now the doctrines which lead us away from
Christ, he says, are *divers* or various, because there is no other
simple and unmixed truth but the knowledge of Christ; and he calls them
also *strange* or foreign, because whatever is apart from Christ is not
regarded by God as his own; and we are hereby also reminded how we are
to proceed, if we would make a due proficiency in the Scripture, for he
who takes not a straight course to Christ, goes after strange doctrines.
The Apostle farther intimates that the Church of God will always have to
contend with strange doctrines and that there is no other means of
guarding against them but by being fortified with the pure knowledge of
Christ.  <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281)

<span id="xix.ii-p22"></span>*For it is a good thing,* *etc.* He now
comes from a general principle to a particular case. The Jews, for
instance, as it is well known, were superstitious as to distinctions in
meats; and hence arose many disputes and discords; and this was one of
the strange doctrines which proceeded from their ignorance of Christ.
Having then previously grounded our faith on Christ, he now says that
the observance of meats does not conduce to our salvation and true
holiness. As he sets *grace* in opposition to *meats*, I doubt not but
that by grace he means the spiritual worship of God and regeneration. In
saying *that the heart may be established,* he alludes to the word,
*carried about,* as though he had said, “It is the spiritual grace of
God, and not the observance of meats, that will really establish us.
 <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282)

<span id="xix.ii-p24"></span>*Which have not profited them that have
been occupied therein.* It is uncertain to whom he here refers; for the
fathers who lived under the Law had no doubt a useful training, and a
part of it was the distinction as to meats. It seems then that this is
to be understood rather of the superstitious, who, after the Gospel had
been revealed, still perversely adhered to the old ceremonies. At the
same time were we judiciously to explain the words as applied to the
fathers, there would be no inconsistency; it was indeed profitable for
them to undergo the yoke laid on them by the Lord, and to continue
obediently under the common discipline of the godly and of the whole
Church; but the Apostle means that abstinence from meats was in itself
of no avail. And no doubt it is to be regarded as nothing, except as an
elementary instruction at the time when God’s people were like children
as to their external discipline. To be *occupied in meats* is to be
taken as having a regard to them, so as to make a distinction between
clean and unclean. But what he says of meats may be extended to the
other rites of the Law.

<span id="xix.iii"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 13:10-15

<span id="xix.iii-p2"></span>**10.** We have an altar, whereof they have
no right to eat which serve the tabernacle.

<span id="xix.iii-p3"></span>**10.** Habemus altare, de quo edendi non
habent potestatem qui tabernaculo serviunt.

<span id="xix.iii-p4"></span>**11.** For the bodies of those beasts,
whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin,
are burned without the camp.

<span id="xix.iii-p5"></span>**11.** Qyiryn ebun abunakuyn ubfertyr
sabgyus ori oeccati ub sabcta oer sacerdotem, eorum corpora cremantur
extra castra.

<span id="xix.iii-p6"></span>**12.** Wherefore Jesus also, that he might
sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate.

<span id="xix.iii-p7"></span>**12.** Quare et Iesus ut sanctificaret per
proprium sanguinem populum, extra portam passus est.

<span id="xix.iii-p8"></span>**13.** Let us go forth therefore unto him
without the camp, bearing his reproach.

<span id="xix.iii-p9"></span>**13.** Prinde exeamus ad eum extra castra,
probrum ejus ferentes:

<span id="xix.iii-p10"></span>**14.** For here have we no continuing
city, but we seek one to come.

<span id="xix.iii-p11"></span>**14.** Non enim habemus hic manentem
civitatem, sed futurum inquirimus.

<span id="xix.iii-p12"></span>**15.** By him therefore let us offer the
sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of *our* lips
giving thanks to his name.

<span id="xix.iii-p13"></span>**15.** Pere ipsum ergo offeramus semper
hostiam laudis Deo, hoc est, fructum labiorum confitentium nomini ejus.

<span id="xix.iii-p14"></span> 

<span id="xix.iii-p15"></span><span id="xix.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p16"></span>**10.** *We have an altar,* *etc.* This is
a beautiful adaptation of an old rite under the Law, to the present
state of the Church. There was a kind of sacrifice appointed, mentioned
in the sixteenth chapter of Leviticus, no part of which returned to the
priests and Levites. This, as he now shows by a suitable allusion, was
accomplished in Christ; for he was sacrificed on this condition, that
they who serve the tabernacle should not feed on him. But by the
*ministers of the tabernacle* he means all those who performed the
ceremonies. Then that we may partake of Christ, he intimates that we
must renounce the tabernacle; for as the word *altar* includes
sacrificing and the victim; so *tabernacle,* all the external types
connected with it.

<span id="xix.iii-p17"></span>Then the meaning is, “No wonder if the
rites of the Law have now ceased, for this is what was typified by the
sacrifice which the Levites brought without the camp to be there burnt;
for as the ministers of the tabernacle did eat nothing of it, so if we
serve the tabernacle, that is, retain its ceremonies, we shall not be
partakers of that sacrifice which Christ once offered, nor of the
expiation which he once made by his own blood; for his own blood he
brought into the heavenly sanctuary that he might atone for the sin of
the world.”  <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283)

<span id="xix.iii-p19"></span><span id="xix.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p20"></span>**13.** *Let us go forth, therefore,*
*etc.* That the preceding allegory or mystical similitude might not be
frigid and lifeless, he connects with it an important duty required of
all Christians. And this mode of teaching is what Paul also usually
adopts, that he might show to the faithful what things God would have
them to be engaged in, while he was endeavoring to draw them away from
vain ceremonies; as though he had said, “This is what God demands from
you, but not that work in which you in vain weary yourselves.” So now
our Apostle speaks; for while he invites us to leave the tabernacle and
to follow Christ, he reminds us that a far different thing is required
of us from the work of serving God in the shade under the magnificent
splendor of the temple; for we must go after him through exiles,
flights, reproaches, and all kinds of afflictions. This warfare, in
which we must strive even unto blood, he sets in opposition to those
shadowy practices of which alone the teachers of ceremonies boasted.

<span id="xix.iii-p21"></span><span id="xix.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p22"></span>**14.** *For here we have no continuing
city,* *etc.* He extends still further the going forth which he had
mentioned, even that as strangers and wanderers in this world we should
consider that we have no fixed residence but in heaven. Whenever,
therefore, we are driven from place to place, or whenever any change
happens to us, let us think of what the Apostle teaches us here, that we
have no certain shade on earth, for heaven is our inheritance; and when
more and more tried, let us ever prepare ourselves for our last end; for
they who enjoy a very quiet life commonly imagine that they have a rest
in this world: it is hence profitable for us, who are prone to this kind
of sloth, to be often tossed here and there, that we who are too much
inclined to look on things below, may learn to turn our eyes up to
heaven.

<span id="xix.iii-p23"></span><span id="xix.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p24"></span>**15.** *By him, therefore, let us offer
the sacrifice of praise to God,* *etc.* He returns to that particular
doctrine to which he had referred, respecting the abrogation of the
ancient ceremonies; and he anticipates an objection that might have been
made; for as the sacrifices were attached as appendages to the
tabernacle, when this was abolished, it follows that the sacrifices also
must have ceased. But the Apostle had taught us that as Christ had
suffered without the gate, we are also called thither, and that hence
the tabernacle must be forsaken by those who would follow him.

<span id="xix.iii-p25"></span>Here a question arises, whether any
sacrifices remained for Christians; for this would have been
inconsistent, as they had been instituted for the purpose of celebrating
God’ worship. The Apostle, therefore, in due time meets this objection,
and says that another kind of sacrifice remains for us, which no less
pleases God, even the offering of the calves of our lips, as the Prophet
Hoses says.  <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) (<span
id="xix.iii-p26.1"></span>[Ho
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002)<span id="xix.iii-p26.1"></span>.)
Now that the sacrifice of praise is not only equally pleasing to God,
but of more account than all those external sacrifices under the Law,
appears evident from <span id="xix.iii-p26.2"></span>[Ps
50:1-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001)<span
id="xix.iii-p26.2"></span>; for God there repudiates all these as things
of nought, and bids the sacrifice of praise to be offered to him. We
hence see that it is the highest worship of God, justly preferred to all
other exercises, when we acknowledge God’s goodness by thanksgiving;
yea, this is the ceremony of sacrificing which God commends to us now.
There is yet no doubt but that under this one part is included the whole
of prayer; for we cannot give him thanks except when we are heard by
him; and no one obtains anything except he who prays. He in a word means
that without brute animals we have what is required to be offered to
God, and that he is thus rightly and really worshipped by us.

<span id="xix.iii-p27"></span>But as it was the Apostle’s design to
teach us what is the legitimate way of worshipping God under the New
Testament, so by the way he reminds us that God cannot be really invoked
by us and his name glorified, except through Christ the mediator; for it
is he alone who sanctifies our lips, which otherwise are unclean, to
sing the praises of God; and it is he who opens a way for our prayers,
who in short performs the office of a priest, presenting himself before
God in our name.

<span id="xix.iv"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 13:16-19

<span id="xix.iv-p2"></span>**16.** But to do good and to communicate
forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

<span id="xix.iv-p3"></span>**16.** Beneficentiae autem et
communicationis ne sitis immemores: talibus enim hostiis delectatur
Deus.

<span id="xix.iv-p4"></span>**17.** Obey them that have the rule over
you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls, as they that
must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for
that *is* unprofitable for you.

<span id="xix.iv-p5"></span>**17.** Parate praefectis vestris ac
deferte; ipsi enim vigilant pro animabus vestris tanquam rationem
redditurei, ut cum guadio hoc faciant, et non gementes; id enim vobis
non expedit.

<span id="xix.iv-p6"></span>**18.** Pray for us: for we trust we have a
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly.

<span id="xix.iv-p7"></span>**18.** Orate pro nobis; confidimus enim
quod bonam habemus conscientam, cupientes in omnibus honeste versari.

<span id="xix.iv-p8"></span>**19.** But I beseech *you* the rather to do
this, that I may be restored to you the sooner.

<span id="xix.iv-p9"></span>**19.** Magis autem vos hortor ut id
faciatis, quo celerius vobis restituar.

<span id="xix.iv-p10"></span> 

<span id="xix.iv-p11"></span><span id="xix.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p12"></span>**16.** *But to do good,* *etc.* Here he
points out even another way of offering a due and regular sacrifice, for
all the acts and duties of love are so many sacrifices; and he thereby
intimates that they were foolish and absurd in their wishes who thought
that something was wanting except they offered beasts to God according
to the Law, since God gave them many and abundant opportunities for
sacrificing. For though he can derive no benefit from us, yet he regards
prayer a sacrifice, and so much as the chief sacrifice, that it alone
can supply the place of all the rest; and then, whatever benefits we
confer on men he considers as done to himself, and honors them with the
name of sacrifices. So it appears that the elements of the Law are now
not only superfluous, but do harm, as they draw us away from the right
way of sacrificing.

<span id="xix.iv-p13"></span>The meaning is, that if we wish to
sacrifice to God, we must call on him and acknowledge his goodness by
thanksgiving, and further, that we must do good to our brethren; these
are the true sacrifices which Christians ought to offer; and as to other
sacrifices, there is neither time nor place for them.

<span id="xix.iv-p14"></span>*For with such sacrifices God is well
pleased.* There is to be understood here an implied contrast, — that he
no longer requires those ancient sacrifices which he had enjoined until
the abrogation of the Law.

<span id="xix.iv-p15"></span>But with this doctrine is connected an
exhortation which ought powerfully to stimulate us to exercise kindness
towards our neighbors; for it is not a common honor that God should
regard the benefits we confer on men as sacrifices offered to himself,
and that he so adorns our works, which are nothing worth, as to
pronounce them holy and sacred things, acceptable to him. When,
therefore, love does not prevail among us, we not only rob men of their
right, but God himself, who has by a solemn sentence dedicated to
himself what he has commanded to be done to men.

<span id="xix.iv-p16"></span>The word *communicate* has a wider meaning
than *to do good,* for it embraces all the duties by which men can
mutually assist one another; and it is a true mark or proof of love,
when they who are united together by the Spirit of God communicate to
one another.  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285)

<span id="xix.iv-p18"></span><span id="xix.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p19"></span>**17.** *Obey them,* *etc.* I doubt not but
that he speaks of pastors and other rulers of the Church, for there were
then no Christian magistrates; and what follows, *for they watch for
your souls,* properly belongs to spiritual government. He commands first
obedience and then honor to be rendered to them.  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) These two things are necessarily
required, so that the people might have confidence in their pastors, and
also reverence for them. But it ought at the same time to be noticed
that the Apostle speaks only of those who faithfully performed their
office; for they who have nothing but the title, nay, who use the title
of pastors for the purpose of destroying the Church, deserve but little
reverence and still less confidence. And this also is what the Apostle
plainly sets forth when he says, that they *watched* for their souls, —
a duty which is not performed but by those who are faithful rulers, and
are really what they are called.

<span id="xix.iv-p22"></span>Doubly foolish, then, are the Papists, who
from these words confirm the tyranny of their own idol: “The Spirit bids
us obediently to receive the doctrine of godly and faithful bishops, and
to obey their wholesome counsels; he bids us also to honor them.” But
how does this favor mere apes of bishops? And yet not only such are all
those who are bishops under the Papacy, but they are cruel murderers of
souls and rapacious wolves. But to pass by a description of them, this
only will I say at present, that when we are bidden to obey our pastors,
we ought carefully and wisely to find out those who are true and
faithful rulers; for if we render this honor to all indiscriminately,
first, a wrong will be done to the good; and secondly, the reason here
added, to honor them because they watch for souls, will be rendered
nugatory. In order, therefore, that the Pope and those who belong to him
may derive support from this passage, they must all of necessity first
prove that they are of the number of those who watch for our salvation.
If this be made evident, there will then be no question but that they
ought to be reverently treated by all the godly.  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287)

<span id="xix.iv-p24"></span>*For they watch,* *etc.* His meaning is,
that the heavier the burden they bear, the more honor they deserve; for
the more labor anyone undertakes for our sake, and the more difficulty
and danger he incurs for us, the greater are our obligations to him. And
such is the office of bishops, that it involves the greatest labor and
the greatest danger; if, then, we wish to be grateful, we can hardly
render to them that which is due; and especially, as they are to give an
account of us to God, it would be disgraceful for us to make no account
of them.  <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288)

<span id="xix.iv-p26"></span>He further reminds us in what great a
concern their labor may avail us, for, if the salvation of our souls be
precious to us, they ought by no means to be deemed of no account who
watch for it. He also bids us to be teachable and ready to obey, that
what pastors do in consequence of what their office demands, they may
also willingly and *joyfully* do; for, if they have their minds
restrained by grief or weariness, though they may be sincere and
faithful, they will yet become disheartened and careless, for vigor in
acting will fail at the same time with their cheerfulness. Hence the
Apostle declares, that it would be *unprofitable* to the people to cause
sorrow and mourning to their pastors by their ingratitude; and he did
this, that he might intimate to us that we cannot be troublesome or
disobedient to our pastors without hazarding our own salvation.

<span id="xix.iv-p27"></span>As hardly one in ten considers this, it is
hence evident how great generally is the neglect of salvation; nor is it
a wonder how few at this day are found who strenuously watch over the
Church of God. For besides, there are very few who are like Paul, who
have their mouth open when the people’s ears are closed, and who enlarge
their own heart when the heart of the people is straitened. The Lord
also punishes the ingratitude which everywhere prevails. Let us then
remember that we are suffering the punishment of our own perverseness,
whenever the pastors grow cold in their duty, or are less diligent than
they ought to be.

<span id="xix.iv-p28"></span><span id="xix.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p29"></span>**18.** *For we trust,* *etc.* After having
commended himself to their prayers, in order to excite them to pray, he
declares that he had a *good conscience.* Though indeed our prayers
ought to embrace the whole world, as love does, from which they flow; it
is yet right and meet that we should be peculiarly solicitous for godly
and holy men, whose probity and other marks of excellency have become
known to us. For this end, then, he mentions the integrity of his own
conscience, that is, that he might move them more effectually to feel an
interest for himself. By saying, I am persuaded, or I *trust,* he thus
partly shows his modesty and partly his confidence. *In all,* may be
applied to things as well as to men; and so I leave it undecided.  <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289)

<span id="xix.iv-p31"></span><span id="xix.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p32"></span>**19.** *But I beseech you,* *etc.* He now
adds another argument, — that the prayers they would make for him, would
be profitable to them all as well as to himself individually, as though
he had said, “I do not so much consult my own benefit as the benefit of
you all; for to be restored to you would be the common good of all.”

<span id="xix.iv-p33"></span>A probable conjecture may hence perhaps be
gathered, that the author of this Epistle was either beset with troubles
or detained by the fear of persecution, so as not to be able to appear
among those to whom he was writing. It might however be, that he thus
spoke, though he was free and at liberty, for he regarded man’s steps as
being in God’s hand; and this appears probable from the end of the
Epistle.

<span id="xix.v"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 13:20-25

<span id="xix.v-p2"></span>**20.** Now the God of peace, that brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep,
through the blood of the everlasting covenant,

<span id="xix.v-p3"></span>**20.** Porro Deus pacis, qui eduxit ex
mortuis Pastorem ovium magnum in sanguine Testamenti aeterni, Dominum
nostrum Iesum,

<span id="xix.v-p4"></span>**21.** Make you perfect in every good work
to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ; to whom *be* glory for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="xix.v-p5"></span>**21.** Confirmet (*alias, aptet, vel,
perficiat*) vos in omni opere bono, ut faciatis ejus voluntatem, faciens
in vobis quod acceptum sit coram ipso, per Iesum Christum, cui gloria in
secula seculorum. Amen.

<span id="xix.v-p6"></span>**22.** And I beseech you, brethren, suffer
the word of exhortation: for I have written a letter unto you in few
words.

<span id="xix.v-p7"></span>**22.** Hortar (*alias, obsecro*) autem vos
fratres, suscipite sermonem exhortationis: etenim brevibus verbis
scripsi.

<span id="xix.v-p8"></span>**23.** Know ye that *our* brother Timothy is
set at liberty; with whom, if he come shortly, I will see you.

<span id="xix.v-p9"></span>**23.** Scitate (*alias, scitis*) fratrem
Timotheum solutum esse, cum quo, si celerius venerit, videbo vos.

<span id="xix.v-p10"></span>**24.** Salute all them that have the rule
over you, and all the saints. They of Italy salute you.

<span id="xix.v-p11"></span>**24.** Salutate omnes qui praesunt vobis et
omnes sanctos: salutant vos Itali.

<span id="xix.v-p12"></span>**25.** Grace *be* with you all. Amen.

<span id="xix.v-p13"></span>Gratia cum omnibus vobia. Amen.

<span id="xix.v-p14"></span>Written to the Hebrews from Italy, by
Timothy.

<span id="xix.v-p15"></span>Ad Hebroeos scripta ab Italia per Timotheum
 <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290)

<span id="xix.v-p17"></span> 

<span id="xix.v-p18"></span><span id="xix.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p19"></span>**20.** *Now the God of peace,* *etc.* To
render mutual what he desired them to do, he ends his Epistle with
prayer; and he asks of God to *confirm,* or to fit, or to perfect them
in *every good work;* for such is the meaning of καταρτίσαι. We hence
conclude, that we are by no means fit to do good until we are made or
formed for the purpose by God, and that we shall not continue long in
doing good unless he strengthens us; for perseverance is his peculiar
gift. Nor is there a doubt but that as no common gifts of the Spirit had
already, as it seems, appeared in them, the first impression with which
they began, is not what is prayed for, but the polishing, which they
were to be made perfect.

<span id="xix.v-p20"></span>*That brought again from the dead,* *etc.*
This clause was added for the sake of confirmation; for he intimates
that God is then only prayed to aright by us, to lead us on to
perfection, when we acknowledge his power in the resurrection of Christ,
and acknowledge Christ himself as our pastor. He, in short, would have
us to look to Christ, in order that we may rightly trust in God for
help; for Christ was raised from death for this end, that we might be
renewed unto eternal life, by the same power of God; and he is the great
pastor of all, in order that we may protect the sheep committed to him
by the Father.

<span id="xix.v-p21"></span>*Through the blood,* *etc.* I have rendered
it, “In the blood;” for as <span id="xix.v-p21.1"></span>ב “in,” is
often taken in the sense of *with*, so I prefer to regard it here. For
it seems to me, that the Apostle means, that Christ so arose from the
dead, that his death was not yet abolished, but that it retains its
efficacy forever, as though he had said, “God raised up his own son, but
in such a way that the blood he shed once for all in his death is
efficacious after his resurrection for the ratification of the
everlasting covenant, and brings forth fruit the same as though it were
flowing always.”  <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291)

<span id="xix.v-p23"></span><span id="xix.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p24"></span>**21.** *To do his will,* *etc.* He now
gives a definition of good works by laying down God’s *will* as the
rule; for he thus intimates, that no works are to be deemed good, but
such as are agreeable to the will of God, as Paul also teaches us in
<span id="xix.v-p24.1"></span>[Ro
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)<span id="xix.v-p24.1"></span>,
and in many other places. Let us then remember, that it is the
perfection of a good and holy life, when we live in obedience to his
will. The clause which next follows is explanatory, *working* (or doing)
*in you what is well pleasing in his sight.* He had spoken of that will
which is made known in the Law; he now shows, that in vain is obtruded
on God what he has not commanded; for he values the decrees of his own
will far more than all the inventions of the world.

<span id="xix.v-p25"></span>*Through Jesus Christ,* *etc.* This may be
explained in two ways, — “Working through Jesus Christ”, or,
“Well­pleasing through Jesus Christ.” Both senses are suitable. For we
know that the spirit of regeneration and also all graces are bestowed on
us through Christ; and then it is certain, that as nothing can proceed
from us absolutely perfect, nothing can be acceptable to God without
that pardon which we obtain through Christ. Thus it comes, that our
works, performed by the odor of Christ’s grace, emit a sweet fragrance
in God’s presence, while otherwise they would have a fetid smell. I am
disposed to include both meanings.

<span id="xix.v-p26"></span>*To whom be glory,* *etc.* This I refer to
Christ. And as he here ascribes to Christ what peculiarly belongs to God
alone, he thus bears a clear testimony to his divinity; but still if
anyone prefers to explain this of the Father, I do not object; though I
embrace the other sense, as being the most obvious.

<span id="xix.v-p27"></span><span id="xix.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p28"></span>**22.** *And I beseech you,* *etc.* Some
understand this as though he was soliciting them to hear him; but I take
another view; for he mentions, as I think, that he had written in a *few
words,* or briefly, in order that he might not appear as though he
wished to lessen in any degree the ordinary practice of teaching. Let us
hence learn that the Scripture has not been committed to us in order to
silence the voice of pastors, and that we are not to be fastidious when
the same exhortations often sound in our ears; for the holy Spirit has
so regulated the writings which he has dictated to the Prophets and the
Apostles, that he detracts nothing from the order instituted by himself;
and the order is, that constant exhortations should be heard in the
Church from the mouth of pastors. And probably he recommends the *word
of exhortation* for this reason, that though men are by nature anxious
to learn, they yet prefer to hear something new rather than to be
reminded of things known and often heard before. Besides, as they
indulge themselves in sloth, they can ill bear to be stimulated and
reproved.

<span id="xix.v-p29"></span><span id="xix.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p30"></span>**23.** *Know ye that our brother,* *etc.*
Since the termination of the Greek verb γινώσκετε, will admit of either
renderings, we may read, “Ye know,” or, “Know ye;” but I prefer the
latter reading, though I do not reject the other.  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) The probability is, that he was
informing the Jews on the other side of the sea of what they did not
know. Now, if this *Timothy* was the renowned companion of Paul, which I
am inclined to think, it is very probable that either Luke or Clement
was the author of this Epistle. Paul, indeed, more usually calls him his
son; and then what immediately follows does not apply to Paul; for it
appears that the writer was at liberty and at his own disposal; and
besides, that he was then anywhere rather than at Rome; nay, it is very
probable, that he was going round through various cities, and was then
preparing to pass over the sea. Now all these particulars might have
been suitable to the circumstances either of Luke or of Clement after
the death of Paul.  <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293)

<span id="xix.v-p34"></span><span id="xix.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p35"></span>**24.** *Salute,* *etc.* As he writes his
Epistle generally to the Hebrews, it is strange that he bids some,
separate from the rest, to be saluted; but he sends this salutation, as
I think, more particularly to the rulers, as a mark of honor, that he
might conciliate them, and gently lead them to assent to his doctrine.
And he adds, —

<span id="xix.v-p36"></span>*And all the saints.* He either means the
faithful from among the Gentiles, and refers to them that both Jews and
Gentiles might learn to cultivate unity among themselves; or his object
was to intimate, that they who first received the Epistle, were to
communicate it to others.

<span id="xix.v-p37"></span>END OF THE COMMENTARIES ON THE EPISTLE  
TO THE HEBREWS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc44018.htm#fr_274) <span
id="xix.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p17"></span> “Continue” or remain, implies that they had
manifested this love, <span id="xix.i-p17.1"></span>[Heb
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#010)<span id="xix.i-p17.1"></span>; as
though he had said, “Let the love of the brethren be such as it has
been.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc44018.htm#fr_275) <span
id="xix.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p24"></span> What Beza says of this opinion is, “I by no
means reject it, though I regard the other (first mentioned here) as the
most obvious.” It has been said that whenever Paul mentions the mystical
body, it is in connection with Christ, <span id="xix.i-p24.1"></span>[Ro
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#005)<span id="xix.i-p24.1"></span>,
and that “in the body” is to be understood literally, <span
id="xix.i-p24.2"></span>[2Co 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span
id="xix.i-p24.2"></span>. It is so taken here by Grotius, Doddridge,
Scott, and Stuart. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc44018.htm#fr_276) <span
id="xix.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p29"></span> If the whole verse be rightly considered,
the construction of the first part will become evident. Two things are
mentioned, “marriage” and “bed” — the conjugal bed. Two characters are
afterwards mentioned, “fornicators and adulterers.” The first disregard
marriage and the second defile the conjugal bed. Then the first clause
speaks of marriage as in itself honorable, in opposition to the dishonor
put on it by fornicators, who being unmarried, indulge in illicit
intercourse with women; and the second speaks of the conjugal bed as
being undefiled, when not contaminated with adultery. This being
evidently the meaning, the declarative form seems most suitable.
Besides, the particle δὲ, “but” in the second part, as Beza observes,
required this construction.

<span id="xix.i-p30"></span>But if γὰρ be the reading, as found in some
copies, then the perceptive form seems necessary, though even then the
sense would be materially the same, — that marriage ought to be deemed
honorable in all, that is in all ranks and orders of men, as Grotius
observes, and that the conjugal bed ought to be undefiled. —

<span id="xix.i-p31"></span>“Let marriage be deemed honorable among all,
and the marriage bed be undefiled; for God will condemn fornicator and
adulterer.”

<span id="xix.i-p32"></span>Hammond, Macknight, and Stuart adopt the
perceptive form; but Beza, Doddridge and Scott, the declarative. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc44018.htm#fr_277) <span
id="xix.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p37"></span> See Appendix B 3.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc44018.htm#fr_278) <span
id="xix.i-p38.3"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p39"></span> See Appendix C 3.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc44018.htm#fr_279) <span
id="xix.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p11"></span> See Appendix D 3.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc44018.htm#fr_280) <span
id="xix.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p16"></span> Stuart takes the same view with Calvin in
this point — that the eternal existence of Christ is not what is here
taught, but that he as a Mediator is unchangeably the same. See Appendix
E 3. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc44018.htm#fr_281) <span
id="xix.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p21"></span> “Doctrines” were said to be “various”
because of their number; there were then as now many false doctrines;
and “strange” because they were new or foreign to the truth, not
consistent with the faith, but derived from abroad as it were, borrowed
from traditions, ceremonies, or other foreign sources. Stuart gives
another meaning to the first word, that is “different” from Christian
doctrine; but it has no such meaning. Still less warranted is Macknight
in saying that it means what is “discordant.” What is meant by “diverse
diseases” and “diverse lusts” is that they were of various kinds, or
that they were many. The same author gives an unprecedented meaning to
the second word. “foreign,” that is, taught by unauthorized teachers!
Stuart says, that it means “foreign” to Christian doctrine. The word is
indeed used in <span id="xix.ii-p21.1"></span>[Ac
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018)<span id="xix.ii-p21.1"></span>,
and in <span id="xix.ii-p21.2"></span>[1Pe
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012)<span id="xix.ii-p21.2"></span>,
in the sense of “new,” a thing unusual, not heard of before; nor is this
meaning unsuitable here. See <span id="xix.ii-p21.3"></span>[Eph
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)<span id="xix.ii-p21.3"></span>,
where the same subject is handled. See also <span
id="xix.ii-p21.4"></span>[Mt 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#009)<span
id="xix.ii-p21.4"></span>. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc44018.htm#fr_282) <span
id="xix.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p23"></span> See Appendix F 3.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc44018.htm#fr_283) <span
id="xix.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p18"></span> The verb ἁγιάζω means here expiation, as
in <span id="xix.iii-p18.1"></span>[Heb.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011), [Heb.
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#010)<span id="xix.iii-p18.1"></span>,
and other places in this Epistle; and so it is taken by Calvin and the
rendering of Stuart is “that he might make expiation,” etc. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc44018.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xix.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p26"></span> The words in Hosea are not regimen, but
in apposition. “So will we render calves, our lips.” Such is the meaning
given by the Targum, though the Vulg. puts the words in construction,
“the calves of our lips.” Instead of the calves offered in sacrifices,
the promise made was to offer their lips, that is, words which they were
required to take, “Take with you words”. The Sept., Syr., and Arab.
Render the phrase as here given, “the fruit of our lips,” only the
Apostle leaves out “our”. There is the same meaning, though not exactly
the same words. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc44018.htm#fr_285) <span
id="xix.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p17"></span> The words may be thus rendered, “And
forget not benevolence (or, literally, well-doing) and liberality.” The
δὲ here should be rendered “and,” for this is enjoined in addition to
what is stated in the previous verse. The word εὐποιΐα means kindness,
benevolence, beneficence, the doing of good generally; but κοινωνία
refers to the distribution of what is needful for the poor. See <span
id="xix.iv-p17.1"></span>[Ro
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#026)<span id="xix.iv-p17.1"></span>,
<span id="xix.iv-p17.2"></span>[2Co
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013)<span id="xix.iv-p17.2"></span>.
So that Calvin in this instance has reserved their specific meaning.
Stuart’s version is “Forget not kindness also and liberality;” and he
explains the clause thus, “Beneficence or kindness toward the suffering
and liberality toward the needy.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc44018.htm#fr_286) <span
id="xix.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p20"></span> Grotius renders the second verb, ὑπείκετε,
“concede” to them, that is, the honor due to their office; Beza, “be
compliant,” (<span id="xix.iv-p20.1"></span>obsecundate;) and the
directions of your guides and submit to their admonitions.” Doddridge
gives the sentiment of Calvin, “Submit yourselves to them with becoming
respect.”

<span id="xix.iv-p21"></span>The words may be rendered, “Obey your
rulers and be submissive;” that is cultivate an obedient, compliant and
submissive spirit. He speaks first of what they were to do — to render
obedience and then of the spirit with which that obedience was to be
rendered; it was not merely to be an outward act, but proceeding from a
submissive mind. Schleusner’s explanation is similar, “Obey your rulers
and promptly (or willingly) obey them.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc44018.htm#fr_287) <span
id="xix.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p23"></span> “The Greek interpreters,” says Estius,
“teach that obedience is due to a bishop, though he be immoral in his
conduct; but not if he perverts the doctrine of faith in his public
preaching, for in that case he deprives himself of power, as he declares
himself to be an enemy to the church.” Poole, who quotes this passage,
adds, “Let the Papisticals note this, who vociferously claim blind
obedience in behalf of their pastors.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc44018.htm#fr_288) <span
id="xix.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p25"></span> See Appendix G 3.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc44018.htm#fr_289) <span
id="xix.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p30"></span> The Greek fathers connect it with the
preceding clause, “For we trust we have a good conscience towards all,”
that is towards Jews and Gentiles; but the Vulg. connects it with the
following, “willing in all things to live well;” that is honorably.
“Willing in all things to behave well” Macknight; “determined in all
things to behave honorable” Doddridge; “being desirous in all things to
conduct ourselves uprightly,” Stuart. To keep the alliteration in the
text, the words may be rendered thus — “We trust that we have a good
conscience, being desirous to maintain a good conduct." A good
conscience is a pure conscience, free from guilt and sinister motives:
and to behave or live goodly, as the words are literally, is not to
behave honorably or honestly, but to behave or live uprightly according
to the rule of God’s word; so that the best version is, “Willing in all
things to live uprightly.” “We trust,” is rendered by Doddridge and
Macknight, “we are confident;” but our version is preferable. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc44018.htm#fr_290) <span
id="xix.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p16"></span> This forms no part of the Epistle; and the
subscriptions to the other Epistles must be viewed the same. Some of
them are indeed manifestly erroneous, as the case with this. See <span
id="xix.v-p16.1"></span>[Heb
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023)<span id="xix.v-p16.1"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc44018.htm#fr_291) <span
id="xix.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p22"></span> See Appendix H 3.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc44018.htm#fr_292) <span
id="xix.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p31"></span> The Vulgate Beza and almost all expounders,
render it as an imperative, “Know ye.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc44018.htm#fr_293) <span
id="xix.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p32"></span> The words ἀπολελυμένον in this verse, has
been rendered by Macknight and some others, “sent away.” It is no doubt
used in the sense of dismissing, dissolving, or sending away an assembly
or a multitude, but not of sending away a person on a message. The two
things are wholly distinct. The verb means to set loose, to loosen to
release and hence to dismiss, to set at liberty, to make free, and never
in the sense of sending a person to a place on business, or with an
errand or message. The objection that we do not read elsewhere of
Timothy’s imprisonment is of no weight for the history we have of those
times is very brief; and if we judge from the state of things at that
period, there is nothing more probable than that Timothy shared the lot
of Paul and of others. It is also probable that he was not imprisoned at
Rome, where Paul was, but at some other place, for Paul says he expected
him soon; and he does not say “If he returns quickly,” but “if he come
quickly.” —*Ed.*

<span id="xix.v-p33"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix of Additional Notations](cc44019)
