[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc44016)  [Next](cc44018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 44: Hebrews*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 12:1-3

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Wherefore seeing we also are
compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside
every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset *us*, and let us
run with patience the race that is set before us,

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Proinde nos quoque quum tanta
circumdati simus nube testium, deposito omni onere et peccato quod nos
circumstat, per patientiam curramus proposito nobis certamine;

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Looking unto Jesus the author and
finisher of *our* faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured
the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the
throne of God.

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Intuentes in principem et
perfectorem fidei Iesum, qui pro guidio sibi proposito, pertulit crucem,
ignominia contempta, et in dextera throni Dei consedit:

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span>**3.** For consider him that endured such
contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint
in your minds.

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ac reputate quis hic fuerit qui
tantam in se sustinuit ab impiis contradictionem, ut ne fatigemini
animabus vestris soluti.

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span><span id="xviii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span>**1.** *Wherefore, seeing we also,* *etc.*
This conclusion is, as it were, an epilogue to the former chapter, by
which he shows the end for which he gave a catalogue of the saints who
excelled in faith under the Law, even that every one should be prepared
to imitate them; and he calls a large multitude metaphorically a
*cloud,* for he sets what is dense in opposition to what is thinly
scattered.  <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) Had they been a few
in number, yet they ought to have roused us by their example; but as
they were a vast throng, they ought more powerfully to stimulate us.

<span id="xviii.i-p12"></span>He says that we are so surrounded by this
dense throng, that wherever we turn our eyes many examples of faith
immediately meet us. The word *witnesses* I do not take in a general
sense, as though he called them the martyrs of God, and I apply it to
the case before us, as though he had said that faith is sufficiently
proved by their testimony, so that no doubt ought to be entertained; for
the virtues of the saints are so many testimonies to confirm us, that
we, relying on them as our guides and associates, ought to go onward to
God with more alacrity.

<span id="xviii.i-p13"></span>*Let us lay aside every weight,* or *every
burden, etc.* As he refers to the likeness of a race, he bids us to be
lightly equipped; for nothing more prevents haste than to be encumbered
with burdens. Now there are various burdens which delay and impede our
spiritual course, such as the love of this present life, the pleasures
of the world, the lusts of the flesh, worldly cares, riches also and
honors, and other things of this kind. Whosoever, then, would run in the
course prescribed by Christ, must first disentangle himself from all
these impediments, for we are already of ourselves more tardy than we
ought to be, so no other causes of delay should be added.

<span id="xviii.i-p14"></span>We are not however bidden to cast away
riches or other blessings of this life, except so far as they retard our
course for Satan by these as by toils retains and impedes us.

<span id="xviii.i-p15"></span>Now, the metaphor of a race is often to be
found in Scripture; but here it means not any kind of race, but a
running contest, which is wont to call forth the greatest exertions. The
import of what is said then is, that we are engaged in a contest, even
in a race the most celebrated, that many witnesses stand around us, that
the Son of God is the umpire who invites and exhorts us to secure the
prize, and that therefore it would be most disgraceful for us to grow
weary or inactive in the midst of our course. And at the same time the
holy men whom he mentioned, are not only witnesses, but have been
associates in the same race, who have beforehand shown the way to us;
and yet he preferred calling them witnesses rather than runners, in
order to intimate that they are not rivals, seeking to snatch from us
the prize, but approves to applaud and hail our victory; and Christ also
is not only the umpire, but also extends his hand to us, and supplies us
with strength and energy; in short, he prepares and fits us to enter on
our course, and by his power leads us on to the end of the race.

<span id="xviii.i-p16"></span>*And the sin which does so easily beset
us,* or, *stand around us, etc.* This is the heaviest burden that
impedes us. And he says that we are entangled, in order that we may
know, that no one is fit to run except he has stripped off all toils and
snares. He speaks not of outward, or, as they say, of actual sin, but of
the very fountain, even concupiscence or lust, which so possesses every
part of us, that we feel that we are on every side held by its snares.
 <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242)

<span id="xviii.i-p18"></span>*Let us run with patience,* *etc.* By this
word *patience,* we are ever reminded of what the Apostle meant to be
mainly regarded in faith, even that we are in spirit to seek the kingdom
of God, which is invisible to the flesh, and exceeds all that our minds
can comprehend; for they who are occupied in meditating on this kingdom
can easily disregard all earthly things. He thus could not more
effectually withdraw the Jews from their ceremonies, than by calling
their attention to the real exercises of faith, by which they might
learn that Christ’s kingdom is spiritual, and far superior to the
elements of the world.

<span id="xviii.i-p19"></span><span id="xviii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p20"></span>**2.** *Who for the joy that was set
before him,* *etc.* Though the expression in Latin is somewhat
ambiguous, yet according to the words in Greek the Apostle’s meaning is
quite clear; for he intimates, that though it was free to Christ to
exempt himself from all trouble and to lead a happy life, abounding in
all good things, he yet underwent a death that was bitter, and in every
way ignominious. For the expression, *for joy,* is the same as, instead
of joy; and joy includes every kind of enjoyment. And he says, *set
before him,* because the power of availing himself of this joy was
possessed by Christ, had it so pleased him. At the same time if any one
thinks that the preposition ἀντὶ denotes the final cause, I do not much
object; then the meaning would be, that Christ refused not the death of
the cross, because he saw its blessed issue. I still prefer the former
exposition.  <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243)

<span id="xviii.i-p22"></span>But he commends to us the patience of
Christ on two accounts, because he endured a most bitter death, and
because he despised shame. He then mentions the glorious end of his
death, that the faithful might know that all the evils which they may
endure will end in their salvation and glory, provided they follow
Christ. So also says James, “Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and
ye know the end.” (<span id="xviii.i-p22.1"></span>[Jas
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#011)<span id="xviii.i-p22.1"></span>.)
Then the Apostle means that the end of our sufferings will be the same
with those of Christ, according to what is said by Paul, “If we suffer
with him, we shall also reign together.” (<span
id="xviii.i-p22.2"></span>[Ro
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017)<span id="xviii.i-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p23"></span><span id="xviii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p24"></span>**3.** *For consider him,* *etc.* He
enforces his exhortation by comparing Christ with us; for if the Son of
God, whom it behaves all to adore, willingly underwent such severe
conflicts, who of us should dare to refuse to submit with him to the
same? For this one thought alone ought to be sufficient to conquer all
temptations, that is, when we know that we are companions or associates
of the Son of God, and that he, who was so far above us, willingly came
down to our condition, in order that he might animate us by his own
example; yea, it is thus that we gather courage, which would otherwise
melt away, and turn as it were into despair.

<span id="xviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 12:4-8

<span id="xviii.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Ye have not yet resisted unto
blood, striving against sin.

<span id="xviii.ii-p3"></span>**4.** Nondum ad sanguinem restitistis
adversus peccatum certando.

<span id="xviii.ii-p4"></span>**5.** And ye have forgotten the
exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children, My son, despise
not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of
him:

<span id="xviii.ii-p5"></span>**5.** Et obliti estic exhortationis quae
vobis tanquam filiis loquitur, Fili mi, ne disciplinam Domini negligas,
et ne deficias dum ab eo argueris:

<span id="xviii.ii-p6"></span>**6.** For whom the Lord loveth he
chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.

<span id="xviii.ii-p7"></span>**6.** Quem enim diligit Dominus castigat,
flegallat omnem filium quem suscipit.

<span id="xviii.ii-p8"></span>**7.** If ye endure chastening, God
dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father
chasteneth not?

<span id="xviii.ii-p9"></span>**7.** Si disciplinam sustinetis, Deus
tanquam filiis offeertur: quis enim est filius quem pater non castiget?

<span id="xviii.ii-p10"></span>**8.** But if ye be without chastisement,
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons.

<span id="xviii.ii-p11"></span>**8.** Quod si disciplinae expertes
estis, cujus participes sunt omnes, spurii igitur estis, non filii.

<span id="xviii.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xviii.ii-p13"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p14"></span>**4.** *Ye have not yet, resisted unto
blood,* *etc.* He proceeds farther, for he reminds us, that even when
the ungodly persecute us for Christ’s sake, we are then contending
against sin. Into this contest Christ could not enter, for he was pure
and free from all sin; in this respect, however, we are unlike him, for
sin always dwells in us, and afflictions serve to subdue and put it to
flight.

<span id="xviii.ii-p15"></span>In the first place we know that all the
evils which are in the world, and especially death, proceed from sin;
but this is not what the Apostle treats of; he only teaches us, that the
persecutions which we endure for the Gospel’s sake, are on another
account useful to us, even because they are remedies to destroy sin; for
in this way God keeps us under the yoke of his discipline, lest our
flesh should become wanton; he sometimes also thus checks the impetuous,
and sometimes punishes our sins, that we may in future be more cautious.
Whether then he applies remedies to our sins, or anticipates us before
we sin, he thus exercises us in the conflict with sin, referred to by
the Apostle. With this honor indeed the Son of God favors us, that he by
no means regards what we suffer for his Gospel as a punishment for sin.
It behooves us still to acknowledge what we hear from the Apostle in
this place, that we so plead and defend the cause of Christ against the
ungodly, that at the same time we are carrying on war with sin, our
intestine enemy. Thus God’s grace towards us is twofold — the remedies
he applies to heal our vices, he employs for the purpose of defending
his gospel.  <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244)

<span id="xviii.ii-p18"></span>But let us bear in mind whom he is here
addressing, even those who had joyfully suffered the loss of their goods
and had endured many reproaches; and yet he charges them with sloth,
because they were fainting half way in the contest, and were not going
on strenuously to the end. There is therefore no reason for us to ask a
discharge from the Lord, whatever service we may have performed; for
Christ will have no discharged soldiers, but those who have conquered
death itself.

<span id="xviii.ii-p19"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p20"></span>**5.** *And ye have forgotten,* *etc.* I
read the words as a question; for he asks, whether they had forgotten,
intimating that it was not yet time to forget. But he enters here on the
doctrine, that it is useful and needful for us to be disciplined by the
cross; and he refers to the testimony of Solomon, which includes two
parts; the first is, that we are not to reject the Lord’s correction;
and in the second the reason is given, because the Lord loves those whom
he chastises.  <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) But as Solomon
thus begins, my “Son”, the Apostle reminds us that we ought to be
allured by so sweet and kind a word, as that this exhortation should
wholly penetrate into our hearts.  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246)

<span id="xviii.ii-p25"></span>Now Solomon’s argument is this: — If the
scourges of God testify his love towards us, it is a shame that they
should be regarded with dislike or hatred. For they who bear not to be
chastised by God for their own salvation, yea, who reject a proof of his
paternal kindness, must be extremely ungrateful.

<span id="xviii.ii-p26"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p27"></span>**6.** *For whom the Lord loveth,* *etc.*
This seems not to be a well­founded reason; for God visits the elect as
well as the reprobate indiscriminately, and his scourges manifest his
wrath oftener than his love; and so the Scripture speaks, and experience
confirms. But yet it is no wonder that when the godly are addressed, the
effect of chastisements which they feel, is alone referred to. For
however severe and angry a judge God may show himself towards the
reprobate, whenever he punishes them; yet he has no other end in view as
to the elect, but to promote their salvation; it is a demonstration of
his paternal love. Besides, the reprobate, as they know not that they
are governed by God’s hand, for the most part think that afflictions
come by chance. As when a perverse youth, leaving his father’s house,
wanders far away and becomes exhausted with hunger, cold, and other
evils, he indeed suffers a just punishment for his folly, and learns by
his sufferings the benefit of being obedient and submissive to his
father, but yet he does not acknowledge this as a paternal chastisement;
so is the case with the ungodly, who having in a manner removed
themselves from God and his family, do not understand that God’s hand
reaches to them.

<span id="xviii.ii-p28"></span>Let us then remember that the taste of
God’s love towards us cannot be had by us under chastisements, except we
be fully persuaded that they are fatherly scourges by which he chastises
us for our sins. No such thing can occur to the minds of the reprobate,
for they are like fugitives. It may also be added, that judgment must
begin at God’s house; though, then, he may strike aliens and domestics
alike, he yet so puts forth his hand as to the latter as to show that
they are the objects of his peculiar care. But the previous one is the
true solution, even that every one who knows and is persuaded that he is
chastised by God, must immediately be led to this thought, that he is
chastised because he is loved by God. For when the faithful see that God
interposes in their punishment, they perceive a sure pledge of his love,
for unless he loved them he would not be solicitous about their
salvation. Hence the Apostle concludes that God is offered as a Father
to all who endure correction. For they who kick like restive horses, or
obstinately resist, do not belong to this class of men. In a word, then,
he teaches us that God’s corrections are then only paternal, when we
obediently submit to him.  <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247)

<span id="xviii.ii-p30"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p31"></span>**7.** *For what son is he,* *etc.* He
reasons from the common practice of men, that it is by no means right or
meet that God’s children should be exempt from the discipline of the
cross; for if no one is to be found among us, at least no prudent man
and of a sound judgment, who does not correct his children — for without
discipline they cannot be led to a right conduct — how much less will
God neglect so necessary a remedy, who is the best and the wisest
Father?

<span id="xviii.ii-p32"></span>If any one raises an objection, and says
that corrections of this kind cease among men as soon as children arrive
at manhood: to this I answer, that as long as we live we are with regard
to God no more than children, and that this is the reason why the rod
should ever be applied to our backs. Hence the Apostle justly infers,
that all who seek exemption from the cross do as it were withdraw
themselves from the number of his children.

<span id="xviii.ii-p33"></span>It hence follows that the benefit of
adoption is not valued by us as it ought to be, and that the grace of
God is wholly rejected when we seek to withdraw ourselves from his
scourges; and this is what all they do who bear not their afflictions
with patience. But why does he call those who refuse correction
*bastards* rather than aliens? Even because he was addressing those who
were members of the Church, and were on this account the children of
God. He therefore intimates that the profession of Christ would be false
and deceitful if they withdrew themselves from the discipline of the
Father, and that they would thus become bastards, and be no more
children.  <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248)

<span id="xviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 12:9-11

<span id="xviii.iii-p2"></span>**9.** Furthermore we have had fathers of
our flesh which corrected *us*, and we gave *them* reverence: shall we
not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live?

<span id="xviii.iii-p3"></span>**9.** Quum carnis nostrae patres
habueerimus castigatores et reveriti simus illos, annon multo magic
sujjiciemur patri spirituum et vivemus?

<span id="xviii.iii-p4"></span>**10.** For they verily for a few days
chastened *us* after their own pleasure; but he for *our* profit, that
*we* might be partakers of his holiness.

<span id="xviii.iii-p5"></span>**10.** Et illi quidem ad paucos dies pro
suo arbitratu nos castigarunt; hic vero ad utilitatem, ut nobis
impertiat sanctimoniam suam.

<span id="xviii.iii-p6"></span>**11.** Now no chastening for the present
seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth
the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised
thereby.

<span id="xviii.iii-p7"></span>**11.** Porro omnis castigation in
praesens non videtur gaudii esse sed tristitiae; in posterum tamen
fructum pacatum justitiae affert exercitatis.

<span id="xviii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iii-p9"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p10"></span>**9.** *Furthermore, we have had fathers
of our flesh,* *etc.* This comparison has several parts: the first is,
that if we showed so much reverence to the fathers from whom we have
descended according to the flesh, as to submit to their discipline, much
more honor is due to God who is our spiritual Father; another is, that
the discipline which fathers use as to their children is only useful for
the present life, but that God looks farther, having in view to prepare
us for an eternal life; and the third is, that men chastise their
children as it seems good to them, but that God regulates his discipline
in the best manner, and with perfect wisdom, so that there is nothing in
it but what is duly ordered. He then, in the first place, makes this
difference between God and men, that they are the fathers of the flesh,
but he of the spirit; and on this difference he enlarges by comparing
the flesh with the spirit.

<span id="xviii.iii-p11"></span>But it may be asked, Is not God the
Father also of our flesh? For it is not without reason that Job mentions
the creation of men as one of the chief miracles of God: hence on this
account also he is justly entitled to the name of Father. Were we to say
that he is called the Father of spirits, because he alone creates and
regenerates our souls without the aid of man, it might be said again
that Paul glories in being the spiritual father of those whom he had
begotten in Christ by the Gospel. To these things I reply, that God is
the Father of the body as well as of the soul, and, properly speaking,
he is indeed the only true Father; and that this name is only as it were
by way of concession applied to men, both in regard of the body and of
the soul. As, however, in creating souls, he does use the
instrumentality of men, and as he renews them in a wonderful manner by
the power of the Spirit, he is peculiarly called, by way of eminence,
the Father of spirits.  <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249)

<span id="xviii.iii-p13"></span>When he says, *and we gave them
reverence,* he refers to a feeling implanted in us by nature, so that we
honor parents even when they treat us harshly. By saying, *in subjection
to the Father of spirits,* he intimates that it is but just to concede
to God the authority he has over us by the right of a Father. By saying,
*and live,* he points out the cause or the end, for the conjunction
“and” is to be rendered *that,* — “that we may live.” Now we are
reminded by this word *live,* that there is nothing more ruinous to us
than to refuse to surrender ourselves in obedience to God.

<span id="xviii.iii-p14"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p15"></span>**10.** *For they verily for a few
days,* *etc.* The second amplification of the subject, as I have said,
is that God’s chastisements are appointed to subdue and mortify our
flesh, so that we may be renewed for a celestial life. It hence appears
that the fruit or benefit is to be perpetual; but such a benefit cannot
be expected from men, since their discipline refers to civil life, and
therefore properly belongs to the present world. It hence follows that
these chastisements bring far greater benefit, as the spiritual holiness
conferred by God far exceeds the advantages which belong to the body.

<span id="xviii.iii-p16"></span>Were any one to object and say, that it
is the duty of parents to instruct their children in the fear and
worship of God, and that therefore their discipline seems not to be
confined to so short a time; to this the answer is, that this is indeed
true, but the Apostle speaks here of domestic life, as we are wont
commonly to speak of civil government; for though it belongs to
magistrates to defend religion, yet we say that their office is confined
to the limits of this life, for otherwise the civil and earthly
government cannot be distinguished from the spiritual kingdom of Christ.

<span id="xviii.iii-p17"></span>Moreover when God’s *chastisements* are
said to be profitable to make men *partners of his holiness,* this is
not to be so taken as though they made us really holy, but that they are
helps to sanctify us, for by them the Lord exercises us in the work of
mortifying the flesh.

<span id="xviii.iii-p18"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p19"></span>**11.** *Now no chastening,* *etc.* This
he adds, lest we should measure God’s chastisements by our present
feelings; for he shows that we are like children who dread the rod and
shun it as much as they can, for owing to their age they cannot yet
judge how useful it may be to them. The object, then, of this admonition
is, that chastisements cannot be estimated aright if judged according to
what the flesh feels under them, and that therefore we must fix our eyes
on the end: we shall thus receive the *peaceable fruit of
righteousness.* And by the *fruit of righteousness* he means the fear of
the Lord and a godly and holy life, of which the cross is the teacher.
He calls it *peaceable,* because in adversities we are alarmed and
disquieted, being tempted by impatience, which is always noisy and
restless; but being chastened, we acknowledge with a resigned mind how
profitable did that become to us which before seemed bitter and
grievous.  <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250)

<span id="xviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 12:12-17

<span id="xviii.iv-p2"></span>**12.** Wherefore lift up the hands which
hang down, and the feeble knees;

<span id="xviii.iv-p3"></span>**12.** Quare manus remissas et genua
soluta surrigite;

<span id="xviii.iv-p4"></span>**13.** And make straight paths for your
feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way; but let it
rather be healed.

<span id="xviii.iv-p5"></span>**13.** Et rectasfacite vias pedibus
vestris, ne claudicatio aberret, sed magis sanetur.

<span id="xviii.iv-p6"></span>**14.** Follow peace with all *men*, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord:

<span id="xviii.iv-p7"></span>**14.** Pacem sectamini cum omnibus et
sanctimonium, sine qua nemo videbit Dominum:

<span id="xviii.iv-p8"></span>**15.** Looking diligently lest any man
fail of the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up
trouble *you*, and thereby many be defiled;

<span id="xviii.iv-p9"></span>**15.** Curam agentes ne quis deficiat a
grtia Dei, no quae radix amaritudinis sursum pullulans obturbet et per
eam inquinentur multi;

<span id="xviii.iv-p10"></span>**16.** Lest there *be* any fornicator,
or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his
birthright.

<span id="xviii.iv-p11"></span>**16.** Ne quis scortator vel profanus,
ut Esau, quo pro uno edulio vendidit primogenituram suam.

<span id="xviii.iv-p12"></span>**17.** For ye know how that afterward,
when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected: for he found
no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears.

<span id="xviii.iv-p13"></span>**17.** Nostis enim quod quum postea
vellet haeriditariam obtinere benedictionem, reprobatus sit, poenitentae
enim locum non invenit, etiamsi cum lachrymis quaesiisset eam.

<span id="xviii.iv-p14"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iv-p15"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p16"></span>**12.** *Wherefore, lift up,* *etc.*
After having taught us that God regards our salvation when he chastises
us, he then exhorts us to exert ourselves vigorously; for nothing will
more weaken us and more fully discourage us than through the influence
of a false notion to have no taste of God’s grace in adversities. There
is, therefore, nothing more efficacious to raise us up than the
intimation that God is present with us, even when he afflicts us, and is
solicitous about our welfare. But in these words he not only exhorts us
to bear afflictions with courage, but also reminds us that there is no
reason for us to be supine and slothful in performing our duties; for we
find more than we ought by experience how much the fear of the cross
prevents us to serve God as it behooves us. Many would be willing to
profess their faith, but as they fear persecution, hands and feet are
wanting to that pious feeling of the mind. Many would be ready to
contend for God’s glory, to defend what is good and just in private and
in public, and to do their duties to God and their brethren; but as
danger arises from the hatred of the wicked, as they see that troubles,
and those many, are prepared for them, they rest idly with their hands
as it were folded.

<span id="xviii.iv-p17"></span>Were then this extreme fear of the cross
removed, and were we prepared for endurance, there would be nothing in
us not fitted and adapted for the work of doing God’s will. This, then,
is what the Apostle means here, “You have your hands,” he says, “hanging
down and your knees feeble, because ye know not what real consolation
there is in adversity; hence ye are slow to do your duty: but now as I
have shown how useful to you is the discipline of the cross, this
doctrine ought to put new vigor in all your members, so that you may be
ready and prompt, both with your hands and feet, to follow the call of
God.” Moreover, he seems to allude to a passage in Isaiah, (<span
id="xviii.iv-p17.1"></span>[Isa
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003)<span
id="xviii.iv-p17.1"></span>;) and there the Prophet commands godly
teachers to strengthen trembling knees and weak hands by giving them the
hope of favor; but the Apostle bids all the faithful to do this; for
since this is the benefit of the consolation which God offers to us,
then as it is the office of a teacher to strengthen the whole Church, so
every one ought, by applying especially the doctrine to his own case, to
strengthen and animate himself.  <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251)

<span id="xviii.iv-p21"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p22"></span>**13.** *And make straight paths,* *etc.*
He has been hitherto teaching us to lean on God’s consolations, so that
we may be bold and strenuous in doing what is right, as his help is our
only support; he now adds to this another thing, even that we ought to
walk prudently and to keep to a straight course; for indiscreet ardor is
no less an evil than inactivity and softness. At the same time this
straightness of the way which he recommends, is preserved when a man’s
mind is superior to every fear, and regards only what God approves; for
fear is ever very ingenious in finding out byways. As then we seek
circuitous courses, when entangled by sinful fear; so on the other hand
every one who has prepared himself to endure evils, goes on in a
straight way wheresoever the Lord calls him, and turns not either to the
right hand or to the left. In short, he prescribes to us this rule for
our conduct, — that we are to guide our steps according to God’s will,
so that neither fear nor the allurements of the world, nor any other
things, may draw us away from it.  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252)

<span id="xviii.iv-p24"></span>Hence be adds, *Lest that which is lame
be turned out of the way,* or, lest halting should go astray; that is,
lest by halting ye should at length depart far from the way. He calls it
halting, when men’s minds fluctuate, and they devote not themselves
sincerely to God. So spoke Elijah to the double­minded who blended their
own superstitions with God’s worship, “How long halt ye between two
opinions?” (<span id="xviii.iv-p24.1"></span>[1Ki
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021)<span
id="xviii.iv-p24.1"></span>.) And it is a befitting way of speaking, for
it is a worse thing to go astray than to halt. Nor they who begin to
halt do not immediately turn from the right way, but by degrees depart
from it more and more, until having been led into a diverse path so they
remain entangled in the midst of Satan’s labyrinth. Hence the apostle
warns us to strive for the removal of this halting in due time; for if
we give way to it, it will at length turn us far away from God.

<span id="xviii.iv-p25"></span>The words may indeed be rendered, “Lest
halting should grow worse,” or turn aside; but the meaning would remain
the same; for what the Apostle intimates is, that those who keep not a
straight course, but gradually though carelessly turn here and there,
become eventually wholly alienated from God.  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253)

<span id="xviii.iv-p27"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p28"></span>**14.** *Follow peace,* *etc.* Men are so
born that they all seem to shun peace; for all study their own interest,
seek their own ways, and care not to accommodate themselves to the ways
of others. Unless then we strenuously labor to follow peace, we shall
never retain it; for many things will happen daily affording occasion
for discords. This is the reason why the Apostle bids us to *follow*
peace, as though he had said, that it ought not only to be cultivated as
far as it may be convenient to us, but that we ought to strive with all
care to keep it among us. And this cannot be done unless we forget many
offenses and exercise mutual forbearance.  <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254)

<span id="xviii.iv-p31"></span>As however peace cannot be maintained
with the ungodly except on the condition of approving of their vices and
wickedness, the Apostle immediately adds, that *holiness* is to be
followed together with peace; as though he commended peace to us with
this exception, that the friendship of the wicked is not to be allowed
to defile or pollute us; for holiness has an especial regard to God.
Though then the whole world were roused to a blazing war, yet holiness
is not to be forsaken, for it is the bond of our union with God. In
short, let us quietly cherish concord with men, but only, according to
the proverb, as far as conscience allows.

<span id="xviii.iv-p32"></span>He declares, that without holiness *no
man shall see the Lord;* for with no other eyes shall we see God than
those which have been renewed after his image.

<span id="xviii.iv-p33"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p34"></span>**15.** *Looking diligently,* or, *taking
care,* or, *attentively providing, etc.*  <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) By these words he intimates that it is
easy to fall away from the grace of God; for it is not without reason
that attention is required, because as soon as Satan sees us secure or
remiss, he instantly circumvents us. We have, in short, need of striving
and vigilance, if we would persevere in the grace of God.

<span id="xviii.iv-p36"></span>Moreover, under the word *grace,* he
includes our whole vocation. If any one hence infers that the grace of
God is not efficacious, except we of our own selves cooperate with it,
the argument is frivolous. We know how great is the slothfulness of our
flesh; it therefore wants continual incentives; but when the Lord
stimulates us by warning and exhortation, he at the same time moves and
stirs up our hearts, that his exhortations may not be in vain, or pass
away without effect. Then from precepts and exhortations we are not to
infer what man can do of himself, or what is the power of freewill; for
doubtless the attention or diligence which the Apostle requires here is
the gift of God.

<span id="xviii.iv-p37"></span>*Lest any root,* *etc.* I doubt not but
that he refers to a passage written by Moses in <span
id="xviii.iv-p37.1"></span>[De
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018)<span
id="xviii.iv-p37.1"></span>; for after having promulgated the Law, Moses
exhorted the people to beware, lest any root germinating should bear
gall and wormwood among them. He afterwards explained what he meant,
that is, lest any one, felicitating himself in sin, and like the drunken
who are wont to excite thirst, stimulating sinful desires, should bring
on a contempt of God through the alluring of hope of impunity. The same
is what the Apostle speaks of now; for he foretells what will take
place, that is, if we suffer such a root to grow, it will corrupt and
defile many; he not only bids every one to irradiate such a pest from
their hearts, but he also forbids them to allow it to grow among them.
It cannot be indeed but that these roots will ever be found in the
Church, for hypocrites and the ungodly are always mixed with the good;
but when they spring up they ought to be cut down, lest by growing they
should choke the good seed.

<span id="xviii.iv-p38"></span>He mentions *bitterness* for what Moses
calls gall and wormwood; but both meant to express a root that is
poisonous and deadly. Since then it is so fatal an evil, with more
earnest effort it behooves us to check it, lest it should rise and creep
farther.  <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256)

<span id="xviii.iv-p40"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p41"></span>**16.** *Lest there be any fornicator or
profane person,* *etc.* As he had before exhorted them to holiness, so
now, that he might reclaim them from defilements opposed to it, he
mentions a particular kind of defilement, and says, “Lest there be any
fornicator.” But he immediately comes to what is general, and adds, “or
a profane person;” for it is the term that is strictly contrary to
holiness. The Lord calls us for this end, that he may make us holy unto
obedience: this is done when we renounce the world; but any one who so
delights in his own filth that he continually rolls in it, profanes
himself. We may at the same time regard the profane as meaning generally
all those who do not value God’s grace so much as to seek it and despise
the world. But as men become profane in various ways, the more earnest
we ought to strive lest an opening be left for Satan to defile us with
his corruptions. And as there is no true religion without holiness, we
ought to make progress continually in the fear of God, in the mortifying
of the flesh, and in the whole practice of piety; for as we are profane
until we separate from the world so if we roll again in its filth we
renounce holiness.

<span id="xviii.iv-p42"></span>*As Esau,* *etc.* This example may be
viewed as an exposition of the word *profane*; for when Esau set more
value on one meal than on his birthright, he lost his blessing. Profane
then are all they in whom the love of the world so reigns and prevails
that they forget heaven: as is the case with those who are led away by
ambition, or become fond of money or of wealth, or give themselves up to
gluttony, or become entangled in any other pleasures; they allow in
their thoughts and cares no place, or it may be the last place, to the
spiritual kingdom of Christ.

<span id="xviii.iv-p43"></span>Most appropriate then is this example;
for when the Lord designs to set forth the power of that love which he
has for his people, he calls all those whom he has called to the hope of
eternal life his firstborn. Invaluable indeed is this honor with which
he favors us; and all the wealth, all the conveniences, the honors and
the pleasures of the world, and everything commonly deemed necessary for
happiness, when compared with this honor, are of no more value than a
morsel of meat. That we indeed set a high value on things which are
nearly worth nothing, arises from this, — that depraved lust dazzles our
eyes and thus blinds us. If therefore we would hold a place in God’s
sanctuary, we must learn to despise morsels of meat of this kind, by
which Satan is wont to catch the reprobate.  <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257)

<span id="xviii.iv-p45"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p46"></span>**17.** *When he would have inherited the
blessing,* *etc.* He at first regarded as a sport the act by which he
had sold his birthright, as though it was a child’s play; but at length,
when too late, he found what a loss he had incurred, when the blessing
transferred by his father to Jacob was refused to him. Thus they who are
led away by the allurements of this world alienate themselves from God,
and sell their own salvation that they may feed on the morsels of this
world, without thinking that they lose anything, nay, they flatter and
applaud themselves, as though they were extremely happy. When too late
their eyes are opened, so that being warned by the sight of their own
wickedness, they become sensible of the loss of which they made no
account.

<span id="xviii.iv-p47"></span>While Esau was hungry, he cared for
nothing but how he might have his stomach well filled; when full he
laughed at his brother, and judged him a fool for having voluntarily
deprived himself of a meal. Nay, such is also the stupidity of the
ungodly, as long as they burn with depraved lusts or intemperately
plunge themselves into sinful pleasures; after a time they understand
how fatal to them are all the things which they so eagerly desired. The
word “rejected” means that he was repulsed, or denied his request.

<span id="xviii.iv-p48"></span>*For he found no place of repentance,*
*etc.*; that is, he profited nothing, he gained nothing by his late
repentance, though he sought with tears the blessing which by his own
fault he had lost.  <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258)

<span id="xviii.iv-p53"></span>Now as he denounces the same danger on
all the despisers of God’s grace, it may be asked, whether no hope of
pardon remains, when God’s grace has been treated with contempt and his
kingdom less esteemed than the world? To this I answer, that pardon is
not expressly denied to such, but that they are warned to take heed,
lest the same thing should happen to them also. And doubtless we may see
daily many examples of God’s severity, which prove that he takes
vengeance on the mockings and scoffs of profane men: for when they
promise themselves tomorrow, he often suddenly takes them away by death
in a manner new and unexpected; when they deem fabulous what they hear
of God’s judgment, he so pursues them that they are forced to
acknowledge him as their judge; when they have consciences wholly dead,
they afterwards feel dreadful agonies as a punishment for their
stupidity. But though this happens not to all, yet as there is this
danger, the Apostle justly warns all to beware.

<span id="xviii.iv-p54"></span>Another question also arises, Whether the
sinner, endued with repentance, gains nothing by it? For the Apostle
seems to imply this when he tells us that Esau’s repentance availed him
nothing. My reply is, that repentance here is not to be taken for
sincere conversion to God; but it was only that terror with which the
Lord smites the ungodly, after they have long indulged themselves in
their iniquity. Nor is it a wonder that this terror should be said to be
useless and unavailing, for they do not in the meantime repent nor hate
their own vices, but are only tormented by a sense of their own
punishment. The same thing is to be said of *tears;* whenever a sinner
sighs on account of his sins, the Lord is ready to pardon him, nor is
God’s mercy ever sought in vain, for to him who knocks it shall be
opened, (<span id="xviii.iv-p54.1"></span>[Mt
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#008)<span id="xviii.iv-p54.1"></span>;)
but as the tears of Esau were those of a man past hope, they were not
shed on account of having offended God; so the ungodly, however they may
deplore their lot, complain and howl, do not yet knock at God’s door for
mercy, for this cannot be done but by faith. And the more grievously
conscience torments them, the more they war against God and rage against
him. They might indeed desire that an access should be given them to
God; but as they expect nothing but his wrath, they shun his presence.
Thus we often see that those who often say, as in a jest, that
repentance is sufficiently in time when they are drawing towards their
end, do then cry bitterly, amidst dreadful agonies, that the season of
obtaining repentance is past; for that they are doomed to destruction
because they did not seek God until it was too late. Sometimes, indeed,
they break out into such words as these, “Oh! if — oh! if;” but
presently despair cuts short their prayers and chokes their voice, so
that they proceed no farther.

<span id="xviii.v"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 12:18-24

<span id="xviii.v-p2"></span>**18.** For ye are not come unto the mount
that might be touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto blackness,
and darkness, and tempest,

<span id="xviii.v-p3"></span>**18.** Non enim accessistis ad montem qui
tangatur vel ignem accensum ac turbinem et caliginem et procellam.

<span id="xviii.v-p4"></span>**19.** And the sound of a trumpet, and the
voice of words; which *voice* they that heard intreated that the word
should not be spoken to them any more:

<span id="xviii.v-p5"></span>**19.** Et tubae sonitum et vocem verborum,
quam qui audierant excusarunt, ne illis proponeretur sermo:

<span id="xviii.v-p6"></span>**20.** (For they could not endure that
which was commanded, And if so much as a beast touch the mountain, it
shall be stoned, or thrust through with a dart:

<span id="xviii.v-p7"></span>**20.** Non enim ferebant quod edicebatur,
Etiam si bestia tetigerit montem, lapidabitur aut jaculo configatur;

<span id="xviii.v-p8"></span>**21.** And so terrible was the sight,
*that* Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake:)

<span id="xviii.v-p9"></span>**21.** Ac sic terribile erat visum quod
apparuit, Moses dixit, Expavefactus sum et tremefactus:

<span id="xviii.v-p10"></span>**22.** But ye are come unto mount Sion,
and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable company of angels,

<span id="xviii.v-p11"></span>**22.** Sed accessistis ad Sion montem,
civitatem Dei viventis, Jerusalem coelestem,

<span id="xviii.v-p12"></span>**23.** To the general assembly and church
of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of
all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect,

<span id="xviii.v-p13"></span>**23.** Et ad conventum innumerabilium
Angelorum, et ecclesiam primogenitorum, qui scripti sunt in coelis, et
judicem omnium Deum, et spiritus justorum consecratorum,

<span id="xviii.v-p14"></span>**24.** And to Jesus the mediator of the
new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better
things than *that of* Abel.

<span id="xviii.v-p15"></span>**24.** Et Mediatorem Novi Testamenti
Iesum, et sanguinem aspersionis, meliora loquentem quam loquebatur
sanguis Abel.

<span id="xviii.v-p16"></span> 

<span id="xviii.v-p17"></span><span id="xviii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p18"></span>**18.** *For ye are not come,* *etc.* He
fights now with a new argument, for he proclaims the greatness of the
grace made known by the Gospel, that we may reverently receive it; and
secondly, he commends to us its benign characters that he might allure
us to love and desire it. He adds weight to these two things by a
comparison between the Law and the Gospel; for the higher the excellency
of Christ’s kingdom than the dispensation of Moses, and the more
glorious our calling than that of the ancient people, the more
disgraceful and the less excusable is our ingratitude, unless we embrace
in a becoming manner the great favor offered to us, and humbly adore the
majesty of Christ which is here made evident; and then, as God does not
present himself to us clothed in terrors as he did formerly to the Jews,
but lovingly and kindly invites us to himself, so the sin of ingratitude
will be thus doubled, except we willingly and in earnest respond to his
gracious invitation.  <span id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259)

<span id="xviii.v-p20"></span>Then let us first remember that the Gospel
is here compared with the Law; and secondly, that there are two parts in
this comparison, — that God’s glory displays itself more illustriously
in the Gospel than in the Law, — and that his invitation is now full of
love, but that formerly there was nothing but the greatest terrors.

<span id="xviii.v-p21"></span>*Unto the mount that might be touched,*
 <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) *etc.* This sentence is
variously expounded; but it seems to me that an earthly mountain is set
in opposition to the spiritual; and the words which follow show the same
thing, *that burned with fire, blackness, darkness, tempest,* etc.; for
these were signs which God manifested, that he might secure authority
and reverence to his Law.  <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) When
considered in themselves they were magnificent and truly celestial; but
when we come to the kingdom of Christ, the things which God exhibits to
us are far above all the heavens. It hence follows, that all the dignity
of the Law appears now earthly: thus mount Sinai might have been touched
by hands; but mount Sion cannot be known but by the spirit. All the
things recorded in the nineteenth chapter of <span
id="xviii.v-p23.5"></span>[Ex
19:1-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)<span
id="xviii.v-p23.5"></span> were visible things; but those which we have
in the kingdom of Christ are hid from the senses of the flesh.  <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262)

<span id="xviii.v-p25"></span>Should any one object and say, that the
meaning of all these things was spiritual, and that there are at this
day external exercises of religion by which we are carried up to heaven:
to this I answer, that the Apostle speaks comparatively; and no one can
doubt but that the Gospel, contrasted with the Law, excels in what is
spiritual, but the Law in earthly symbols.

<span id="xviii.v-p26"></span><span id="xviii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p27"></span>**19.** *They that heard entreated,*
*etc.* This is the second clause, in which he shows that the Law was
very different from the Gospel; for when it was promulgated there was
nothing but terrors on every side. For everything we read of in the
nineteenth chapter of <span id="xviii.v-p27.1"></span>[Ex
19:1-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)<span
id="xviii.v-p27.1"></span> was of this kind, and intended to show to the
people that God had ascended his tribunal and manifested himself as a
strict judge. If by chance an innocent beast approached, he commanded it
to be killed: how much heavier punishment awaited sinners who were
conscious of their guilt, nay, who knew themselves to be condemned to
eternal death by the Law? But the Gospel contains nothing but love,
provided it be received by faith. What remains to be said you may read
in the <span id="xviii.v-p27.2"></span>[2Co
3:1-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001)<span id="xviii.v-p27.2"></span>
of the Second Epistle to the Corinthians.

<span id="xviii.v-p28"></span>But by the words the people *entreated,*
etc., is not to be understood that they refused to hear God, but that
they prayed not to be constrained to hear God himself speaking; for by
the interposition of Moses their dread was somewhat mitigated.  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) Yet interpreters are at a loss to know
how it is that the Apostle ascribes these words to Moses, *I exceedingly
fear and quake;* for we read nowhere that they were expressed by Moses.
But the difficulty may be easily removed, if we consider that Moses
spoke thus in the name of the people, whose requests as their delegate
he brought to God. It was, then, the common complaint of the whole
people; but Moses is included, who was, as it were, the speaker for them
all.  <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264)

<span id="xviii.v-p31"></span><span id="xviii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p32"></span>**22.** *Unto mount Sion,* *etc.* He
alludes to those prophecies in which God had formerly promised that his
Gospel should thence go forth, as in <span
id="xviii.v-p32.1"></span>[Isa
2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001)<span id="xviii.v-p32.1"></span>,
and in other places. Then he contrasts mount Sion with mount Sinai; and
he further adds, *the heavenly Jerusalem,* and he expressly calls it
heavenly, that the Jews might not cleave to that which was earthly, and
which had flourished under the Law; for when they sought perversely to
continue under the slavish yoke of the Law, mount Sion was turned into
mount Sinai as Paul teaches us in the <span
id="xviii.v-p32.2"></span>[Ga
4:21-31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021)<span
id="xviii.v-p32.2"></span> of the Epistle to the Galatians. Then by the
heavenly Jerusalem he understood that which was to be built throughout
the whole world, even as the angel, mentioned by Zechariah, extended his
line from the east even to the west.

<span id="xviii.v-p33"></span>*To an innumerable company of angels,*
*etc.* He means that we are associated with angels, chosen into the
ranks of patriarchs, and placed in heaven among all the spirits of the
blessed, when Christ by the Gospel calls us to himself. But it is an
incalculable honor, conferred upon us by our heavenly Father, that he
should enroll us among angels and the holy fathers. The expression,
*myriads of angels,* in taken from the book of Daniel, though I have
followed Erasmus, and rendered it *innumerable company of angels.*
 <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265)

<span id="xviii.v-p35"></span><span id="xviii.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p36"></span>**23.** *The firstborn,* *etc.* He does
not call the children of God indiscriminately the firstborn, for the
Scripture calls many his children who are not of this number; but for
the sake of honor he adorns with this distinction the patriarchs and
other renowned saints of the ancient Church. He adds, which are written
in heaven, because God is said to have all the elect enrolled in his
book or secret catalogue, as Ezekiel speaks.  <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266)

<span id="xviii.v-p38"></span>*The judge of all,* *etc.* This seems to
have been said to inspire fear, as though he had said, that grace is in
such a way altered to us, that we ought still to consider that we have
to do with a judge, to whom an account must be given if we
presumptuously intrude into his sanctuary polluted and profane.

<span id="xviii.v-p39"></span>*The spirits of just men,* *etc.* He adds
this to intimate that we are joined to holy souls, which have put off
their bodies, and left behind them all the filth of this world; and
hence he says that they are consecrated or “made perfect”, for they are
no more subject to the infirmities of the flesh, having laid aside the
flesh itself. And hence we may with certainty conclude, that pious
souls, separated from their bodies, still live with God, for we could
not possibly be otherwise joined to them as companions.

<span id="xviii.v-p40"></span><span id="xviii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p41"></span>**24.** *And to Jesus the Mediator,*
*etc.* He adds this in the last place, because it is he alone through
whom the Father is reconciled to us, and who renders his face serene and
lovely to us, so that we may come to him without fear. At the same time
he shows how Christ becomes our Mediator, even through his own *blood,*
which after the Hebrew mode of speaking he calls the blood of
*sprinkling,* which means sprinkled blood; for as it was once for all
shed to make an atonement for us, so our souls must be now cleansed by
it through faith. At the same time the Apostle alludes to the ancient
rite of the Law, which has been before mentioned.

<span id="xviii.v-p42"></span>*That speaketh better things,* *etc.*
There is no reason why *better* may not be rendered adverbially in the
following manner, — “Christ’s blood cries more efficaciously, and is
better heard by God than the blood of Abel.” It is, however, preferable
to take the words literally: the blood of Christ is said to speak
*better things*, because it avails to obtain pardon for our sins. The
*blood of Abel* did not properly cry out; for it was his murder that
called for vengeance before God. But the blood of Christ cries out, and
the atonement made by it is heard daily.  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267)

<span id="xviii.vi"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 12:25-29

<span id="xviii.vi-p2"></span>**25.** See that ye refuse not him that
speaketh. For if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth,
much more *shall not* we *escape*, if we turn away from him that
*speaketh* from heaven:

<span id="xviii.vi-p3"></span>**25.** Videte ne asperenemini loquentem;
nam si illi, qui aspeernati sunt eum qui loquebatur in terra, non
effugerunt, multo magic nos si aversemur loquentem e coelis;

<span id="xviii.vi-p4"></span>**26.** Whose voice then shook the earth:
but now he hath promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth
only, but also heaven.

<span id="xviii.vi-p5"></span>**26.** Cujus vox tune terram concussit,
nunc autem denuntiavit, dicens, Adhuc semel ego moveo non solum terram,
sed etiam coelum.

<span id="xviii.vi-p6"></span>**27.** And this *word*, Yet once more,
signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things
that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain.

<span id="xviii.vi-p7"></span>**27.** Illud autem, Adhuc semel,
significat eurum quae concutiuntur translationem, ut maneant quae non
concutiuntur.

<span id="xviii.vi-p8"></span>**28.** Wherefore we receiving a kingdom
which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God
acceptably with reverence and godly fear:

<span id="xviii.vi-p9"></span>**28.** Quare regnum quod non concutitur
apprehendentes, habemus (*alias, habeumus*) gratiam: per quam colamus
Deum, placentes illi cum reverentia et religione:

<span id="xviii.vi-p10"></span>**29.** For our God *is* a consuming
fire.

<span id="xviii.vi-p11"></span>**29.** Deus enim noster ignis consumens
est.

<span id="xviii.vi-p12"></span> 

<span id="xviii.vi-p13"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p14"></span>**25.** *See that ye refuse not him that
speaketh,* *etc.* He uses the same verb as before, when he said that the
people entreated that God should not speak to them; but he means as I
think, another thing, even that we ought not to reject the word destined
for us. He further shows what he had in view in the last comparison,
even that the severest punishment awaits the despisers of the Gospel,
since the ancients under the Law did not despise it with impunity. And
he pursues the argument from the less to the greater, when he says, that
God or Moses spoke then on earth, but that the same God or Christ speaks
now from heaven. At the same time I prefer regarding God in both
instances as the speaker. And he is said to have spoken on earth,
because he spoke in a lower strain. Let us ever bear in mind that he
refers to the external ministration of the Law, which, as compared with
the gospel, partook of what was earthly, and did not lead men’s minds
above the heavens unto perfect wisdom; for though the Law contained in
it the same truth, yet as it was only a training school, perfection
could not belong to it.  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268)

<span id="xviii.vi-p18"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p19"></span>**26.** *Whose voice then shook the
earth,* *etc.* Though God shook the earth when he published his Law, yet
he shows that he now speaks more gloriously, for he shakes both earth
and heaven. He quotes on the subject the testimony of the Prophet
Haggai, though he gives not the words literally; but as the Prophet
foretells a future shaking of the earth and the heaven, the Apostle
borrows the idea in order to teach us that the voice of the Gospel not
only thunders through the earth, but also penetrates above the heavens.
But that the Prophet speaks of Christ’s kingdom, is beyond any dispute,
for it immediately follows in the same passage, “I will shake all
nations; and come shall the desire of all nations, and I will fill this
house with glory.” It is however certain that neither all nations have
been gathered into one body, except under the banner of Christ, nor has
there been any desire in which we ought to acquiesce but Christ alone,
nor was the temple of Solomon exceeded in glory until the magnificence
of Christ became known through the whole world. The Prophet then no
doubt refers to the time of Christ. But if at the commencement of
Christ’s kingdom, not only the lower parts of the world were shaken, but
his power also reached the heaven, the Apostle justly concludes that the
doctrine of the Gospel is sublimer than that of the Law, and ought to be
more distinctly heard by all creatures.  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269)

<span id="xviii.vi-p21"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p22"></span>**27.** *And this word, yet once more,*
*etc.* The words of the Prophet are these, “Yet a little while;” and he
means that the calamity of the people would not be perpetual, but that
the Lord would succor them. But the Apostle lays no stress on this
expression; he only infers from the shaking of the heaven and the earth
that the state of the world was to be changed at the coming of Christ;
for things created are subject to decay, but Christ’s kingdom is
eternal; then all creatures must needs be brought into a better state.
 <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270)

<span id="xviii.vi-p24"></span>He makes hence a transition to another
exhortation, that we are to lay hold on that kingdom which cannot be
shaken; for the Lord shakes us for this end, that he may really and
forever establish us in himself. At the same time I prefer a different
reading, which is given by the ancient Latin version, “Receiving a
kingdom, we have grace,” etc. When read affirmatively, the passage runs
best, — “We, in embracing the Gospel, have the gift of the Spirit of
Christ, that we may reverently and devoutly worship God.” If it be read
as an exhortation, “Let us have,” it is a strained and obscure mode of
speaking. The Apostle means in short, as I think, that provided we enter
by faith into Christ’s kingdom, we shall enjoy constant grace, which
will effectually retain us in the service of God; for as the kingdom of
Christ is above the world, so is the gift of regeneration.  <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271)

<span id="xviii.vi-p26"></span>By saying that God is to be served
*acceptably,* εὐαρέστως, *with reverence and fear,* he intimates that
though he requires us to serve with promptitude and delight, there is
yet no service approved by him except it be united with humility and due
reverence. Thus he condemns froward confidence of the flesh, as well as
the sloth which also proceeds from it.  <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272)

<span id="xviii.vi-p28"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p29"></span>**29.** *For our God,* *etc.* As he had
before kindly set before us the grace of God, so he now makes known his
severity; and he seems to have borrowed this sentence from the <span
id="xviii.vi-p29.1"></span>[De
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)<span id="xviii.vi-p29.1"></span>
of Deuteronomy. Thus we see that God omits nothing by which he may draw
us to himself; he begins indeed with love and kindness, so that we may
follow him the more willingly; but when by alluring he effects but
little, he terrifies us.

<span id="xviii.vi-p30"></span>And doubtless it is expedient that the
grace of God should never be promised to us without being accompanied
with threatening; for we are so extremely prone to indulge ourselves,
that without the application of these stimulants the milder doctrine
would prove ineffectual. Then the Lord, as he is propitious and merciful
to such as fear him unto a thousand generations; so he is a jealous God
and a just avenger, when despised, unto the third and the fourth
generation.  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc44017.htm#fr_241) <span
id="xviii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span> A cloud for a large multitude is a
classical metaphor, and not scriptural. A cloud of footmen, and a cloud
of birds, are used by Homer; and a cloud of footmen and horsemen, by
Livy. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc44017.htm#fr_242) <span
id="xviii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p17"></span> See Appendix P 2.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc44017.htm#fr_243) <span
id="xviii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p21"></span> See Appendix Q 2.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc44017.htm#fr_244) <span
id="xviii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p16"></span> “Striving against sin,” or contending or
fighting against sin, — the sin of apostasy, says Grotius, — the sin of
their persecutors, say Macknight and Stuart, sin being considered here
as standing for sinners, the abstract for the concrete. The Apostle
says, that they had not yet resisted — resisted what? This he seems to
explain by saying, “contending against sin.” It was then, the assault of
sin that they had not yet resisted unto blood; and that sin was
evidently apostasy, the sin plausibly presented to them, or ready to
encompass and entangle them, mentioned in <span
id="xviii.ii-p16.1"></span>[Heb
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001)<span id="xviii.ii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="xviii.ii-p17"></span>The phraseology here is similar to what
is in the preceding verse; a participle ends the sentence, and that
qualifies the foregoing verb — “that ye may not become wearied, being
faint in your souls.” Faintness or despondency in mind would inevitably
be accompanied with weariness. Faith or strength of mind is necessary to
prevent fatigue or weariness while engaged in contests and great trials;
and as a preventive of despondency, we are directed attentively to
consider how our savior bore the extreme trials which he had to endure.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc44017.htm#fr_245) <span
id="xviii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p21"></span> “Correction” is the best word for
παιδεία, as it stands for <span id="xviii.ii-p21.1"></span>מוסר and not
“chastening” or chastisement. “Despise” in Hebrew is to regard a thing
as trifling or with contempt, and so in Greek it means to regard a thing
as little; the meaning is, not stoical; and then the meaning of the next
clause is, be not depending. “Fret not,” or “be not faint” or
despairing, “when reproved” or “chastised.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc44017.htm#fr_246) <span
id="xviii.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p22"></span> Beza, Grotius, Macknight and Stuart,
agree with Calvin in reading the first words interrogatively — “And have
ye forgotten?” etc.

<span id="xviii.ii-p23"></span>Ribera, the Jesuit, in his comment on
this verse said, “The Apostle indirectly (<span
id="xviii.ii-p23.1"></span>tacite) reproves them, because they had no
recourse to Scripture in their afflictions; compare <span
id="xviii.ii-p23.2"></span>[Ro
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)<span
id="xviii.ii-p23.2"></span>.” Capellus, referring to this passage,
observed, “I wish the Jesuits were always to speak in this manner, but
Ribera ought to have remembered that Paul was addressing the flock
rather than the pastors, and that therefore, the Scriptures ought to be
read by laymen.”

<span id="xviii.ii-p24"></span>The clear intimation of the passage no
doubt is, that the Hebrews ought to have attended to the truths
contained in Scripture. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc44017.htm#fr_247) <span
id="xviii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p29"></span> See Appendix R 2.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc44017.htm#fr_248) <span
id="xviii.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p34"></span> There is in this verse the word “sons,”
to be understood after “all;” that is, “all the sons are partakers:” so
Macknight and Stuart. As “sons” conclude the verse, the word is omitted
here. Those who have only the name of Christians are called “bastards,”
or spurious or illegitimate children, because they are not born of God,
being only the children of the flesh. They are not Isaac’s but Ishmael,
whatever their professions may be, and though baptized and partakers of
all the outward privileges of the gospel. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc44017.htm#fr_249) <span
id="xviii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p12"></span> Here is an instance, among many others,
in which men’s ingenuity is allowed unnecessarily to involve things in
difficulties. The comparison here is founded on two palpable facts:
there are fathers of our flesh, i.e., the body, and they have for a
short time a duty to perform as such; but God, being the Father of our
Spirits, which are to continue forever, deals with us in a way
corresponding to our destiny. The question of instrumentality has
nothing to do with the subject. Nor can anything be fairly drawn from
this passage as to the useless question of the non-traduction of souls,
as some have thought; and it may be justly be called useless, as it is a
question beyond the range of human inquiry. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc44017.htm#fr_250) <span
id="xviii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p20"></span> See Appendix S 2.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc44017.htm#fr_251) <span
id="xviii.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p18"></span> The words are neither from the Hebrew
nor from the Septuagint, but the order is more according to the former
than the latter. The Hebrew is “Brace ye up the relaxed hands, and the
tottering knees invigorate;” and the Sept., “Be strong, ye relaxed hands
and paralyzed knees.” The literal rendering of this passage is,
“Therefore the enfeebled (or relaxed) hands and the paralyzed knees
restore; i.e., to their former vigor, so that you may contend with your
enemies and your trials and run your race.” They had before acted nobly
as it is stated in <span id="xviii.iv-p18.1"></span>[Heb
10:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032)<span
id="xviii.iv-p18.1"></span>; he now exhorts them to recover their former
vigor and strength. It is rendered by Macknight, “Bring to their right
position.” The verb ἀνορθόω literally means no doubt to make straight
again, and is so used in <span id="xviii.iv-p18.2"></span>[Lu
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#013)<span
id="xviii.iv-p18.2"></span>; but it has also the meaning of renewing or
restoring to a former state, or of rebuilding. See <span
id="xviii.iv-p18.3"></span>[Ac
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#016)<span
id="xviii.iv-p18.3"></span>. And in this sense Schleusner takes it in
this passage. It is used in the Sept. in the sense of establishing
confirming, making firm or strong. See <span
id="xviii.iv-p18.4"></span>[Jer
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#012)<span
id="xviii.iv-p18.4"></span>. Hence Stuart gives this version,—

<span id="xviii.iv-p19"></span>“Strengthen the weak hands and the feeble
knees.”

<span id="xviii.iv-p20"></span>But the idea of repairing, or restoring
or reinvigorating, gives the passage the most emphatic meaning. The
Apostle in this instance only borrows some of the words from Isaiah, and
accommodates them to his own purpose. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc44017.htm#fr_252) <span
id="xviii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p23"></span> Having spoken of strength, he now tells
them how to use that strength. Be strong, and take a right course; go
along the straight way of duty. See Appendix T 2. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc44017.htm#fr_253) <span
id="xviii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p26"></span> This interpretation is given by Grotius,
Macknight and Stuart; but Beza, Doddridge and Scott, take the view given
in our version regarding the lame or weak person as intended by τὸ
χωλὸν. So is the Vulgate, “that no one halting may go astray, but rather
be healed.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc44017.htm#fr_254) <span
id="xviii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p29"></span> It has been justly observed that διώκω
is to follow or pursue one fleeing away from us. It means not only to
seek peace but strive to maintain it. <span
id="xviii.iv-p29.1"></span>[Ps
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#014)<span
id="xviii.iv-p29.1"></span>, we have pursuing after seeking, “Seek peace
and pursue it,” i.e., strive earnestly to secure and retain it. <span
id="xviii.iv-p29.2"></span>[Ro
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018)<span
id="xviii.iv-p29.2"></span>, is an explanation.

<span id="xviii.iv-p30"></span>But this strenuous effort as to peace is
to be extended to holiness; not chastity, as Chrysostom and some other
fathers have imagined, but holiness in its widest sense, purity of heart
and life, universal holiness. The word ἁγιασμὸς is indeed taken in a
limited sense, and rendered “sanctification” <span
id="xviii.iv-p30.1"></span>[1Th
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#003)<span id="xviii.iv-p30.1"></span>,
and it may be so rendered here as it is in those places where it
evidently means holiness universally, <span
id="xviii.iv-p30.2"></span>[1Co
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span id="xviii.iv-p30.2"></span>;
<span id="xviii.iv-p30.3"></span>[2Th
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013)<span id="xviii.iv-p30.3"></span>,
<span id="xviii.iv-p30.4"></span>[1Pe
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002)<span id="xviii.iv-p30.4"></span>.
The article is put before it in order to show its connection with what
follows, “and the (or that) holiness, without which no one shall see the
Lord.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc44017.htm#fr_255) <span
id="xviii.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p35"></span> It means properly overseeing and is
rendered “taking the oversight,” in <span
id="xviii.iv-p35.1"></span>[1Pe
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#002)<span id="xviii.iv-p35.1"></span>,
where alone it occurs elsewhere. The word bishop comes from it. It is
rendered, “taking heed,” by Erasmus; “Diligently attending,” by Grotius;
“Taking care,” by Beza; “Looking to it,” by Doddridge; “carefully
observing,” by Macknight; and “Seeing to it.” By Stuart. Considering
what follows, “Taking heed” would be the best version. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc44017.htm#fr_256) <span
id="xviii.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p39"></span> See Appendix U 2.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc44017.htm#fr_257) <span
id="xviii.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p44"></span> It is said that “for one morsel of
meat,” literally, “for one eating,” or, “for one meal,” as rendered by
Doddridge, “he sold his birthright,” or according to Macknight, “he gave
away his birthrights.” In this reference the Apostle gives the substance
without regarding expressions, though he adopts those of the Septuagint
in two instances, — the verb, which means to give away, used in the
sense of selling, — and birthrights, or the rights of primogeniture. The
word in Hebrew means primogeniture, used evidently by metonymy for its
rights and privileges. Not only a double portion belonged to the
first-born, but also the paternal blessing, which included things
temporal and spiritual. The notion that the priesthood at that time and
from the beginning of the world belonged to the first-born, has nothing
to support it. Abel was a priest as well as Cain, and a better priest
too. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc44017.htm#fr_258) <span
id="xviii.iv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p49"></span> Though many such as Beza, Doddridge,
Stuart etc. regard this “repentance” as that of Isaac, yet the phrase
seems to favor the views of Calvin, “he found not the place of
repentance,” that is the admission of repentance; it was inadmissible,
there was no place found for it. The word τόπος has this meaning in
<span id="xviii.iv-p49.1"></span>[Heb
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007)<span id="xviii.iv-p49.1"></span>,
“there should be no place (or admission) have been sought for the
second.” The same sense is given to the word in <span
id="xviii.iv-p49.2"></span>[Sir
38:12](../../../bib/apo/sir038.htm#012)<span
id="xviii.iv-p49.2"></span>, “give place” (or admission) to the
physician — ἱατρῷ δὸς τόπον. We may give this rendering, “for he found
not room for repentance;” he seemed to repent of his sin and folly, but
his repentance availed nothing, for it could not be admitted; there was
in his case no repentance allowed, as the account given in Genesis
testifies.

<span id="xviii.iv-p50"></span>The difficulty about “it” in the
following clause is removed, when we consider that here, as in some
previous instances, the Apostle arranges his sentences according to the
law of parallelism; there are here four clauses; the first and last are
connected, and also the middle clauses, —

<span id="xviii.iv-p51"></span>“For ye know,  
That even afterwards wishing to inherit the blessing,  
He was rejected,  
For he found no room for repentance,  
Though with tears he sought it, (i.e., the blessing.)”

<span id="xviii.iv-p52"></span>Though Macknight gave the other
explanation of “repentance” yet he considered the blessing as the
antecedent to “it” in the last line. Though with the tears of repentance
he sought the blessing, yet he was rejected: the door to repentance was
as it were closed up, and it could not be opened — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc44017.htm#fr_259) <span
id="xviii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p19"></span> The connection of this part has been
viewed by some to be the following: — Having exhorted the Hebrews to
peace and holiness, and warned them against apostasy and sinful
indulgences, the Apostle now enforces his exhortations and warnings by
showing the superiority of the Gospel over the Law. This is the view of
Doddridge and Stuart. It appears that Scott connected this part with
<span id="xviii.v-p19.1"></span>[Heb
10:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#028)<span
id="xviii.v-p19.1"></span>, and that he considered that the object of
the apostle was to bring forward an instance, in addition to former
ones, of the superiority of the Gospel, in order to show that the
neglect of it would involve a greater guilt than that of the Law. And
this appears to have been the view of Calvin, which seems to be favored
by the concluding part of the chapter. The word γὰρ may be rendered
“moreover.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc44017.htm#fr_260) <span
id="xviii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p22"></span> It has been conjectured that μὴ has been
omitted before “touched;” for in that case the passage would more
exactly correspond with the account given in Exodus, for the people were
expressly forbidden to touch the mountain. An omission of this kind was
surely not impossible. The phrase as it is hardly admits of a
grammatical construction: it has been found necessary to give the sense
of an adjective to the participle. There would not be this necessity
were the words rendered “To a mount not to be touched and burning with
fire, and to,” etc. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc44017.htm#fr_261) <span
id="xviii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p23"></span> The words used here are not taken
literally from the Hebrew nor from the Sept. the four things mentioned
in this verse, and the two things mentioned in the following verse, are
found in the narrative in <span id="xviii.v-p23.1"></span>[Exodus
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#000)<span id="xviii.v-p23.1"></span> and
20; but not consecutively as here; nor are the same terms used.
“Blackness” γνόφῳ, should be “a dark or thick cloud,” <span
id="xviii.v-p23.2"></span>[Ex
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)<span id="xviii.v-p23.2"></span>.
“Tempest,” θυέλλη, is not mentioned in Exodus or in Deuteronomy; but it
includes evidently “the thunders and lightnings” mentioned twice at
least in Exodus, \[<span id="xviii.v-p23.4"></span>[Exod.
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016), [Exod.
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018)<span
id="xviii.v-p23.4"></span>\] though not once in Deuteronomy. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc44017.htm#fr_262) <span
id="xviii.v-p23.6"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p24"></span> “The Hebrews,” says Grotius, “came in the
body to a material mountain, but we in spirit to that which is
spiritual.”

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc44017.htm#fr_263) <span
id="xviii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p29"></span> The words at the end of verse 20, “or
thrust through with a dart,” are not deemed genuine, being not found in
the best MSS., and none of any authority containing them. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc44017.htm#fr_264) <span
id="xviii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p30"></span> It is supposed by some that the reference
here is to what is found in <span id="xviii.v-p30.1"></span>[Exod.
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017)<span id="xviii.v-p30.1"></span>.
It is said in the former verse that all the people in the camp trembled;
and it is concluded that Moses was at the time with them, for it is said
in the next verse that he brought them forth out of the camp. But the
passage that seems most evidently to intimate what is here said in the
<span id="xviii.v-p30.2"></span>[Ex
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#019)<span id="xviii.v-p30.2"></span>,
where we are told, that when the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder
and louder. “Moses spake” and that “God answered him by a voice.” Now we
are not told what he said, nor what the answer was which God gave. It is
however, natural to conclude, that under the circumstances mentioned,
Moses expressed his fears, and that God removed them. —*Ed*.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc44017.htm#fr_265) <span
id="xviii.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p34"></span> Calvin follows the Vulg. And connects
πανηγύρει with “angels.” It means a whole or a general assembly, and
occurs in the Sept., and stands for <span id="xviii.v-p34.1"></span>מועד
often rendered a solemn assembly: it was a solemnity observed by the
whole people. Both as to sense construction, it is better to adopt the
arrangement of our version. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc44017.htm#fr_266) <span
id="xviii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p37"></span> To keep this clause distinct from the
next but one, “the spirits of just men,” etc. has been difficult. The
distinction which Calvin seems to make as well as Doddridge, Scott and
Stuart, is this, — that those mentioned here, “the first-born,” were the
most eminent of the ancients; but that “the spirits of just men” include
the godly generally. The people of Israel were called “the first born,”
<span id="xviii.v-p37.1"></span>[Ex
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)<span id="xviii.v-p37.1"></span>,
because they were God’s chosen people. Ephraim is also called, “the
first born,” <span id="xviii.v-p37.2"></span>[Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009)<span id="xviii.v-p37.2"></span>,
because of the superiority granted to that tribe; and the Messiah is so
called, <span id="xviii.v-p37.3"></span>[Ps
89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027)<span id="xviii.v-p37.3"></span>,
on account of his eminence. The first born is one possessed of peculiar
privileges. The word here seems to designate the saints, believers,
Christians, as they are God’s chosen people and highly privileged. We
hence see the propriety of “the whole assembly,” or the whole number of
the faithful, composed of Jews or Gentiles. The Apostle says, “We are
part of this whole assembly,” and in order to point out his meaning more
distinctly he calls it “the Church.” The reference here seems to be the
saints on earth, and at the end of the verse to departed saints. And
they are said to be “made perfect,” because freed from guilt, sin, and
every pollution, having “washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb.” —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc44017.htm#fr_267) <span
id="xviii.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p43"></span> See Appendix X 2.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc44017.htm#fr_268) <span
id="xviii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p15"></span> By “him that speaketh,” is by some
understood Christ, but more properly God, as his is the leading subject
in the foregoing and the following verses. The words which follow are
brief; and the first clause is explained more fully in <span
id="xviii.vi-p15.1"></span>[Heb
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#028)<span
id="xviii.vi-p15.1"></span>, and the second in <span
id="xviii.vi-p15.2"></span>[Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="xviii.vi-p15.2"></span>.
God spake “on earth” by Moses, but “from heaven” by his son, who came
from heaven, ascended into heaven and sent his spirit down from heaven.
The comparison here is between speaking on earth and speaking from
heaven; but included in this, as previously explained in the Epistle,
are the agents employed. God in delivering the Law fixed on a place on
earth, and then as it were descended and employed an earthly agent, a
mere man as his mediator; but in delivering the gospel, he did not
descend from heaven, but employed a heavenly agent, his own son; thus
manifested the superiority of the Gospel over the law. And that God is
meant throughout this verse is evident from the following verse, “Whose
voice,” etc. The passage may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xviii.vi-p16"></span>“See that ye reject not him who speaketh;
for if they escaped not who rejected him when speaking on earth, how
much more shall not we, if we turn away from him when speaking from
heaven?”

<span id="xviii.vi-p17"></span>We have no single word to express
χρηματίζοντα — oraculizing, rendered by Doddridge, “giving forth
oracles;” by Macknight, “delivering an oracle;” and by Stuart,
“warning.” But the best word we can adopt here is “speaking.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc44017.htm#fr_269) <span
id="xviii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p20"></span> The quotation is literally neither from
Hebrew nor from the Sept., but is substantially the same. “The earth and
the heaven” may be deemed a phrase used to designate the whole state of
things, as they include the whole of the visible creation. The whole
Jewish polity, civil and religious, is generally supposed to be intended
here. But as the shaking of the nations is mentioned in <span
id="xviii.vi-p20.1"></span>[Hag. 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007)<span id="xviii.vi-p20.1"></span>,
Macknight thought that by “the earth” is meant heathen idolatry, and by
“heaven” the Jewish economy, so called because it was divinely
appointed. If this be allowed, then we see a reason for the change which
the Apostle has made in the words: the original is both in Hebrew and in
the Sept., “I shake (or will shake) the heaven and the earth;” but the
Apostle says: “I shake not only the earth, but the heaven also.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc44017.htm#fr_270) <span
id="xviii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p23"></span> See Appendix Y 2.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc44017.htm#fr_271) <span
id="xviii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p25"></span> See Appendix Z 2.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc44017.htm#fr_272) <span
id="xviii.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p27"></span> The Vulgate is, “with fear and
reverence;” Beza’s “with modesty and reverence and religious fear;”
Schleusner’s, “with reverence and devotion.” Stuart has adopted our
version. See Appendix A 3. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc44017.htm#fr_273) <span
id="xviii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p31"></span> The conjunction καὶ at the beginning of
this verse is commonly omitted by translators, but Macknight has
retained it, “For even our God,” etc. The intimation clearly is, that
under the Gospel no less than under the Law God is a consuming fire to
apostates; and apostasy or idolatry is the sin especially referred to in
<span id="xviii.vi-p31.1"></span>[De
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)<span id="xviii.vi-p31.1"></span>,
from which this passage is taken. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](cc44018)
