[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc44006)  [Next](cc44008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 44: Hebrews*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span><span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>[Hebrews
2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Therefore we ought to give the more
earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we
should let *them* slip.

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quamobrem opertet nos magis attendere
iis quae audimus, ne quando diffluamus.

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span>**2.** For if the word spoken by angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward;

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Si enim quo per angelos enunciatus
erat, sermo, firmus fuit, et omnis transgressio et inobedientia justam
acceptit repensionem mercedis;

<span id="viii.i-p6"></span>**3.** How shall we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and
was confirmed unto us by them that heard *him*;

<span id="viii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Quomodo nos effugiemus tanta neglecta
salute? quae quum initio coepisset enarrari per Dominum, ab iis qui
audierant, erga nos confirmata fuit;

<span id="viii.i-p8"></span>**4.** God also bearing *them* witness, both
with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy
Ghost, according to his own will?

<span id="viii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Simul attestante Deo signis et
prodigiis, et virtutibus variis, et distributionibus Spiritus Sancti
secundum ejus voluntatem.

<span id="viii.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="viii.i-p11"></span><span id="viii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p12"></span>**1.** *Therefore we ought,* *etc.* He now
declares what he had before in view, by comparing Christ with angels,
even to secure the highest authority to his doctrine. For if the Law
given through angels could not have been received with contempt, and if
its transgression was visited with severe punishment, what is to happen,
he asks, to the despisers of that gospel, which has the Son of God as
its author, and was confirmed by so many miracles? The import of the
whole is this, that the higher the dignity of Christ is than that of
angels, the more reverence is due to the Gospel than to the Law. Thus he
commends the doctrine by mentioning its author.

<span id="viii.i-p13"></span>But should it seem strange to any one, that
as the doctrine both of the Law and of the Gospel is from God, one
should be preferred to the other; inasmuch as by having the Law lowered
the majesty of God would be degraded; the evident answer would be this,
— that he ought indeed always to be heard with equal attention whenever
he may speak, and yet that the fuller he reveals himself to us, it is
but right that our reverence and attention to obedience should increase
in proportion to the extent of his revelations; not that God is in
himself less at one time than at another; but his greatness is not at
all times equally made known to us.

<span id="viii.i-p14"></span>Here also another question arises. Was not
the Law also given by Christ? If so, the argument of the Apostle seems
not to be well grounded. To this I reply, that in this comparison regard
is had to a veiled revelation on one side, and to that which is manifest
on the other. Now, as Christ in bringing the Law showed himself but
obscurely or darkly, and as it were under coverings, it is nothing
strange that the Law should be said to have been brought by angels
without any mention being made of his name; for in that transaction he
never appeared openly; but in the promulgation of the Gospel his glory
was so conspicuous, that he may justly be deemed its author.

<span id="viii.i-p15"></span>*Lest at any time we should let them slip,*
or, “lest we should at any time flow abroad,” or, if you prefer, “let
dip,” though in reality there is not much difference. The true sense is
to be gathered from the contrast; for to give heed, or to attend and to
let slip, are opposites; the first means to hold a thing, and the other
to let off like a sieve, or a perforated vessel, whatever may be poured
into it. I do not indeed approve of the opinion of those who take it in
the sense of dying, according to what we find in <span
id="viii.i-p15.1"></span>[2Sa
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#014)<span id="viii.i-p15.1"></span>,
“We all die and slide away like water.” On the contrary, we ought, as I
have said, to regard the contrast between attention and flowing out; an
attentive mind is like a vessel capable of holding water; but that which
is roving and indolent is like a vessel with holes.  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28)

<span id="viii.i-p17"></span><span id="viii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p18"></span>**2.** *Steadfast,* or “firm,” or *sure*,
*etc.*; that is, it was the word of authority, for God required it to be
believed; and that it was authoritative, was made more evident by its
sanctions; for no one despised the law with impunity. Then firmness
means authority; and what is added respecting punishment ought to be
understood as explanatory; for it is evident the doctrine of which God
shows himself to be the avenger, is by no means unprofitable or
unimportant.

<span id="viii.i-p19"></span><span id="viii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p20"></span>**3.** *If we neglect so great a
salvation,* *etc.* Not only the rejection of the Gospel, but also its
neglect, deserves the heaviest punishment, and that on account of the
greatness of the grace which it offers; hence he says, *so great a
salvation.* God would indeed leave his gifts valued by us according to
their worth. Then the more precious they are, the baser is our
ingratitude when we do not value them. In a word, in proportion to the
greatness of Christ will be the severity of God’s vengeance on all the
despisers of his Gospel.  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29)

<span id="viii.i-p22"></span>And observe that the word salvation is
transferred here metonymically to the doctrine of salvation; for as the
Lord would not have men otherwise saved than by the Gospel, so when that
is neglected the whole salvation of God is rejected; for it is God’s
power unto salvation to those who believe. (<span
id="viii.i-p22.1"></span>[Ro 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i-p22.1"></span>.) Hence he who seeks salvation in any other
way, seeks to attain it by another power than that of God; which is an
evidence of extreme madness. But this encomium is not only a
commendation of the Gospel, but is also a wonderful support to our
faith; for it is a testimony that the word is by no means unprofitable,
but that a sure salvation is conveyed by it.  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30)

<span id="viii.i-p24"></span>*Which at first began,* *etc.* Here he sets
the Son of God, the first herald of the Gospel, in opposition to angels,
and also anticipates what was necessary to remove a doubt which might
have crept into the minds of many; for they had not been taught by the
mouth of Christ himself, whom the greatest part had never seen. If then
they regarded only the man by whose ministry they had been led to the
faith, they might have made less of what they had learnt from him; hence
the Apostle reminded them, that the doctrine which had been delivered
them by others, yet proceeded from Christ; for he says that those who
had faithfully declared what had been committed to them by Christ, had
been his disciples. He therefore uses the word, *was confirmed,* as
though he had said, that it was not a random report, without any author,
or from witnesses of doubtful credit, but a report which was confirmed
by men of weight and authority.

<span id="viii.i-p25"></span>Moreover, this passage indicates that this
epistle was not written by Paul; for he did not usually speak so humbly
of himself, as to confess that he was one of the Apostles’ disciples,
nor did he thus speak from ambition, but because wicked men under a
pretense of this kind attempted to detract from the authority of his
doctrine. It then appears evident that it was not Paul who wrote that he
had the Gospel by hearing and not by revelation.  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31)

<span id="viii.i-p27"></span><span id="viii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p28"></span>**4.** *God also bearing them witness,*
*etc.* In addition to the fact, that the Apostles had what they preached
from the Son of God, the Lord also proved his approbation of their
preaching by miracles, as by a solemn subscription. Then they who do not
reverently receive the Gospel recommended by such testimonies, disregard
not only the word of God, but also his works.

<span id="viii.i-p29"></span>He designates miracles, for the sake of
amplifying their importance, by three names. They are called *signs*
because they rouse men’s minds, that they may think of something higher
that what appears; and *wonders*, because they present what is rare and
unusual; and *miracles,* because the Lord shows in them a singular and
an extraordinary evidence of his power.  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32)

<span id="viii.i-p31"></span>As to the word, *bearing witness,* or
attesting, it points out the right use of miracles, even that they serve
to establish the Gospel. For almost all the miracles done in all ages
were performed as we find for this end, that they might be the seals of
Gods word. The more strange then is the superstition of the Papists, who
employ their own fictitious miracles for the purpose of overthrowing the
truth of God.

<span id="viii.i-p32"></span>The conjunction συν, *together with*, has
this meaning, that we are confirmed in the faith of the Gospel by the
joint testimony of God and men; for God’s miracles were testimonies
concurring with the voice of men.

<span id="viii.i-p33"></span>He adds, *by the gifts* or distributions
*of the Holy Spirit,* by which also the doctrine of the Gospel was
adorned, of which they were the appendages.  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) For why did God distribute the gifts of
his Spirit, except in part that they might be helps in promulgating it,
and in part that their might move through admiration the minds of men to
obey it? Hence Paul says, that tongues were a sign to unbelievers. The
words, *according to his will,* remind us, that the miracles mentioned
could not be ascribed to any except to God alone, and that they were not
wrought undesignedly, but, for the distinct purpose of sealing the truth
of the Gospel.

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Hebrews
2:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** For unto the angels hath he not put
in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak.

<span id="viii.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Non enim angelis subjecit orbem
futurum de quo loquimur:

<span id="viii.ii-p4"></span>**6.** But one in a certain place
testified, saying, What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the son
of man, that thou visitest him?

<span id="viii.ii-p5"></span>**6.** Testatus est autem quidam alicubi,
dicens, Quid est homo quod memor es ejus? aut filius hominis quod
visitas eum?

<span id="viii.ii-p6"></span>**7.** Thou madest him a little lower than
the angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and didst set him
over the works of thy hands:

<span id="viii.ii-p7"></span>**7.** Minuisti eum paululum ab angelis;
gloria et onore coronasti eum, et constituisti eum super opera manuum
tuarum:

<span id="viii.ii-p8"></span>**8.** Thou hast put all things in
subjection under his feet. For in that he put all in subjection under
him, he left nothing *that is* not put under him. But now we see not yet
all things put under him.

<span id="viii.ii-p9"></span>**8.** Omnia subjecisti sub pedibus ejus:
subjiciendo certe illi omnia, nihil reliquit non subjectum: atqui nonc
nondum videmus illi omnia subjecta:

<span id="viii.ii-p10"></span>**9.** But we see Jesus, who was made a
little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with
glory and honor; that he by the grace of God should taste death for
every man.

<span id="viii.ii-p11"></span>**9.** Iesum autem qui paululum imminuatus
fuit ab angelis intuimur propter passionem mortis gloria et honore
coronatum; ut gratia Dei pro omnibus gustaret mortem.

<span id="viii.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii-p13"></span><span id="viii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p14"></span>**5.** *For unto the angels,* *etc.* He
again proves by another argument that Christ ought to be obeyed; for the
Father has conferred on him the sovereignty of the whole world, while
the angels are wholly destitute of such an honor. It hence follows that
none of the angels should stand in the way of his preeminence who alone
possesses supremacy.

<span id="viii.ii-p15"></span>But first, the Psalm which he quotes must
be examined, for it seems to be unfitly applied to Christ. David there
mentions the benefits which God bestows on mankind; for after having
contemplated God’s power as manifested in heaven and the stars, he comes
to man, among whom the wonderful goodness of God appears in a peculiar
manner. He does not, then, speak of any particular person, but of all
mankind. To this I answer, that all this affords no reason why the words
should not be applied to the person of Christ. I indeed allow that man
was at first put in possession of the world, that he might rule over all
the works of God; but by his own defection he deserved the loss of his
dominion, for it was a just punishment for ingratitude as to one thus
favored, that the Lord, whom he refused to acknowledge and faithfully to
worship, should have deprived him of a right previously granted to him.
As soon, then, as Adam alienated himself from God through sin, he was
justly deprived of the good things which he had received; not that he
was denied the use of them, but that he would have had no right to them
after he had forsaken God. And in the very use of them God intended that
there should be some tokens of this loss of right, such as these, — the
wild beasts ferociously attack us, those who ought to be awed by our
presence are dreaded by us, some never obey us, others can hardly be
trained to submit, and they do us harm in various ways; the earth
answers not our expectations in cultivating it; the sky, the air, the
sea, and other things are often adverse to us. But were all creatures to
continue in subjection, yet whatever the sons of Adam possessed would be
deemed a robbery; for what can they call their own when they themselves
are not God’s?

<span id="viii.ii-p16"></span>This foundation being laid, it is evident
that God’s bounty belongs not to us until the right lost in Adam be
restored by Christ. For this reason Paul teaches us that food is
sanctified to us by faith, (<span id="viii.ii-p16.1"></span>[1Ti
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii-p16.1"></span>;)
and in another place he declares that to the unbelieving nothing is
clean, for they have a polluted conscience. (<span
id="viii.ii-p16.2"></span>Titus 1:16.)

<span id="viii.ii-p17"></span>We found at the beginning of this epistle
that Christ has been appointed by the Father the heir of all things.
Doubtless, as he ascribes the whole inheritance to one, he excludes all
others as aliens, and justly too, for we are all become exiles from
God’s kingdom. What food, then, God has destined for his own family, we
leave no right to take. But Christ, by whom we are admitted into this
family, at the same time admits us into a participation of this right,
so that we may enjoy the whole world, together with the favor of God.
Hence Paul teaches us that Abraham was by faith made an heir of the
world, that is, because he was united to the body of Christ. (<span
id="viii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ro
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#013)<span id="viii.ii-p17.1"></span>)
If men, then, are precluded from all God’s bounty until they receive a
right to it through Christ, it follows that the dominion mentioned in
the Psalm was lost to us in Adam, and that on this account it must again
be restored as a donation. Now, the restoration begins with Christ as
the head. There is, then, no doubt but that we are to look to him
whenever the dominion of man over all creatures is spoken of.

<span id="viii.ii-p18"></span>To this the reference is made when the
Apostle mentions *the world to come*, or the future world, for he
understands by it the renovated world. To make the thing clearer, let us
suppose two worlds, — the first the old, corrupted by Adam’s sin; the
other, later in time, as renewed by Christ. The state of the first
creation has become wholly decayed, and with man has fallen as far as
man himself is concerned. Until, then, a new restitution be made by
Christ, this Psalm will not be fulfilled. It hence now appears that here
the world to come is not that which we hope for after the resurrection,
but that which began at the beginning of Christ’s kingdom; but it will
no doubt have its full accomplishment in our final redemption.

<span id="viii.ii-p19"></span>But why he suppressed the name of David
does not appear to me. Doubtless he says *one*, or some one, not in
contempt, but for honor’s sake, designating him as one of the prophets
or a renowned writer.

<span id="viii.ii-p20"></span><span id="viii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p21"></span>**7.** *Thou madest him,* *etc.* A new
difficulty now arises as to the explanation of the words. I have already
shown that the passage is fitly applicable to the Son of God; but the
Apostle seems now to turn the words from that meaning in which David
understood them; for *a little,* βραχύ τι seems to refer to time, as it
means a little while, and designates the abasement of Christ’s
humiliation; and he confines the glory to the day of resurrection, while
David extends it generally to the whole life of man.

<span id="viii.ii-p22"></span>To this I answer, that it was not the
Apostle’s design to give an exact explanation of the words. For there is
nothing improperly done, when verbal allusions are made to embellish a
subject in hand, as Paul does in quoting a passage in <span
id="viii.ii-p22.1"></span>[Ro
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)<span id="viii.ii-p22.1"></span>,
from Moses, “Who shall ascend into heaven,” *etc.*, he does not join the
words “heaven and hell” for the purpose of explanation, but as
ornaments. The meaning of David is this, — “O Lord, thou hast raised man
to such a dignity, that it differs but little from divine or angelic
honor; for he is set a ruler over the whole world.” This meaning the
Apostle did not intend to overthrow, nor to turn to something else; but
he only bids us to consider the abasement of Christ, which appeared for
a short time, and then the glory with which he is perpetually crowned;
and this he does more by alluding to expressions than by explaining what
David understood.  <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)

<span id="viii.ii-p24"></span>To be *mindful* and to *visit* mean the
same thing, except that the second is somewhat fuller, for it sets forth
the presence of God by the effect.

<span id="viii.ii-p25"></span><span id="viii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p26"></span>**8.** *For in that he put all in
subjection under him;* or, doubtless in subjecting all things to him,
*etc.* One might think the argument to be this, — “To the man whom David
speaks all things are subjected, but to mankind all things are not made
subject; then he does not speak of any individual man.” But this
reasoning cannot stand, for the minor proposition is true also of
Christ; for all things are not as yet made subject to him, as Paul shows
in <span id="viii.ii-p26.1"></span>[1Co
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span id="viii.ii-p26.1"></span>.
There is therefore another sentence; for after having laid down this
truth, that Christ has universal dominion over all creatures, he adds,
as an objection, “But all things do not as yet obey the authority of
Christ.” To meet this objection he teaches us that yet now is seen
completed in Christ what he immediately adds respecting *glory* and
*honor,* as if he had said, “Though universal subjection does not as yet
appear to us, let us be satisfied that he has passed through death, and
has been exalted to the highest state of honor; for that which is as yet
wanting, will in its time be completed.”

<span id="viii.ii-p27"></span>But first, this offends some, that the
Apostle concludes with too much refinement, that there is nothing not
made subject to Christ, as David includes all things generally; for the
various kinds of things which he enumerates afterwards prove no such
thing, such as beasts of the field, fishes of the sea, and birds of the
air. To this I reply, that a general declaration ought not to be
confined to these species, for David meant no other thing than to give
some instances of his power over things the most conspicuous, or indeed
to extend it to things even the lowest, that we may know that nothing is
ours except through the bounty of God and our union with Christ. We may,
therefore, explain the passage thus, — “Thou hast made subject to him
all things, not only things needful for eternal blessedness, but also
such inferior things as serve to supply the wants of the body.” However
this may be, the inferior dominion over animals depends on the higher.

<span id="viii.ii-p28"></span>It is again asked, “Why does he say that
we see not all things made subject to Christ?” The solution of this
question you will find in that passage already quoted from Paul; and in
the first chapter of this Epistle we said a few things on the subject.
As Christ carries on war continually with various enemies, it is
doubtless evident that he has no quiet possession of his kingdom. He is
not, however, under the necessity of waging war; but it happens through
his will that his enemies are not to be subdued till the last day, in
order that we may be tried and proved by fresh exercises.

<span id="viii.ii-p29"></span><span id="viii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p30"></span>**9.** *But we see Jesus,* *etc.* As the
meaning of the words, βραχύ τι “a little” is ambiguous,  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) he looks to the thing itself, as
exhibited in the person of Christ, rather then to the exact meaning of
the words, as I have already said; and he presents to our meditation the
glory after the resurrection, which David extends to all the gifts by
which man is adorned by God’s bounty; but in this embellishment, which
leaves the literal sense entire, there is nothing unsuitable or
improper.

<span id="viii.ii-p32"></span>*For the suffering of death,* *etc.* It is
the same as though it was said that Christ, having passed through death,
was exalted into the glory which he has obtained, according to what Paul
teaches us in <span id="viii.ii-p32.1"></span>[Php
2:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span
id="viii.ii-p32.1"></span>; not that Christ obtained anything for
himself individually, as sophists say, who have devised the notion that
he first earned eternal life for himself and then for us; for the way or
means, so to speak, of obtaining glory, is only indicated here. Besides,
Christ is crowned with glory for this end, that every knee should bow to
him. (<span id="viii.ii-p32.2"></span>[Php
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span id="viii.ii-p32.2"></span>.)
We may therefore reason from the final cause that all things are
delivered into his hand.

<span id="viii.ii-p33"></span>*That he by the grace of God,*  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) *etc.* He refers to the cause and the
fruit of Christ’s death, lest he should be thought to detract anything
from his dignity. For when we hear that so much good has been obtained
for us, there is no place left for contempt, for admiration of the
divine goodness fills the whole mind. By saying *for every man,* he
means not only that he might be ample to others, as Chrysostom says, who
brings the example of a physician tasting first a bitter draught, that
the patient might not refuse to drink it; but he means that Christ died
for us, and that by taking upon him what was due to us, he redeemed us
from the curse of death. And it is added, that this was done through the
*grace of God*, for the cause of redemption was the infinite love of God
towards us, through which it was that he spared not even his own Son.
What Chrysostom says of *tasting of death*, as though he touched it with
his lips, because Christ emerged from death a conqueror, I will not
refute nor condemn, though I know not whether the Apostle meant to speak
in a manner so refined.  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37)

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p1"></span><span id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Hebrews
2:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010)<span
id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p2"></span>**10.** For it became him, for whom *are*
all things, and by whom *are* all things, in bringing many sons unto
glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through
sufferings.

<span id="viii.iii-p3"></span>**10.** Decebat enim eum propter quem
omnia, et per quem omnia, quum multos filios in gloriam adduceret, ducem
salutis eorum per passiones consecrare.

<span id="viii.iii-p4"></span>**11.** For both he that sanctifieth and
they who are sanctified *are* all of one: for which cause he is not
ashamed to call them brethren,

<span id="viii.iii-p5"></span>**11.** Nam qui sanctificat et qui
sanctificantur, ex uno omnes; propter quam causam non erubescit fratres
ipsos vocare;

<span id="viii.iii-p6"></span>**12.** Saying, I will declare thy name
unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto
thee.

<span id="viii.iii-p7"></span>**12.** Dicens, Nuntiabo nomen tuum
fratribus meis; in medio Ecclesiae canam te;

<span id="viii.iii-p8"></span>**13.** And again, I will put my trust in
him. And again, Behold I and the children which God hath given me.

<span id="viii.iii-p9"></span>**13.** Et rursum, Ego ero fidens in ipso;
et rursum, Ecce ego et pueri quos mihi dedit Deus.

<span id="viii.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="viii.iii-p11"></span><span id="viii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p12"></span>**10.** *For it became him,* *etc.* His
object is, to make Christ’s humiliation to appear glorious to the godly;
for when he is said to have been clothed with our flesh, he seems to be
classed with the common order of men; and the cross brought him lower
than all men. We must therefore take heed, lest Christ should be less
esteemed, because he willingly humbled himself for us; and this is what
is here spoken of. For the Apostle shows that this very thing ought to
be deemed honorable to the Son of God, that he was by these means
consecrated the Captain of our salvation.

<span id="viii.iii-p13"></span>He first assumes it as granted, that we
ought to be satisfied with God’s decree; for as all things are sustained
by his power, so all things ought to serve to his glory. No betters
cause, then, can be found out than the good pleasure of God. Such is the
purport of the circumlocution which he employs*, for whom, and by whom,
are all things.* He might by one word have named God; but his purpose
was to remind us, that what is to be deemed best is that which he
appoints, whose will and glory is the right end of all things.  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38)

<span id="viii.iii-p15"></span>It does not, however, appear as yet what
he intends by saying, that it became Christ to be thus consecrated. But
this depends on the ordinary way which God adopts in dealing with his
own people; for his will is to exercise them with various trials, so
that they may spend their whole life under the cross. It was hence
necessary that Christ, as the first­begotten, should by the cross be
inaugurated into his supremacy, since that is the common lot and
condition of all. This is the conforming of the head with the members,
of which Paul speaks in <span id="viii.iii-p15.1"></span>[Ro
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span id="viii.iii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="viii.iii-p16"></span>It is indeed a singular consolation,
calculated to mitigate the bitterness of the cross, when the faithful
hear, that by sorrows and tribulations they are sanctified for glory as
Christ himself was; and hence they see a sufficient reason why they
should lovingly kiss the cross rather than dread it. And when this is
the case, then doubtless the reproach of the cross of Christ immediately
disappears, and its glory shines forth; for who can despise what is
sacred, nay, what God sanctifies? Who can deem that ignominious, by
which we are prepared for glory? And yet both these things are said here
of the death of Christ.

<span id="viii.iii-p17"></span>*By whom are all things,* *etc.* When
creation is spoken of, it is ascribed to the Son as his own world, for
by him were all things created; but here the Apostle means no other
thing than that all creatures continue or are preserved by the power of
God. What we have rendered *consecrated,* others have rendered *made
perfect.* But as the word, τελειῶσαι which he uses, is of a doubtful
meaning, I think it clear that the word I leave adopted is more suitable
to the context.  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) For what is meant
is the settled and regular way or method by which the sons of God are
initiated, so that they may obtain their own honor, and be thus
separated from the rest of the world; and then immediately
sanctification is mentioned.

<span id="viii.iii-p21"></span><span id="viii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p22"></span>**11.** *For both he that sanctifieth,*
*etc.* He proves that it was necessary that what he had said should be
fulfilled in the person of Christ on account of his connection with his
members; and he also teaches that it was a remarkable evidence of the
divine goodness that he put on our flesh. hence he says, that they are
*all of one,* that is, that the author of holiness and we are made
partakers of it, are all of one nature, as I understated the expression.
It is commonly understood of one Adam; and some refer it to God, and not
without reasons; but I rather think that one nature is meant, and *one*
I consider to be in the neuter gender, as though he had said, that they
are made out of the same mass.  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40)

<span id="viii.iii-p25"></span>It avails not, indeed, a little to
increase our confidence, that we are united to the Son of God by a bond
so close, that we can find in our nature that holiness of which we are
in want; for he not only as God sanctifies us, but there is also the
power of sanctifying in his human nature, not that it has it from
itself, but that God had poured upon it a perfect fullness of holiness,
so that from it we may all draw. And to this point this sentence refers,
“For their sakes I sanctify myself.” (<span
id="viii.iii-p25.1"></span>[Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019)<span
id="viii.iii-p25.1"></span>.) If, then we are sinful and unclean, we
have not to go far to seek a remedy; for it is offered to us in our own
flesh. If any one prefers to regard as intended here that spiritual
unity which the godly have with the Son of God, and which differs much
from that which men commonly have among themselves, I offer no
objection, though I am disposed to follow what is more commonly
received, as it is not inconsistent with reason.

<span id="viii.iii-p26"></span>*He is not ashamed to call them
brethren.* This passage is taken from <span
id="viii.iii-p26.1"></span>[Ps
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022)<span
id="viii.iii-p26.1"></span>. That Christ is the speaker there, or David
in his name, the evangelists do especially testify, for they quote from
it many verses, such as the following, — “They parted my garments,” —
“They gave gall for my meat,” — “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me?” And further, the other parts of the chapter prove the same; for we
may see in the history of the passion a delineation of what is there
related. The end of the Psalm, which speaks of the calling of the
Gentiles, can be applied to none but to Christ alone, “Turn to the Lord
shall all the ends of the world; adore before him shall all the families
of the nations,” — “The Lord’s is the kingdom, and he will reign over
the nations.” These things are found accomplished only in Christ, who
enlarged the kingdom of God not over a small space, as David did, but
extended it over the whole world; it was before confined as it were
within narrow limits. There is, then, no doubt but that his voice is
what is referred to in this passage; and appropriately and suitably does
he say that he is *not ashamed;* for how great is the distance between
us and him? Much, then, does he let down himself, when he dignifies us
with the name of brethren; for we are unworthy that he should deem us
his servants. And this so great an honor conferred on us is amplified by
this circumstance — Christ does not speak here as a mortal man while in
the form of a servant, but when elevated after the resurrection into
immortal glory. Hence this title is the same, as though he had raised us
into heaven with himself. And let us remember, whenever we hear that we
are called brethren by Christ, that he has clothed us, so to speak, with
this honor, that together with this fraternal name we may lay hold on
eternal life and every celestial blessing.  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)

<span id="viii.iii-p28"></span>We must further notice the office which
Christ assumes, which is that of *proclaiming the name of God;* and this
began to be done when the gospel was first promulgated and is now done
daily by the ministry of pastors. We hence learn, that the gospel has
been presented to us for this end, that we may be brought to the
knowledge of God, in order that his goodness may be celebrated by us,
and that Christ is the author of the gospel in whatever manner it may be
offered to us. And this is what Paul says, for he declares that he and
others were ambassadors for Christ; and he exhorted men as it were in
the name of Christ. (<span id="viii.iii-p28.1"></span>[2Co
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span
id="viii.iii-p28.1"></span>.) And this ought to add no small reverence
to the gospel, since we ought not so much to consider men as speaking to
us, as Christ by his own mouth; for at the time when he promised to
publish God’s name to men, he had ceased to be in the world; it was not
however to no purpose that he claimed this office as his own; for he
really performs it by his disciples.

<span id="viii.iii-p29"></span><span id="viii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p30"></span>**12.** *In the midst of the Church.*
 <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) It hence appears plainly, that the
proclamation of God’s praises is always promoted by the teaching of the
gospel; for as soon as God becomes known to us, his boundless praises
sound in our hearts and in our ears; and at the same time Christ
encourages us by his own example publicly to celebrate them, so that
they may be heard by as many as possible. For it would not be sufficient
for each one of us to thank God himself for benefits received, except we
testify openly our gratitude, and thus mutually stimulate one another.
And it is a truth, which may serve as a most powerful stimulant, and may
lead us most fervently to praise God, when we hear that Christ leads our
songs, and is the chief composer of our hymns.

<span id="viii.iii-p32"></span><span id="viii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p33"></span>**13.** *I will put my trust in him,* or,
I will confide in him. As this sentence is found in <span
id="viii.iii-p33.1"></span>[Ps
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002)<span id="viii.iii-p33.1"></span>,
it was probably taken from that place;  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) and Paul, in <span
id="viii.iii-p34.9"></span>[Ro
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009)<span id="viii.iii-p34.9"></span>,
applies another verse to Christ respecting the calling of the Gentiles.
In addition to this, it may be said that the general contents of that
Psalm show clearly that David spoke in the person of another. There
indeed appeared in David but a faint shadow of the greatness which is
there set forth in terms so magnificent. He boasts that he was made the
head of the heathens, and that even aliens and people unknown willingly
surrendered themselves to him at the report of his name. David subdued a
few neighboring and well­known nations by the force of arms, and made
them tributaries. But what was this to the extensive dominions of many
other kings? And further, where was voluntary submission? Where were the
people that were so remote that he knew them not? In short, where was
the solemn proclamation of God’s glory among the nations mentioned at
the end of the Psalm? Christ then is he who is made head over many
nations, to whom strangers from the utmost borders of the earth submit,
and roused by hearing of him only; for they are not forced by arms to
undertake his yoke, but being subdued by his doctrine, they
spontaneously obey him.

<span id="viii.iii-p35"></span>There is also seen in the Church that
feigned and false profession of religion, which is there referred to;
for many daily profess the name of Christ, but not from the heart.

<span id="viii.iii-p36"></span>There is then no doubt but that the Psalm
is rightly applied to Christ. But what has this to do with the present
subject? For it seems not to follow that we and Christ are of one, in
order that he might especially put his trust in God. To this I answer,
that the argument is valid, because he would have no need of such trust,
had he not been a man exposed to human necessities and wants. As then he
depended on God’s aid, his lot is the same with ours. It is surely not
in vain or for nothing that we trust in God; for were we destitute of
his grace, we should be miserable and lost. The trust then which we put
in God, is an evidence of our helplessness. At the same time we differ
from Christ in this — the weakness which necessarily and naturally
belongs to us he willingly undertook. But it ought not a little to
encourage us to trust in God, that we have Christ as our leader and
instructor; for who would fear to go astray while following in his
steps? Nay, there is no danger that our trust should be useless when we
have it in common with Christ; who, we know, cannot be mistaken.

<span id="viii.iii-p37"></span>*Behold, I and the children,* *etc.* It
is indeed certain that Isaiah was speaking of himself; for when he gave
hope of deliverance to the people, and the promise met with no credit,
lest being broken down by the perverse unbelief of the people he should
despond, the Lord bade him to seal the doctrine he had announced among a
few of the faithful; as though he had said, that though it was rejected
by the multitude, there would yet be a few who would receive it. Relying
on this answer, Isaiah took courage, and declared that he and the
disciples given to him would be ever ready to follow God. (<span
id="viii.iii-p37.1"></span>[Isa
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018)<span
id="viii.iii-p37.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.iii-p38"></span>Let us now see why the Apostle applied
this sentence to Christ. First, what is found in the same place, that
the Lord would become a rock of stumbling and a stone of offense to the
kingdom of Israel and of Judas, will not be denied by any one of a sound
mind, to have been fulfilled in Christ. And doubtless as the restoration
from the Babylonian exile was a sort of prelude to the great redemption
obtained by Christ for us and the fathers; so also the fact that so few
among the Jews availed themselves of that kindness of God, that a small
remnant only were saved, was a presage of their future blindness,
through which it happened that they rejected Christ, and that they in
turn were rejected by God, and perished. For we must observe that the
promises extant in the Prophets respecting the restoration of the Church
from the time the Jews returned from exile, extend to the kingdom of
Christ, as the Lord had this end in view in restoring the people, that
his Church might continue to the coming of his Son, by whom it was at
length to be really established.

<span id="viii.iii-p39"></span>Since it was so, God not only addressed
Isaiah, when he bade him to seal the law and the testimony, but also in
his person all his ministers, who would have to contend with the
unbelief of the people, and hence Christ above all, whom the Jews
resisted with greater contumacy than all the former Prophets. And we see
now that they who have been substituted for Israel, not only repudiate
his Gospel, but also furiously assail him. But how much soever the
doctrine of the Gospel may be a stone of stumbling to the household of
the Church, it is not yet God’s will that it should wholly fail; on the
contrary, he bids it to be sealed among his disciples: and Christ, in
the name of all his teachers as the head of them, yea, as the only true
Teacher, who rules us by their ministry, declares that amidst this
deplorable ingratitude of the world, there shall still be some always
who shall be obedient to God.  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44)

<span id="viii.iii-p42"></span>See then how this passage may be fitly
applied to Christ: the Apostle concludes, that we are one with him,
because he unites us to himself, when he presents himself and us
together to God the Father: for they form but one body who obey God
under the same rule of faith. What could have been said more suitably to
commend faith, than that we are by it the companions of the Son of God,
who by his example encourages us and shows us the way? If then we follow
the Word of God, we know of a certainty that we have Christ as our
leader; but they belong not at all to Christ, who turn aside from his
word. What, I pray, can be more desired than to agree with the Son of
God? But this agreement or consent is in faith. Then by unbelief we
disagree with him, than which nothing is a greater evil. The word
“children”, which in many places is taken for servants, means here
disciples.

<span id="viii.iii-p43"></span>*Which God hath given me.* Here is
pointed out the primary cause of obedience, even that God has adopted
us. Christ brings none to the Father, but those given him by the Father;
and this donation, we know, depends on eternal election; for those whom
the Father has destined to life, he delivers to the keeping of his Son,
that he may defend them. This is what he says by John, “All that the
Father has given me, will come to me.” (<span
id="viii.iii-p43.1"></span>[Joh
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037)<span
id="viii.iii-p43.1"></span>.) That we then submit to God by the
obedience of faith, let us learn to ascribe this altogether to his
mercy; for otherwise we shall never be led to him by the hand of Christ.
Besides, this doctrine supplies us with strong ground of confidence; for
who can tremble under the guidance and protection of Christ? Who, while
relying on such a keeper and guardian, would not boldly disregard all
dangers? And doubtless, while Christ says, “Behold, I and the children,”
he really fulfills what he elsewhere promises, that he will not suffer
any of those to perish whom he has received from the Father. (<span
id="viii.iii-p43.2"></span>[Joh
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028)<span
id="viii.iii-p43.2"></span>.)  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)

<span id="viii.iii-p46"></span>We must observe lastly, that though the
world with mad stubbornness reject the Gospel, yet the sheep ever
recognize the voice of their shepherd. Let not therefore the impiety of
almost all ranks, ages, and nations, disturb us, provided Christ gathers
together his own, who have been committed to his protection. If the
reprobate rush headlong to death by their impiety, in this way the
plants which God has not planted are rooted up. (<span
id="viii.iii-p46.1"></span>[Mt
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013)<span
id="viii.iii-p46.1"></span>.) Let us at the same time know that his own
are known to him, and that the salvation of them all is sealed by him,
so that not one of them shall be lost. (<span
id="viii.iii-p46.2"></span>[2Ti
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span
id="viii.iii-p46.2"></span>.) Let us be satisfied with this seal.

<span id="viii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p1"></span><span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Hebrews
2:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p2"></span>**14.** Forasmuch then as the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the
same; that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is, the devil;

<span id="viii.iv-p3"></span>**14.** Quando igitur pueri carni et
sanguini communicant, ipse quoque similiter eorundem fuit particeps, ut
per mortem aboleret eum qui habebat mortis imperium, hoc est, diabolum;

<span id="viii.iv-p4"></span>**15.** And deliver them who through fear
of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.

<span id="viii.iv-p5"></span>**15.** Et redimeret quicunque metu mortis
per totam vitam obnoxii erant servituti.

<span id="viii.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="viii.iv-p7"></span><span id="viii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p8"></span>**14.** *Forasmuch then as the children,*
*etc.*, or, *since then the children, etc.* This is an inference from
the foregoing; and at the same time a fuller reason is given than what
has been hitherto stated, why it behooved the Son of God to put on our
flesh, even that he might partake of the same nature with us, and that
by undergoing death he might redeem us from it.

<span id="viii.iv-p9"></span>The passage deserves especial notice, for
it not only confirms the reality of the human nature of Christ, but also
shows the benefit which thence flows to us. “The Son of God,” he says,
“became man, that he might partake of the same condition and nature with
us.” What could be said more fitted to confirm our faith? Here his
infinite love towards us appears; but its overflowing appears in this —
that he put on our nature that he might thus make himself capable of
dying, for as God he could not undergo death. And though he refers but
briefly to the benefits of his death, yet there is in this brevity of
words a singularly striking and powerful representation, and that is,
that he has so delivered us from the tyranny of the devil, that we are
rendered safe, and that he has so redeemed us from death, that it is no
longer to be dreaded.

<span id="viii.iv-p10"></span>But as all the words are important, they
must be examined a little more carefully. First, the destruction of the
devil, of which he speaks, imports this — that he cannot prevail against
us. For though the devil still lives, and constantly attempts our ruin,
yet all his power to hurt us is destroyed or restrained. It is a great
consolation to know that we have to do with an enemy who cannot prevail
against us. That what is here said has been said with regard to us, we
may gather from the next clause, *that he might destroy him that had the
power of death;* for the apostle intimates that the devil was so far
destroyed as he has power to reign to our ruin; for “the power of death”
is ascribed to him from the effect, because it is destructive and brings
death. He then teaches us not only that the tyranny of Satan was
abolished by Christ’s death, but also that he himself was so laid
prostrate, that no more account is to be made of him than as though he
were not. He speaks of the *devil* according to the usual practice of
Scripture, in the singular number, not because there is but one, but
because they all form one community which cannot be supposed to be
without a head.  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46)

<span id="viii.iv-p12"></span><span id="viii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p13"></span>**15.** *And deliver them who,* *etc.*
This passage expresses in a striking manner how miserable is the life of
those who fear death, as they must feel it to be dreadful, because they
look on it apart from Christ; for then nothing but a curse appears in
it: for whence is death but from God’s wrath against sin? Hence is that
bondage throughout life, even perpetual anxiety, by which unhappy souls
are tormented; for through a consciousness of sin the judgment of God is
ever presented to the view. From this fear Christ has delivered us, who
by undergoing our curse has taken away what is dreadful in death. For
though we are not now freed from death, yet in life and in death we have
peace and safety, when we have Christ going before us.  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47)

<span id="viii.iv-p15"></span>But it any one cannot pacify his mind by
disregarding death, let him know that he has made as yet but very little
proficiency in the faith of Christ; for as extreme fear is owing to
ignorance as to the grace of Christ, so it is a certain evidence of
unbelief.

<span id="viii.iv-p16"></span>*Death* here does not only mean the
separation of the soul from the body, but also the punishment which is
inflicted on us by an angry God, so that it includes eternal ruin; for
where there is guilt before God, there immediately hell shows itself.

<span id="viii.v"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p1"></span>Hebrews Chapter 2:16-18

<span id="viii.v-p2"></span>**16.** For verily he took not on *him the
nature of* angels; but he took on *him* the seed of Abraham.

<span id="viii.v-p3"></span>**16.** Nusquam enim angelos assumit; sed
semen Abrahae assumit.

<span id="viii.v-p4"></span>**17.** Wherefore in all things it behooved
him to be made like unto *his* brethren, that he might be a merciful and
faithful high priest in things *pertaining* to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people.

<span id="viii.v-p5"></span>**17.** Unde fratribus debuit per omnia esse
similis, ut misericors esset et fidelis pontifex in iis quae sunt erga
Deum, ut peccata expiet populi.

<span id="viii.v-p6"></span>**18.** For in that he himself hath suffered
being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.

<span id="viii.v-p7"></span>**18.** Ex quo enim ipsi contigit tentari,
potest et iis qui tentantur, succurrere.

<span id="viii.v-p8"></span> 

<span id="viii.v-p9"></span><span id="viii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p10"></span>**16.** *For verily,* or, *For nowhere,
etc.* By this comparison he enhances the benefit and the honor with
which Christ has favored us, by putting on our flesh; for he never did
so much for angels. As then it was necessary that there should be a
remarkable remedy for man’s dreadful ruin, it was the design of the Son
of God that there should be some incomparable pledge of his love towards
us which angels had not in common with us. That he preferred us to
angels was not owing to our excellency, but to our misery. There is
therefore no reason for us to glory as though we were superior to
angels, except that our heavenly Father has manifested toward us that
ampler mercy which we needed, so that the angels themselves might from
on high behold so great a bounty poured on the earth. The present tense
of the verb is to be understood with reference to the testimonies of
Scripture, as though he set before us what had been before testified by
the Prophets.

<span id="viii.v-p11"></span>But this one passage is abundantly
sufficient to lay prostrate such men as Marcion and Manicheus, and
fanatical men of similar character, who denied Christ to have been a
real man, begotten of human seed. For if he bore only the appearance of
man, as he had before appeared in the form of an angel, there could have
been no difference; but as it could not have been said that Christ
became really an angel, clothed with angelic nature, it is hence said
that he took upon him man’s nature and not that of angels.

<span id="viii.v-p12"></span>And the Apostle speaks of nature, and
intimates that Christ, clothed with flesh, was real man, so that there
was unity of person in two natures. For this passage does not favor
Nestorius, who imagined a twofold Christ, as though the Son of God was
not a real man but only dwelt in man’s flesh. But we see that the
Apostle’s meaning was very different, for his object was to teach us
that we find in the Son of God a brother, being a partaker of our common
nature. Being not therefore satisfied with calling him man, he says that
he was begotten of human seed; and he names expressly the *seed of
Abraham,* in order that what he said might have more credit, as being
taken from Scripture.  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48)

<span id="viii.v-p14"></span><span id="viii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p15"></span>**17.** *Wherefore in all things it
behooved him to be made like unto his brethren,* or, *to be like his
brethren, etc.* In Christ’s human nature there are two things to be
considered, the real flesh and the affections or feelings. The Apostle
then teaches us, that he had not only put on the real flesh of man, but
also all those feelings which belong to man, and he also shows the
benefit that hence proceeds; and it is the true teaching of faith when
we in our case find the reason why the Son of God undertook our
infirmities; for all knowledge without feeling the need of this benefit
is cold and lifeless. But he teaches us that Christ was made subject to
human affections, *that he might be a merciful and faithful high
priest;* which words I thus explain, “that he might be a merciful, and
therefore a faithful high priest.”  <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49)

<span id="viii.v-p19"></span>For in a priest, whose office it is to
appease God’s wrath, to help the miserable, to raise up the fallen, to
relieve the oppressed, mercy is especially required, and it is what
experience produces in us; for it is a rare thing, for those who are
always happy to sympathize with the sorrows of others. The following
saying of Virgil was no doubt derived from daily examples found among
men:

<span id="viii.v-p20"></span>“Not ignorant of evil, I learn to aid the
miserable.”  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50)

<span id="viii.v-p22"></span>The Son of God had no need of experience
that he might know the emotions of mercy; but we could not be persuaded
that he is merciful and ready to help us, had he not become acquainted
by experience with our miseries; but this, as other things, has been as
a favor given to us. Therefore whenever any evils pass over us, let it
ever occur to us, that nothing happens to us but what the Son of God has
himself experienced in order that he might sympathize with us; nor let
us doubt but that he is at present with us as though he suffered with
us.  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51)

<span id="viii.v-p24"></span>*Faithful* means one true and upright, for
it is one opposite to a dissembler; and to him who fulfils not his
engagements. An acquaintance with our sorrows and miseries so inclines
Christ to compassion, that he is constant in imploring God’s aid for us.
What besides? Having purposed to make atonement for sins, he put on our
nature that we might have in our own flesh the price of our redemption;
in a word, that by the right of a common nature he might introduce us,
together with himself, into the sanctuary of God. By the words, *in
things pertaining to God*, he means such things as are necessary to
reconcile men to God; and as the first access to God is by faith, there
is need of a Mediator to remove all doubting.

<span id="viii.v-p25"></span><span id="viii.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p26"></span>**18.** *For in that he himself has
suffered,* *etc.* Having been tried by our evils, he is ready, he says,
to bring us help. The word *temptation* here means no other thing than
experience or probation; and to be *able,* is to be fit, or inclined, or
suitable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc44007.htm#fr_28) <span
id="viii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p16"></span> See Appendix F.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc44007.htm#fr_29) <span
id="viii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p21"></span> To “neglect,” is literally, not to care
for; not to care for our salvation is to neglect it. It is rendered, to
“make light of,” in <span id="viii.i-p21.1"></span>[Mt
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#005)<span id="viii.i-p21.1"></span>;
and “not to regard,” in <span id="viii.i-p21.2"></span>[Heb
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#009)<span id="viii.i-p21.2"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc44007.htm#fr_30) <span
id="viii.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p23"></span> So great, observes Dr. Owen is this
salvation, that is a deliverance from Satan, from sin, and from eternal
sin, and from eternal death. The means also by which it has been
procured, and is now effected, and its endless results, prove in a
wonderful manner its greatness. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc44007.htm#fr_31) <span
id="viii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p26"></span> The same objection has been advanced by
Grotius and others, but it has no weight in it; for the Apostle here
distinctly refers to the facts in connection with the twelve Apostles,
as this alone was necessary for his purpose here; and the same reason
for concealing his name accounts for no reference being made here to his
own ministry. And “we” and “us” as employed by the Apostle, often refer
to things which belong to all in common as Christians. See <span
id="viii.i-p26.1"></span>[Heb. 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011), [Heb.
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#040)<span id="viii.i-p26.1"></span>,
etc. And he uses them sometimes when he himself personally is not
included. See <span id="viii.i-p26.2"></span>[1Co
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)<span id="viii.i-p26.2"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc44007.htm#fr_32) <span
id="viii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p30"></span> These three words occur twice together in
other places, <span id="viii.i-p30.1"></span>[Ac
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022)<span id="viii.i-p30.1"></span>,
and <span id="viii.i-p30.2"></span>[2Th
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)<span id="viii.i-p30.2"></span>;
only they are found in Acts in a different order — miracles wonders and
signs. Signs and wonders are often found together both in the Old
Testament, and in this order except in three places, <span
id="viii.i-p30.3"></span>[Acts 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#019),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#043), [Acts
7:36](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#036)<span id="viii.i-p30.3"></span>.
The same things, as Calvin says, are no doubt meant by three words under
different views. They are called “signs” or as tokens as evidence of a
divine interposition; “wonders” or prodigies, as being not natural, but
supernatural, and as having the effect of filling men with terror, <span
id="viii.i-p30.4"></span>[Ac 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#043)<span
id="viii.i-p30.4"></span>; and “miracles” or powers, as being the
effects of a divine power. So that “signs” betoken their intention;
“wonders” their characters; and “miracles” their origin, or the power
which produces them. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc44007.htm#fr_33) <span
id="viii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p34"></span> By referring to <span
id="viii.i-p34.1"></span>[1Co
12:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004)<span
id="viii.i-p34.1"></span>, we shall be able to see the meaning of
“distributions of the Spirit,” which seems to have been different from
signs and wonders, for in that passage there are several gifts mentioned
distinct from signs and wonders, such as the word of wisdom, the word of
knowledge, the gift of prophecy, and the discerning of spirits. These
were the distributions, or the portions, which the Spirit divined to
every one “according to his will;” for the “will” here, as in <span
id="viii.i-p34.2"></span>[1Co
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span id="viii.i-p34.2"></span>,
is the will of the Spirit. The most suitable rendering of the last
clause would be “and by the gifts of the Holy Spirit distributed
according to his will.” There is an evident metonymy in the word
“distributions;” it is used abstractly for things distributed or
divided. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc44007.htm#fr_34) <span
id="viii.ii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p23"></span> See Appendix G.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc44007.htm#fr_35) <span
id="viii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p31"></span> There is no doubt but that the expression
is capable of being understood as “little” in degree, or as “little” in
time; but in the Psalm the former is evidently the meaning, and there is
no reason for a different meaning here: Christ, in becoming man, assumed
a nature inferior to that of angels. Many of the fathers, indeed, and
some moderns, have thought that time is what is intended “for a little
while;” but this is not true, for Christ continues in the nature which
has assumed, though it be now refined and perfected. The inferiority of
nature is admitted, but that inferiority is as it were compensated by a
superiority of honor and glory. Our version is the Vulgate, which
Doddridge has also adopted, and also Stuart and Bloomfield. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc44007.htm#fr_36) <span
id="viii.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p34"></span> See Appendix H.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc44007.htm#fr_37) <span
id="viii.ii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p35"></span> There is no doubt but that is a fanciful
refinement. To taste food, according to the language of Scripture, is to
eat it. See <span id="viii.ii-p35.1"></span>[Acts
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#011), [Acts
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#011), [Acts
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#014)<span id="viii.ii-p35.1"></span>.
To taste death is to die, to undergo death, and nothing else. See <span
id="viii.ii-p35.2"></span>[Mt
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028)<span id="viii.ii-p35.2"></span>;
<span id="viii.ii-p35.3"></span>[Lu
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#027)<span id="viii.ii-p35.3"></span>.
Stuart observes that the word for taste in Hebrew is taken in the same
sense, and also in classic Greek authors. “For every man,” ὑπὲρ πάντος,
that is “man,” mentioned in verse 6; and the “man” there means all the
faithful, to whom God in Noah restored the dominion lost in Adam; but
this dominion was not renewed to man as a fallen being, but as made
righteous by faith. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc44007.htm#fr_38) <span
id="viii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p14"></span> Having vindicated Christ’s superiority
over angels, he being “crowned with glory and honor,” notwithstanding
his assumption of human nature, and for his sufferings, the Apostle now,
as it were, goes back, and proves the necessity of what has been done;
showing how needful it was for him to become man, and to suffer as he
did; and we find he states two especial reasons — that he might
reconcile us to God and be able to sympathize with his people. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc44007.htm#fr_39) <span
id="viii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p18"></span> Our version seems more intelligible —
“to make perfect.” As it appears afterwards his perfection consisted in
his having made an atonement for sin, and in being capable of sympathy
with his people. God made him perfectly qualified to be the Captain or
leader in our salvation, that is, in the work of saving us, even through
sufferings, as thereby he procured our salvation and became
experimentally acquainted with the temptations and trials of humanity.

<span id="viii.iii-p19"></span>The sense given by Stuart and some
others, borrowed from the use of the word in the classics, which is that
of crowning or rewarding the victor at the games is not suitable here;
for what follows clearly shows that its meaning is what has been stated.

<span id="viii.iii-p20"></span>Both Scott and Stuart connect “the
bringing many sons unto glory” with “the captain of their salvation.”
One thing is indeed thus gained, the cases seem to suit better; but then
the sense is violated. When the sentence is thus rendered, there is no
antecedent to “their” connected with “salvation;” and the faithful are
not called the “sons” of Christ, but his brethren. As to the case of the
participle for “bringing,” an accusative for a dative, it is an anomaly,
says Bloomfield, that sometimes occurs in Paul’s writings and also in
the classics. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc44007.htm#fr_40) <span
id="viii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p23"></span> Though many, ancient and modern, such as
Chrysostom, Beza, Grotius and Bloomfield, regard “God” as meant here by
“one”, yet the context is in favor of the view taken by Calvin, which is
also adopted by Dr. Owen and Stuart. The <span
id="viii.iii-p23.1"></span>[Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span id="viii.iii-p23.1"></span>
verse seems to decide the question.

<span id="viii.iii-p24"></span>The word to sanctify ἁγιάζω, means — 1.
To consecrate, to set apart to a holy use or to an office, <span
id="viii.iii-p24.1"></span>[Mt
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#019)<span
id="viii.iii-p24.1"></span>; <span id="viii.iii-p24.2"></span>[Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019)<span
id="viii.iii-p24.2"></span>; — 2. To purify from pollution, either
ceremonially, <span id="viii.iii-p24.3"></span>[Heb
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013)<span id="viii.iii-p24.3"></span>,
or morally and spiritually, <span id="viii.iii-p24.4"></span>[1Th
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span id="viii.iii-p24.4"></span>;
— 3. To purify from the guilt of sin by a free remission, <span
id="viii.iii-p24.5"></span>[Heb
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#010)<span
id="viii.iii-p24.5"></span>, compared with <span
id="viii.iii-p24.6"></span>[Heb.
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#014),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#018)<span id="viii.iii-p24.6"></span>.
Now, which of these meanings are we to take here? Calvin takes the
second, that is to purify from pollution, or to make spiritually holy;
others, such as Stuart and Bloomfield, take the last meaning, and the
latter gives the rendering, “the expiator and the expiated,” This is
more consistent with the general tenor of the passage. The subject is
not sanctification properly so called, but expiation or atonement. See
<span id="viii.iii-p24.7"></span>[Heb.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#017)<span id="viii.iii-p24.7"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc44007.htm#fr_41) <span
id="viii.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p27"></span> “If Christ was merely a man and nothing
more, where (we may ask with Abresch) would be either the great
condescension, or particular kindness manifested in calling men his
brethren? If however, he possessed a higher nature, if ἑαυτὸν ἐκένωσεν
μορφὴν δούλου λαβών, <span id="viii.iii-p27.1"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="viii.iii-p27.1"></span>,
if ἐκένωσε ἑαυτὸν μορφὴν δούλου λαβὼν, <span
id="viii.iii-p27.2"></span>[Php
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="viii.iii-p27.2"></span>;
then was it an act of particular kindness and condescension in him to
call men his brethren?” — *Stuart*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc44007.htm#fr_42) <span
id="viii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p31"></span> This quotation is made from <span
id="viii.iii-p31.1"></span>[Ps
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022)<span
id="viii.iii-p31.1"></span>, and from the Sept., except that the Apostle
changes διηγήσομαι into ἀπαγγελῶ. The words are often used synonymously,
only the latter includes the idea of a message, as it literally means to
declare something from another. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc44007.htm#fr_43) <span
id="viii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p34"></span> The words are found literally, according
to the Sept., in <span id="viii.iii-p34.1"></span>[2Sa
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#003)<span id="viii.iii-p34.1"></span>;
which chapter is materially the same with <span
id="viii.iii-p34.2"></span>[Psalm
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#000)<span id="viii.iii-p34.2"></span>,
and also in <span id="viii.iii-p34.3"></span>[Isa
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017)<span id="viii.iii-p34.3"></span>.
The words are somewhat different in <span id="viii.iii-p34.4"></span>[Ps
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002)<span id="viii.iii-p34.4"></span>,
though the Hebrew is the same as in <span
id="viii.iii-p34.5"></span>[2Sa
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#003)<span id="viii.iii-p34.5"></span>,
<span id="viii.iii-p34.6"></span>אחסה בו, “I will trust in him.” The
words in Hebrew are wholly different in <span
id="viii.iii-p34.7"></span>[Isa
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017)<span id="viii.iii-p34.7"></span>,
rendered literally, from Isaiah, because they see nothing in the 18th
Psalm respecting the Messiah; but the whole Psalm is respecting him who
was eminently a type of the Messiah; and in that sense no doubt the
Messiah is found there. As God was to David his trust in all trials, so
he was to the Son of David. See <span id="viii.iii-p34.8"></span>[Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)<span id="viii.iii-p34.8"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc44007.htm#fr_44) <span
id="viii.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p40"></span> Stuart suggests that these texts are
applicable to Christ as the antitype of those to whom they most
immediately refer. “As the type,” he says, “put his confidence in God,
so did the antitype: as the type had children who were pledges for the
deliverance of Judah, so has the antitype ‘many sons and daughters,’ the
pledges of his powerful grace, and sureties that his promises in regard
to future blessings will be accomplished.”

<span id="viii.iii-p41"></span>Christ was promised as the Son of David
in his office as king: he was therefore to be like David: and the trials
and support of David as a king were typical of his trials and support.
Hence the Apostle applies to him the language of David. Christ was also
promised as a Prophet; and is applied to the antitype. This must have
been admitted as a valid reasoning by the Jews who regarded the Messiah
both as king and as a prophet. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc44007.htm#fr_45) <span
id="viii.iii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p44"></span> Be it observed that throughout the whole
of this passage, from 5 to 14 inclusive, the representation is, that God
had a people prior to the coming of Christ, first called “man,”
afterwards “sons” and “children,” and Christ’s “brethren,” — that those
were promised “dominion,” glory and honor,” — and that the Son of God
assumed their nature became lower than the angels, in order to obtain
for them this dominion, glory and honor.

<span id="viii.iii-p45"></span>This statement bears a similarity to what
the Apostle says in <span id="viii.iii-p45.1"></span>[Ro
4:1-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#001)<span
id="viii.iii-p45.1"></span>, and in <span id="viii.iii-p45.2"></span>[Ga
3:1-4:31](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)<span
id="viii.iii-p45.2"></span>: only he seems to go back here to Noah, to
whom was restored the dominion and the glory lost in Adam, while in the
chapters referred to, he begins with Abraham: and there seems to have
been a reason for this; for the posterity of Noah soon departed from the
faith; and Abraham became alone the father of the faithful, and through
faith “the heir of the world,” and had the land of Canaan as a special
pledge of a “better country.” And the Apostle here also comes to
Abraham, verse 16. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc44007.htm#fr_46) <span
id="viii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p11"></span> See Appendix I

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc44007.htm#fr_47) <span
id="viii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p14"></span> The same seem to be meant here as before,
— “the sons, the children.” Before Christ came, though heirs, yet they
were in a state of bondage; so the Apostle represents them in <span
id="viii.iv-p14.1"></span>[Ga
4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001)<span id="viii.iv-p14.1"></span>.
See <span id="viii.iv-p14.2"></span>[Ro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span id="viii.iv-p14.2"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc44007.htm#fr_48) <span
id="viii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p13"></span> See Appendix K

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc44007.htm#fr_49) <span
id="viii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p16"></span> Here is, as I conceive, an instance of an
arrangement similar to what is often found in the prophets, and to what
occurs in verse 9; this would be seen were a part of this verse and the
following verse put in lines, —

<span id="viii.v-p17"></span>That compassionate he might be  
And a faithful high priest in the things of God  
To make an atonement for the sins of the people;  
For as he suffered, being himself tempted, he can help the tempted.

<span id="viii.v-p18"></span>The first and last line correspond, and the
second and the third. He is compassionate, because he can sympathize
with the tempted, having been himself tempted; and he is a true and
faithful high priest, because he really expiated the sins of the people:
and that he might be all this, he became like his brethren that is, by
taking their nature. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc44007.htm#fr_50) <span
id="viii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p21"></span> <span id="viii.v-p21.1"></span>Non ignara
mali, miseris succurrere disco.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc44007.htm#fr_51) <span
id="viii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p23"></span> This paragraph, which begins at verse 5,
commences with what belongs to the kingly office — dominion, and what
accompanies it, glory and honor; but it ends with the priestly office;
and it is shown that it was necessary for the Savior to be a priest in
order that he might be a king, and might make his people kings as well
as priests to God. The dominion and glory promised to the faithful from
the beginning intimated even in the first promise made to fallen man,
and more fully developed afterwards, was what they had no power to
attain of themselves: Hence it became necessary for the Son of God to
become the son of man, that he might obtain for his people the dominion
and glory. This seems to be the view presented to us in this passage.
The children of God, before Christ came into the world, were like heirs
under age, though lords of all. He came, took their flesh and effected
whatever was necessary to put them in full possession of the privileges
promised them. See <span id="viii.v-p23.1"></span>[Ga
4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001)<span id="viii.v-p23.1"></span>.
— *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc44008)
