[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tee04)  [Next](tee06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL744/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Evil Eye*, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

## CHAPTER III

### TOTEMS, PORTENTS, TREE-WORSHIP

A BELIEF so strong, so universal, so founded on fear, as that connected
with fascination, would naturally in the earliest days of humanity have
led to the study and search for means to baffle or to counteract its
dreaded effects. The causes of most kinds of evil, indeed of all that
could not be easily accounted for by the senses, were set down to the
supernatural action of invisible but malignant spirits which in one form
or other were worshipped as divinities. Without going far into the field
of primitive religion or of pagan mythology, it becomes abundantly
evident that more thought was bestowed upon propitiating the angry or
the destructive deities, than in the worship of those whose attributes
were beneficent; we find that fear and dread have in all human history
been more potent factors in man's conduct than hope and gratitude or
love. Even the earliest records of worship in our ancient Scriptures
point in the same direction. The sacrifices of Abel and of Cain were, we
imagine, more propitiatory of an offended power, than as thank-offerings
in grateful remembrance of blessings received. It is true we hear later
of acts of devotion by way of acknowledgment and in gratitude for
mercies bestowed, but they were the

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

result of an express command, recognising man's innate weakness of fear,
rather than the outcome of spontaneous thanksgiving. Our very words, to
atone for sins, atoning sacrifice, imply acts to appease, to submit, to
propitiate anger, to avoid the punishment due to offences.

As men degenerated from the monotheistic sun-worship, every power and
attribute of nature became personified; even Time became Chronos the
destroyer, the avenger, the Saturn of the Romans with his scythe, who
ate up his own children; and in our day is the personification of Death
the terrible. Zeus or Jupiter, the king of heaven, the giver of all his
blessings and miseries to man, was generally represented as the holder
of the thunderbolts, whose wrath had to be appeased. The stories of the
various metamorphoses of Jove into a swan, a bull, a satyr or goat, do
but carry back the later, even the present superstitions, as to the
power of uncanny persons to assume animal shapes. Juno, too, the Queen
of the Gods, though often a protectress and benefactress, was on the
whole more dreaded than beloved, and was the very type of jealousy and
spite. A sow and a ewe lamb were the offerings she most accepted, and
these animals were consequently sacred to her, as representing or
symbolising her attributes. Surely we may conclude that in the witch
lore of today the misfortune of a sow crossing the path implies the
envious anger likely to be felt and displayed by somebody towards the
person to whom Juno exhibits herself in this guise. Certain objects and
certain animals seem by primæval habit to have been sacrificed as
propitiatory offerings to the various deities who were supposed to watch
over, for good or for

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

evil, the doings of mankind. Moreover certain other objects or animals
were supposed to partake of their special natures, and hence were held
to be especially under their protection, and to be their particular
favourites. Consequently these became sacred, and like the modern
totems <span id="fr_138"></span>[131](#fn_138.md) of many savages, or the
sacred animals of India, must on no account be killed or molested. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[132](#fn_139.md)

In early days no doubt the swan was the totem of some tribe, and being
also the most famous metamorphosis of Jupiter, it would naturally follow
that this bird should be held specially sacred. The Irish saga shows the
strength of the belief:--

Then was it Erin's sons, listening that cry,  
Decreed: "The man who slays a swan shall die." <span
id="fr_140"></span>[133](#fn_140.md)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Lir" was an
ocean-god of both Ireland and Britain. According to Irish romance, the
children of Lir were turned into swans by enchantment; and the men of
Erin were so grieved at their departure, that they made a law and
proclaimed it throughout the land, that no one should kill a swan in
Erin from

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

that time forth. In Welsh histories he appears as "Lear." <span
id="fr_141"></span>[134](#fn_141.md)

Totemism cannot after all be so very savage a cult, for we are told by
Mr. G. L. Gomme <span id="fr_142"></span>[135](#fn_142.md) that various
animals are still held sacred in Britain. Among these he places the
seal, wolf, fowl, cat, hare, magpie, butterfly, Sparrow, swan, raven,
and otter. To these we should add many others which sentimentally are
held to be sacred by various individuals, such as the wren, robin,
swallow, lady-bird, bat, cuckoo, dog, fox, horse, swine, salmon, goose,
cow, toad, deer. <span id="fr_143"></span>[135a](#fn_143.md) "The robin (in
Irish, the *spiddóge*) is, as is well known, a blessed bird, and no one,
no matter how wild or cruel, would kill or hurt one, partly from love,
partly from fear. They believe if they killed a robin a large lump would
grow on the palm of their right hand, preventing them from working and
from hurling. It is fear alone, however, that saves a swallow from
injury, for it is equally well known that every swallow has in him three
drops of the devil's blood." <span id="fr_144"></span>[136](#fn_144.md) In
Somerset much the same notion still exists. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[137](#fn_145.md)

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

The root idea of totemism seems to be that whatever connection there may
be, either in character or temper, between a person and his totem, is of
benefit to both sides. Hence the totem becomes the man's protector, and
the man will not kill or injure his totem. The totem is not a fetish to
be worshipped like an idol: it includes a whole class of objects like
the whole family of wolves or bears; it is not often inanimate, and very
rarely artificial. It may belong to an entire class, or to one sex in
the tribe, but not to the other: again it may belong to an individual
without passing to his descendants. Members of the same totem may not
intermarry.

How strong all these so-called savage beliefs still are may be seen
almost on the surface of things. Who can doubt that the prohibition of
certain marriages between persons having no blood kinship, however
canonical, is after all the outcome of this belief in some
indescribable, impalpable relationship described politely as affinity,
but among the uncivilised as totemism; such, for instance, as that
between god-parents, or between a man and his wife's kin? Surely it is
pure totemism which in Shropshire makes it unlucky to kill a bat, and
elsewhere, as here in Somerset, to kill a swallow, wren, or robin.

The belief in the owl's hooting being a death portent

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

is very widely extended, and it is said to be unlucky to shoot an
owl. <span id="fr_146"></span>[137a](#fn_146.md) Even among the Australian
natives the kokok or great owl is a bird of ill omen: "It smells death
in the camp, and visits the neighbourhood of a dying person, calling
Kokok! Kokok!" <span id="fr_147"></span>[138](#fn_147.md) The "bad spirit"
also is said to employ owls to watch for him; hence owls are birds of
ill omen, and hated accordingly. When one is heard hooting, the children
immediately crawl under their grass mats. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[139](#fn_148.md)

In Tonquin every village chooses its guardian spirit (or totem), often
in the form of an animal, as a dog, tiger, cat, or serpent. Sometimes a
living person is selected as the patron divinity. Thus a beggar
persuaded the people of a village that he was their guardian spirit, so
they loaded him with honours and entertained him with their best. <span
id="fr_149"></span>[140](#fn_149.md) The names of many Irish kings are said
to be taken from their totems, and instances are given of the wearing of
dresses to imitate curious animals on particular festival days. <span
id="fr_150"></span>[141](#fn_150.md)

Almost all savage beliefs are nowadays traced back by the savants to
totemism. Why then should not the origin of similar ones held by refined
and educated people be stretched back a little, so as to cover the time
of their evolution from outward or undisguised savagery?

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

Where is the family in which some member does not believe in luck, or
fatalism, in the dire calamity to follow the spilling of salt, in
"thirteen at dinner" foreboding death? Whose heart has not beat at the
sound of the death-watch? Where is the house which is not considered
lucky to have a swallow's nest under the eaves, but especially against a
window? Does not every household contain some one who dreads to hear an
owl hoot, or a raven croak? Since this was written we have read in the
papers of the heroic doings of the "Thirteen Club," who bravely defy the
terrors which their very buffoonery shows they acknowledge. Their
splendid temerity is well matched by their singular ignorance, to which
the *Spectator* and other journals did sufficient justice at the time.
Did we not note the names of more than one acknowledged savant, among
the famous "thirteen" group?

In all lands there is something more than mere dread of deadly animals.
They are looked upon by human beings with that same sort of physical
shrinking, that negative attraction, with which all wild creatures,
familiar with his appearance, regard a man--they fly from him. The
stoutest of us, even here in England, will admit an involuntary shock,
at least a momentary flutter, when he suddenly perceives he was about to
step on a viper. The same instinct unrestrained, is that which causes
some silly women to shriek at the sight of a mouse in the room, as
though a lion were in the path. We superior people flout the idea of
superstition, or of anything akin to the belief that there is anything
uncanny in venomous beasts, yet very often the writer has remarked that
a sportsman will call the keeper to kill an

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

adder, when a stroke from himself would have done it. Neither is it
entire tenderness of heart which causes "my lady" to ring for Perks or
the butler to kill the mouse. Mankind is the same everywhere at bottom,
whether in Belgravia or in Uganda.

Hindoos especially hold the tiger in superstitious awe: many would not
kill him if they could, nor are they always willing to show where he may
be found, even when he has been killing their comrades or their cattle,
from the fear that he may haunt them, or do them mischief, after he is
dead. . . . In certain districts they will not pronounce his name. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[142](#fn_151.md)

They do the same as regards the wolf; but as a general rule they are
glad that others should destroy both wolf and tiger, and make great
rejoicing when either is killed. "All sorts of powers are ascribed to
portions of the tiger after death: the fangs, the claws, the whiskers
are potent charms, medicines, love philtres, or protectors against the
*evil eye*, magic, disease or death. . . . It is difficult to preserve
the skin of a tiger with claws and whiskers intact; the natives steal
them if possible." Not only does this apply to tigers, but to lions,
leopards, hyenas, cheetahs, wolves, jackals, wild dogs, and bears. "It
is believed that these bears (*Ursus labiatus*) sometimes carry off
women, hence perhaps one of their names, Adam-Zad." <span
id="fr_152"></span>[143](#fn_152.md)

Everywhere it is thought that the raven <span
id="fr_153"></span>[144](#fn_153.md) is a bird of ill omen, and in Scotland
this is well expressed in

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

the gilly's proverb: "Nae gude ever cam' o' killin' black craws."

The belief that bees have an affinity with the family of their owners is
strongly held even now in Somerset. If a death occurs in the house to
which the bees belong, they must be formally told of it before the
corpse is carried away, or they will all die before the year is
out. <span id="fr_154"></span>[145](#fn_154.md) It is considered a death
portent in the family if the bees in swarming should settle on a dead
tree.

In Northampton <span id="fr_155"></span>[146](#fn_155.md) if at a funeral
the hearse has to be turned after the coffin is placed in it, it is a
sure sign of another death in the family quickly to follow. Besides
these portents, are the firm beliefs that certain objects used in a
special way are not merely bad omens, but actual producers of death. For
instance, here in Somerset it is steadfastly believed far and wide that
"May"--the flower of the hawthorn--if brought into the house will cause
death in it shortly. To put that common household implement the bellows
on the table is equally fatal. The writer has known this to produce
fright little short of convulsions in the "gudewife."

In some places the crowing of a hen, or rather the attempt, for it is at
best only a poor and laughable imitation of her lord and master, is
looked upon as foreboding ill-luck to the owner, and death is quickly
dealt out to her in consequence; the idea being that taking her life
will avert the impending trouble. On entering a farm-house in
Somersetshire recently, I saw on the table a beautiful plump fowl, all
picked and trussed ready for cooking, the farmer's wife explaining to me
that her husband, seeing the hen in the yard in the act of crowing that
morning, caught her at once, and then and there despatched her without

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

delay, his prompt action in the matter proving how strong and firmly
rooted was his belief in the superstition. <span
id="fr_156"></span>[147](#fn_156.md)

Mr. Gomme says that certain trees are English totems, that they are
particularly identified with the life of certain animals; that in many
places in Ireland, and also in Scotland, misfortunes which have happened
to families are said to have been occasioned by the cutting down of
trees.

The curious antipathy of many people, particularly the Scotch, to the
cutting down of trees, not on account of their beauty, but from the
feeling that it is unlucky, or that it will lead to misfortune to do so,
may surely be traced to the ancient worship of trees. We find in
Scripture abundant evidence of this. The very earliest mention of them
lends a sort of inspiration to the tree of knowledge and the tree of
life, planted in the garden of our first parents. Then before they
became objects of idolatry we read how Abraham planted a tree (grove, in
the A.V.) in Beersheba, which was evidently of special sanctity, for
there he called on the name of the Lord (Gen. xxi. 33). Later on when
the Israelites had come under Egyptian influence, trees became objects
of direct idolatry; the planting of a grove of trees near the altar of
the Lord was strictly forbidden, "Neither shalt thou set thee up any
image, which the Lord thy God hateth" (Deut. xvi. 22). <span
id="fr_157"></span>[148](#fn_157.md)

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

Among the ancient Egyptians <span id="fr_158"></span>[149](#fn_158.md) many
trees and plants were held to be specially sacred. The peach was sacred
to Athor, and to Harpocrates; while the sycamore was sacred to Nut. The
tamarisk, so common in Egypt, was a holy tree, from having been chosen
to overshadow the sepulchre of Osiris; the chest containing his body was
found by Isis lodged in its branches, when driven ashore by the waves.
The legend is quite in accord with our own experience, for the tamarisk
is almost the only tree which will grow by the sea, where salt spray can
reach.

Garlic and onions were treated as gods by the Egyptians when taking an
oath, says Pliny, <span id="fr_159"></span>[150](#fn_159.md) while Juvenal
satirises <span id="fr_160"></span>[151](#fn_160.md) them for their
veneration of these garden-born deities. The palm branch represented a
year in ideographic writing. The ivy was called Chenosiris, or the plant
of Osiris. <span id="fr_161"></span>[152](#fn_161.md) Evergreens seem to
have been special favourites in ancient times; among the Romans, the
myrtle was sacred to Venus, <span id="fr_162"></span>[153](#fn_162.md) and
it was on this account that the myrtle had always to be excluded from
the components of a maiden's wreath. The laurel and bay were sacred to
Apollo, and the olive to Minerva. The pine has been held in reverence by
many races. In ancient Greece it was sacred to Poseidon, Dionysos, and
Zeus. It was especially the tree beloved of virgins. The *Pinea Corona*
was the emblem of virginity which Daphne took from Chloe and placed upon
her own head. Among the Romans the chaste Diana was crowned with a
chaplet of pine. <span id="fr_163"></span>[154](#fn_163.md)

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

Clement of Alexandria mentions thirty-six plants dedicated to the genii
who presided over the signs of the zodiac.

In classic days tree and plant worship was prevalent both in Greece and
Italy. Pliny tells us that in the Forum at Rome there was a sacred
fig-tree named *ruminalis*, which was worshipped from the time of
Romulus down to his day, <span id="fr_164"></span>[155](#fn_164.md) and
dire consternation would have arisen if any evil had befallen it.
Tacitus also speaks of this tree, while the writer can testify that it
is still to be seen on the Forum, sculptured on one of the two
remarkable monuments, said to have been erected by Trajan, each of which
has the Sustaurovilia or Suovetaurilia on one of its sides. The tree
appears in the bas-relief which commemorates the foundation of an
orphanage. Another sacred tree in Rome grew on the Palatine, and
whenever in a dry season this tree seemed to be drooping, Plutarch says
a shout was raised, and people ran from all sides with pails of water as
if to put out a fire. The story of Daphne being changed into a
laurel-tree is all in keeping with this ancient faith. <span
id="fr_165"></span>[156](#fn_165.md)

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

Uncivilised man all the world over, from the extreme east in Kamtschatka
to the extreme west in the Rocky Mountains, has always believed that
trees held not only living spirits, but that they were animate
themselves.

Trees are regarded by some people as the body itself of a living being,
and by others as the abode of a spirit, but in either case as capable of
feeling, and hence they must not be cut down or injured. In Livonia
there is a sacred grove, where it is believed that if any man cuts down
a tree, or even breaks a branch, he will die within the year. The tree
spirit had always to be appeased before the wood could be cut. In
ancient Rome, before thinning out trees, a pig had to be sacrificed to
the deity of the grove.

One remarkable and widespread belief regarding trees was that certain
kinds had the power of granting easy delivery to women. In Sweden there
was a sacred tree near every farm, which no one was allowed to touch,
not even to pluck a single leaf. The women used to clasp this tree

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

with their arms during pregnancy to ensure easy delivery. <span
id="fr_166"></span>[157](#fn_166.md)

The same thing is done in Congo, and the women also make themselves
garments from the bark of their sacred tree, because they believe that
it will deliver them from the peril of childbirth.

How old this belief is, may be seen from the Greek story of Leto, that
when about to give birth to Apollo and Artemis, she clasped a palm and
an olive, or, according to some, two laurels, that she might obtain
painless delivery.

It is still believed that certain trees have the power of producing
fertility; moreover the exact converse has been believed in all ages
regarding other plants. Among the ancient Greeks and Romans it was
firmly held that certain plants had the property of rendering women
pregnant. In Turkestan, the Kirjiz women, if barren, roll themselves on
the ground under a solitary apple-tree in order to obtain offspring.
This ancient faith in the fertilising power of the tree spirit is shown
still in the common custom in many parts of Europe of placing a green
branch on May Day before the house of a sweetheart. A similar custom is
placed to the account of the Irish: "they fancy a green bough of a tree
fastened on May Day against the house will produce plenty of milk." In
Germany also peasants set up May-trees, one for each horse or cow,
before the stable doors, in order that the cows may give more milk.

Moreover, May Day customs have always been accompanied by much dancing,
which has been held to have a mystic meaning in connection with
fertility,

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

but somewhat outside our subject, as treated for the general reader.

Most of our May Day festivities if traced to their ultimate origin will
be found to be branches of tree-worship, and to lead to the old faith,
typified by the death of the spirit of vegetation, and its resuscitation
in the spring. The harvest wail in our "Crying the Neck" to-day, the
Μανέρως or Λίνος of the ancient Greeks, the "Dirge of Isis" of the still
dimmer antiquity, alike point to the central belief of humanity that the
deity should be slain and die that he might rise again to give life to
man. The joyous shout following the wail in all these cases typifies the
gladness of the world at the revival of the dead god, just as the May
Day rejoicings all over the temperate part of the northern hemisphere
commemorate the spring, or the uprising of dead vegetation.

This must be the true meaning of all those curious customs of which
Brand, Hone, and others' give so many particulars. If such were
doubtful, it is proved by the fact that in more northern latitudes,
where vegetation is much later in the season, all these rites are
postponed. In Sweden they setup their *Maj Stänger* on St. John's Eve
(June 23), with elaborate decorations of leaves and flowers, round which
they dance. They have also large bonfires like the Beltan fires, to be
danced around and jumped over. In some parts of Bohemia also the pole is
set up on Midsummer Eve, and like bonfire customs are observed there,
together with much climbing of the pole by the men, after the garlands
and ribbons fixed to it by the maidens. All these things are said to
have typical relation to subjects nearly akin to the revival of
vegetation,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

and to many grosser rites, that can be no more than hinted at in these
pages. <span id="fr_167"></span>[158](#fn_167.md)

The Congo natives place calabashes of water under certain trees, that
the tree spirit may drink when thirsty. In parts of India a marriage
ceremony is performed between trees, as between human beings; while in
the Moluccas, <span id="fr_168"></span>[159](#fn_168.md) clove-trees in
blossom are treated like pregnant women. No loud noise must be made nor
anything done to frighten the tree, lest she should drop her fruit like
the untimely deliverance of a woman. This same idea of pregnancy is held
with regard to rice in bloom, by the Javanese, and in Orissa. Red
Indians of North America and old Austrian peasants are equally averse to
cutting down green trees, from the belief that they are animate, and
feel wounds as acutely as a man himself The Mundaris <span
id="fr_169"></span>[160](#fn_169.md) in Assam have a sacred grove near
every village, and the grove deities are held responsible for the crops;
at all great agricultural festivals they are especially honoured.

Philippine Islanders believe the souls of their fathers to dwell in
certain trees, and cut them only on compulsion.

Among the Bechuanas the blackthorn is held sacred, and it is a very
serious offence to cut a bough from it and carry it into the village
during the rainy season; but when the corn is ripe they go and cut a
branch, which each man brings back. <span
id="fr_170"></span>[161](#fn_170.md) The juniper is much venerated,
according to De Gubernatis, in Italy and in Northern Germany,

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

as a protector against evil spirits. "Frau Wachholder," the juniper
spirit, is invoked to discover thieves by bending down certain of the
branches. There are many Italian stories and legends about the juniper
in connection with Our Lady, who was hidden by one in her flight, and
who blessed it in consequence. In Italy branches of juniper are hung up
at Christmas just as the holly is in England, France, and Switzerland.
"In the sacred cemetery at Meccah, the aloe, here as in Egypt, is hung
like the dried crocodile over houses as a talisman against evil
spirits." <span id="fr_171"></span>[162](#fn_171.md)

Of all trees, the oak seems to be the sacred one *par excellence* of the
Aryan people in those latitudes where it grows. It certainly ranked
first among the holy trees of the Germans, and was indeed their chief
god; distinct traces of its worship have survived almost to the present
day. To the ancient inhabitants of Italy the oak was sacred above all
other trees. The image of Jupiter Capitolinus at Rome was nothing but a
natural oak-tree, according to Livy. The Greeks worshipped Zeus as
residing in the sacred oak at Dodona, and the rustling of its leaves was
his voice. The civic crown of the Romans was of oak; and a chaplet of
oak was the reward of eminent services rendered to the State. Acorns
having been the staple food of man till Demeter introduced corn, boughs
of oak were carried in her mysteries at Eleusis. The Druids all
consenting pitched on the most beautiful oak-tree, cut off its side
branches, and then joined two of them to the highest part of the trunk,
so that they extended

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

themselves on either side like the arms of a man this was the Thau or
God. <span id="fr_172"></span>[163](#fn_172.md)

Frazer <span id="fr_173"></span>[164](#fn_173.md) says the presumption is
that in the primitive fire festivals, the essential feature was the
burning of a man who represented the tree spirit, and that the tree so
represented was the oak. These sacred fires were of oak kindled by the
"needfire," which was always produced by the friction of two pieces of
wood, and these pieces, among Celts, Germans, and Slavs, were always of
oak. <span id="fr_174"></span>[165](#fn_174.md) In Scotland until quite
modern times the Beltein, <span id="fr_175"></span>[166](#fn_175.md) or
Baal's fire as it is (wrongly) called, was kept up in Ayr on St. Peter's
Day, and in Perth on May Day; in Northumberland and Cumberland at
Midsummer, and in Ireland, known as *La Beal-tine*, on May Day. The
first of May is called in Irish *La Beal-tine*, "that is, the day of
Beal's fire." Beal and Phœnician Baal are said to be one and the same
deity--the sun. <span id="fr_176"></span>[167](#fn_176.md) Another
writer <span id="fr_177"></span>[168](#fn_177.md) says: "On St. John's Eve,
the 23rd of June, still may be seen a few bonfires on the mountains; in
the old days they blazed on every hill and in every farm. No field was
fruitful into which a burning brand had not been thrown, no horse or cow
which had not been touched by fire on that night." The date

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

here does not accord with other accounts, though the custom is
abundantly recorded.

Here in Britain we all believe in the sacred groves of our Druid
forefathers, whose worship is said to have always been under an oak. The
Saxons held their meetings under an oak, and there are endless stories
connected with that tree, all of which may be said to be kept alive by
our still commemorating the 29th of May as "Oak Apple Day," with boughs
of oak--a notable example of popular inaccuracy. The date of the
Restoration being perpetuated by the memory of King Charles's escape on
quite a different occasion. We are too apt to forget that besides King
Charles's oak, all this tree-worship is in our very midst, and is kept
up to this day. What is the old Christmas custom of wassailing the
apple-trees, which the writer himself has often heard going on, but a
worship, a pouring out of a libation to the tree spirit? <span
id="fr_178"></span>[169](#fn_178.md)

In the typical representation of "plenty" known to all Freemasons, we
have in the "ear of corn near a fall of water," not only a reminder of
the ancient worship of the spirit of vegetation, symbolised by the corn,
but also another example of association of ideas with facts--the
dramatic representation of the desired result. The corn irrigated by the
water from this point of view is a singularly appropriate symbol of
abundance.

Our Scandinavian forefathers were less acquainted

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

with the oak. With them the ash, Igdrasil, the tree of life, was
especially sacred. We find the survival of this amongst ourselves in the
passing of a child afflicted with congenital hernia through a growing
ash, <span id="fr_179"></span>[170](#fn_179.md) always an ash, with certain
formulæ connected with sunrise and Sunday, by which a new-born life is
typified. <span id="fr_180"></span>[171](#fn_180.md) Several instances of
this cure are recorded in the *Gentleman's Magazine* for 1804, p. 909.
The writer of these says the rupture returns whenever the tree is cut
down. Other beliefs are still entertained respecting the ash in various
parts of England. The following evidently relates to Warwickshire: "Tom
was in a state of as blank unimaginativeness concerning the cause and
tendency of his sufferings, as if he had been an innocent shrew-mouse
imprisoned in the split trunk of an ash-tree in order to cure lameness
in cattle." <span id="fr_181"></span>[172](#fn_181.md)

The old west country custom of burning an ashen faggot on Christmas Eve
points to the sacredness of the ash. From it, an old Norse tradition
says that man was first formed. It is believed that idols were made from
it: "He planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it. . . And the
residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image" (Isaiah xliv.
14-17). Hence probably was developed our Christmas custom, which is no
less

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

than the burning of Igdrasil, the tree of life, emblematical of the
death of vegetation at the winter solstice. It is supposed that
misfortune will certainly fall on the house where the burning is not
kept up, while, on the other hand, its due performance is believed to
lead to many benefits. The faggot must be bound with three or more
"binds" or withes, and one or other of these is chosen by the young
people. The bind which first bursts in the fire shows that whoever chose
it will be first to be married. Hence at the breaking of each bind the
cider cup goes round to pledge the healths first of the lucky ones and
afterwards of "our noble selves," etc. <span
id="fr_182"></span>[173](#fn_182.md)

The old idea of a spirit residing in trees is expanded into one
embracing all vegetation. Hence the corn spirit, which the Romans
worshipped as the goddess Ceres, was a cult which still exists
unconsciously at our very doors. The little plaited ears of corn hung up
in a farmhouse kitchen, which the writer has seen within the past few
days (December 1893), speak of the slaying of a divinity, such as the
Egyptian Osiris, and of the subsequent resurrection of the life-giving
corn. <span id="fr_183"></span>[174](#fn_183.md)

The remarkable similarity in customs all over Europe points to the
conclusion that tree-worship was once an important element in the early
religion of mankind, especially of the Aryan stock, and that the
singular uniformity of the rites and ceremonies which can easily be
shown to exist in widely separated countries, fully warrants us in
believing that they have not much changed from very remote

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

ages, and that the practices continued down to a very recent period by
peasantry, some even among ourselves, were substantially identical with
the same rites and ceremonies observed by Egyptians, Etruscans, Greeks
and Romans. <span id="fr_184"></span>[175](#fn_184.md)

In further reference to trees and plants it should be noted, that there
is a strange and very remarkable antipathy as well as sympathy amongst
certain of them, just as there is between certain animals. The laurel is
said to be fatal to rosemary and the vine: the cabbage will not grow
under either vine or olive. We all know that the fir will not grow with
the elm; that hardly anything will grow under the beech. On the other
hand, the vine and the poplar have a special affinity; so has the
mushroom for the chestnut, and rue for the fig. Between the oak and the
olive there exists a hatred so inveterate, that transplanted, either of
them, to a site previously occupied by the other, they will die. <span
id="fr_185"></span>[176](#fn_185.md)

The same attraction or repulsion is very evident between certain animals
and reptiles, and still more is this the case as between some men and
some animals. Man and beast alike have an inborn repugnance to snakes;
"dog-and-cat life" is a common description of habitual domestic
squabbling. Some persons cannot endure cats, and the very presence of a
cat, even if not seen, throws them into convulsions. Bats, too, have the
like effect upon certain people. An Italian physician, Antonio

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vallisneri,
relates a curious instance of this kind. He shut up a bat in a box which
he placed in the room of his patient, who on entering, though utterly
ignorant of the presence of the bat, was immediately seized with
convulsions, which continued until the bat was removed. Those of us who
have visited tombs and ruins where many bats live, can more readily
accept this story, from the peculiar and pungent odour they emit.

Antipathy and sympathy among men and women have existed from the
beginning, and create a feeling we cannot call mere prejudice, viewed
from either side of the attraction we now call fascination.

Non amo te, Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare;  
  Hoc tantum possum dicere--non amo te! <span
id="fr_186"></span>[177](#fn_186.md)

is but the old-world form of our modern

I do not love you, Dr. Fell!  
The reason why, I cannot tell  
But this alone I know full well,  
I do not love you, Dr. Fell.

Many authors from Plato and Aristotle down to Descartes and William
Hazlitt have written upon this subject, which may be said to fall within
the scope of fascination, although here we have only space to hint at
it.

On reflecting upon all the strange cults and practices in connection
with the annual death and resurrection of the spirit of vegetation we
are struck by the apparent repetition of the same old idea of the
slaying and the resurrection of a god, figured in the ancient Egyptian
myth of Osiris preserved on the wall at Philæ; in the very remarkable
cult of Diana Nemorensis, wherein her priest was slain

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

by his successor after he had plucked the golden bough; and in our own
familiar custom of "crying the neck," already referred to.

Mr. Frazer has worked out at considerable length and with striking
force, the belief which seems to lie deep down in the heart of man,
inherited from his very earliest ancestors, that not only was a human
victim a fitting, but a necessary object for sacrifice, whether to atone
for past offences or to propitiate for future favours. The faith of
Abraham was tested in a way evidently familiar, and not apparently
shocking or unreasonable according to the customs of his day. The
killing of a substitute for a god, <span
id="fr_187"></span>[178](#fn_187.md) may be observed in many of the human
sacrificial rites performed by savage or semi-savage people. The view
that the victim is also an embodiment of the spirit of the deity to be
slain, is shown by the great pains taken "to secure a physical
correspondence between him and the natural object," whose spirit or
embodiment he is made to represent. Thus the Mexicans killed young
victims for the young corn, and old ones for the ripe. The full
identification of the victim with the corn spirit or deity is shown by
the African custom of putting him to death with spades and hoes, and by
the Mexican, of grinding him like corn between two stones.

Stranger still, the same author shows plainly and at great length the
custom of sacramental eating the representative body of the slain god to
be prevalent as the survival of a cult long anterior to Christianity.

Not only did the Pawnee chief devour the heart of the Sioux girl, slain
as a sacrificial offering, but

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

other savages ate the victim's flesh not as cannibals, but as a sacred
rite. Even in pious Sweden the flour from the grain of the last sheaf,
supposed to contain the corn spirit, is baked into a loaf in the shape
of a girl, which is divided amongst the whole household and eaten by
them. In Scotland, too, the last sheaf is made up into a female form and
is called "the Maiden," but we are told nothing as to its being eaten in
any special way--it is rather kept; but everywhere the eating of a loaf
made from the last sheaf is certainly thought to be eating the god of
the corn. At La Palisse, in France, moreover, the dough man, made of the
last of the corn, cut at the end of harvest, is actually broken in
pieces by the mayor and given to the people to eat.

The custom of eating bread sacramentally as the body of a god was
practised by the Aztecs before the discovery and conquest of Mexico by
the Spaniards. A long account of the ceremonies used is given by Acosta
(Hakluyt Society); and another writer (Bancroft) gives further details
of this rite, especially how a priest took a flint-tipped dart, and
hurled it into the breast of the dough image, piercing it through and
through. This was called "killing the god Huitzilopochtli, so that his
body might be eaten." The image was divided into minute pieces, one of
which every male, even down to the babe in the cradle, received to eat,
but no woman might taste a morsel. The ceremony was called *torqualo*,
that is "God is eaten." Mr. Frazer also produces evidence of sacramental
eating of bread as practised by ancient Romans at Aricia, near Albano,
and traces the custom of eating animals and men by various races,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

in the belief that the eater acquires the physical, moral, and
intellectual qualities of the animal or man so eaten.

There can be no doubt of the totem origin of the ritual of sacrificial
offerings, especially that of eating the slain god. "The victim is not
only slain, but the worshippers partake of the body and blood of the
victim, so that his life passes into their life, and knits them to the
deity in living communion." <span id="fr_188"></span>[179](#fn_188.md)

The same belief comes to us from Australia, where the cannibal
aborigines consider that "the most delicate morsel of all is the fat
about the kidneys. By eating this they believe that they acquire part of
the slain person's strength, and so far as I could understand, this was
even more true of the kidneys themselves. For according to a widespread
Australian belief, the kidneys are the centre of life." <span
id="fr_189"></span>[180](#fn_189.md) The natives on Herbert River are
particularly fond of the fat of a dead foe, which is not only eaten as a
delicacy and as strengthening food, but is also carried as an amulet.

In the north-east of Burmah are mountain tribes who eat the congealed
blood of their enemies. "The blood is poured into bamboo reeds, corked
up, and in course of time hardens. When the chief wants to treat his
friends to this kind of food, the reed is broken and the contents
devoured with the greatest relish." The natives believe that they "will
thereby acquire the courage and strength of their enemies." <span
id="fr_190"></span>[181](#fn_190.md)

In further support of this idea, an authentic story comes from
India, <span id="fr_191"></span>[181a](#fn_191.md) where it is very firmly
believed

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

that the flesh eaten imparts to the eater the fierceness or other
qualities of the animal so consumed.

Mr. Evans, a Wesleyan missionary, who has been living in the Kassia
hills, but who has evidently no knowledge of native religions, relates
that the people there are primitive and old-world in their beliefs,
although it appears that he has a considerable flock who have adopted
Christianity. Not long since, a certain Captain Crawley, who was on a
visit, heard that a goat had been killed by a tiger close to the
village. After the usual preparations he shot the tiger, whereupon the
natives asked to have the flesh given to them; this was agreed to on
condition that he should have the skin and head. The people (we presume
the men) then took the carcase and made a hearty meal off it. On the
following day, being Sunday, they attended Mr. Evans's chapel, and he
was at once aware of the overpowering odour from the people's breath--so
much so that he was obliged to adjourn to the open air, but even there
he had to conduct his service with much discomfort.

Among Mr. Evans's congregation was a milkman, to whom of course the cows
were quite accustomed. On that Sunday morning however, on going to milk
his cows, they became instantly frantic, and the usually docile
creatures burst from their fastenings and rushed away, They would not
permit their own attendant to come near them, and had to be milked by
another man who did not smell of tiger. It does not appear that these
people liked tiger meat, but it seems to have been eaten under the
impression that it would make them strong and fierce, by the absorption
into their bodies of the tiger qualities through

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

eating his flesh; and looking at the fact that Hindoos hold the tiger in
awe as the embodiment of a deity, they were performing a sort of
sacramental rite, which their adoption of Christianity by no means
tended to modify or to influence.

There is nothing uncommon in the notion that the flesh of oxen gives
strength and courage, while that of sheep does not. This is said to be
the reason why our soldiers and sailors are fed on beef and seldom taste
mutton.

We are thus brought to see that some of the most sacred and mysterious
rites of our religious faith have had their beginning in the beliefs and
customs of those we now call pagans, and that these crude though firm
ideas, planted in the heart of primæval man, have but been purified,
purged from their gross accretions, and adapted to our still imperfect
intelligence, as suitable to the limited vision of our humanity. So far
from investigations of this nature tending to injure or to lower our
convictions of the truth, or the reality of Revelation, the veil seems
to be somewhat lifted, to enable us to see how consistent and
prearranged is the divine plan to meet the usages and forms of thought
implanted in the human breast. The various types, allegories, and
parables, whereby we are instructed in Holy Scripture, are but
adaptations of that innate association of ideas with facts, which seems
to have been one of the very earliest creations of man's reasoning
faculties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_138"></span>[89:131](tee05.htm#fr_138.md) The word "totem" is
North-American Indian, almost unchanged. Among the Algonquins *dodaim*
is their name for their tribe-animal or *totem*, and hence the term has
been adopted by ethnologists everywhere to express the idea (Tylor,
*Prim. Cult.* ii. 213). Ogilvie spells it *Totam*.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[89:132](tee05.htm#fr_139.md) "The term *totem*
signifies the device of a gens or tribal division; it may be an animal
or a vegetable, or any natural object or phenomenon, or even a mere
quality. The nature of *totemism* as a system is shown by the fact that
among the Australians the totem is the symbol of a group of kinsmen. It
is thus equivalent to a family name, and it is properly defined as a
'badge of fraternity,' answering to the 'device of a gens.' . . . The
gens is founded on two chief conceptions, the bond of kin and
non-intermarriage of persons belonging to the same gens. This obligation
applies not only to human beings, but also to the totem group of objects
which are regarded as sacred by the members of the gens, although they
may be killed and eaten by persons not belonging to it. . . . The
fundamental basis of *totemism* is to be found in the phase of human
thought which supposes spirits to inhabit trees and groves, and to move
in the winds and stars, and which personifies almost every phase of
nature."--C. Stanisland Wake, "Definition of Totemism," *British
Association Report*, 1887, p. 906.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[89:133](tee05.htm#fr_140.md) *Foray of Queen
Meave*, p. 96, quoted in *N. and Q.* 8th ser. iv. p. 431.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[90:134](tee05.htm#fr_141.md) Elton, *Origins of
English History*, 2nd edition, p. 279.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[90:135](tee05.htm#fr_142.md) "Lecture on
Totemism," *Standard*, April 17, 1889.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[90:135a](tee05.htm#fr_143.md) "There is a small
black spider that often gets on clothes or hats; this is called a 'money
spider,' and if you kill it you will be sure to suffer from the lack of
the needful."--*Choice Notes from N. and Q.* ("Folk Lore") p. 164.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[90:136](tee05.htm#fr_144.md) Le Farm, *Seventy
Years of Irish Life*, 1894, p. 41.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[90:137](tee05.htm#fr_145.md) "Hold a robin in
veneration: to kill one is most unlucky. This bird is said to tap three
times at the window before the death of any member of the family. Always
take off your hat to a magpie, or at any rate bow respectfully to him,
or evil will surely follow."--"Somerset Superstitions," in *Somerset
County Herald*, Nov. 8, 1892. The magpie seems to be held everywhere as
a portentous bird.

Augurs and understood relations have  
By magot-pies and choughs and rooks brought forth  
The secret'st man of blood.--*Macbeth*, Act iii. Sc. 4.

Nearly every district has its own special version of the omens to be
interpreted by the numbers seen at any one time. Our Somerset one
is--<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

One, sign o' anger; two, sign o' muth;  
Dree, sign o' wedding-day; vower, sign o' death  
Vive, sign o' zorrow; zix, sign o' joy;  
Zebm, sign o' maid; an' eight, sign o' boy.

The belief that the magpie is the devil's own bird is no doubt the
reason of the well-known custom alluded to above. Our vernacular "Always
take off your hat to the devil," conveys the same notion, which may be
considered as a free paraphrase of "A soft answer turneth away wrath,"
that is, disarms malignity, and so neutralises the baneful glance of an
enemy's eye.

In Ireland (Le Fanu, *op. cit.* p. 104) it is lucky to see two pies, but
unlucky to see one. This seems the universal belief.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[92:137a](tee05.htm#fr_146.md) I have shot many
owls, and have often "had bad luck." I scarcely attribute the bad luck
to the owls.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[92:138](tee05.htm#fr_147.md) Dawson, *Australian
Aborigines*, 1881, p. 52.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[92:139](tee05.htm#fr_148.md) *Ibid.* p. 50,

<span id="fn_149"></span>[92:140](tee05.htm#fr_149.md) Frazer, *Golden
Bough*, vol. i. p. 40. Bastian, *Die Völker des östlichen Asien*, vol.
iv. p. 383.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[92:141](tee05.htm#fr_150.md) For a full and
comprehensive review of totemism, see Frazer, *Golden Bough*, vol. ii.
p. 337 *et seq*. For particulars of various *gentes*, with their
customs, stories, legends, but especially for lists of birds, animals,
and objects adopted as totems with their native names, see
"Anthropological Report," *British Association Report*. 1889, p. 819 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[94:142](tee05.htm#fr_151.md) Sir Joseph Fayrer,
"Deadly Wild Beasts of India," in *Nineteenth Century*, August 1889, p.
223.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[94:143](tee05.htm#fr_152.md) *Ibid.* p. 236.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[94:144](tee05.htm#fr_153.md)

The owl shriek'd at thy birth,--an evil sign  
The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time  
Dogs howl'd, and hideous tempest shook down trees  
The raven rook'd her on the chimney's top,  
And chattering pies in dismal discords sung.  
                                 3 *Henry VI*. Act v. Sc. 6.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[95:145](tee05.htm#fr_154.md) *West Somerset
Word-Book*, p. 55; also Brand, vol. ii. p. 300; also "Superstitions," in
*Somerset County Herald*, Nov. 8, 1892.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[95:146](tee05.htm#fr_155.md) *Notes and Queries*,
Oct. 21, 1893, p. 328 (8th ser. iv.).

<span id="fn_156"></span>[96:147](tee05.htm#fr_156.md) *Wellington Weekly
News*, June 13, 1889.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[96:148](tee05.htm#fr_157.md) It should be borne
in mind that the word "grove" in the A.V. must not be always, nor indeed
generally, taken in its present sense. Authorities agree that Jezebel's
groves were idols of a special kind called *Asherah* in Hebrew. They
were symbolic trees, of which several representations are preserved in
Babylonish sculptures. The worship was particularly licentious and
obscene. Full information may be found in Smith's *Dict. of the Bible*,
s.v. "Asherah-Grove," and in Daremberg et Saglio, *Dict. des
Antiquités*. Those who require more detailed particulars must consult
books like Forlong's *Rivers of Life*, Inman's *Ancient Faiths*,
Higgins's *Anacalypsis*, etc. The latter is a learned and very
interesting book.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[97:149](tee05.htm#fr_158.md) Wilkinson, *Ancient
Egyptians*, iii, 349; see also *Ib*. pp. 110, 131, 132.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[97:150](tee05.htm#fr_159.md) *Nat. Hist.* xix.
32. The inhabitants of Pelusium were devoted to the worship of the onion
and garlic.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[97:151](tee05.htm#fr_160.md) Juvenal, *Sat.* xv.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[97:152](tee05.htm#fr_161.md) Plutarch, *De
Iside*, s. 37.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[97:153](tee05.htm#fr_162.md) Pliny, *Nat. Hist.*
xv. 35 (Bohn, vol. iii. p. 328).

<span id="fn_163"></span>[97:154](tee05.htm#fr_163.md) In Silesia (*Cultus
Arborum*, privately printed 1890, p. 76). "Frau <span id="page_97">p.
97</span> Fichte," the pine, is credited with great healing powers, and
is believed to preserve animals from harm. Boughs of it are hung up on
stable doors to keep off the evil spirits. In Bohemia, too, the pine
kernel from the topmost cone is thought to make the eater invulnerable
against shot. In other parts of Germany to tie a knot in the highest
shoot of a pine-tree is a sovereign remedy for gout! (Doubtless!).

<span id="fn_164"></span>[98:155](tee05.htm#fr_164.md) Pliny, *Nat. Hist.*
xv. 20 (Bohn, vol. iii. p. 3 10).

<span id="fn_165"></span>[98:156](tee05.htm#fr_165.md) Among the sacred
trees and plants we cannot omit the large number which in a way are,
even amongst ourselves, dedicated to or named after Our Lady. First are
those into which the name enters, as in Marigold, Marsh Marigold, Rose
Mary, Mary Buds (*Calendula officinalis*).

     Winking Mary-buds begin  
To ope their golden eyes.--*Cymbeline*, Act ii. Sc. 3.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> St. Mary's Seed
(*Sonchus Oleraceus*, Sow thistle), Mary's Tears, or Sage of Bethlehem
(Pulmonaria officinalis).

Then we have Lady Glove (*Digitalis purpurea*). This is very different
from the Italian *Guanto di nostra Signora*.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

Our Lady's Cowslip, Our Lady's Cushion, Lady's Keys (*Primula veris*),
called also in German *Frauenschlüssel*.

Our Lady's Mantle (*Alchemilla vulgaris*).

Lady's Meat, Lady's Milk, Lady's Milkwort, Our Lady's Seal (*Tamus
communis*), "Sigillum Sanctæ Mariæ."

Our Lady's Thistle (*Carduus Marianus*).

Virgin Mary's Candle (*Verbascum Thapsus*).

Virgin Mary's Cowslip and Virgin Mary's Milk-drops (*Pulmonaria
officinalis*).

Virgin Mary's Pinch (*Polygonum Persicaria*).

Virgin's Bower (*Clematis vitalba*). With very many more. We do not of
course include amongst these any plants which are not manifestly
intended by their names to indicate the B.V.M. There are very many of
these--such as Lady's Slipper, Lady's Garters, My Lady's
Looking-glass--to be found in the old herbals, but more readily in
Britten's *Eng. Plant-Names* (E. Dial. Soc.), or in Prior's *Popular
Names of British Plants*.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[100:157](tee05.htm#fr_166.md) Mannhardt, Der
Baumkultur der Germanen und ihrer Nachbarstämme, p. 51. For much
information on this subject see Frazer, *G. B.* i. 74.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[102:158](tee05.htm#fr_167.md) Upon this subject
see Forlong, *Rivers of Life*; Hargrave Jennings, *Phallicism*; Phallic
Series; Payne Knight's *Worship of Priapus*, etc. etc.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[102:159](tee05.htm#fr_168.md) Frazer, *Golden
Bough*, vol. i. p. 60 *et seq*. Much information is given and very many
authorities are quoted.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[102:160](tee05.htm#fr_169.md) Dalton, *Ethnology
of Bengal*, p. 188.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[102:161](tee05.htm#fr_170.md) J. Mackenzie, *Ten
Years North of the Orange River*, p. 385.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[103:162](tee05.htm#fr_171.md) Sir R. F. Burton,
*Pilgrimage to Meccah and Medinah*, ed. 1893, ii. 248.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[104:163](tee05.htm#fr_172.md) Borlase, *Hist. of
Cornwall*, p.. 108.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[104:164](tee05.htm#fr_173.md) *Golden Bough*,
Vol. ii. p. 291 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[104:165](tee05.htm#fr_174.md) In the Pitt Rivers
Museum is a complete collection of apparatus such as was used for the
"needfire," and is still employed by some savage races.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[104:166](tee05.htm#fr_175.md) Brand, *Pop. Ant.*
Vol. i. pp. 226, 228, 318, 337. Elton, *Orig. Eng. Hist.* p. 261. See
also Kemble, *Saxons in England*, Vol. i. p. 361.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[104:167](tee05.htm#fr_176.md) See *New Eng.
Dict.* s.v. "Beltane." "The rubbish about *Baal*, *Bel*, *Belus*,
imported into the word from the O.T. and classical antiquity, is outside
the scope of scientific etymology." The word is pure Celtic; in Gaelic
*bealltainn* is the name of the 1st of May. The word has nothing to do
with Baal, and is but one more instance of popular etymology. The very
fact that the name was applied to fires lighted at different seasons
completely destroys the Baal theory.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[104:168](tee05.htm#fr_177.md) Le Fanu, Seventy
Years of Irish Life, 1894, p. 101.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[105:169](tee05.htm#fr_178.md) See *W. Somerset
Word-Bk.* p. 820. Brand, *Pop. Ant.* vol. i. pp. 9-29. An account of the
recent performance of this curious ceremony appeared in the *Devon and
Somerset Weekly News*, Feb. 20, 1890, although Brand says the custom is
discontinued. Raymond in *Sam and Sabina* (Pseudonym Library) gives a
good account of wassailing apple-trees, and also of burning the ashen
faggot.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[106:170](tee05.htm#fr_179.md) This tree was
evidently highly prized by the ancients who had the oak as well; for
Pliny (*Nat. Hist.* xvi. 24; Bohn, iii. 365) says that the leaves of the
ash yield an extract which is a specific for the bites of serpents; that
no serpent will ever lie in the shadow of an ash, either morning or
evening, and that they keep the greatest possible distance from it. He
states positively that if a serpent and a lighted fire are placed within
a circle formed of the leaves, it will rather throw itself into the fire
than encounter the ash leaves.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[106:171](tee05.htm#fr_180.md) Referred to *ante*,
[p. 69](tee04.htm#page_69.md). Newspapers and magazines in plenty testify
to the prevalence of this well-known custom. See *Gentleman's Mag.* June
1804; also *Cultus Arborum*, Phallic Series, privately printed 1890, p.
67.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[106:172](tee05.htm#fr_181.md) George Eliot, *Mill
on the Floss*, p. 126. See also Brand, iii. 290.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[107:173](tee05.htm#fr_182.md) Many curious
beliefs as to the power of the ash-tree will be found in Brand, vol.
iii. p. 290 sq.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[107:174](tee05.htm#fr_183.md) "Crying the Neck,"
by F. T. Elworthy, *Trans. Devon Assoc.* 1891.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[108:175](tee05.htm#fr_184.md) "Tree-worship may
be traced from the interior of Africa not only into Egypt and Arabia,
but also onward uninterruptedly into Palestine and Syria, Assyria,
Persia, India, Thibet, Siam, the Philippine Islands, China, Japan and
Siberia, also westward into Asia Minor, Greece, Italy, and other
countries."--*Gen. of Earth and Man*, p. 139, in Smith's *Dict. of the
Bible.*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[108:176](tee05.htm#fr_185.md) Pliny, *Nat. Hist.*
xxiv. i. (Bohn). The whole chapter is upon the antipathies and
sympathies which exist among trees and plants.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[109:177](tee05.htm#fr_186.md) Martial, *Epigr.*
i. 33.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[110:178](tee05.htm#fr_187.md) Frazer, *Golden
Bough*, vol. i. p. 391; vol. ii. p. 67 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[112:179](tee05.htm#fr_188.md) Prof. W. Robertson
Smith, *Ency. Brit.* s.v. "Sacrifice," p. 138.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[112:180](tee05.htm#fr_189.md) Carl Lumholtz,
*Among Cannibals*, 1889, p. 272.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[112:181](tee05.htm#fr_190.md) *Ibid.* p. 274.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[112:181a](tee05.htm#fr_191.md) Letter from Mr.
Samuel Peal, resident in Assam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Symbols and Amulets](tee06.md)
