[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptn04)  [Next](ptn06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641812X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XT7I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Popular Tales from the Norse*, by George Webbe Dasent, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

### ORIGIN.

THE most careless reader can hardly fail to see that many of the Tales
in this volume have the same groundwork as those with which he has been
familiar from his earliest youth. They are Nursery Tales, in fact, of
the days when there were tales in nurseries—old wives' fables, which
have faded away before the light of gas and the power of steam. It is
long, indeed, since English nurses told these tales to English children
by force of memory and word of mouth. In a written shape, we have long
had some of them at least in English versions of the *Contes de ma Mère
l'Oye* of Perrault, and the *Contes de Fées* of Madame D'Aulnoy; those
tight-laced, high-heeled tales of the "teacup times" of Louis XIV. and
his successors, in which the popular tale appears to as much
disadvantage as an artless country girl in the stifling atmosphere of a
London theatre. From these foreign sources, after the voice of the
English reciter was hushed—and it was hushed in England more than a
century ago—our great-grandmothers learnt to tell of Cinderella and
Beauty and the Beast, of Little Red Riding-Hood and Blue Beard, mingled
together in the *Cabinet des Fées* with Sindbad the Sailor and Aladdin's
wondrous lamp; for that was an uncritical age, and its spirit breathed
hot and cold, east and west, from all quarters of the globe at once,
confusing

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

the traditions and tales of all times and countries into one incongruous
mass of fable, as much tangled and knotted as that famous pound of flax
which the lassie in one of these Tales is expected to spin into an even
woof within four-and-twenty hours. No poverty of invention or want of
power on the part of translators could entirely destroy the innate
beauty of those popular traditions; but here, in England at least, they
had almost dwindled out, or at any rate had been lost sight of as
home-growths. We had learnt to buy our own children back disguised in
foreign garb; and as for their being anything more than the mere pastime
of an idle hour—as to their having any history or science of their
own—such an absurdity was never once thought of. It had indeed, been
remarked, even in the eighteenth century—that dreary time of
indifference and doubt—that some of the popular traditions of the
nations north of the Alps contained striking resemblances and parallels
to stories in the classical mythology. But those were the days when
Greek and Latin lorded it over the other languages of the earth; and
when any such resemblance or analogy was observed, it was commonly
supposed that that base-born slave, the vulgar tongue, had dared to make
a clumsy copy of something, peculiarly belonging to the twin tyrants who
ruled all the dialects of the world with a pedant's rod.

At last, just at the close of that great war which Western Europe waged
against the genius and fortune of the first Napoleon; just as the
eagle—Prometheus and the eagle in one shape—was fast fettered by sheer
force and strength to his rock in the Atlantic, there arose a man in
Central Germany, on the old Thuringian soil, to

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

whom it was given to assert the dignity of vernacular literature, to
throw off the yoke of classical tyranny, and to claim for all the
dialects of Teutonic speech a right of ancient inheritance and perfect
freedom before unsuspected and unknown. It is almost needless to mention
this honoured name. For the furtherance of the good work which he began
nearly fifty years ago, he still lives <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) and still labours. There is no spot on
which an accent of Teutonic speech is uttered where the name of Jacob
Grimm is not a "household word." His General Grammar of all the Teutonic
Dialects from Iceland to England has proved the equality of these
tongues with their ancient classical oppressors. His Antiquities of
Teutonic Law have shewn that the codes of the Lombards, Franks, and
Goths were not mere savage, brutal customaries, based, as had been
supposed, on the absence of all law and right. His numerous treatises on
early German authors have shewn that the German poets of the Middle Age,
Godfrey of Strasburg, Wolfram von Eschenbach, Hartmann von der Aue,
Walter von der Vogelweide, and the rest, can hold their own against any
contemporary writers in other lands. And lastly, what rather concerns us
here, his Teutonic Mythology, his Reynard the Fox, and the collection of
German Popular Tales, which he and his brother William published, have
thrown a flood of light on the early history of all the branches of our
race, and have raised what had come to be looked on as mere nursery
fictions and old wives' fables—to a study fit for the energies of grown
men, and to all the dignity of a science.

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

In these pages, where we have to run over a vast tract of space, the
reader who wishes to learn and not to cavil—and for such alone this
Introduction is intended—must be content with results rather than
processes and steps. To use a homely likeness, he must be satisfied with
the soup that is set before him, and not desire to see the bones of the
ox out of which it has been boiled. When we say, therefore, that in
these latter days the philology and mythology of the East and West have
met and kissed each other; that they now go hand in hand; that they lend
one another mutual support; that one cannot be understood without the
other,—we look to be believed. We do not expect to be put to the proof,
how the labours of Grimm and his disciples on this side were first
rendered possible by the linguistic discoveries of Anquetil du Perron
and others in India and France, at the end of the last century; then
materially assisted and furthered by the researches of Sir William
Jones, Colebrooke, and others, in India and England during the early
part of this century, and finally have become identical with those of
Wilson, Bopp, Lassen, and Max Müller, at the present day. The affinity,
which exists in a mythological and philological point of view, between
the Aryan or Indo-European languages on the one hand, and the Sanscrit
on the other, is now the first article of a literary creed, and the man
who denies it puts himself as much beyond the pale of argument as he
who, in a religious discussion, should meet a grave divine of the Church
of England with the strict contradictory of her first article, and
loudly declare his conviction that there was no God. In a general way,
then, we may be permitted to dogmatize, and to lay it down as a law
which

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

is always in force, that the first authentic history of a nation is the
history of its tongue. We can form no notion of the literature of a
country apart from its language, and the consideration of its language
necessarily involves the consideration of its history. Here is England,
for instance, with a language, and therefore a literature, composed of
Celtic, Roman, Saxon, Norse, and Romance elements. Is not this simple
fact suggestive of—nay, does it not challenge us to—an inquiry into the
origin and history of the races who have passed over our island, and
left their mark not only on the soil but on our speech? Again, to take a
wider view, and to rise from archæology to science, what problem has
interested the world in a greater degree than the origin of man, and
what toil has not been spent in tracing all races back to their common
stock? The science of comparative philology—the inquiry, not into one
isolated language—for now-a-days it may fairly be said of a man who
knows only one language that he knows none—but into all the languages of
one family, and thus to reduce them to one common centre, from which
they spread like the rays of the sun,—if it has not solved, is in a fair
way of solving, this problem. When we have done for the various members
of each family what has been done of late years for the Indo-European
tongues, its solution will be complete. In such an inquiry the history
of a race is, in fact, the history of its language, and can be nothing
else; for we have to deal with times antecedent to all history, properly
so called, and the stream which in later ages may be divided into many
branches now flows in a single channel.

From the East, then, came our ancestors, in days of immemorial
antiquity, in that grey dawn of time of which

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

all early songs and lays can tell, but of which it is, as impossible as
it is useless to attempt to fix the date. Impossible, because no means
exist for ascertaining it,; useless, because it is in reality a matter
of utter indifference, when, as this tell-tale crust of earth informs
us, we have: an infinity of ages and periods to fall back on, <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) whether

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

this great movement, this mighty lust to change their seats, seized on
the Aryan race one hundred or one thousand years sooner or later. But
from the East we came, and from that central plain of Asia, now commonly
called Iran. Iran, the habitation of the tillers and

<span id="page_l">p. l</span>

*carers* <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) of the earth, as opposed to
Turan, the abode of restless horse-riding nomads—of Turks, in short; for
in their name the root survives, and still distinguishes the great
Turanian or Mongolian family from. the Aryan, Iranian, or Indo-European
race. It is scarce worth while to inquire—even if inquiry could lead to
any result—what cause set them in motion from their ancient seats.
Whether impelled by famine or internal strife, starved out like other
nationalities in recent times, or led on by adventurous chiefs, whose
spirit chafed at the narrowness of home, certain it is that they left
that home and began a wandering westwards, which only ceased when it
reached the Atlantic and the Northern Ocean. Nor was the fate of those
they left behind less strange. At some period almost as remote as, but
after, that at which the wanderers for Europe started, the remaining
portion of the

<span id="page_li">p. li</span>

stock, or a considerable offshoot from it, turned their faces east, and
passing the Indian Caucasus, poured through the defiles of Affghanistan,
crossed the plain of the Five Rivers, and descended on the fruitful
plains of India. The different destiny of these stocks has been
wonderful indeed. Of those who went west, we have only to enumerate the
names under which they appear in history—Celts, Greeks, Romans, Teutons,
Slavonians—to see and to know at once that the stream of this migration
has borne on its waves all that has become most precious to man. To use
the words of Max Müller: "They have been the prominent actors in the
great drama of history, and have carried to their fullest growth all the
elements of active life with which our nature is endowed. They have
perfected society and morals, and we learn from their literature and
works of art the elements of science, the laws of art, and the
principles of philosophy. In continual struggle with each other, and
with Semitic and Mongolian races, these Aryan nations have become the
rulers of history, and it seems to be their mission to link all parts of
the world together by the chains of civilisation, commerce, and
religion." We may add, that though by nature tough and enduring, they
have not been obstinate and self-willed; they have been distinguished
from. all other nations, and particularly from their elder brothers whom
they left behind, by their common sense, by their power of adapting
themselves to all circumstances, and by making the best of their
position; above all, they have been teachable, ready to receive
impressions from without, and, when received, to develop them. To shew
the truth of this, we need only observe, that they adopted Christianity

<span id="page_lii">p. lii</span>

from another race, the most obstinate and stiff-necked the world has
ever seen, who, trained under the Old Dispensation to preserve the
worship of the one true God, were too proud to accept the further
revelation of God under the New, and, rejecting their birthright,
suffered their inheritance to pass into other hands.

Such, then, has been the lot of the Western branch, of the younger
brother, who, like the younger brother whom we shall meet so often in
these Popular Tales, went out into the world, with nothing but his good
heart and God's blessing to guide him; and now has come to all honour
and fortune, and to be a king, ruling over the world. He went out and
did. Let us see now what became of the elder brother, who stayed at home
some time after his brother went out, and then only made a short
journey. Having driven out the few aboriginal inhabitants of India with
little effort, and following the course of the great rivers, the Eastern
Aryans gradually established themselves all over the peninsula; and
then, in calm possession of a world of their own, undisturbed by
conquest from without, and accepting with apathy any change of dynasty
among their rulers, ignorant of the past and careless of the future,
they sat down once for all and *thought*—thought not of what they had to
do here, that stern lesson of every-day life from which neither men nor
nations can escape if they are to live with their fellows, but how they
could abstract themselves entirely from their present existence, and
immerse themselves wholly in dreamy speculations on the future. Whatever
they may have been during their short migration and subsequent
settlement, it is certain that they appear in the Vedas—

<span id="page_liii">p. liii</span>

perhaps the earliest collection which the world possesses—as a nation of
philosophers. Well may Professor Müller compare the Indian mind to a
plant reared in a hot-house, gorgeous in colour, rich in perfume,
precocious and abundant in fruit; it may be all this, "but will never be
like the oak, growing in wind and weather, striking its roots into real
earth, and stretching its branches into real air, beneath the stars and
sun of Heaven"; and well does he also remark, that a people of this
peculiar stamp was never destined to act a prominent part in the history
of the world; nay, the exhausting atmosphere of transcendental ideas
could not but exercise a detrimental influence on the active and moral
character of the Hindoos. <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20)

<span id="page_liv">p. liv</span>

In this passive, abstract, unprogressive state, they have remained ever
since. Stiffened into castes, and tongue-tied and hand-tied by absurd
rites and ceremonies, they were heard of in dim legends by Herodotus;
they were seen by Alexander when that bold spirit pushed his phalanx
beyond the limits of the known world; they trafficked with imperial
Rome, and the later empire; they were again almost lost sight of, and
became fabulous, in the Middle Age; they were rediscovered by the
Portuguese; they have been alternately peaceful subjects and desperate
rebels to us English; but they have been still the same immovable and
unprogressive philosophers, though akin to Europe all the while; and
though the Highlander, who drives his bayonet through the heart of a
high-caste Sepoy mutineer, little knows that his pale features and sandy
hair, and that dusk face with its raven locks, both come from a common
ancestor away in Central Asia, many, many centuries ago.

<span id="page_lv">p. lv</span>

But here arises the question, What interest can we, the descendants of
the practical brother, heirs to so much historical renown, possibly take
in the records of a race so historically characterless, and so sunk in
reveries and mysticism? The answer is easy. Those records are written in
a language closely allied to the primeval common tongue of those two
branches before they parted, and descending from a period anterior to
their separation. It may, or it may not, be the very tongue itself, but
it certainly is not further removed than a few steps. The speech of the
emigrants to the west rapidly changed with the changing circumstances
and various fortune of each of its waves, and in their intercourse with
the aboriginal population they often adopted foreign elements into their
language. One of these waves, it is probable, passing by way of Persia
and Asia Minor, crossed the Hellespont and, following the coast, threw
off a mighty rill, known in after times as Greeks; while the main
stream, striking through Macedonia, either crossed the Adriatic, or,
still hugging the coast, came down on Italy, to be known as Latins.
Another, passing between the Caspian and the Black Sea, filled the
steppes round the Crimea, and, passing on over the Balkan and the
Carpathians towards the west, became that great Teutonic nationality
which, under various names, but all closely akin, filled, when we first
hear of them in historical times, the space between the Black Sea and
the Baltic, and was then slowly but surely driving before them the great
wave of the Celts which had preceded them in their wandering, and which
had probably followed the same line of march as the ancestors of the
Greeks and Latins,—a movement which lasted until all

<span id="page_lvi">p. lvi</span>

that was left of Celtic nationality was either absorbed by the
intruders, or forced aside and driven to take refuge in mountain
fastnesses and outlying islands. Besides all these, there was still
another wave, which is supposed to have passed between the Sea of Aral
and the Caspian, and, keeping still further to the north and east, to
have passed between its kindred Teutons and the Mongolian tribes, and so
to have lain in the background until we find them appearing as
Slavonians on the scene of history. Into so many great stocks did the
Western Aryans pass, each possessing strongly marked nationalities and
languages, and these seemingly so distinct that each often asserted that
the other spoke a barbarous tongue. But, for all that, each of those
tongues bears about with it still, and in earlier times no doubt bore
still more plainly about with it, infallible evidence of common origin,
so that each dialect can be traced up to that primeval form of speech
still in the main preserved in the Sanscrit by the Southern Aryan
branch, who, careless of practical life, and immersed in speculation,
have clung to their ancient traditions and tongue with wonderful
tenacity. It is this which has given such value to Sanscrit, a tongue of
which it may be said that if it had perished the sun would never have
risen on the science of comparative philology. Before the discoveries in
Sanscrit of Sir William Jones, Wilkins, Wilson, and others, the world
had striven to find the common ancestor of European languages, sometimes
in the classical, and sometimes in the Semitic tongues. In the one case
the result was a tyranny of Greek and Latin over the non-classical
tongues, and in the other the most uncritical and unphilosophical waste
of learning.

<span id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> No doubt some
striking analogies exist between the Indo-European family and the
Semitic stock, just as there are remarkable analogies between the
Mongolian and Indo-European families; but the ravings of Vallancey, in
his effort to connect the Erse with Phœnician, are an awful warning of
what unscientific inquiry, based upon casual analogy, may bring itself
to believe, and even to fancy it has proved.

These general observations, then, and this rapid bird's-eye view, may
suffice to show the common affinity which exists between the Eastern and
Western Aryans; between the Hindoo on the one hand, and the nations of
Western Europe on the other. That is the fact to keep steadily before
our eyes. We all came, Greek, Latin, Celt, Teuton, Slavonian, from the
East, as kith and kin, leaving kith and kin behind us; and after
thousands of years, the language and traditions of those who went East,
and those who went West, bear such an affinity to each other, as to have
established, beyond discussion or dispute, the fact of their descent
from a common stock.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xlv:1](ptn05.htm#fr_17) \[He died in 1863. This
Introduction was written in 1858.\]

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xlviii:1](ptn05.htm#fr_18) How strange is the
terror of Natural Science, which seems to possess, with a religious
possession, so many good and pious people! How rigidly do they bind
themselves hand and foot with the mere letter of the law, forgetting Him
who came to teach us that "the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth
life"! What are we to say of those who, when the old crust which clogs
and hampers human knowledge is cracking and breaking all around them,
when the shell is too narrow an abode for the life within it, which is
preparing to cast it off, still cling to the crust and shell, looking,
like the disciples by the sepulchre, at the linen clothes lying, and
know not that He has risen in glory? These are they who obstinately
refuse to believe in the "Testimony of the Rocks," who deny Geology the
thousands, nay millions, of years which she requires to make her
deposits in Nature's great saving-bank. These are they for whom the
Nile, as he brings down year by year his tribute to the sea from Central
Africa, lays down in vain layer after layer of alluvial deposit, which
can be measured to an inch for tens of thousands of years. These are
they to whom the comparatively younger growth of trees, the dragon tree
of Orotava, and the cedars of California, plead in vain when they shew,
year after year, ring on ring of wood for thousands of years. "No; the
world is only five or six thousands of years old, or thereabouts. The
Old Testament"—the dates in which have been confessedly tampered with,
and in some cases <span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span> forged and
fabricated by Hebrew scribes—"says so. We believe in it; we will believe
in nothing else, not even in our senses. We will believe literally in
the first chapter of Genesis, in working days and nights of twenty-four
hours, even before the sun and moon were made, on the fourth day, 'to
divide the day from the night,' and to be 'for signs and for seasons,
and for days and years.' We will not hear of ages or periods, but
'days,' because the 'letter' says so." This is what our Western Brahmins
say; but if they remembered that He who set sun and moon also planted
the eye and ear, that He gave sense, and speech, and mind; if they
considered that faith is a lively thing, elastic and expansive; that it
embraces a thousand or a million years as easily as a moment of time;
that bonds cannot fetter it, nor distance darken and dismay it; that it
is given to man to grow with his growth and strengthen with his
strength; that it rises at doubts and difficulties, and surmounts
them—they would cease to condemn all the world to wear their own
strait-waistcoat, cut and sewn by rabbis and doctors some thousand years
ago; a garment which the human intellect has altogether outgrown, which
it is ridiculous to wear, which careless and impious men laugh at when
it is seen in the streets; and might begin to see that spirit is spirit,
and flesh is flesh; that while one lives for ever, the other is
corruptible and passes away; that there are developments in faith as in
everything else; that as man's intellect and human knowledge have grown
and expanded, so his faith must grow <span id="page_l">p. l</span> and
expand too; that it really matters nothing at all, as an act of faith,
whether the world is six thousand or six million years old; that it must
have had a beginning; that there must be one great first cause, God.
Surely there is no better way to bring His goodness into question, to
throw doubt on His revelation, and to make it the laughing-stock of the
irreligious, than thus to clip the wings of faith, to throw her into a
dungeon, to keep her from the light of day, to make her read through
Hebrew spectacles, and to force her to be a laggard and dullard, instead
of a bright and volatile spirit, forward and foremost in the race of
life.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[l:1](ptn05.htm#fr_19) "But if the first heir of
my invention prove deformed, I shall be sorry it had so noble a
godfather, and never after ear so barren a land, for fear it yield me
still so bad a harvest."—SHAKESPEARE, *Dedication to Venus and Adonis*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[liii:1](ptn05.htm#fr_20) As a specimen of their
thoughtful turn of mind, even in the Vedas, at a time before the
monstrous avatars of the Hindoo Pantheon were imagined, and when their
system of philosophy, properly so called, had no existence, the
following metrical translation of the 129th hymn of the 10th book of the
*Rig-Veda* may be quoted, which Professor Müller assures us is of a very
early date:—

"Nor aught nor nought existed; yon bright sky  
Was not, nor Heaven's broad woof outstretched above.  
What covered all? what sheltered? what concealed?  
Was it the water's fathomless abyss?  
There was not death—yet was there nought immortal.  
There was no confine betwixt day and night;  
The only One breathed breathless by itself,  
Other than It there nothing since has been.  
Darkness there was, and all at first was veiled  
In gloom profound—an ocean without light—  
The germ that still lay covered in the husk  
Burst forth, one nature, from the fervent heat.  
Then first came love upon it, the new spring  
Of mind—yea, poets in their hearts discerned,<span id="page_liv">p.
liv</span>  
Pondering, this bond between created things  
And uncreated. Comes this spark from earth,  
Piercing and all-pervading, or from Heaven?  
Then seeds were sown, and mighty powers arose—  
Nature below, and power and will above—  
Who knows the secret? who proclaimed it here,  
Whence, whence this manifold creation sprang?  
The Gods themselves came later into being—  
Who knows from whence this great creation sprang?  
He from whom all this great creation came,  
Whether His will created or was mute,  
The Most High Seer that is in highest heaven,  
He knows it—or perchance even he knows not."

If we reflect that this hymn was composed centuries before the time of
Hesiod, we shall be better able to appreciate the speculative character
of the Indian mind in its earliest stage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Diffusion](ptn06)
