[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptn00)  [Next](ptn02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641812X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XT7I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Popular Tales from the Norse*, by George Webbe Dasent, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# NOTICE TO THE SECOND EDITION.

THE first edition of these Tales being exhausted, and a demand having
arisen for a second, the Translator has thought it right to add thirteen
tales, which complete the translation of MM. Asbjörnsen and Moe's
Collection, and to strengthen the Introduction by working in some new
matter, and by working out some points which were only slightly sketched
in the first edition.

The favour with which the book was welcomed makes it almost a duty to
say a word here on the many kind and able notices which have been
written upon it. Duties are not always pleasant, but the fulfilment of
this at least gives no pain; because, without one exception, every
criticism which the Translator has seen has shewn him that his prayer
for "gentle" readers has been fully heard. It will be forgiven him, he
hopes, when he says that he has not seen good ground to change or even
to modify any of the opinions as to the origin and diffusion of popular
tales put forth in the first edition. Much

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

indeed has been said by others *for* those views; what has been urged
*against* them, with all kindness and good humour, in one or two cases,
has not availed at all to weigh down mature convictions deliberately
expressed after the studies of years, backed as they are by the
researches and support of those who have given their lives to this
branch of knowledge.

And now, before the Translator takes leave of his readers for the second
time, he will follow the lead of the good godmother in one of these
Tales, and forbid all good children to read the two which stand last in
the book. There is this difference between him and the godmother. She
found her foster-daughter out as soon as she came back. He will never
know it, if any bad child has broken his behest. Still he hopes that all
good children who read this book will bear in mind that there is just as
much sin in breaking a commandment even though it be not found out, and
so he bids them good-bye, and feels sure that no good child will dare to
look into those two rooms. If, after this warning, they peep in, they
may perhaps see something which will shock them.

"Why then print them at all?" some grown reader asks. Because this
volume is meant for you as well as for children, and if you have gone
ever so little into the world with open eyes, you must have seen, yes,
every day, things much more shocking. Because there is nothing

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

immoral in their spirit. Because they are intrinsically valuable, as
illustrating manners and traditions, and so could not well be left out.
Because they complete the number of the Norse originals, and leave none
untranslated. And last, though not least, because the Translator hates
family versions of anything, "Family Bibles," "Family Shakespeares."
Those who, with so large a choice of beauty before them, would pick out
and gloat over this or that coarseness or freedom of expression, are
like those who, in reading the Bible, should always turn to Leviticus,
or those whose Shakespeare would open of itself at Pericles Prince of
Tyre. Such readers the Translator does not wish to have.

<span class="small">BROAD SANCTUARY,  
  *March* 12, 1859.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notice to the First Edition](ptn02.md)
