[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptn63)  [Next](ptn65.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641812X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XT7I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Popular Tales from the Norse*, by George Webbe Dasent, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Cock and Hen a-Nutting

Once on a time the cock and the hen went out into the hazel-wood to pick
nuts; and so the hen got a nutshell in her throat, and lay on her back,
flapping her wings.

Off went the cock to fetch water for her; so he came to the Spring and
said,—

"Dear good friend Spring, give me a drop of water, that I may give it to
Dame Partlet my mate, who lies at death's door in the hazel-wood."

But the Spring answered,—

"You'll get no water from me until I get leaves from you."

So the Cock ran to the Linden and said,—

"Dear good friend Linden, give me some of your leaves, the leaves I'll
give to the Spring, and the Spring'll give me water to give to Dame
Partlet my mate, who lies at death's door in the hazel-wood."

"You'll get no leaves from me," said the Linden, <span id="page_379">p.
379</span> "until I get a red ribbon with a golden edge from you."

So the cock ran to the Virgin Mary.

"Dear good Virgin Mary, give me a red ribbon with a golden edge, and
I'll give the red ribbon to the Linden, the Linden'll give me leaves,
the leaves I'll give to the Spring, the Spring'll give me water, and the
water I'll give to Dame Partlet my mate, who lies at death's door in the
hazel-wood."

"You'll get no red ribbon from me," answered the Virgin Mary, "until I
get shoes from you."

So the Cock ran to the Shoemaker and said,—

"Dear good friend Shoemaker, give me shoes, and I'll give the shoes to
the Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary'll give me a red ribbon, the red ribbon
I'll give to the Linden, the Linden'll give me leaves, the leaves I'll
give to the Spring, the Spring'll give me water, the water I'll give to
Dame Partlet my mate, who lies at death's door in the hazel-wood."

"You'll get no shoes from me," said the Shoemaker, "until I get bristles
from you."

So the Cock ran to the Sow and said,— "Dear good friend Sow, give me
bristles, the bristles I'll give to the Shoemaker, the Shoemaker'll give
me shoes, the shoes I'll give to the Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary'll
give me a red ribbon, the red ribbon I'll give to the Linden, the
Linden'll give me leaves, the leaves I'll give to the Spring, the
Spring'll give me water, the water I'll give to Dame Partlet my mate,
who lies at death's door in the hazel-wood."

"You'll get no bristles from me," said the Sow, "until I get corn from
you."

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

So the Cock ran to the Thresher and said,—

"Dear good friend Thresher, give me corn, the corn I'll give to the Sow,
the Sow'll give me bristles, the bristles I'll give to the Shoemaker,
the Shoemaker'll give me shoes, the shoes I'll give to the Virgin Mary,
the Virgin Mary'll give me a red ribbon, the red ribbon I'll give to the
Linden, the Linden'll give me leaves, the leaves I'll give to the
Spring, the Spring'll give me water, the water I'll give to Dame Partlet
my mate, who lies at death's door in the hazel-wood."

"You'll get no corn from me," said the Thresher, "until I get a bannock
from you."

So the Cock ran to the Baker's wife and said,—

"Dear good friend Mrs. Baker, give me a bannock, the bannock I'll give
to the Thresher, the Thresher'll give me corn, the corn I'll give to the
Sow, the Sow'll give me bristles, the bristles I'll give to the
Shoemaker, the Shoemaker'll give me shoes, the shoes I'll give to the
Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary'll give me a red ribbon, the red ribbon
I'll give to the Linden, the Linden'll give me leaves, the leaves I'll
give to the Spring, the Spring'll give me water, the water I'll give to
Dame Partlet my mate, who lies at death's door in the hazel-wood."

"You'll get no bannock from me," said the Baker's wife, "until I get
wood from you."

So the Cock ran to the Woodcutter and said,—

"Dear good friend Woodcutter, give me wood, the wood I'll give to the
Baker's wife, the Baker's wife'll give me a bannock, the bannock I'll
give to the Thresher, the Thresher'll give me corn, the corn I'll give
to the Sow, the Sow'll give me bristles, the bristles I'll give to the
<span id="page_381">p. 381</span> Shoemaker, the Shoemaker'll give me
shoes, the shoes I'll give to the Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary'll give
me a red ribbon, the red ribbon I'll give to the Linden, the Linden'll
give me leaves, the leaves I'll give to the Spring, the Spring'll give
me water, the water I'll give to Dame Partlet my mate, who lies at
death's door in the hazel-wood."

"You'll get no wood from me," answered the Woodcutter, "until I get an
axe from you."

So the Cock ran to the Smith and said,—

"Dear good friend Smith, give me an axe, the axe I'll give to the
Woodcutter, the Woodcutter'll give me wood, the wood I'll give to the
Baker's wife, the Baker's wife'll give me a bannock, the bannock I'll
give to the Thresher, the Thresher'll give me corn, the corn I'll give
to the Sow, the Sow'll give me bristles, the bristles I'll give to the
Shoemaker, the Shoemaker'll give me shoes, the shoes I'll give to the
Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary'll give me a red ribbon, the red ribbon
I'll give to the Linden, the Linden'll give me leaves, the leaves I'll
give to the Spring, the Spring'll give me water, the water I'll give to
Dame Partlet my mate, who lies at death's door in the hazel-wood."

"You'll get no axe from me," answered the Smith, "until I get charcoal
from you."

So the Cock ran to the Charcoal-burner and said,—

"Dear good friend Charcoal-burner, give me charcoal, the charcoal I'll
give to the Smith, the Smith'll give me an axe, the axe I'll give to the
Woodcutter, the Woodcutter'll give me wood, the wood I'll give to the
Baker's wife, the Baker's wife'll give me a bannock, the bannock I'll
give to the Thresher, the Thresher'll give me corn, the corn I'll <span
id="page_382">p. 382</span> give to the Sow, the Sow'll give me
bristles, the bristles I'll give to the Shoemaker, the Shoemaker'll give
me shoes, the shoes I'll give to the Virgin Mary, the Virgin Mary'll
give me a red ribbon, the red ribbon I'll give to the Linden, the
Linden'll give me leaves, the leaves I'll give to the Spring, the
Spring'll give me water, the water I'll give to Dame Partlet my mate,
who lies at death's door in the hazel-wood."

So the Charcoal-burner took pity on the Cock, and gave him a bit of
charcoal, and then the Smith got his coal, and the Woodcutter his axe,
and the Baker's wife her wood, and the Thresher his bannock, and the Sow
her corn, and the Shoemaker his bristles, and the Virgin Mary her shoes,
and the Linden its red ribbon with a golden edge, and the Spring its
leaves, and the Cock his drop of water, and he gave it to Dame Partlet,
his mate, who lay there at death's door in the hazel-wood, and so she
got all right again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Big Bird Dan](ptn65.md)
