[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptn74)  [Next](ptn76.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641812X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XT7I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Popular Tales from the Norse*, by George Webbe Dasent, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE EAR OF CORN AND THE TWELVE MEN.

\[This tale is imperfect at the beginning.\]

ANANZI said to the King, that if he would give him an ear of corn, he
would bring him twelve strong men. The king gave him the ear of corn,
and he went away. At last he got to a house, where he asked for a
night's lodging which was given him; the next morning he got up very
early, and threw the ear of corn out of the door to the fowls, and went
back to bed. When he got up in the morning, he looked for his ear of
corn, and could not find it anywhere, so he told them he was sure the
fowls had eaten it, and he would not be satisfied unless they gave him
the best cock they had. So they were obliged to give him the cook, and
he went away with it, all day, until night, when he came to another
house, and asked again for a night's lodging, which he got; but when
they wanted to put the cock into the fowl-house, he said,

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

no, the cook must sleep in the pen with the sheep, so they put the cock
with the sheep. At midnight he got up, killed the cock, threw it back
into the pen, and went back to bed. Next morning, when it was time for
him to go away, his cock was dead, and he would not take anything for it
but one of the best sheep, so they gave it to him, and be went off with
it all that day, until night-fall, when he got to a village, where he
again asked for a night's lodging, which was given to him, and when-they
wanted to put his sheep with the other sheep, he said, no, the sheep
must sleep with the cattle; so they put the sheep with the cattle. In
the middle of the night he got up and killed the sheep, and went back to
bed. Next morning he went for his sheep, which was dead, so he told them
they must give him the best heifer for his sheep, and if they would not
do so, he would go back and tell the King, who would come and make war
on them.

So to get rid of him, they were glad to give him the heifer, and let him
go; and away he went, and walked nearly all day with the heifer. Towards
evening he met a funeral, and asked whose it was? one of the men said,
it was his sister, so he asked the men if they would let him have her;
they said no, but after a while, he begged so hard, saying he would give
them the heifer, that they consented, and he took, the dead body and
walked away, carrying it until it was dark, when he came to a large
town, where he went to a house and begged hard for a night's lodging for
himself and his sister, who was so tired he was obliged to carry her,
and they would be thankful if they would let them rest there that night.
So they let them in, and he asked them to let them sit in the dark, as
his sister could not bear the light. So they took them into a room, and
left them in the dark; and when they were alone, he seated himself on a
bench near the table, and put his sister close by his side, with his arm
round her to keep her up. Presently they brought them in some supper;
one plate he set before his sister, and put her hand in it, and the
other plate for himself, but he ate out of both plates. When it was time
to go to bed, he asked if they would allow his

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

sister to sleep in a room where there were twelve strong men sleeping,
for she had fits, and if she had one in the night, they would be able to
hold her, and would not disturb the rest of the house. So they agreed to
this, and he carried her in his arms, because, he said, she was so
tired, she was asleep, and laid her in a bed; he charged the men not to
disturb her, and went himself to sleep in the next room. In the middle
of the night he heard the men calling out, for they smelt a horrid
smell, and tried to wake the woman—first one man gave her a blow, and
then another, until all the men had struck her, but Ananzi took no
notice of the noise. In the morning when he went in for his sister and
found her dead, he declared they had killed her, and that he must have
the twelve men; to this the townsmen said no, not supposing that all the
men had killed her, but the men confessed that they had each given her a
blow—so he would not be satisfied with less than the twelve, and he
carried them off to the King, and [delivered](errata.htm#3.md) them up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The King and the Ant's Tree](ptn76.md)
