[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptn73)  [Next](ptn75) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641812X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XT7I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Popular Tales from the Norse*, by George Webbe Dasent, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

### ANANZI AND QUANQUA.

QUANQUA was a very clever fellow, and he had a large house full of all
sorts of meat. But you must know he had a way of saying *Quan*? *Qua*?
(how? what?) when any one asked him anything, and so they called him
"Quanqua." One day when he was out, he met Atoukama, Ananzi's wife, who
was going along driving an ox, but the ox would not walk, so Atoukama
asked Quanqua to help her; and they got on pretty well till they came to
a river, when the ox would not cross through the water. Then Atoukama
called to Quanqua to drive the ox across, but all she got out of him
was, "QUAN? QUA? *Quan*? *Qua*?" At last she said, "Oh! you stupid
fellow, you're no good; stop here and mind the ox while I go and get
help to drive him across." So off she went to fetch Ananzi. As soon as
Atoukama was gone away, Quanqua killed the ox, and hid it all away,
where Ananzi should not see it; but first he cut off the tail, then he
dug a hole near the river side, and stuck the tail partly in, leaving
out the tip. When he saw Ananzi coming, he caught hold of the tail,
pretending to tug at it as if he were pulling the ox out of the hole.
Ananzi seeing this, ran up as fast as be could, and tugging at the tail
with all his might, fell over into the river, but he still had hold of
the tail, and contrived to get across the water, when he called out to
Quanqua, "You idle fellow, you couldn't take care of the ox, so you
shan't have a bit of the tail," and then on he went. When he was gone
quite out of sight, Quanqua took the ox home, and made a very good
dinner.

Next day he went to Ananzi's house, and said, Ananzi must give him some
of the tail, for he had got plenty of yams, but he had no meat. Then
they agreed to cook their pot together. Quanqua was to put in white
yams, and Ananzi the tail, and red yams. When they came to put the yams
in, Quanqua put

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

in a great many white yams, but Ananzi only put in one little red
cush-cush yam. Quanqua asked him if that little yam would be enough? he
said, "Oh! plenty, for I don't eat much."

When the pot boiled, they uncovered it, and sat down to eat their
shares, but they couldn't find any white yams at all; the little red one
had turned them all red. So Ananzi claimed them all, and Quanqua was
glad to take what Ananzi would give him.

Now, when they had done eating, they said they would try which could
bear heat best, so they heated two irons, and Ananzi was to try first on
Quanqua, but he made so many attempts, that the iron got cold before he
got near him; then it was Quanqua's turn, and he pulled the iron out of
the fire, and poked it right down Ananzi's throat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ear of Corn and the Twelve Men](ptn75)
