<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mlc04)  [Next](mlc06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486280926/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6FKE/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths and Legends of China*, by Edward T.C. Werner, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Chapter III

# Cosmogony-p’an Ku and the Creation Myth

## The Fashioner of the Universe

The most conspicuous figure in Chinese cosmogony is P’an Ku. He it was
who chiselled the universe out of Chaos. According to Chinese ideas, he
was the offspring of the original dual powers of Nature, the *yin* and
the *yang* (to be considered presently), which, having in some
incomprehensible way produced him, set him the task of giving form to
Chaos and “making the heavens and the earth.”

Some accounts describe him as the actual creator of the universe—“the
ancestor of Heaven and earth and all that live and move and have their
being.” ‘P’an’ means ‘the shell of an egg,’ and ‘Ku’ ‘to secure,’
‘solid,’ referring to P’an Ku being hatched from out of Chaos and to his
settling the arrangement of the causes to which his origin was due. The
characters themselves may, however, mean nothing more than ‘Researches
into antiquity,’ though some bolder translators have assigned to them
the significance if not the literal sense of ‘aboriginal abyss,’ or the
Babylonian Tiamat, ‘the Deep.’

P’an Ku is pictured as a man of dwarfish stature clothed in bearskin, or
merely in leaves or with an apron of leaves. He has two horns on his
head. In his right hand he holds a hammer and in his left a chisel
(sometimes these are reversed), the only implements he used in carrying
out his great task. Other pictures show him attended in his labours by
the four supernatural creatures—the unicorn, phoenix, tortoise, and
dragon; others again with the sun in one hand and the moon in the other,
<span id="page_77">p. 77</span> some of the firstfruits of his
stupendous labours. (The reason for these being there will be apparent
presently.) His task occupied eighteen thousand years, during which he
formed the sun, moon, and stars, the heavens and the earth, himself
increasing in stature day by day, being daily six feet taller than the
day before, until, his labours ended, he died that his works might live.
His head became the mountains, his breath the wind and clouds, his voice
the thunder, his limbs the four quarters of the earth, his blood the
rivers, his flesh the soil, his beard the constellations, his skin and
hair the herbs and trees, his teeth, bones, and marrow the metals,
rocks, and precious stones, his sweat the rain, and the insects creeping
over his body human beings, who thus had a lowlier origin even than the
tears of Khepera in Egyptian cosmology.  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md)

This account of P’an Ku and his achievements is of Taoist origin. The
Buddhists have given a somewhat different account of him, which is a
late adaptation from the Taoist myth, and must not be mistaken for
Buddhist cosmogony proper.  <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3.md)

## The Sun and the Moon

In some of the pictures of P’an Ku he is represented, as already noted,
as holding the sun in one hand and the moon in the other. Sometimes they
are in the form of those bodies, sometimes in the classic character. The
legend says that when P’an Ku put things in order in the lower world, he
did not put these two luminaries in their proper courses, so they
retired into the Han Sea, and the people dwelt in darkness. The
Terrestrial <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> Emperor sent an officer,
Terrestrial Time, with orders that they should come forth and take their
places in the heavens and give the world day and night. They refused to
obey the order. They were reported to Ju Lai; P’an Ku was called, and,
at the divine direction of Buddha, wrote the character for ‘sun’ in his
left hand, and that for ‘moon’ in his right hand; and went to the Han
Sea, and stretched forth his left hand and called the sun, and then
stretched forth his right hand and called the moon, at the same time
repeating a charm devoutly seven times; and they forthwith ascended on
high, and separated time into day and night.  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[3](#fn_4.md)

Other legends recount that P’an Ku had the head of a dragon and the body
of a serpent; and that by breathing he caused the wind, by opening his
eyes he created day, his voice made the thunder, etc.

## P’an Ku and Ymer

Thus we have the heavens and the earth fashioned by this wonderful being
in eighteen thousand years. With regard to him we may adapt the
Scandinavian ballad:

  
It was Time’s morning  
When P’an Ku lived;  
There was no sand, no sea,  
Nor cooling billows;

  
Earth there was none,  
No lofty Heaven;  
No spot of living green;  
Only a deep profound.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span> 

And it is interesting to note, in passing, the similarity between this
Chinese artificer of the universe and Ymer, the giant, who discharges
the same functions in Scandinavian mythology. Though P’an Ku did not
have the same kind of birth nor meet with the violent death of the
latter, the results as regards the origin of the universe seem to have
been pretty much the same.  <span id="fr_5"></span>[4](#fn_5.md)

## P’an Ku a Late Creation

But though the Chinese creation myth deals with primeval things it does
not itself belong to a primitive time. According to some writers whose
views are entitled to respect, it was invented during the fourth century
A.D. by the Taoist recluse, Magistrate Ko Hung, author of the *Shên
hsien chuan* (*Biographies of the Gods*). The picturesque person of P’an
Ku is said to have been a concession to the popular dislike of, or
inability to comprehend, the abstract. He was conceived, some Chinese
writers say, because the philosophical explanations of the Cosmos were
too recondite for the ordinary mind to grasp. That he did fulfil the
purpose of furnishing the <span id="page_80">p. 80</span> ordinary mind
with a fairly easily comprehensible picture of the creation may be
admitted; but, as will presently be seen, it is over-stating the case to
say that he was conceived with the set purpose of furnishing the
ordinary mind with a concrete solution or illustration of this great
problem. There is no evidence that P’an Ku had existed as a tradition
before the time when we meet with the written account of him; and, what
is more, there is no evidence that there existed any demand on the part
of the popular mind for any such solution or illustration. The ordinary
mind would seem to have been either indifferent to or satisfied with the
abstruse cosmogonical and cosmological theories of the early sages for
at least a thousand years. The cosmogonies of the *I ching*, of Lao Tzŭ,
Confucius (such as it was), Kuan Tzŭ, Mencius, Chuang Tzŭ, were
impersonal. P’an Ku and his myth must be regarded rather as an accident
than as a creation resulting from any sudden flow of psychological
forces or wind of discontent ruffling the placid Chinese mind. If the
Chinese brought with them from Babylon or anywhere else the elements of
a cosmogony, whether of a more or less abstruse scientific nature or a
personal mythological narrative, it must have been subsequently
forgotten or at least has not survived in China. But for Ko Hung’s
eccentricity and his wish to experiment with cinnabar from Cochin-China
in order to find the elixir of life, P’an Ku would probably never have
been invented, and the Chinese mind would have been content to go on
ignoring the problem or would have quietly acquiesced in the abstract
philosophical explanations of the learned which it did not understand.
Chinese cosmogony would then have consisted exclusively of the recondite
impersonal metaphysics which the Chinese <span id="page_81">p.
81</span> mind had entertained or been fed on for the nine hundred or
more years preceding the invention of the P’an Ku myth.

## Nü Kua Shih, the Repairer of the Heavens

It is true that there exist one or two other explanations of the origin
of things which introduce a personal creator. There is, for instance,
the legend—first mentioned by Lieh Tzŭ (to whom we shall revert
later)—which represents Nü Kua Shih (also called Nü Wa and Nü Hsi), said
to have been the sister and successor of Fu Hsi, the mythical sovereign
whose reign is ascribed to the years 2953–2838 B.C., as having been the
creator of human beings when the earth first emerged from Chaos. She (or
he, for the sex seems uncertain), who had the “body of a serpent and
head of an ox” (or a human head and horns of an ox, according to some
writers), “moulded yellow earth and made man.” Ssŭ-ma Chêng, of the
eighth century A.D., author of the *Historical Records* and of another
work on the three great legendary emperors, Fu Hsi, Shên Nung, and Huang
Ti, gives the following account of her: “Fu Hsi was succeeded by Nü Kua,
who like him had the surname Fêng. Nü Kua had the body of a serpent and
a human head, with the virtuous endowments of a divine sage. Toward the
end of her reign there was among the feudatory princes Kung Kung, whose
functions were the administration of punishment. Violent and ambitious,
he became a rebel, and sought by the influence of water to overcome that
of wood \[under which Nü Kua reigned\]. He did battle with Chu Jung
\[said to have been one of the ministers of Huang Ti, and later the God
of Fire\], but was not victorious; whereupon he struck his head against
the Imperfect Mountain, <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> Pu Chou Shan,
and brought it down. The pillars of Heaven were broken and the corners
of the earth gave way. Hereupon Nü Kua melted stones of the five colours
to repair the heavens, and cut off the feet of the tortoise to set
upright the four extremities of the earth.  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[5](#fn_6.md) Gathering the ashes of reeds she stopped the
flooding waters, and thus rescued the land of Chi, Chi Chou \[the early
seat of the Chinese sovereignty\].”

Another account separates the name and makes Nü and Kua brother and
sister, describing them as the only two human beings in existence. At
the creation they were placed at the foot of the K’un-lun Mountains.
Then they prayed, saying, “If thou, O God, hast sent us to be man and
wife, the smoke of our sacrifice will stay in one place; but if not, it
will be scattered.” The smoke remained stationary.

But though Nü Kua is said to have moulded the first man (or the first
human beings) out of clay, it is to be noted that, being only the
successor of Fu Hsi, long lines of rulers had preceded her of whom no
account is given, and also that, as regards the heavens and the earth at
least, she is regarded as the repairer and not the creator of them.

Heaven-deaf (T’ien-lung) and Earth-dumb (Ti-ya), the two attendants of
Wên Ch’ang, the God of Literature (see following chapter), have also
been drawn into the cosmogonical net. From their union came the heavens
and the earth, mankind, and all living things.

<span id="img_p082"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Nŭ Kua
Shih](tn/p082.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/p082.jpg.md)  
Nŭ Kua Shih  
</span>

These and other brief and unelaborated personal cosmogonies, even if not
to be regarded as spurious imitations, certainly have not become
established in the Chinese mind as the explanation of the way in which
the <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> universe came to be: in this sphere
the P’an Ku legend reigns supreme; and, owing to its concrete, easily
apprehensible nature, has probably done so ever since the time of its
invention.

## Early Cosmogony Dualistic

The period before the appearance of the P’an Ku myth may be divided into
two parts; that from some early unknown date up to about the middle of
the Confucian epoch, say 500 B.C., and that from 500 B.C. to A.D. 400.
We know that during the latter period the minds of Chinese scholars were
frequently occupied with speculations as to the origin of the universe.
Before 500 B.C. we have no documentary remains telling us what the
Chinese believed about the origin of things; but it is exceedingly
unlikely that no theories or speculations at all concerning the origin
of themselves and their surroundings were formed by this intelligent
people during the eighteen centuries or more which preceded the date at
which we find the views held by them put into written form. It is safe
to assume that the dualism which later occupied their philosophical
thoughts to so great an extent as almost to seem inseparable from them,
and exercised so powerful an influence throughout the course of their
history, was not only formulating itself during that long period, but
had gradually reached an advanced stage. We may even go so far as to say
that dualism, or its beginnings, existed in the very earliest times, for
the belief in the second self or ghost or double of the dead is in
reality nothing else. And we find it operating with apparently
undiminished energy after the Chinese mind had reached its maturity in
the Sung dynasty. <span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

## The Canon of Changes

The Bible of Chinese dualism is the *I ching*, the *Canon of Changes*
(or *Permutations*). It is held in great veneration both on account of
its antiquity and also because of the “unfathomable wisdom which is
supposed to lie concealed under its mysterious symbols.” It is placed
first in the list of the classics, or Sacred Books, though it is not the
oldest of them. When exactly the work itself on which the subsequent
elaborations were founded was composed is not now known. Its origin is
attributed to the legendary emperor Fu Hsi (2953–2838 B.C.). It does not
furnish a cosmogony proper, but merely a dualistic system as an
explanation, or attempted explanation, or even perhaps orly a record, of
the constant changes (in modern philosophical language the
“redistribution of matter and motion”) going on everywhere. That
explanation or record was used for purposes of divination. This
dualistic system, by a simple addition, became a monism, and at the same
time furnished the Chinese with a cosmogony.

## The Five Elements

The Five Elements or Forces (*wu hsing*)—which, according to the
Chinese, are metal, air, fire, water, and wood—are first mentioned in
Chinese literature in a chapter of the classic *Book of History*.  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[6](#fn_7.md) They play a very important part in Chinese
thought: ‘elements’ meaning generally not so much the actual substances
as the forces essential to human, life. They have to be noticed in
passing, because they were involved in the development of the
cosmogonical ideas which took place in the eleventh and twelfth
centuries A.D. <span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

## Monism

As their imagination grew, it was natural that the Chinese should begin
to ask themselves what, if the *yang* and the *yin* by their
permutations produced, or gave shape to, all things, was it that
produced the *yang* and the *yin*. When we see traces of this
inquisitive tendency we find ourselves on the borderland of dualism
where the transition is taking place into the realm of monism. But
though there may have been a tendency toward monism in early times, it
was only in the Sung dynasty that the philosophers definitely placed
behind the *yang* and the *yin* a First Cause—the Grand Origin, Grand
Extreme, Grand Terminus, or Ultimate Ground of Existence.  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[7](#fn_8.md) They gave to it the name *t’ai chi*, and
represented it by a concrete sign, the symbol of a circle. The complete
scheme shows the evolution of the Sixty-four Diagrams (*kua*) from the
*t’ai chi* through the *yang* and the *yin*, the Four, Eight, Sixteen,
and Thirty-two Diagrams successively. This conception was the work of
the Sung philosopher Chou Tun-i (A.D. 1017–73), commonly known as Chou
Tzŭ, and his disciple Chu Hsi (A.D. 1130–1200), known as Chu Tzŭ or Chu
Fu Tzŭ, the famous historian and Confucian commentator—two of the
greatest names in Chinese philosophy. It was at this time that the tide
of constructive imagination in China, tinged though it always was with
classical Confucianism, rose to its greatest height. There is the
philosopher’s seeking for causes. Yet in this matter of the First Cause
we detect, in the full flood of Confucianism, the potent influence of
Taoist and Buddhist speculations. It has even been said that the Sung
philosophy, which grew, not from the *I ching* itself, but from the
appendixes to it, is more Taoistic than Confucian. As it was with the
P’an Ku <span id="page_86">p. 86</span> legend, so was it with this more
philosophical cosmogony. The more fertile Taoist and Buddhist
imaginations led to the preservation of what the Confucianists,
distrusting the marvellous, would have allowed to die a natural death.
It was, after all, the mystical foreign elements which gave point to—we
may rightly say rounded off—the early dualism by converting it into
monism, carrying philosophical speculation from the Knowable to the
Unknowable, and furnishing the Chinese with their first scientific
theory of the origin, not of the changes going on in the universe (on
which they had already formed their opinions), but of the universe
itself.

## Chou Tzŭ’s “T’ai Chi T’u”

Chou Tun-i, appropriately apotheosized as ‘Prince in the Empire of
Reason,’ completed and systematized the philosophical world-conception
which had hitherto obtained in the Chinese mind. He did not ask his
fellow-countrymen to discard any part of what they had long held in high
esteem: he raised the old theories from the sphere of science to that of
philosophy by unifying them and bringing them to a focus. And he made
this unification intelligible to the Chinese mind by his famous *T’ai
chi t’u*, or Diagram of the Great Origin (or Grand Terminus), showing
that the Grand Original Cause, itself uncaused, produces the *yang* and
the *yin*, these the Five Elements, and so on, through the male and
female norms (*tao*), to the production of all things.

## Chu Hsi’s Monistic Philosophy

The writings of Chu Hsi, especially his treatise on *The Immaterial
Principle \[li\] and Primary Matter \[ch’i\]*, leave no doubt as to the
monism of his philosophy. In this work <span id="page_87">p.
87</span> occurs the passage: “In the universe there exists no primary
matter devoid of the immaterial principle; and no immaterial principle
apart from primary matter”; and although the two are never separated
“the immaterial principle \[as Chou Tzŭ explains\] is what is previous
to form, while primary matter is what is subsequent to form,” the idea
being that the two are different manifestations of the same mysterious
force from which all things proceed.

It is unnecessary to follow this philosophy along all the different
branches which grew out of it, for we are here concerned only with the
seed. We have observed how Chinese dualism became a monism, and how
while the monism was established the dualism was retained. It is this
mono-dualistic theory, combining the older and newer philosophy, which
in China, then as now, constitutes the accepted explanation of the
origin of things, of the universe itself and all that it contains.

## Lao Tzŭ’s “Tao”

There are other cosmogonies in Chinese philosophy, but they need not
detain us long. Lao Tzŭ (sixth century B.C.), in his *Tao-tê ching, The
Canon of Reason and Virtue* (at first entitled simply *Lao Tzŭ*), gave
to the then existing scattered sporadic conceptions of the universe a
literary form. His *tao*, or ‘Way,’ is the originator of Heaven and
earth, it is “the mother of all things.” His Way, which was “before
God,” is but a metaphorical expression for the manner in which things
came at first into being out of the primal nothingness, and how the
phenomena of nature continue to go on, “in stillness and quietness,
without striving or crying.” Lao Tzŭ is thus so far monistic, but he is
also mystical, transcendental, even <span id="page_88">p.
88</span> pantheistic. The way that can be walked is not the Eternal
Way; the name that can be named is not the Eternal Name. The Unnameable
is the originator of Heaven and earth; manifesting itself as the
Nameable, it is “the mother of all things.” “In Eternal Non-Being I see
the Spirituality of Things; in Eternal Being their limitation. Though
different under these two aspects, they are the same in origin; it is
when development takes place that different names have to be used. It is
while they are in the condition of sameness that the mystery concerning
them exists. This mystery is indeed the mystery of mysteries. It is the
door of all spirituality.”

This *tao*, indefinable and in its essence unknowable, is “the
fountain-head of all beings, and the norm of all actions. But it is not
only the formative principle of the universe; it also seems to be
primordial matter: chaotic in its composition, born prior to Heaven and
earth, noiseless, formless, standing alone in its solitude, and not
changing, universal in its activity, and unrelaxing, without being
exhausted, it is capable of becoming the mother of the universe.” And
there we may leave it. There is no scheme of creation, properly so
called. The Unwalkable Way leads us to nothing further in the way of a
cosmogony.

## Confucius’s Agnosticism

Confucius (551–479 B.C.) did not throw any light on the problem of
origin. He did not speculate on the creation of things nor the end of
them. He was not troubled to account for the origin of man, nor did he
seek to know about his hereafter. He meddled neither with physics nor
metaphysics. There might, he thought, be <span id="page_89">p.
89</span> something on the other side of life, for he admitted the
existence of spiritual beings. They had an influence on the living,
because they caused them to clothe themselves in ceremonious dress and
attend to the sacrificial ceremonies. But we should not trouble
ourselves about them, any more than about supernatural things, or
physical prowess, or monstrosities. How can we serve spiritual beings
while we do not know how to serve men? We feel the existence of
something invisible and mysterious, but its nature and meaning are too
deep for the human understanding to grasp. The safest, indeed the only
reasonable, course is that of the agnostic—to leave alone the
unknowable, while acknowledging its existence and its mystery, and to
try to understand knowable phenomena and guide our actions accordingly.

Between the monism of Lao Tzŭ and the positivism of Confucius on the one
hand, and the landmark of the Taoistic transcendentalism of Chuang Tzŭ
(fourth and third centuries B.C.) on the other, we find several “guesses
at the riddle of existence” which must be briefly noted as links in the
chain of Chinese speculative thought on this important subject.

## Mo Tzŭ and Creation

In the philosophy of Mo Ti (fifth and fourth centuries B.C.), generally
known as Mo Tzŭ or Mu Tzŭ, the philosopher of humanism and
utilitarianism, we find the idea of creation. It was, he says, Heaven
(which was anthropomorphically regarded by him as a personal Supreme
Being) who “created the sun, moon, and innumerable stars.” His system
closely resembles Christianity, but the great power of Confucianism as a
weapon wielded against all opponents by its doughty <span
id="page_90">p. 90</span> defender Mencius (372–289 B.C.) is shown by
the complete suppression of the influence of Mo Tzŭism at his hands. He
even went so far as to describe Mo Tzŭ and those who thought with him as
“wild animals.”

## Mencius and the First Cause

Mencius himself regarded Heaven as the First Cause, or Cause of Causes,
but it was not the same personal Heaven as that of Mo Tzŭ. Nor does he
hang any cosmogony upon it. His chief concern was to eulogize the
doctrines of the great Confucius, and like him he preferred to let the
origin of the universe look after itself.

## Lieh Tzŭ’s Absolute

Lieh Tzŭ (said to have lived in the fifth century B.C.), one of the
brightest stars in the Taoist constellation, considered this nameable
world as having evolved from an unnameable absolute being. The evolution
did not take place through the direction of a personal will working out
a plan of creation: “In the beginning there was Chaos \[*hun tun*\]. It
was a mingled potentiality of Form \[*hsing*\], Pneuma \[*ch’i*\], and
Substance \[*chih*\]. A Great Change \[*t’ai i*\] took place in it, and
there was a Great Starting \[*t’ai ch’u*\] which is the beginning of
Form. The Great Starting evolved a Great Beginning \[*t’ai shih*\],
which is the inception of Pneuma. The Great Beginning was followed by
the Great Blank \[*t’ai su*\], which is the first formation of
Substance. Substance, Pneuma, and Form being all evolved out of the
primordial chaotic mass, this material world as it lies before us came
into existence.” And that which made it possible for Chaos to evolve was
the Solitary Indeterminate (*i tu* or the *tao*), <span id="page_91">p.
91</span> which is not created, but is able to create everlastingly. And
being both Solitary and Indeterminate it tells us nothing determinate
about itself.

<span id="img_p090"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![Mencius](tn/p090.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/p090.jpg.md)  
Mencius  
</span>

## Chuang Tzŭ’s Super-tao

Chuang Chou (fourth and third centuries B.C.), generally known as Chuang
Tzŭ, the most brilliant Taoist of all, maintained with Lao Tzŭ that the
universe started from the Nameless, but it was if possible a more
absolute and transcendental Nameless than that of Lao Tzŭ. He dwells on
the relativity of knowledge; as when asleep he did not know that he was
a man dreaming that he was a butterfly, so when awake he did not know
that he was not a butterfly dreaming that he was a man.  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[8](#fn_9.md) But “all is embraced in the obliterating
unity of the *tao*, and the wise man, passing into the realm of the
Infinite, finds rest therein.” And this *tao*, of which we hear so much
in Chinese philosophy, was before the Great Ultimate or Grand Terminus
(*t’ai chi*), and “from it came the mysterious existence of God
\[*ti*\]. It produced Heaven, it produced earth.”

## Popular Cosmogony still Personal or Dualistic

These and other cosmogonies which the Chinese have devised, though it is
necessary to note their existence in order to give a just idea of their
cosmological speculations, need not, as I said, detain us long; and the
reason <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> why they need not do so is that,
in the matter of cosmogony, the P’an Ku legend and the *yin-yang* system
with its monistic elaboration occupy virtually the whole field of the
Chinese mental vision. It is these two—the popular and the
scientific—that we mean when we speak of Chinese cosmogony. Though here
and there a stern sectarian might deny that the universe originated in
one or the other of these two ways, still, the general rule holds good.
And I have dealt with them in this order because, though the P’an Ku
legend belongs to the fourth century A.D., the *I ching* dualism was
not, rightly speaking, a cosmogony until Chou Tun-i made it one by the
publication of his *T’ai chi t’u* in the eleventh century A.D. Over the
unscientific and the scientific minds of the Chinese these two are
paramount.

Applying the general principles stated in the preceding chapter, we find
the same cause which operated to restrict the growth of mythology in
general in China operated also in like manner in this particular branch
of it. With one exception Chinese cosmogony is non-mythological. The
careful and studiously accurate historians (whose work aimed at being
*ex veritate*, ‘made of truth’), the sober literature, the vast
influence of agnostic, matter-of-fact Confucianism, supported by the
heavy Mencian artillery, are indisputable indications of a constructive
imagination which grew too quickly and became too rapidly scientific to
admit of much soaring into the realms of fantasy. Unaroused by any
strong stimulus in their ponderings over the riddle of the universe, the
sober, plodding scientists and the calm, truth-loving philosophers
gained a peaceful victory over the mythologists. <span id="page_93">p.
93</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[93:1](mlc05.htm#fr_2.md) *Cf*. Aristotle’s belief
that bugs arose spontaneously from sweat.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[93:2](mlc05.htm#fr_3.md) For the Buddhist account
see *China Review*, xi, 80–82.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[93:3](mlc05.htm#fr_4.md) Compare the Japanese
legend, which relates that the Sun-goddess was induced to come out of a
cave by being tempted to gaze at herself in a mirror. See *Myths and
Legends of Japan*, F. Hadland Davis, pp. 27–28.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[93:4](mlc05.htm#fr_5.md) See *Myths of the
Norsemen*, by H. A. Guerber. These resemblances and the further
one—namely, the dualism in the prechaotic epoch (a very interesting
point in Scandinavian mythology)—illustrate the danger of inferring
identity of origin from similarity of physical, intellectual, or moral
results. Several remarkable parallelisms of Chinese religious and
mythological beliefs with those recorded in the Hebrew scriptures may
also be briefly noted. There is an age of virtue and happiness, a garden
with a tree bearing ‘apples of immortality,’ guarded by a winged serpent
(dragon), the fall of man, the beginnings of lust and war (the doctrine
of original sin), a great flood, virgin-born god-men who rescue man from
barbarism and endow him with superhuman attributes, discipleship,
worship of a Virgin Mother, trinities, monasticism, celibacy, fasting,
preaching, prayers, primeval Chaos, Paradise, etc. For details see
*Chinese Repository,* vii, 520–521.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[93:5](mlc05.htm#fr_6.md) *Cf.* the dwarfs in the
Scandinavian myth.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[93:6](mlc05.htm#fr_7.md) See Legge, *Shu ching*,
ii, 320, note.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[93:7](mlc05.htm#fr_8.md) In order to avoid
misunderstanding, it is as well to note that the mention of the *t’ai
chi* in the *Canon of Changes (I ching*) no more constituted monism the
philosophy of China than did the steam-driven machinery mentioned by
Hero of Alexandria constitute the first century B.C. the ‘age of steam.’
Similarly, to take another example, the idea of the earth’s rotundity,
though conceived centuries before Ptolemy in the second century, did not
become established before the sixteenth century. It was, in fact, from
the *I ching* that the Chinese derived their *dualistic* (not their
monistic) conception of the world.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[93:8](mlc05.htm#fr_9.md) “Formerly, I, Chuang Chou,
dreamt that I was a butterfly, flying about and feeling that it was
enjoying itself. I did not know that it was Chou. Suddenly I awoke and
was myself again, the veritable Chou. I did not know whether it had
formerly been Chou dreaming that he was a butterfly, or whether it was
now a butterfly dreaming that it was Chou.” *Chuang Tzŭ*, Book II.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Birth of the Soul](mlc06.md)

</div>
