<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mlc03)  [Next](mlc05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486280926/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6FKE/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of China*, by Edward T.C. Werner, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

## Chapter II

# On Chinese Mythology

## Mythology and Intellectual Progress

The Manichæst, *yin-yang* (dualist), idea of existence, to which further
reference will be made in the next chapter, finds its illustration in
the dual life, real and imaginary, of all the peoples of the earth. They
have both real histories and mythological histories. In the preceding
chapter I have dealt briefly with the first—the life of reality—in China
from the earliest times to the present day; the succeeding chapters are
concerned with the second—the life of imagination. A survey of the first
was necessary for a complete understanding of the second. The two react
upon each other, affecting the national character and through it the
history of the world.

Mythology is the science of the unscientific man’s explanation of what
we call the Otherworld—itself and its denizens, their mysterious habits
and surprising actions both there and here, usually including the
creation of this world also. By the Otherworld he does not necessarily
mean anything distant or even invisible, though the things he explains
would mostly be included by us under those terms. In some countries
myths are abundant, in others scarce. Why should this be? Why should
some peoples tell many and marvellous tales about their gods and others
say little about them, though they may say a great deal to them? We
recall the ‘great’ myths of Greece and Scandinavia. Other races are
‘poor’ in myths. The difference is to be explained by the mental
characters of the peoples as moulded by their surroundings and
hereditary tendencies. The problem is of course a psychological one, for
it is, as already noted, in imagination <span id="page_61">p.
61</span> that myths have their root. Now imagination grows with each
stage of intellectual progress, for intellectual progress implies
increasing representativeness of thought. In the lower stages of human
development imagination is feeble and unproductive; in the highest
stages it is strong and constructive.

## The Chinese Intellect

The Chinese are not unimaginative, but their minds did not go on to the
construction of any myths which should be world-great and immortal; and
one reason why they did not construct such myths was that their
intellectual progress was arrested at a comparatively early stage. It
was arrested because there was not that contact and competition with
other peoples which demands brain-work of an active kind as the
alternative of subjugation, inferiority, or extinction, and because, as
we have already seen, the knowledge required of them was mainly the
parrot-like repetition of the old instead of the thinking-out of the
new  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)—a state of things rendered
possible by the isolation just referred to. Confucius discountenanced
discussion about the supernatural, and just as it is probable that the
exhortations of Wên Wang, the virtual founder of the Chou dynasty
(1121–255 B.C.), against drunkenness, in a time before tea was known to
them, helped to make the Chinese the sober people that they are, so it
is probable—more than probable—that this attitude of Confucius may have
nipped in the bud much that might have developed a vigorous mythology,
though for a reason to be stated later it may be doubted if he thereby
deprived the world of any beautiful and marvellous results of the <span
id="page_62">p. 62</span> highest flights of poetical creativeness.
There are times, such as those of any great political upheaval, when
human nature will assert itself and break through its shackles in spite
of all artificial or conventional restraints. Considering the enormous
influence of Confucianism throughout the latter half of Chinese
history—*i.e.* the last two thousand years—it is surprising that the
Chinese dared to think about supernatural matters at all, except in the
matter of propitiating their dead ancestors. That they did so is
evidence not only of human nature’s inherent tendency to tell stories,
but also of the irrepressible strength of feeling which breaks all laws
and commandments under great stimulus. On the opposing unæsthetic side
this may be compared to the feeling which prompts the unpremeditated
assassination of a man who is guilty of great injustice, even though it
be certain that in due course he would have met his deserts at the hands
of the public executioner.

## The Influence of Religion

Apart from this, the influence of Confucianism would have been even
greater than it was, but for the imperial partiality periodically shown
for rival doctrines, such as Buddhism and Taoism, which threw their
weight on the side of the supernatural, and which at times were exalted
to such great heights as to be officially recognized as State religions.
These, Buddhism especially, appealed to the popular imagination and love
of the marvellous. Buddhism spoke of the future state and the nature of
the gods in no uncertain tones. It showed men how to reach the one and
attain to the other. Its founder was virtuous; his commandments pure and
life-sustaining. It supplied in great part what Confucianism lacked.
And, as in the <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> fifth and sixth centuries
A.D., when Buddhism and Taoism joined forces and a working union existed
between them, they practically excluded for the time all the “chilly
growth of Confucian classicism.”

Other opponents of myth, including a critical philosopher of great
ability, we shall have occasion to notice presently.

## History and Myth

The sobriety and accuracy of Chinese historians is proverbial. I have
dilated upon this in another work, and need add here only what I
inadvertently omitted there—a point hitherto unnoticed or at least
unremarked—that the very word for history in Chinese (*shih*) means
impartiality or an impartial annalist. It has been said that where there
is much myth there is little history, and *vice versa*, and though this
may not be universally true, undoubtedly the persistently truthful
recording of facts, events, and sayings, even at the risk of loss, yea,
and actual loss of life of the historian as the result of his refusal to
make false entries in his chronicle at the bidding of the emperor (as in
the case of the historiographers of Ch’i in 547 B.C.), indicates a type
of mind which would require some very strong stimulus to cause it to
soar very far into the hazy realms of fanciful imagination.

## Chinese Rigidity

A further cause, already hinted at above, for the arrest of intellectual
progress is to be found in the growth of the nation in size during many
centuries of isolation from the main stream of world-civilization,
without that increase in heterogeneity which comes from the moulding by
forces external to itself. “As iron sharpeneth iron, so a man sharpeneth
the countenance of his friend.” <span id="page_64">p.
64</span> Consequently we find China what is known to sociology as an
‘aggregate of the first order,’ which during its evolution has parted
with its internal life-heat without absorbing enough from external
sources to enable it to retain the plastic condition necessary to
further, or at least rapid, development. It is in a state of rigidity, a
state recognized and understood by the sociologist in his study of the
evolution of nations.

## The Prerequisites to Myth

But the mere increase of constructive imagination is not sufficient to
produce myth. If it were, it would be reasonable to argue that as
intellectual progress goes on myths become more numerous, and the
greater the progress the greater the number of myths. This we do not
find. In fact, if constructive imagination went on increasing without
the intervention of any further factor, there need not necessarily be
any myth at all. We might almost say that the reverse is the case. We
connect myth with primitive folk, not with the greatest philosophers or
the most advanced nations—not, that is, with the most advanced stages of
national progress wherein constructive imagination makes the nation
great and strong. In these stages the philosopher studies or criticizes
myth, he does not make it.

In order that there may be myth, three further conditions must be
fulfilled. There must, as we have seen, be constructive imagination,
but, nevertheless, there must not be too much of it. As stated above,
mythology, or rather myth, is the *unscientific* man’s explanation. If
the constructive imagination is so great that it becomes self-critical,
if the story-teller doubts his own story, if, in short, his mind is
scientific enough to see that his explanation <span id="page_65">p.
65</span> is no explanation at all, then there can be no myth properly
so called. As in religion, unless the myth-maker believes in his myth
with all his heart and soul and strength, and each new disciple, as it
is cared for and grows under his hands during the course of years, holds
that he must put his shoes from off his feet because the place whereon
he treads is holy ground, the faith will not be propagated, for it will
lack the vital spark which alone can make it a living thing.

## Stimulus Necessary

The next condition is that there must be a stimulus. It is not ideas,
but feelings, which govern the world, and in the history of mythology
where feeling is absent we find either weak imitation or repetition of
the myths of other peoples (though this must not be confused with
certain elements which seem to be common to the myths of all races), or
concoction, contamination, or “genealogical tree-making,” or myths
originated by “leisurely, peaceful tradition” and lacking the essential
qualities which appeal to the human soul and make their possessors very
careful to preserve them among their most loved and valued treasures.
But, on the other hand, where feeling is stirred, where the requisite
stimulus exists, where the people are in great danger, or allured by the
prize of some breathless adventure, the contact produces the spark of
divine poetry, the myths are full of artistic, philosophic, and
religious suggestiveness, and have abiding significance and charm. They
are the children, the poetic fruit, of great labour and serious
struggles, revealing the most fundamental forces, hopes, and cravings of
the human soul. Nations highly strung, undergoing strenuous emotion,
intensely energized by constant conflict with <span id="page_66">p.
66</span> other nations, have their imagination stimulated to
exceptional poetic creativeness. The background of the Danaïds is
Egyptian, not Greek, but it was the danger in which the Greeks were
placed in their wars with the sons of the land of the Pharaohs that
stimulated the Greek imagination to the creation of that great myth.

This explains why so many of the greatest myths have their staging, not
in the country itself whose treasured possessions they are, but where
that country is ‘playing the great game,’ is carrying on wars decisive
of far-reaching national events, which arouse to the greatest pitch of
excitement the feelings both of the combatants and of those who are
watching them from their homes. It is by such great events, not by the
romance-writer in his peaceful study, that mythology, like literature,
is “incisively determined.” Imagination, we saw, goes *pari passu* with
intellectual progress, and intellectual progress, in early times, is
furthered not so much by the mere contact as by the actual conflict of
nations. And we see also that myths may, and very frequently do, have a
character quite different from that of the nation to which they
appertain, for environment plays a most important part both in their
inception and subsequent growth—a truth too obvious to need detailed
elaboration.

## Persistent Soul-expression

A third condition is that the type of imagination must be persistent
through fairly long periods of time, otherwise not only will there be an
absence of sufficient feeling or momentum to cause the myths to be
repeated and kept alive and transmitted to posterity, but the inducement
to add to them and so enable them to mature and become complete and
finished off and sufficiently attractive to <span id="page_67">p.
67</span> appeal to the human mind in spite of the foreign character
they often bear will be lacking. In other words, myths and legends grow.
They resemble not so much the narrative of the story-teller or novelist
as a gradually developing art like music, or a body of ideas like
philosophy. They are human and natural, though they express the thought
not of any one individual mind, but of the folk-soul, exemplifying in
poetical form some great psychological or physiographical truth.

## The Character of Chinese Myth

The nature of the case thus forbids us to expect to find the Chinese
myths exhibiting the advanced state and brilliant heterogeneity of those
which have become part of the world’s permanent literature. We must
expect them to be true to type and conditions, as we expect the other
ideas of the Chinese to be, and looking for them in the light of this
knowledge we shall find them just where we should expect to find them.

The great sagas and eddas exalted among the world’s literary
masterpieces, and forming part of the very life of a large number of its
inhabitants, are absent in China. “The Chinese people,” says one
well-known sinologist, “are not prone to mythological invention.” “He
who expects to find in Tibet,” says another writer, “the poetical charm
of Greek or Germanic mythology will be disappointed. There is a striking
poverty of imagination in all the myths and legends. A great monotony
pervades them all. Many of their stories, taken from the sacred texts,
are quite puerile and insipid. It may be noted that the Chinese
mythology labours under the same defect.” And then there comes the
crushing judgment of an over-zealous Christian missionary sinologist:
“There <span id="page_68">p. 68</span> is no hierarchy of gods brought
in to rule and inhabit the world they made, no conclave on Mount
Olympus, nor judgment of the mortal soul by Osiris, no transfer of human
love and hate, passions and hopes, to the powers above; all here is
ascribed to disembodied agencies or principles, and their works are
represented as moving on in quiet order. There is no religion \[!\], no
imagination; all is impassible, passionless, uninteresting.... It has
not, as in Greece and Egypt, been explained in sublime poetry, shadowed
forth in gorgeous ritual and magnificent festivals, represented in
exquisite sculptures, nor preserved in faultless, imposing fanes and
temples, filled with ideal creations.” Besides being incorrect as to
many of its alleged facts, this view would certainly be shown by further
study to be greatly exaggerated.

## Periods Fertile in Myth

What we should expect, then, to find from our philosophical study of the
Chinese mind as affected by its surroundings would be barrenness of
constructive imagination, except when birth was given to myth through
the operation of some external agency. And this we do find. The period
of the overthrow of the Yin dynasty and the establishment of the great
house of Chou in 1122 B.C., or of the Wars of the Three States, for
example, in the third century after Christ, a time of terrible anarchy,
a medieval age of epic heroism, sung in a hundred forms of prose and
verse, which has entered as motive into a dozen dramas, or the advent of
Buddhism, which opened up a new world of thought and life to the simple,
sober, peace-loving agricultural folk of China, were stimuli not by any
means devoid of result. In China there are gods many and heroes many,
and the very fact of the existence <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> of so
great a multitude of gods would logically imply a wealth of mythological
lore inseparable from their apotheosis. You cannot—and the Chinese
cannot—get behind reason. A man is not made a god without some cause
being assigned for so important and far-reaching a step; and in matters
of this sort the stated cause is apt to take the form of a narrative
more or less marvellous or miraculous. These resulting myths may, of
course, be born and grow at a later time than that in which the
circumstances giving rise to them took place, but, if so, that merely
proves the persistent power of the originating stimulus. That in China
these narratives always or often reach the highest flights of
constructive imagination is not maintained—the maintenance of that
argument would indeed be contradictory; but even in those countries
where the mythological garden has produced some of the finest flowers
millions of seeds must have been sown which either did not spring up at
all or at least failed to bring forth fruit. And in the realm of
mythology it is not only those gods who sit in the highest
seats—creators of the world or heads of great religions—who dominate
mankind; the humbler, though often no less powerful gods or
spirits—those even who run on all fours and live in holes in the ground,
or buzz through the air and have their thrones in the shadow of a
leaf—have often made a deeper impress on the minds and in the hearts of
the people, and through that impress, for good or evil, have, in greater
or less degree, modified the life of the visible universe.

## Sources of Chinese Myth

“So, if we ask whence comes the heroic and the romantic, which supplies
the story-teller’s stock-in-trade, <span id="page_70">p. 70</span> the
answer is easy. The legends and history of early China furnish abundance
of material for them. To the Chinese mind their ancient world was
crowded with heroes, fairies, and devils, who played their part in the
mixed-up drama, and left a name and fame both remarkable and piquant.
Every one who is familiar with the ways and the language of the people
knows that the country is full of common objects to which poetic names
have been given, and with many of them there is associated a legend or a
myth. A deep river’s gorge is called ‘the Blind Man’s Pass,’ because a
peculiar bit of rock, looked at from a certain angle, assumes the
outline of the human form, and there comes to be connected therewith a
pleasing story which reaches its climax in the petrifaction of the hero.
A mountain’s crest shaped like a swooping eagle will from some one have
received the name of ‘Eagle Mountain,’ whilst by its side another shaped
like a couchant lion will have a name to match. There is no lack of
poetry among the people, and most striking objects claim a poetic name,
and not a few of them are associated with curious legends. It is,
however, to their national history that the story-teller goes for his
most interesting subjects, and as the so-called history of China
imperceptibly passes into the legendary period, and this again fades
into the mythical, and as all this is assuredly believed by the masses
of the people, it is obvious that in the national life of China there is
no dearth of heroes whose deeds of prowess will command the rapt
attention of the crowds who listen.”  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

The soul in China is everywhere in evidence, and if myths have “first
and foremost to do with the life of the soul” it would appear strange
that the Chinese, <span id="page_71">p. 71</span> having spiritualized
everything from a stone to the sky, have not been creative of myth. Why
they have not the foregoing considerations show us clearly enough. We
must take them and their myths as we find them. Let us, then, note
briefly the result of their mental workings as reacted on by their
environment.

## Phases of Chinese Myth

We cannot identify the earliest mythology of the Chinese with that of
any primitive race. The myths, if any, of their place of origin may have
faded and been forgotten in their slow migration eastward. We cannot say
that when they came from the West (which they probably did) they brought
their myths with them, for in spite of certain conjectural derivations
from Babylon we do not find them possessed of any which we can identify
as imported by them at that time. But research seems to have gone at
least as far as this—namely, that while we cannot say that Chinese myth
was derived from Indian myth, there is good reason to believe that
Chinese and Indian myth had a common origin, which was of course outside
of China.

To set forth in detail the various phases through which Chinese myth has
passed would involve a technical description foreign to the purpose of a
popular work. It will sufficiently serve our present purpose to outline
its most prominent features.

In the earliest times there was an ‘age of magic’ followed by an ‘heroic
age,’ but myths were very rare before 800 B.C., and what is known as
primitive mythology is said to have been invented or imitated from
foreign sources after 820 B.C. In the eighth century B.C. myths of an
astrological character began to attract <span id="page_72">p.
72</span> attention. In the age of Lao Tzŭ (604 B.C.), the reputed
founder of the Taoist religion, fresh legends appear, though Lao Tzŭ
himself, absorbed in the abstract, records none. Neither did Confucius
(551–479 B.C.) nor Mencius, who lived two hundred years later, add any
legends to history. But in the Period of the Warring States (500–100
B.C.) fresh stimuli and great emotion prompted to mythological creation.

## Tso-ch’iu Ming and Lieh Tzŭ

Tso-ch’iu Ming, commentator on Confucius’s *Annals*, frequently
introduced legend into his history. Lieh Tzŭ (fifth and fourth centuries
B.C.), a metaphysician, is one of the earliest authors who deal in
myths. He is the first to mention the story of Hsi Wang Mu, the Western
Queen, and from his day onward the fabulists have vied with one another
in fantastic descriptions of the wonders of her fairyland. He was the
first to mention the islands of the immortals in the ocean, the kingdoms
of the dwarfs and giants, the fruit of immortality, the repairing of the
heavens by Nü Kua Shih with five-coloured stones, and the great tortoise
which supports the universe.

## The T’ang and Sung Epochs

Religious romance began at this time. The T’ang epoch (A.B. 618–907) was
one of the resurrection of the arts of peace after a long period of
dissension. A purer and more enduring form of intellect was gradually
overcoming the grosser but less solid superstition. Nevertheless the
intellectual movement which now manifested itself was not strong enough
to prevail against the powers of mythological darkness. It was reserved
<span id="page_73">p. 73</span> for the scholars of the Sung Period
(A.D. 960–1280) to carry through to victory a strong and sustained
offensive against the spiritualistic obsessions which had weighed upon
the Chinese mind more or less persistently from the Han Period (206
B.C.-A.D. 221) onward. The dogma of materialism was specially cultivated
at this time. The struggle of sober reason against superstition or
imaginative invention was largely a struggle of Confucianism against
Taoism. Though many centuries had elapsed since the great Master walked
the earth, the anti-myth movement of the T’ang and Sung Periods was in
reality the long arm and heavy fist of Confucius emphasizing a truer
rationalism than that of his opponents and denouncing the danger of
leaving the firm earth to soar into the unknown hazy regions of fantasy.
It was Sung scholarship that gave the death-blow to Chinese mythology.

<span id="img_p072"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Lao
Tzu](tn/p072.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/p072.jpg)  
Lao Tzu  
</span>

It is unnecessary to labour the point further, because after the Sung
epoch we do not meet with any period of new mythological creation, and
its absence can be ascribed to no other cause than its defeat at the
hands of the Sung philosophers. After their time the tender plant was
always in danger of being stunted or killed by the withering blast of
philosophical criticism. Anything in the nature of myth ascribable to
post-Sung times can at best be regarded only as a late blossom born when
summer days are past.

## Myth and Doubt

It will bear repetition to say that unless the myth-builder firmly
believes in his myth, be he the layer of the foundation-stone or one of
the raisers of the superstructure, he will hardly make it a living
thing. Once he believes in reincarnation and the suspension of natural
<span id="page_74">p. 74</span> laws, the boundless vistas of space and
the limitless æons of time are opened to him. He can perform miracles
which astound the world. But if he allow his mind to inquire, for
instance, why it should have been necessary for Elijah to part the
waters of the Jordan with his garment in order that he and Elisha might
pass over dryshod, or for Bodhidharma to stand on a reed to cross the
great Yangtzŭ River, or for innumerable Immortals to sit on ‘favourable
clouds’ to make their journeys through space, he spoils myth—his child
is stillborn or does not survive to maturity. Though the growth of
philosophy and decay of superstition may be good for a nation, the
process is certainly conducive to the destruction of its myth and much
of its poetry. The true mythologist takes myth for myth, enters into its
spirit, and enjoys it.

We may thus expect to find in the realm of Chinese mythology a large
number of little hills rather than a few great mountains, but the little
hills are very good ones after their kind; and the object of this work
is to present Chinese myth as it is, not as it might have been had the
universe been differently constituted. Nevertheless, if, as we may
rightly do, we judge of myth by the sentiments pervading it and the
ideals upheld and taught by it, we shall find that Chinese myth must be
ranked among the greatest.

## Myth and Legend

The general principles considered above, while they explain the paucity
of myth in China, explain also the abundance of legend there. The six
hundred years during which the Mongols, Mings, and Manchus sat upon the
throne of China are barren of myth, but like all periods of the Chinese
national life are fertile in legend. And <span id="page_75">p.
75</span> this chiefly for the reason that myths are more general,
national, divine, while legends are more local, individual, human. And
since, in China as elsewhere, the lower classes are as a rule less
educated and more superstitious than the upper classes—have a certain
amount of constructive imagination, but not enough to be
self-critical—legends, rejected or even ridiculed by the scholarly class
when their knowledge has become sufficiently scientific, continue to be
invented and believed in by the peasant and the dweller in districts far
from the madding crowd long after myth, properly so called, has exhaled
its last breath. <span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[76:1](mlc04.htm#fr_0) The inventions of the
Chinese during a period of four thousand years may be numbered on the
fingers of one hand."

<span id="fn_1"></span>[76:2](mlc04.htm#fr_1) *East of Asia Magazine*,
i, 15–16.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Fashioner of the Universe](mlc05)

</div>
