<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mlc14)  [Next](mlc16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486280926/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6FKE/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of China*, by Edward T.C. Werner, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Chapter XIII

# A Battle of the Gods

## Multifarious Versatile Divinities

The *Fêng shên yen i* describes at length how, during the wars which
preceded the accession of the Chou dynasty in 1122 B.C., a multitude of
demigods, Buddhas, Immortals, etc., took part on one side or the other,
some fighting for the old, some for the new dynasty. They were wonderful
creatures, gifted with marvellous powers. They could at will change
their form, multiply their heads and limbs, become invisible, and
create, by merely uttering a word, terrible monsters who bit and
destroyed, or sent forth poison gases, or emitted flames from their
nostrils. In these battles there is much lightning, thunder, flight of
fire-dragons, dark clouds which vomit burning hails of murderous
weapons; swords, spears, and arrows fall from the sky on to the heads of
the combatants; the earth trembles, the pillars of Heaven shake.

## Chun T’i

One of these gifted warriors was Chun T’i, a Taoist of the Western
Paradise, who appeared on the scene when the armies of the rival
dynasties were facing each other. K’ung Hsüan was gallantly holding the
pass of the Chin-chi Ling; Chiang Tzŭ-ya was trying to take it by
assault—so far without success.

Chun T’i’s mission was to take K’ung Hsüan to the abode of the blest,
his wisdom and general progress having now reached the required degree
of perfection. This was a means of breaking down the invincible
resistance of this powerful enemy and at the same time of rewarding his
brilliant talents. <span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

But K’ung Hsüan did not approve of this plan, and a fight took place
between the two champions. At one moment Chun T’i was seized by a
luminous bow and carried into the air, but while enveloped in a cloud of
fire he appeared with eighteen arms and twenty-four heads, holding in
each hand a powerful talisman.

## The One-eyed Peacock

He put a silk cord round K’ung Hsüan’s neck, touched him with his wand,
and forced him to reassume his original form of a red one-eyed peacock.
Chun T’i seated himself on the peacock’s back, and it flew across the
sky, bearing its saviour and master to the Western Paradise. Brilliantly
variegated clouds marked its track through space.

## Arrangements for the Siege

On the disappearance of its defender the defile of Chin-chi Ling was
captured, and the village of Chieh-p’ai Kuan, the bulwark of the enemy’s
forces, reached. This place was defended by a host of genii and
Immortals, the most distinguished among them being the Taoist
T’ung-t’ien Chiao-chu, whose specially effective charms had so far kept
the fort secure against every attempt upon it.

Lao Tzŭ himself had deigned to descend from dwelling in happiness,
together with Yüan-shih T’ien-tsun and Chieh-yin Tao-jên, to take part
in the siege. But the town had four gates, and these heavenly rulers
were only three in number. So Chun T’i was recalled, and each member of
the quartette was entrusted with the task of capturing one of the gates.
<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

## Impediments

Chun T’i’s duty was to take the Chüeh-hsien Mên, defended by T’ung-t’ien
Chiao-chu. The warriors who had tried to enter the town by this gate had
one and all paid for their temerity with their lives. The moment each
had crossed the threshold a clap of thunder had resounded, and a
mysterious sword, moving with lightning rapidity, had slain him.

## Offence and Defence

As Chun T’i advanced at the head of his warriors terrible lightning rent
the air and the mysterious sword descended like a thunderbolt upon his
head. But Chun T’i held on high his Seven-precious Branch, whereupon
there emerged from it thousands of lotus-flowers, which formed an
impenetrable covering and stopped the sword in its fall. This and the
other gates were then forced, and a grand assault was now directed
against the chief defender of the town.

T’ung-t’ien Chiao-chu, riding his ox and surrounded by his warriors, for
the last time risked the chance of war and bravely faced his four
terrible adversaries. With his sword held aloft, he threw himself on
Chieh-yin Tao-jên, whose only weapon was his fly-whisk. But there
emerged from this a five-coloured lotus-flower, which stopped the
sword-thrust. While Lao Tzŭ struck the hero with his staff, Yüan-shih
T’ien-tsun warded off the terrible sword with his jade *ju-i*.

Chun T’i now called to his help the spiritual peacock, and took the form
of a warrior with twenty-four heads and eighteen arms. His mysterious
weapons surrounded T’ung-t’ien Chiao-chu, and Lao Tzŭ struck the hero so
<span id="page_323">p. 323</span> hard that fire came out from his eyes,
nose, and mouth. Unable to parry the assaults of his adversaries, he
next received a blow from Chun T’i’s magic wand, which felled him, and
he took flight in a whirlwind of dust.

The defenders now offered no further resistance, and Yüan-shih
T’ien-tsun thanked Chun T’i for the valuable assistance he had rendered
in the capture of the village, after which the gods returned to their
palace in the Western Heaven.

## Attempts at Revenge

T’ung-t’ien Chiao-chu, vanquished and routed, swore to have his revenge.
He called to his aid the spirits of the twenty-eight constellations, and
marched to attack Wu Wang’s army. The honour of the victory that ensued
belonged to Chun T’i, who disarmed both the Immortal Wu Yün and
T’ung-t’ien Chiao-chu.

Wu Yün, armed with his magic sword, entered the lists against Chun T’i;
but the latter opened his mouth and a blue lotus-flower came out and
stopped the blows aimed at him. Other thrusts were met by similar
miracles.

“Why continue so useless a fight?” said Chun T’i at last. “Abandon the
cause of the Shang, and come with me to the Western Paradise. I came to
save you, and you must not compel me to make you resume your original
form.”

An insulting flow of words was the reply; again the magic sword
descended like lightning, and again the stroke was averted by a timely
lotus-flower. Chun T’i now waved his wand, and the magic sword was
broken to bits, the handle only remaining in Wu Yün’s hand. <span
id="page_324">p. 324</span>

## The Golden-bearded Turtle

Mad with rage, Wu Yün seized his club and tried to fell his enemy. But
Chun T’i summoned a disciple, who appeared with a bamboo pole. This he
thrust out like a fishing-rod, and on a hook at the end of the line
attached to the pole dangled a large golden-bearded turtle. This was the
Immortal Wu Yün, now in his original form of a spiritual turtle. The
disciple seated himself on its back, and both, disappearing into space,
returned to the Western Heavens.

## The Battle Won

To conquer T’ung-t’ien Chiao-chu was more difficult, but after a long
fight Chun T’i waved his Wand of the Seven Treasures and broke his
adversary’s sword. The latter, disarmed and vanquished, disappeared in a
cloud of dust. Chun T’i did not trouble to pursue him. The battle was
won.

## Buddhahood

A disciple of T’ung-t’ien Chiao-chu, P’i-lu Hsien, ‘the Immortal
P’i-lu,’ seeing his master beaten in two successive engagements, left
the battlefield and followed Chun T’i to the Western Paradise, to become
a Buddha. He is known as P’i-lu Fo, one of the principal gods of
Buddhism.

Chun T’i’s festival is celebrated on the sixth day of the third moon. He
is generally shown with eight hands and three faces, one of the latter
being that of a pig. <span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. How the Monkey Became a God](mlc16)

</div>
