<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mlc15)  [Next](mlc17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486280926/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6FKE/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of China*, by Edward T.C. Werner, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Chapter XIV

# How the Monkey Became a God

## The Hsi Yu Chi

In dealing with the gods of China we noticed the monkey among them. Why
and in what manner he attained to that exalted rank is set forth in
detail in the *Hsi yu chi*  <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32)—a work
the contents of which have become woven into the fabric of Chinese
legendary lore and are known and loved by every intelligent native. Its
pages are filled with ghosts, demons, and fairies, good and bad, but “it
contains no more than the average Chinese really believes to exist, and
his belief in such manifestations is so firm that from the cradle to the
grave he lives and moves and has his being in reference to them.” Its
characters are said to be allegorical, though it may be doubted whether
these implications may rightly be read into the Chinese text. Thus:

Hsüan (or Yüan) Chuang, or T’ang Sêng, is the pilgrim of the *Hsi yu
chi*, who symbolizes conscience, to which all actions are brought for
trial. The priestly garment of Hsüan Chuang symbolizes the good work of
the rectified human nature. It is held to be a great protection to the
new heart from the myriads of evil beings which surround it, seeking its
destruction.

Sun Hou-tzŭ, the Monkey Fairy, represents human nature, which is prone
to all evil. His unreasonable vagaries moved Hsüan Chuang to compel him
to wear a Head-splitting Helmet which would contract upon his head in
moments of waywardness. The agonizing <span id="page_326">p.
326</span> pressure thus caused would bring him to his senses,
irrespective of his distance from his master.

The iron wand of Sun Hou-tzŭ is said to represent the use that can be
made of doctrine. It was useful for all purposes, great or small. By a
word it could be made invisible, and by a word it could become long
enough to span the distance between Heaven and earth.

Chu Pa-chieh, the Pig Fairy, with his muck-rake, stands for the coarser
passions, which are constantly at war with the conscience in their
endeavours to cast off all restraint.

Sha Ho-shang, Priest Sha, is a good representation of Mr Faithful in
*The Pilgrim’s Progress*. In the *Hsi yu chi* he stands for the human
character, which is naturally weak and which needs constant
encouragement.

## Legend of Sun Hou-tzŭ

The deeds of this marvellous creature, the hero of the *Hsi yu chi*, are
to be met with continually in Chinese popular literature, and they are
very much alive in the popular mind. In certain parts a regular worship
is offered to him, and in many temples representations of or legends
concerning him are to be seen or heard.

Other names by which Sun Hou-tzŭ is referred to are: Sun Hsing-chê, Sun
Wu-k’ung, Mei Hou-wang, Ch’i-t’ien Ta Shêng, and Pi-ma Wên, the
last-mentioned being a title which caused him annoyance by recalling the
derisive dignity conferred upon him by Yü Huang.  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33) Throughout the remainder of this chapter
Sun Hou-tzŭ will be shortly referred to as ‘Sun.’

<span id="img_p326"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/p326.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/p326.jpg)</span>  
The Birth of the Monkey

Beyond the seas, in the Eastern continent, in the kingdom of Ao-lai, is
the mountain Hua-kuo Shan. <span id="page_327">p. 327</span> On the
steep sides of this mountain there is a rocky point 36 feet 5 inches
high and 24 feet in circumference. At the very top an egg formed, and,
fructified by the breath of the wind, gave birth to a stone monkey. The
newly-born saluted the four points of the horizon; from his eyes shone
golden streaks of lightning, which filled the palace of the North Pole
Star with light. This light subsided as soon as he was able to take
nourishment.

“To-day,” said Yü Huang to himself, “I am going to complete the
wonderful diversity of the beings engendered by Heaven and earth. This
monkey will skip and gambol to the highest peaks of mountains, jump
about in the waters, and, eating the fruit of the trees, will be the
companion of the gibbon and the crane. Like the deer he will pass his
nights on the mountain slopes, and during the day will be seen leaping
on their summits or in their caverns. That will be the finest ornament
of all for the mountains!”

The creature’s exploits soon caused him to be proclaimed king of the
monkeys. He then began to try to find some means of becoming immortal.
After travelling for eighteen years by land and sea he met the Immortal
P’u-t’i Tsu-shih on the mountain Ling-t’ai-fang-ts’un. During his
travels the monkey had gradually acquired human attributes; his face
remained always as it had been originally, but dressed in human apparel
he began to be civilized. His new master gave him the family name of
Sun, and personal name of Wu-k’ung, ‘Discoverer of Secrets.’ He taught
him how to fly through the air, and to change into seventy-two different
forms. With one leap he could cover 108,000 *li* (about 36,000 miles).
<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

## A Rod of Iron

Sun, after his return to Hua-kuo Shan, slew the demon Hun-shih Mo-wang,
who had been molesting the monkeys during his long absence. Then he
organized his subjects into a regular army, 47,000 all told. Thus the
peace of the simian kingdom was assured. As for himself, he could not
find a weapon to suit him, and went to consult Ao Kuang, the Lung Wang,
or Dragon-king of the Eastern Sea, about it. It was from him that he
obtained the formidable rod of iron, formerly planted in the ocean-bed
by the Great Yü (Yü Wang) to regulate the level of the waters. He pulled
it out, and modified it to suit his tastes. The two extremities he bound
round with gold bands, and on it engraved the words: ‘Gold-bound Wand of
my Desires.’ This magic weapon could accommodate itself to all his
wishes; being able to assume the most incredible proportions or to
reduce itself to the form of the finest of needles, which he kept hidden
in his ear. He terrorized the Four Kings of the sea, and dressed himself
at their expense. The neighbouring kings allied themselves with him. A
splendid banquet with copious libations of wine sealed the alliance of
friendship with the seven kings; but alas! Sun had partaken so liberally
that when he was seeing his guests off, no sooner had he taken a few
steps than he fell into a drunken sleep. The undertakers of Yen Wang,
the King of the Hells, to whom Lung Wang had accused him as the
disturber of his watery kingdom, seized his soul, put chains round its
neck, and led it down to the infernal regions. Sun awoke in front of the
gate of the kingdom of the dead, broke his fetters, killed his two
custodians, and, armed with his magic staff, penetrated into the realm
of Yen Wang, where he <span id="page_329">p. 329</span> threatened to
carry out general destruction. He called to the ten infernal gods to
bring him the Register of the Living and the Dead, tore out with his own
hand the page on which were written his name and those of his monkey
subjects, and then told the King of the Hells that he was no longer
subject to the laws of death. Yen Wang yielded, though with bad grace,
and Sun returned triumphant from his expedition beyond the tomb.

Before long Sun’s escapades came to the knowledge of Yü Huang. Ao Kuang
and Yen Wang each sent deputies to the Master of Heaven, who took note
of the double accusation, and sent T’ai-po Chin-hsing to summon before
him this disturber of the heavenly peace.

## Grand Master of the Heavenly Stables

In order to keep him occupied, Sun was appointed Grand Master of the
Heavenly Stables, and was entrusted with the feeding of Yü Huang’s
horses; his official celestial title being Pi-ma Wên. Later on, learning
the object of the creation of this derisory appointment, he overturned
the Master’s throne, seized his staff, broke down the South Gate of
Heaven, and descended on a cloud to Hua-kuo Shan.

## Grand Superintendent of the Heavenly Peach-garden

Yü Huang in great indignation organized a siege of Hua-kuo Shan, but the
Kings of Heaven and the generals with their celestial armies were
repulsed several times. Sun now arrogated to himself the pompous title
of Grand Saint, Governor of Heaven. He had this emblazoned on his
banners, and threatened Yü Huang that he would carry destruction into
his kingdom if he refused to <span id="page_330">p. 330</span> recognize
his new dignity. Yü Huang, alarmed at the result of the military
operations, agreed to the condition laid down by Sun. The latter was
then appointed Grand Superintendent of the Heavenly Peach-garden, the
fruit of which conferred immortality, and a new palace was built for
him.

## Double Immortality

Having made minute observations on the secret properties of the peaches,
Sun ate of them and was thus assured against death. The time was ripe
for him to indulge in his tricks without restraint, and an opportunity
soon presented itself. Deeply hurt at not having been invited to the
feast of the Peach Festival, P’an-t’ao Hui, given periodically to the
Immortals by Wang-mu Niang-niang, the Goddess of the Immortals, he
resolved upon revenge. When the preparations for the feast were complete
he cast a spell over the servants, causing them to fall into a deep
sleep, and then ate up all the most juicy meats and drank the fine wines
provided for the heavenly guests. Sun had, however, indulged himself too
liberally; with heavy head and bleary eye he missed the road back to his
heavenly abode, and came unaware to the gate of Lao Chün, who was,
however, absent from his palace. It was only a matter of a few minutes
for Sun to enter and swallow the pills of immortality which Lao Chün
kept in five gourds. Thus Sun, doubly immortal, riding on the mist,
again descended to Hua-kuo Shan.

## Sun Hou-tzŭ Captured

These numerous misdeeds aroused the indignation of all the gods and
goddesses. Accusations poured in upon <span id="page_331">p.
331</span> Yü Huang, and he ordered the Four Gods of the Heavens and
their chief generals to bring Sun to him. The armies laid siege to
Hua-kuo Shan, a net was spread in the heavens, fantastic battles took
place, but the resistance of the enemy was as strenuous and obstinate as
before.

Lao Chün and Êrh-lang, nephew of Yü Huang, then appeared on the scene.
Sun’s warriors resisted gallantly, but the forces of Heaven were too
much for them, and at length they were overcome. At this juncture Sun
changed his form, and in spite of the net in the sky managed to find a
way out. In vain search was made everywhere, until Li T’ien-wang, by the
help of his devil-finding mirror, detected the quarry and informed
Êrh-lang, who rushed off in pursuit. Lao Chün hurled his magic ring on
to the head of the fugitive, who stumbled and fell. Quick as lightning,
the celestial dog, T’ien Kou, who was in Êrh-lang’s service, threw
himself on him, bit him in the calf, and caused him to stumble afresh.
This was the end of the fight. Sun, surrounded on all sides, was seized
and chained. The battle was won.

## Sun escapes from Lao Chün’s Furnace

The celestial armies now raised the siege, and returned to their
quarters. But a new and unexpected difficulty arose. Yü Huang condemned
the criminal to death, but when they went to carry out the sentence the
executioners learned that he was invulnerable; swords, iron, fire, even
lightning, could make no impression on his skin. Yü Huang, alarmed,
asked Lao Chün the reason of this. The latter replied that there was
nothing surprising about it, seeing that the knave had eaten the peaches
of life in the garden of Heaven and the pills of immortality <span
id="page_332">p. 332</span> which he had composed. “Hand him over to
me,” he added. “I will distil him in my furnace of the Eight Trigrams,
and extract from his composition the elements which render him
immortal.”

Yü Huang ordered that the prisoner be handed over, and in the sight of
all he was shut up in Lao Chün’s alchemical furnace, which for
forty-nine days was heated white-hot. But at an unguarded moment Sun
lifted the lid, emerged in a rage, seized his magic staff, and
threatened to destroy Heaven and exterminate its inhabitants. Yü Huang,
at the end of his resources, summoned Buddha, who came and addressed Sun
as follows: “Why do you wish to possess yourself of the Kingdom of the
Heavens?”

“Have I not power enough to be the God of Heaven?” was the arrogant
reply.

“What qualifications have you?” asked Buddha. “Enumerate them.”

“My qualifications are innumerable,” replied Sun. “I am invulnerable, I
am immortal, I can change myself into seventy-two different forms, I can
ride on the clouds of Heaven and pass through the air at will, with one
leap I can traverse a hundred and eight thousand *li*.”

“Well,” replied Buddha, “have a match with me; I wager that in one leap
you cannot even jump out of the palm of my hand. If you succeed I will
bestow upon you the sovereignty of Heaven.”

## Broad-jump Competition

Sun rose into space, flew like lightning in the great vastness, and
reached the confines of Heaven, opposite the five great red pillars
which are the boundaries of <span id="page_333">p. 333</span> the
created universe. On one of them he wrote his name, as irrefutable
evidence that he could reach this extreme limit; this done, he returned
triumphant to demand of Buddha the coveted inheritance.

“But, wretch,” said Buddha, “you never went out of my hand!”

“How is that?” rejoined Sun. “I went as far as the pillars of Heaven,
and even took the precaution of writing my name on one of them as proof
in case of need.”

“Look then at the words you have written,” said Buddha, lifting a finger
on which Sun read with stupefaction his name as he had inscribed it.

Buddha then seized Sun, transported him out of Heaven, and changed his
five fingers into the five elements, metal, wood, water, fire, and
earth, which instantly formed five high mountains contiguous to each
other. The mountains were called Wu Hsing Shan, and Buddha shut Sun up
in them.

## Conditions of Release

Thus subdued, Sun would not have been able to get out of his stone
prison but for the intercession of Kuan Yin P’u-sa, who obtained his
release on his solemn promise that he would serve as guide, philosopher,
and friend to Hsüan Chuang, the priest who was to undertake the
difficult journey of 108,000 *li* to the Western Heaven. This promise,
on the whole, he fulfilled in the service of Hsüan Chuang during the
fourteen years of the long journey. Now faithful, now restive and
undisciplined, he was always the one to triumph in the end over the
eighty-one fantastical tribulations which beset them as they journeyed.
<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

## Sha Ho-shang

One of the principal of Sun’s fellow-servants of the Master was Sha
Ho-shang.

He is depicted wearing a necklace of skulls, the heads of the nine
Chinese deputies sent in former centuries to find the Buddhist canon,
but whom Sha Ho-shang had devoured on the banks of Liu-sha River when
they had attempted to cross it.

He is also known by the name of Sha Wu-ching, and was originally Grand
Superintendent of the Manufactory of Stores for Yü Huang’s palace.
During a great banquet given on the Peach Festival to all the gods and
Immortals of the Chinese Olympus he let fall a crystal bowl, which was
smashed to atoms. Yü Huang caused him to be beaten with eight hundred
blows, drove him out of Heaven, and exiled him to earth. He lived on the
banks of the Liu-sha Ho, where every seventh day a mysterious sword
appeared and wounded him in the neck. Having no other means of
subsistence, he used to devour the passers-by.

## Sha Ho-shang becomes Baggage-coolie

When Kuan Yin passed through that region on her way to China to find the
priest who was predestined to devote himself to the laborious
undertaking of the quest of the sacred Buddhist books, Sha Ho-shang
threw himself on his knees before her and begged her to put an end to
all his woes.

The goddess promised that he should be delivered by the priest, her
envoy, provided he would engage himself in the service of the pilgrim.
On his promising to do this, and to lead a better life, she herself
ordained him priest. In the end it came about that Hsüan Chuang, when
passing the Sha Ho, took him into his suite as coolie to carry <span
id="page_335">p. 335</span> his baggage. Yü Huang pardoned him in
consideration of the service he was rendering to the Buddhist cause.

## Chu Pa-chieh

Chu Pa-chieh is a grotesque, even gross, personage, with all the
instincts of animalism. One day, while he was occupying the high office
of Overseer-general of the Navigation of the Milky Way, he, during a fit
of drunkenness, vilely assaulted the daughter of Yü Huang. The latter
had him beaten with two thousand blows from an iron hammer, and exiled
to earth to be reincarnated.

During his transition a mistake was made, and entering the womb of a sow
he was born half-man, half-pig, with the head and ears of a pig and a
human body. He began by killing and eating his mother, and then devoured
his little porcine brothers. Then he went to live on the wild mountain
Fu-ling Shan, where, armed with an iron rake, he first robbed and then
ate the travellers who passed through that region.

Mao Êrh-chieh, who lived in the cave Yün-chan Tung, engaged him as
carrier of her personal effects, which she afterward bequeathed to him.

Yielding to the exhortations of the Goddess Kuan Yin, who, at the time
of her journey to China, persuaded him to lead a less dissolute life, he
was ordained a priest by the goddess herself, who gave him the name of
Chu (Pig), and the religious name of Wu-nêng, ‘Seeker after Strength.’
This monster was knocked down by Sun when the latter was passing over
the mountain accompanied by Hsüan Chuang, and he declared himself a
disciple of the pilgrim priest. He accompanied him throughout the
journey, and was also received in the Western Paradise as a reward for
his aid to the Buddhist propaganda. <span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

## Hsüan Chuang, the Master

The origin of this priest was as follows: In the reign of the Emperor
T’ai Tsung of the T’ang dynasty, Ch’ên Kuang-jui, a graduate of Hai
Chou, in his examination for the doctor’s degree came out as *chuang
yüan*, first on the list. Wên Chiao (also named Man-t’ang Chiao), the
daughter of the minister Yin K’ai-shan, meeting the young academician,
fell in love with him, and married him. Several days after the wedding
the Emperor appointed Ch’ên Kuang-jui Governor of Chiang Chou (modern
Chên-chiang Fu), in Kiangsu. After a short visit to his native town he
started to take up his post. His old mother and his wife accompanied
him. When they reached Hung Chou his mother fell sick and they were
forced to stay for a time at the Inn of Ten Thousand Flowers, kept by
one Liu Hsiao-êrh. Days passed; the sickness did not leave her, and as
the time for her son to take over the seals of office was drawing near,
he had to proceed without her.

## The Released Carp

Before his departure he noticed a fisherman holding in his hand a fine
carp; this he bought for a small sum to give to his mother. Suddenly he
noticed that the fish had a very extraordinary look, and, changing his
mind, he let it go in the waters of the Hung Chiang, afterward telling
his mother what he had done. She congratulated him on his action, and
assured him that the good deed would not go unrewarded.

## The Chuang Yüan Murdered

Ch’ên Kuang-jui re-entered his boat with his wife and a servant. They
were stopped by the chief waterman, <span id="page_337">p.
337</span> Liu Hung, and his assistant. Struck with the great beauty of
Ch’ên Kuang-jui’s wife, the former planned a crime which he carried out
with the help of his assistant. At the dead of night he took the boat to
a retired spot, killed Ch’ên and his servant, threw their bodies into
the river, seized his official documents of title and the woman he
coveted, passed himself off as the real *chuang yüan*, and took
possession of the magistracy of Chiang Chou. The widow, who was with
child, had two alternatives—silence or death. Meantime she chose the
former. Before she gave birth to her child, T’ai-po Chin-hsing, the
Spirit of the South Pole Star, appeared to her, and said he had been
sent by Kuan Yin, the Goddess of Mercy, to present her with a son whose
fame would fill the Empire. “Above all,” he added, “take every
precaution lest Liu Hung kill the child, for he will certainly do so if
he can.” When the child was born the mother, during the absence of Liu
Hung, determined to expose it rather than see it slain. Accordingly she
wrapped it up carefully in a shirt, and carried it to the bank of the
Blue River. She then bit her finger, and with the blood wrote a short
note stating the child’s origin, and hid it in its breast. Moreover, she
bit off the infant’s left little toe, as an indelible mark of identity.
No sooner had this been done than a gust of wind blew a large plank to
the river’s edge. The poor mother tied her infant firmly to this plank
and abandoned it to the mercy of the waves. The waif was carried to the
shore of the isle of Chin Shan, on which stands the famous monastery of
Chin-shan Ssŭ, near Chinkiang. The cries of the infant attracted the
attention of an old monk named Chang Lao, who rescued it and gave it the
name of Chiang Liu, ‘Waif of the River.’ He reared it with <span
id="page_338">p. 338</span> much care, and treasured the note its mother
had written with her blood. The child grew up, and Chang Lao made him a
priest, naming him Hsüan Chuang on the day of his taking the vows. When
he was eighteen years of age, having one day quarrelled with another
priest, who had cursed him and reproached him with having neither father
nor mother, he, much hurt, went to his protector Chang Lao. The latter
said to him: “The time has come to reveal to you your origin.” He then
told him all, showed him the note, and made him promise to avenge his
assassinated father. To this end he was made a roving priest, went to
the official Court, and eventually got into touch with his mother, who
was still living with the prefect Liu Hung. The letter placed in his
bosom, and the shirt in which he had been wrapped, easily proved the
truth of his statements. The mother, happy at having found her son,
promised to go and see him at Chin Shan. In order to do this, she
pretended to be sick, and told Liu Hung that formerly, when still young,
she had taken a vow which she had not yet been able to fulfil. Liu Hung
himself helped her to do so by sending a large gift of money to the
priests, and allowed her to go with her servants to perform her
devotions at Chin-shan Ssŭ. On this second visit, during which she could
speak more freely with her son, she wished to see for herself the wound
she had made on his foot. This removed the last shadow of doubt.

## Hsüan Chuang finds his Grandmother

She told Hsüan Chuang that he must first of all go to Hung Chou and find
his grandmother, formerly left at the Inn of Ten Thousand Flowers, and
then on to Ch’ang-an to take to her father Yin K’ai-shan a letter, <span
id="page_339">p. 339</span> putting him in possession of the chief facts
concerning Liu Hung, and praying him to avenge her.

She gave him a stick of incense to take to her mother-in-law. The old
lady lived the life of a beggar in a wretched hovel near the city gate,
and had become blind from weeping. The priest told her of the tragic
death of her son, then touched her eyes with the stick of incense, and
her sight was restored. “And I,” she exclaimed, “have so often accused
my son of ingratitude, believing him to be still alive!” He took her
back to the Inn of Ten Thousand Flowers and settled the account, then
hastened to the palace of Yin K’ai-shan. Having obtained an audience, he
showed the minister the letter, and informed him of all that had taken
place.

## The Murderer Executed

The following day a report was presented to the Emperor, who gave orders
for the immediate arrest and execution of the murderer of Ch’ên
Kuang-jui.

Yin K’ai-shan went with all haste to Chên-chiang, where he arrived
during the night, surrounded the official residence, and seized the
culprit, whom he sent to the place where he had committed the murder.
His heart and liver were torn out and sacrificed to the victim.

## The Carp’s Gratitude

Now it happened that Ch’ên Kuang-jui was not dead after all. The carp
released by him was in fact no other than Lung Wang, the God of the
River, who had been going through his kingdom in that guise and had been
caught in the fisherman’s net. On learning that his rescuer had been
cast into the river, Lung Wang had <span id="page_340">p.
340</span> saved him, and appointed him an officer of his Court. On that
day, when his son, wife, and father-in-law were sacrificing the heart of
his assassin to his *manes* on the river-bank, Lung Wang ordered that he
return to earth. His body suddenly appeared on the surface of the water,
floated to the bank, revived, and came out full of life and health. The
happiness of the family reunited under such unexpected circumstances may
well be imagined. Ch’ên Kuang-jui returned with his father-in-law to
Chên-chiang, where he took up his official post, eighteen years after
his nomination to it.

Hsüan Chuang became the Emperor’s favourite priest. He was held in great
respect at the capital, and had innumerable honours bestowed upon him,
and in the end was chosen for the journey to the Western Paradise, where
Buddha in person handed him the sacred books of Buddhism.

## Pai Ma, the White Horse

When he left the capital, Hsüan Chuang had been presented by the Emperor
with a white horse to carry him on his long pilgrimage. One day, when he
reached Shê-p’an Shan, near a torrent, a dragon emerged from the deep
river-bed and devoured both the horse and its saddle. Sun tried in vain
to find the dragon, and at last had to seek the aid of Kuan Yin.

Now Yü Lung San T’ai-tzŭ, son of Ao Jun, Dragonking of the Western Sea,
having burnt a precious pearl on the roof of his father’s palace, was
denounced to Yü Huang, who had him beaten with three hundred blows and
suspended in the air. He was awaiting death when Kuan Yin passed on her
way to China. The unfortunate dragon requested the goddess to have pity
on him, whereupon <span id="page_341">p. 341</span> she prevailed upon
Yü Huang to spare his life on condition that he served as steed for her
pilgrim on the expedition to the Western Paradise. The dragon was handed
over to Kuan Yin, who showed him the deep pool in which he was to dwell
while awaiting the arrival of the priest. It was this dragon who had
devoured Hsüan Chuang’s horse, and Kuan Yin now bade him change himself
into a horse of the same colour to carry the priest to his destination.
He had the honour of bearing on his back the sacred books that Buddha
gave to T’ai Tsung’s deputy, and the first Buddhist temple built at the
capital bore the name of Pai-ma Miao, ‘Temple of the White Horse.’

## Perils by the Way

It is natural to expect that numberless exciting adventures should
befall such an interesting quartette, and indeed the *Hsi yu chi*, which
contains a hundred chapters, is full of them. The pilgrims encountered
eighty difficulties on the journey out and one on the journey home. The
following examples are characteristic of the rest.

## The Grove of Cypress-trees

The travellers were making their way westward through shining waters and
over green hills, where they found endless luxuriance of vegetation and
flowers of all colours in profusion. But the way was long and lonely,
and as darkness came on without any sign of habitation the Priest said:
“Where shall we find a resting-place for the night?” The Monkey replied:
“My Master, he who has left home and become a priest must dine on the
wind and lodge on the water, lie down under the moon <span
id="page_342">p. 342</span> and sleep in the forest; everywhere is his
home; why then ask where shall we rest?” But Pa-chieh, who was the
bearer of the pilgrim’s baggage, was not satisfied with this reply, and
tried to get his load transferred to the horse, but was silenced when
told that the latter’s sole duty was to carry the Master.

However, the Monkey gave Pai Ma a blow with his rod, causing him to
start forward at a great pace, and in a few minutes from the brow of a
hill Hsüan Chuang espied in the distance a grove of cypress-trees,
beneath the shade of which was a large enclosure. This seemed a suitable
place to pass the night, so they made toward it, and as they approached
observed in the enclosure a spacious and luxurious establishment. There
being no indications that the place was then inhabited, the Monkey made
his way inside.

## A Proposal of Marriage

He was met by a lady of charming appearance, who came out of an inner
room, and said: “Who is this that ventures to intrude upon a widow’s
household?” The situation was embarrassing, but the lady proved to be
most affable, welcomed them all very heartily, told them how she became
a widow and had been left in possession of riches in abundance, and that
she had three daughters, Truth, Love, and Pity by name. She then
proceeded to make a proposal of marriage, not only on behalf of herself,
but of her three daughters as well. They were four men, and here were
four women; she had mountain lands for fruit-trees, dry lands for grain,
flooded fields for rice—more than five thousand acres of each; horses,
oxen, sheep, pigs innumerable; sixty or seventy farmsteads; granaries
choked with grain; storehouses full <span id="page_343">p. 343</span> of
silks and satins; gold and silver enough to last several lifetimes
however extravagantly they lived. Why should the four travellers not
finish their journey there, and be happy ever afterward? The temptation
was great, especially as the three daughters were ladies of surpassing
beauty as well as adepts at needlework and embroidery, well read, and
able to sing sweetly.

But Hsüan Chuang sat as if listening to frogs after rain, unmoved except
by anger that she should attempt to divert him from his heavenly
purpose, and in the end the lady retired in a rage, slamming the door
behind her.

The covetous Pa-chieh, however, expressed himself in favour of accepting
the widow’s terms. Finding it impossible to do so openly, he stole round
to the back and secured a private interview. His personal appearance was
against him, but the widow was not altogether uncompliant. She not only
entertained the travellers, but agreed to Pa-chieh retiring within the
household in the character of a son-in-law, the other three remaining as
guests in the guest-rooms.

## Blind Man’s Buff

But a new problem now arose. If Pa-chieh were wedded to one of the three
daughters, the others would feel aggrieved. So the widow proposed to
blindfold him with a handkerchief, and marry him to whichever he
succeeded in catching. But, with the bandage tied over his eyes,
Pa-chieh only found himself groping in darkness. “The tinkling sound of
female trinkets was all around him, the odour of musk was in his
nostrils; like fairy forms they fluttered about him, but he could no
more grasp one than he could a shadow. One way <span id="page_344">p.
344</span> and another he ran till he was too giddy to stand, and could
only stumble helplessly about.”

The prospective mother-in-law then unloosed the bandage, and informed
Pa-chieh that it was not her daughters’ ‘slipperiness,’ as he had called
it, which prevented their capture, but the extreme modesty of each in
being generous enough to forgo her claims in favour of one of her
sisters. Pa-chieh thereupon became very importunate, urging his suit for
any one of the daughters or for the mother herself or for all three or
all four. This was beyond all conscience, but the widow was equal to the
emergency, and suggested another solution. Each of her daughters wore a
waistcoat embroidered in jewels and gold. Pa-chieh was to try these on
in turn, and to marry the owner of the one which fitted him. Pa-chieh
put one on, but as he was tying the cord round his waist it transformed
itself into strong coils of rope which bound him tightly in every limb.
He rolled about in excruciating agony, and as he did so the curtain of
enchantment fell and the beauties and the palace disappeared.

Next morning the rest of the party on waking up also found that all had
changed, and saw that they had been sleeping on the ground in the
cypress-grove. On making search they found Pa-chieh bound fast to a
tree. They cut him down, to pursue the journey a sadder and wiser Pig,
and the butt of many a quip from his fellow-travellers.

## The Lotus Cave

When the party left the Elephant Country, seeing a mountain ahead, the
Master warned his disciples to be careful. Sun said: “Master, say not
so; remember the text of the Sacred Book, ‘So long as the heart is right
<span id="page_345">p. 345</span> there is nothing to fear.’” After this
Sun kept a close watch on Pa-chieh, who, while professing to be on
guard, slept most of the time. When they arrived at Ping-ting Shan they
were approached by a woodcutter, who warned them that in the mountain,
which extended for 600 *li* (200 miles), there was a Lotus Cave,
inhabited by a band of demons under two chiefs, who were lying in wait
to devour the travellers. The woodcutter then disappeared. Accordingly,
Pa-chieh was ordered to keep watch. But, seeing some hay, he lay down
and went to sleep, and the mountain demons carried him away to the Lotus
Cave.

On seeing Pa-chieh, the second chief said: “He is no good; you must go
in search of the Master and the Monkey.” All this time the Monkey, to
protect his Master, was walking ahead of the horse, swinging his club up
and down and to right and left. The Demon-king saw him from the top of
the mountain and said to himself: “This Monkey is famous for his magic,
but I will prove that he is no match for me; I will yet feast on his
Master.” So, descending the mountain, he transformed himself into a lame
beggar and waited by the roadside. The Master, out of pity, persuaded
the Monkey to carry him. While on the Monkey’s back the Demon, by magic
skill, threw Mount Mêru on to Sun’s head, but the Monkey warded it off
with his left shoulder, and walked on. Then the Demon threw Mount Ô-mei
on to Sun’s head, and this he warded off with his right shoulder, and
walked on, much to the Demon’s surprise. Lastly the Demon caused T’ai
Shan to fall on to his head. This at last stunned the Monkey. Sha
Ho-shang now defended the Master with his staff, which was, however, no
match for the Demon’s starry sword. The Demon <span id="page_346">p.
346</span> seized the Master and carried him under one arm and Sha
Ho-shang under the other to the Lotus Cave.

The two Demons then planned to take their two most precious things, a
yellow gourd and a jade vase, and try to bottle the Monkey. They
arranged to carry them upside down and call out the Monkey’s name. If he
replied, then he would be inside, and they could seal him up, using the
seal of the great Ancient of Days, the dweller in the mansion of T’ai
Sui.  <span id="fr_34"></span>[3](#fn_34)

## The Monkey under the Mountain

When the Monkey found that he was being crushed under the mountain he
was greatly distressed about his Master, and cried out: “Oh, Master, you
delivered me from under the mountain before, and trained me in religion;
how is it that you have brought me to this pass? If you must die, why
should Sha Ho-shang and Pa-chieh and the Dragon-horse also suffer?” Then
his tears poured down like rain.

The spirits of the mountain were astonished at hearing these words. The
guardian angels of the Five Religions asked: “Whose is this mountain,
and who is crushed beneath it?” The local gods replied: “The mountain is
ours, but who is under it we do not know.” “If you do not know,” the
angels replied, “we will tell you. It is the Great Holy One, the Equal
of Heaven, who rebelled there five hundred years ago. He is now
converted, and is the disciple of the Chinese ambassador. How dare you
lend your mountain to the Demon for such a purpose?” The guardian angels
and local gods then recited some prayers, and the mountain was removed.
The Monkey sprang up, brandishing his spear, and the <span
id="page_347">p. 347</span> spirits at once apologized, saying that they
were under enforced service to the Demons.

While they were speaking Sun saw a light approaching, and asked what it
was. The spirits replied: “This light comes from the Demons’ magic
treasures. We fear they are bringing them to catch you.” Sun then said:
“Now we shall have some sport. Who is the Demon-chief’s associate?” “He
is a Taoist,” they replied, “who is always occupied in preparing
chemicals.” The Monkey said: “Leave me, and I will catch them myself.”
He then transformed himself into a duplicate of the Taoist.

## The Magic Gourd

Sun went to meet the Demons, and in conversation learnt from them that
they were on their way to catch the famous Monkey, and that the magic
gourd and vase were for that purpose. They showed these treasures to
him, and explained that the gourd, though small, could hold a thousand
people. “That is nothing,” replied Sun. “I have a gourd which can
contain all the heavens.” At this they marvelled greatly, and made a
bargain with him, according to which he was to give them his gourd,
after it had been tested as to its capacity to contain the heavens, in
exchange for their precious gourd and vase. Going up to Heaven, the
Monkey obtained permission to extinguish the light of the sun, moon, and
stars for one hour. At noon the next day there was complete darkness,
and the Demons believed Sun when he stated that he had put the whole
heavens into his gourd so that there could be no light. They then handed
over to the Monkey their magic gourd and vase, and in exchange he gave
them his false gourd. <span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

## The Magic Rope

On discovering that they had been deceived, the Demons made complaint to
their chiefs, who informed them that Sun, by pretending to be one of the
Immortals, had outwitted them. They had now lost two out of their five
magic treasures. There remained three, the magic sword, the magic palm
fan, and the magic rope. “Go,” said they, “and invite our dear
grandmother to come and dine on human flesh.” Personating one of the
Demons, Sun himself went on this errand. He told the old lady that he
wanted her to bring with her the magic rope, with which to catch Sun.
She was delighted, and set out in her chair carried by two fairies.

When they had gone some few *li*, Sun killed the ladies, and then saw
that they were foxes. He took the magic rope, and thus had three of the
magic treasures. Having changed the dead so that they looked like living
creatures, he returned to the Lotus Cave. Many small demons came running
up, saying that the old lady had been slain. The Demon-king, alarmed,
proposed to release the whole party. But his younger brother said: “No,
let me fight Sun. If I win, we can eat them; if I fail, we can let them
go.”

After thirty bouts Sun lost the magic rope, and the Demon lassoed him
with it and carried him to the cave, and took back the magic gourd and
vase. Sun now transformed himself into two false demons. One he placed
instead of himself in the lasso bound to a pillar, and then went and
reported to the second Demon-chief that Sun was struggling hard, and
that he should be bound with a stronger rope lest he make his escape.
Thus, by this strategy, Sun obtained possession of the magic rope again.
By a similar trick he also got back the magic gourd and vase. <span
id="page_349">p. 349</span>

## The Master Rescued

Sun and the Demons now began to wrangle about the respective merits of
their gourds, which, each assured the other, could imprison men and make
them obey their wishes. Finally, Sun succeeded in putting one of the
Demons into his gourd.

There ensued another fight concerning the magic sword and palm fan,
during which the fan was burnt to ashes. After more encounters Sun
succeeded in bottling the second Demon in the magic vase, and sealed him
up with the seal of the Ancient of Days. Then the magic sword was
delivered, and the Demons submitted. Sun returned to the cave, fetched
his Master out, swept the cave clean of all evil spirits, and they then
started again on their westward journey. On the road they met a blind
man, who addressed them saying: “Whither away, Buddhist Priest? I am the
Ancient of Days. Give me back my magic treasures. In the gourd I keep
the pills of immortality. In the vase I keep the water of life. The
sword I use to subdue demons. With the fan I stir up enthusiasm. With
the cord I bind bundles. One of these two Demons had charge of the gold
crucible. They stole my magic treasures and fled to the mundane sphere
of mortals. You, having captured them, are deserving of great reward.”
But Sun replied: “You should be severely punished for allowing your
servants to do this evil in the world.” The Ancient of Days replied:
“No, without these trials your Master and his disciples could never
attain to perfection.”

Sun understood and said: “Since you have come in person for the magic
treasures, I return them to you.” After receiving them, the Ancient of
Days returned to his T’ai Sui mansion in the skies. <span
id="page_350">p. 350</span>

## The Red Child Demon

By the autumn the travellers arrived at a great mountain. They saw on
the road a red cloud which the Monkey thought must be a demon. It was in
fact a demon child who, in order to entrap the Master, had had himself
bound and tied to the branch of a tree. The child repeatedly cried out
to the passers-by to deliver him. Sun suspected that it was a trick; but
the Master could no longer endure the pitiful wails; he ordered his
disciples to loose the child, and the Monkey to carry him.

As they proceeded on their way the Demon caused a strong whirlwind to
spring up, and during this he carried off the Master. Sun discovered
that the Demon was an old friend of his, who, centuries before, had
pledged himself to eternal friendship. So he consoled his comrades by
saying that he felt sure no harm would come to the Master.

## A Prospective Feast

Soon Sun and his companions reached a mountain covered with
pine-forests. Here they found the Demon in his cave, intent upon
feasting on the Priest. The Demon refused to recognize his ancient
friendship with Sun, so the two came to blows. The Demon set fire to
everything, so that the Monkey might be blinded by the smoke. Thus he
was unable to find his Master. In despair he said: “I must get the help
of some one more skilful than myself.” Pa-chieh was sent to fetch Kuan
Yin. The Demon then seized a magic bag, transformed himself into the
shape of Kuan Yin, and invited Pa-chieh to enter the cave. The simpleton
fell into the trap and was seized and placed in the bag. Then the Demon
appeared in his true form, and said: “I am <span id="page_351">p.
351</span> the beggar child, and mean to cook you for my dinner. A fine
man to protect his Master you are!” The Demon then summoned six of his
most doughty generals and ordered them to accompany him to fetch his
father, King Ox-head, to dine off the pilgrim. When they had gone Sun
opened the bag, released Pa-chieh, and both followed the six generals.

## The Generals Tricked

Sun thought that as the Demon had played a trick on Pa-chieh, he would
play one on his generals. So he hurried on in front of them, and changed
himself into the form of King Ox-head. The Demon and his generals were
invited into his presence, and Red Child said: “If anyone eats of the
pilgrim’s flesh, his life will be prolonged indefinitely. Now he is
caught and I invite you to feast on him.” Sun, personifying the father,
said: “No, I cannot come. I am fasting to-day. Moreover, Sun has charge
of the pilgrim, and if any harm befall him it will be the worse for you,
for he has seventy-two magic arts. He can make himself so big that your
cave cannot contain him, and he can make himself as small as a fly, a
mosquito, a bee, or a butterfly.”

Sun then went to Kuan Yin and appealed for help. She gave him a bottle,
but he found he could not move it. “No,” said Kuan Yin, “for all the
forces of the ocean are stored in it.”

Kuan Yin lifted it with ease, and said: “This dew water is different
from dragon water, and can extinguish the fire of passion. I will send a
fairy with you on your boat. You need no sails. The fairy needs only to
blow a little, and the boat moves along without any effort.” Finally,
the Red Child, having been overcome, repented and <span id="page_352">p.
352</span> begged to be received as a disciple. Kuan Yin received him
and blessed him, giving him the name of Steward.

## The Demons of Blackwater River

One day the Master suddenly exclaimed: “What is that noise?” Sun
replied: “You are afraid; you have forgotten the Heart Prayer, according
to which we are to be indifferent to all the calls of the six senses—the
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, mind. These are the Six Thieves. If you
cannot suppress them, how do you expect to see the Great Lord?” The
Master thought a while and then said: “O disciple, when shall we see the
Incarnate Model (Ju Lai) face to face?”

Pa-chieh said: “If we are to meet such demons as these, it will take us
a thousand years to get to the West.” But Sha Ho-shang rejoined: “Both
you and I are stupid; if we persevere and travel on, shoulder to
shoulder, we shall reach there at last.” While thus talking, they saw
before them a dark river in flood, which the horse could not cross.
Seeing a small boat, the Master said: “Let us engage that boat to take
us across.” While crossing the river in it, they discovered that it was
a boat sent by the Demon of Blackwater River to entrap them in
midstream, and the Master would have been slain had not Sun and the
Western Dragon come to the rescue.

<span id="img_p352"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/p352.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/p352.jpg)</span>  
The Demons of Blackwater River Carry Away the Master

## The Slow-carts Country

Having crossed the Blackwater River, they journeyed westward, facing
wind and snow. Suddenly they heard a great shout as of ten thousand
voices. The Master was alarmed, but Sun laughingly went to investigate.
Sitting on a cloud, he rose in the air, and saw a city, outside of <span
id="page_353">p. 353</span> which there were thousands of priests and
carts laden with bricks and all kinds of building materials. This was
the city where Taoists were respected, and Buddhists were not wanted.
The Monkey, who appeared among the people as a Taoist, was informed that
the country was called the Ch’ê Ch’ih, ‘Slow-carts Country,’ and for
twenty years had been ruled by three Taoists who could procure rain
during times of drought. Their names were Tiger, Deer, and Sheep. They
could also command the wind, and change stones into gold. The Monkey
said to the two leading Taoists: “I wonder if I shall be so fortunate as
to see your Emperor?” They replied: “We will see to that when we have
attended to our business.” The Monkey inquired what business the priests
could have. “In former times,” they said, “when our King ordered the
Buddhists to pray for rain, their prayers were not answered. Then the
Taoists prayed, and copious showers fell. Since then all the Buddhist
priests have been our slaves, and have to carry the building materials,
as you see. We must assign them their work, and then will come to you.”
Sun replied: “Never mind; I am in search of an uncle of mine, from whom
I have not heard for many years. Perhaps he is here among your slaves.”
They said: “You may see if you can find him.”

## Restraints on Freedom

Sun went to look for his uncle. Hearing this, many Buddhist priests
surrounded him, hoping to be recognized as his lost relative. After a
while he smiled. They asked him the reason. He said: “Why do you make no
progress? Life is not meant for idleness.” They said: “We cannot do
anything. We are terribly oppressed.” <span id="page_354">p.
354</span> “What power have your masters?” “By using their magic they
can call up wind or rain.” “That is a small matter,” said Sun. “What
else can they do?” “They can make the pills of immortality, and change
stone into gold.”

Sun said: “These are also small matters; many can do the same. How did
these Taoists deceive your King?” “The King attends their prayers night
and day, expecting thereby to attain to immortality.” “Why do you not
leave the place?” “It is impossible, for the King has ordered pictures
of us to be hung up everywhere. In all the numerous prefectures,
magistracies, and market-places in Slow-carts Country are pictures of
the Buddhist priests, and any official who catches a runaway priest is
promoted three degrees, while every non-official receives fifty taels.
The proclamation is signed by the King. So you see we are helpless.” Sun
then said: “You might as well die and end it all.”

<span id="img_p354"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/p354.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/p354.jpg)</span>  
Buddhists As Slaves in Slow-cart Country

## Immortal for Suffering

They replied: “A great number have died. At one time we numbered more
than two thousand. But through deaths and suicides there now remain only
about five hundred. And we who remain cannot die. Ropes cannot strangle
us, swords cannot cut us; if we plunge into the river we cannot sink;
poison does not kill us.” Sun said: “Then you are fortunate, for you are
all Immortals.” “Alas!” said they, “we are immortal only for suffering.
We get poor food. We have only sand to sleep on. But in the night hours
spirits appear to us and tell us not to kill ourselves, for an Arhat
will come from the East to deliver us. With him there <span
id="page_355">p. 355</span> is a disciple, the Great Holy One, the Equal
of Heaven, most powerful and tender-hearted. He will put an end to these
Taoists and have pity on us Buddhists.”

## The Saviour of the Buddhists

Inwardly Sun was glad that his fame had gone abroad. Returning to the
city, he met the two chief Taoists. They asked him if he had found his
relative. “Yes,” he replied, “they are all my relatives!” They smiled
and said: “How is it that you have so many relatives?” Sun said: “One
hundred are my father’s relatives, one hundred my mother’s relatives,
and the remainder my adopted relatives. If you will let all these
priests depart with me, then I will enter the city with you; otherwise I
will not enter.” “You must be mad to speak to us in this way. The
priests were given us by the King. If you had asked for a few only, we
might have consented, but your request is altogether unreasonable.” Sun
then asked them three times if they would liberate the priests. When
they finally refused, he grew very angry, took his magic spear from his
ear and brandished it in the air, when all their heads fell off and
rolled on the ground.

## Anger of the Buddhist Priests

The Buddhist priests saw from a distance what had taken place, and
shouted: “Murder, murder! The Taoist superintendents are being killed.”
They surrounded Sun, saying: “These priests are our masters; they go to
the temple without visiting the King, and return home without taking
leave of the King. The King is the high priest. Why have you killed his
disciples? The Taoist chief priest will certainly accuse <span
id="page_356">p. 356</span> us Buddhist priests of the murders. What are
we to do? If we go into the city with you they will make you pay for
this with your life.”

Sun laughed. “My friends,” he said, “do not trouble yourselves over this
matter. I am not the Master of the Clouds, but the Great Holy One, a
disciple of the Holy Master from China, going to the Western Paradise to
fetch the sacred books, and have come to save you.”

“No, no,” said they, “this cannot be, for we know him.” Sun replied:
“Having never met him, how can you know him?” They replied: “We have
seen him in our dreams. The spirit of the planet Venus has described him
to us and warned us not to make a mistake.” “What description did he
give?” asked Sun. They replied: “He has a hard head, bright eyes, a
round, hairy face without cheeks, sharp teeth, prominent mouth, a hot
temper, and is uglier than the Thunder-god. He has a rod of iron, caused
a disturbance in Heaven itself, but later repented, and is coming with
the Buddhist pilgrim in order to save mankind from calamities and
misery.” With mixed feelings Sun replied: “My friends, no doubt you are
right in saying I am not Sun. I am only his disciple, who has come to
learn how to carry out his plans. But,” he added, pointing with his
hand, “is not that Sun coming yonder?” They all looked in the direction
in which he had pointed.

## Sun bestows Talismans

Sun quickly changed himself from a Taoist priest, and appeared in his
natural form. At this they all fell down and worshipped him, asking his
forgiveness because their mortal eyes could not recognize him. They then
begged <span id="page_357">p. 357</span> him to enter the city and
compel the demons to repent. Sun told them to follow him. He then went
with them to a sandy place, emptied two carts and smashed them into
splinters, and threw all the bricks, tiles, and timber into a heap,
calling upon all the priests to disperse. “Tomorrow,” he said, “I am
going to see the King, and will destroy the Taoists!” Then they said:
“Sir, we dare not go any farther, lest they attempt to seize you and
cause trouble.” “Have no fear,” he replied; “but if you think so I will
give you a charm to protect you.” He pulled out some hairs, and gave one
to each to hold firmly on the third finger. “If anyone tries to seize
you,” he said, “keep tight hold of it, call out ‘Great Holy One, the
Equal of Heaven,’ and I will at once come to your rescue, even though I
be ten thousand miles away.” Some of them tried the charm, and, sure
enough, there he was before them like the God of Thunder. In his hand he
held a rod of iron, and he could keep ten thousand men and horses at
bay.

## The Magic Circle

It was now winter. The pilgrims were crossing a high mountain by a
narrow pass, and the Master was afraid of wild beasts. The three
disciples bade him fear not, as they were united, and were all good men
seeking truth. Being cold and hungry they rejoiced to see a fine
building ahead of them, but Sun said: “It is another devil’s trap. I
will make a ring round you. Inside that you will be safe. Do not wander
outside it. I will go and look for food.” Sun returned with his bowl
full of rice, but found that his companions had got tired of waiting,
and had disappeared. They had gone forward to the fine building, which
Pa-chieh entered. Not a <span id="page_358">p. 358</span> soul was to be
seen, but on going upstairs he was terrified to see a human skeleton of
immense size lying on the floor. At this moment the Demon of the house
descended on them, bound the Master, and said: “We have been told that
if we eat of your flesh our white hair will become black again, and our
lost teeth grow anew.” So he ordered the small devils who accompanied
him to bind the others. This they did, and thrust the pilgrims into a
cave, and then lay in wait for Sun. It was not long before the Monkey
came up, when a great fight ensued. In the end, having failed,
notwithstanding the exercise of numerous magic arts, to release his
companions, Sun betook himself to the Spiritual Mountain and besought Ju
Lai’s aid. Eighteen *lohan* were sent to help him against the Demon.
When Sun renewed the attack, the *lohan* threw diamond dust into the
air, which blinded the Demon and also half buried him. But, by skilful
use of his magic coil, he gathered up all the diamond dust and carried
it back to his cave.

The *lohan* then advised Sun to seek the aid of the Ancient of Days.
Accordingly, Sun ascended to the thirty-third Heaven, where was the
palace of the god. He there discovered that the Demon was none other
than one of the god’s ox-spirits who had stolen the magic coil. It was,
in fact, the same coil with which Sun himself had at last been subdued
when he had rebelled against Heaven.

## Help from Ju Lai

The Ancient of Days mounted a cloud and went with Sun to the cave. When
the Demon saw who had come he was terrified. The Ancient of Days then
recited an incantation, and the Demon surrendered the magic coil <span
id="page_359">p. 359</span> to him. On the recitation of a second
incantation all his strength left him, and he appeared as a bull, and
was led away by a ring in his nose. The Master and his disciples were
then set at liberty, and proceeded on their journey.

## The Fire-quenching Fan

In the autumn the pilgrims found themselves in the Ssŭ Ha Li Country,
where everything was red—red walls, red tiles, red varnish on doors and
furniture. Sixty *li* from this place was the Flaming Mountain, which
lay on their road westward.

An old man they met told them that it was possible to cross the Flaming
Mountain only if they had the Magic Iron Fan, which, waved once,
quenched fire, waved a second time produced strong wind, and waved a
third time produced rain. This magic fan was kept by the Iron-fan
Princess in a cave on Ts’ui-yün Shan, 1500 *li* distant. On hearing
this, Sun mounted a cloud, and in an instant was transported to the
cave. The Iron-fan Princess was one of the *lochas* (wives and daughters
of demons), and the mother of the Red Child Demon, who had become a
disciple of Kuan Yin. On seeing Sun she was very angry, and determined
to be revenged for the outwitting of her husband, King Ox-head, and for
the carrying away of her son. The Monkey said: “If you lend me the Iron
Fan I will bring your son to see you.” For answer she struck him with a
sword. They then fell to fighting, the contest lasting a long while,
until at length, feeling her strength failing, the Princess took out the
Iron Fan and waved it. The wind it raised blew Sun to a distance of
84,000 *li*, and whirled him about like a leaf in a whirlwind. But he
soon returned, reinforced by further magic power <span id="page_360">p.
360</span> lent him by the Buddhist saints. The Princess, however,
deceived him by giving him a fan which increased the flames of the
mountain instead of quenching them. Sun and his friends had to retreat
more than 20 *li*, or they would have been burned.

The local mountain-gods now appeared, bringing refreshments, and urging
the pilgrims to get the Fan so as to enable them to proceed on their
journey. Sun pointed to his fan and said: “Is not this the Fan?” They
smiled and said: “No, this is a false one which the Princess has given
you.” They added: “Originally there was no Flaming Mountain, but when
you upset the furnace in Heaven five hundred years ago the fire fell
here, and has been burning ever since. For not having taken more care in
Heaven, we have been set to guard it. The Demon-king Ox-head, though he
married the *locha* Princess, deserted her some two years ago for the
only daughter of a fox-king. They live at Chi-lei Shan, some three
thousand *li* from here. If you can get the true Iron Fan through his
help you will be able to extinguish the flames, take your Master to the
West, save the lives of many people round here, and enable us to return
to Heaven once more.”

Sun at once mounted a cloud and was soon at Chi-lei Shan. There he met
the Fox-princess, whom he upbraided and pursued back to her cave. The
Ox-demon came out and became very angry with Sun for having frightened
her. Sun asked him to return with him to the *locha* Princess and
persuade her to give him the Magic Fan, This he refused to do. They then
fought three battles, in all of which Sun was successful. He changed
into the Ox-demon’s shape and visited the *locha* Princess. She,
thinking he was the Ox-demon, gladly received him, <span
id="page_361">p. 361</span> and finally gave him the Magic Fan; he then
set out to return to his Master.

## The Power of the Magic Fan

The Ox-demon, following after Sun, saw him walking along, joyfully
carrying the Magic Fan on his shoulder. Now Sun had forgotten to ask how
to make it small, like an apricot leaf, as it was at first. The Ox-demon
changed himself into the form of Pa-chieh, and going up to Sun he said:
“Brother Sun, I am glad to see you back; I hope you have succeeded.”
“Yes,” replied Sun, and described his fights, and how he had tricked the
Ox-demon’s wife into giving him the Fan. The seeming Pa-chieh said: “You
must be very tired after all your efforts; let me carry the Magic Fan
for you.” As soon as he had got possession of it he appeared in his true
form, and tried to use it to blow Sun away 84,000 *li*, for he did not
know that the Great Holy One had swallowed a wind-resisting pill, and
was therefore immovable. He then put the Magic Fan in his mouth and
fought with his two swords. He was a match for Sun in all the magic
arts, but through the aid of Pa-chieh and the help of the local gods
sent by the Master the Monkey was able to prevail against him. The
Ox-demon changed himself many times into a number of birds, but for each
of these Sun changed himself into a swifter and stronger one. The
Ox-demon then changed himself into many beasts, such as tigers,
leopards, bears, elephants, and an ox 10,000 feet long. He then said to
Sun, with a laugh: “What can you do to me now?” Sun seized his rod of
iron, and cried: “Grow!” He immediately became 100,000 feet high, with
eyes like the sun and moon. They fought till the heavens and the earth
shook with their onslaughts. <span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

## Defeat of the Ox-demon

The Ox-demon being of so fierce and terrible a nature, both Buddha in
Heaven and the Taoist Celestial Ruler sent down whole legions of
celebrated warriors to help the Master’s servant. The Ox-demon tried to
escape in every direction, one after the other, but his efforts were in
vain. Finally defeated, he was made to promise for himself and his wife
to give up their evil ways and to follow the holy precepts of the
Buddhist doctrine.

The Magic Fan was given to Sun, who at once proceeded to test its
powers. When he waved it once the fires on Flaming Mountain died out.
When he waved it a second time a gentle breeze sprang up. When he waved
it a third time refreshing rain fell everywhere, and the pilgrims
proceeded on their way in comfort.

## The Lovely Women

Having travelled over many mountains, the travellers came to a village.
The Master said: “You, my disciples, are always very kind, taking round
the begging-bowl and getting food for me. To-day I will take the
begging-bowl myself.” But Sun said: “That is not right; you must let us,
your disciples, do this for you.” But the Master insisted.

When he reached the village, there was not a man to be seen, but only
some lovely women. He did not think that it was right for him to speak
to women. On the other hand, if he did not procure anything for their
meal, his disciples would make fun of him. So, after long hesitation, he
went forward and begged food of them. They invited him to their cave
home, and, having learnt who he was, ordered food for him, but it was
all human flesh. <span id="page_363">p. 363</span> The Master informed
them that he was a vegetarian, and rose to take his departure, but
instead of letting him go they surrounded and bound him, thinking that
he would be a fine meal for them next day.

## An Awkward Predicament

Then seven of the women went out to bathe in a pool. There Sun, in
search of his Master, found them and would have killed them, only he
thought it was not right to kill women. So he changed himself into an
eagle and carried away their clothes to his nest. This so frightened the
women that they crouched in the pool and did not dare to come out.

But Pa-chieh, also in search of his Master, found the women bathing. He
changed himself into a fish, which the women tried to catch, chasing him
hither and thither round the pool. After a while Pa-chieh leapt out of
the pool and, appearing in his true form, threatened the women for
having bound his Master. In their fright the women fled to a pavilion,
round which they spun spiders’ threads so thickly that Pa-chieh became
entangled and fell. They then escaped to their cave and put on some
clothes.

## How the Master was Rescued

When Pa-chieh at length had disentangled himself from the webs, he saw
Sun and Sha Ho-shang approaching. Having learnt what had happened, they
feared the women might do some injury to the Master, so they ran to the
cave to rescue him. On the way they were beset by the seven dwarf sons
of the seven women, who transformed themselves into a swarm of
dragon-flies, bees, and other insects. But Sun pulled out some hairs
and, changing them into <span id="page_364">p. 364</span> seven
different swarms of flying insects, destroyed the hostile swarm, and the
ground was covered a foot deep with the dead bodies. On reaching the
cave, the pilgrims found it had been deserted by the women. They
released the Master, and made him promise never to beg for food again.
Having given the promise, he mounted his horse, and they proceeded on
their journey.

## The Spiders and the Extinguisher

When they had gone a short distance they perceived a great building of
fine architecture ahead of them. It proved to be a Taoist temple. Sha
Ho-shang said: “Let us enter, for Buddhism and Taoism teach the same
things. They differ only in their vestments.” The Taoist abbot received
them with civility and ordered five cups of tea. Now he was in league
with the seven women, and when the servant had made the tea they put
poison in each cup. Sun, however, suspected a conspiracy, and did not
drink his tea. Seeing that the rest had been poisoned, he went and
attacked the sisters, who transformed themselves into huge spiders. They
were able to spin ropes instead of webs with which to bind their
enemies. But Sun attacked and killed them all.

<span id="img_p364"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/p364.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/p364.jpg)</span>  
Sun Steals Clothing for His Master

The Taoist abbot then showed himself in his true form, a demon with a
thousand eyes. He joined battle with Sun, and a terrible contest ensued,
the result being that the Demon succeeded in putting an extinguisher on
his enemy. This was a new trick which Sun did not understand. However,
after trying in vain to break out through the top and sides, he began to
bore downward, and, finding that the extinguisher was not deep in the
ground, he succeeded in effecting his escape from below. But he feared
that his Master and the others would die of the <span id="page_365">p.
365</span> poison. At this juncture, while he was suffering mental
tortures on their behalf, a Bodhisattva, Lady Pi Lan, came to his
rescue. By the aid of her magic he broke the extinguisher, gave his
Master and fellow-disciples pills to counteract the poison, and so
rescued them.

## Shaving a Whole City

The summer had now arrived. On the road the pilgrims met an old lady and
a little boy. The old lady said: “You are priests; do not go forward,
for you are about to pass into the country known as the Country that
exterminates Religion. The inhabitants have vowed to kill ten thousand
priests. They have already slain that number all but four noted ones
whose arrival they expect; then their number will be complete.”

This old lady was Kuan Yin, with Shên Tsai (Steward), who had come to
give them warning. Sun thereupon changed himself into a candle-moth and
flew into the city to examine for himself. He entered an inn, and heard
the innkeeper warning his guests to look after their own clothes and
belongings when they went to sleep. In order to travel safely through
the city, Sun decided that they should all put on turbans and clothing
resembling that of the citizens. Perceiving from the innkeeper’s warning
that thieving was common, Sun stole some clothing and turbans for his
Master and comrades. Then they all came to the inn at dusk, Sun
representing himself as a horse-dealer.

Fearing that in their sleep their turbans would fall off, and their
shaven heads be revealed, Sun arranged that they should sleep in a
cupboard, which he asked the landlady to lock.

During the night robbers came and carried the cupboard <span
id="page_366">p. 366</span> away, thinking to find in it silver to buy
horses. A watchman saw many men carrying this cupboard, and became
suspicious, and called out the soldiers. The robbers ran away, leaving
the cupboard in the open. The Master was very angry with Sun for getting
him into this danger. He feared that at daylight they would be
discovered and all be executed. But Sun said: “Do not be alarmed; I will
save you yet!” He changed himself into an ant, and escaped from the
cupboard. Then he plucked out some hairs and changed them into a
thousand monkeys like himself. To each he gave a razor and a charm for
inducing sleep. When the King and all the officials and their wives had
succumbed to this charm, the monkeys were to shave their heads.

On the morrow there was a terrible commotion throughout the city, as all
the leaders and their families found themselves shaved like Buddhists.

Thus the Master was saved again.

## The Return to China

The pilgrims having overcome the predicted eighty difficulties of their
outward journey, there remained only one to be overcome on the homeward
way.

They were now returning upon a cloud which had been placed at their
disposal, and which had been charged to bear them safely home. But alas!
the cloud broke and precipitated them to the earth by the side of a wide
river which they must cross. There were no ferry-boats or rafts to be
seen, so they were glad to avail themselves of the kind offices of a
turtle, who offered to take them across on his back. But in midstream
the turtle reminded Hsüan Chuang of a promise he had made him when on
his outward journey, namely, that he would intercede for him <span
id="page_367">p. 367</span> before the Ruler of the West, and ask his
Majesty to forgive all past offences and allow him to resume his
humanity again. The turtle asked him if he had remembered to keep his
word. Hsüan Chuang replied: “I remember our conversation, but I am sorry
to say that under great pressure I quite forgot to keep my promise.”
“Then,” said the turtle, “you are at liberty to dispense with my
services.” He then disappeared beneath the water, leaving the pilgrims
floundering in the stream with their precious books. They swam the
river, and with great difficulty managed to save a number of volumes,
which they dried in the sun.

## The Travellers Honoured

The pilgrims reached the capital of their country without further
difficulty. As soon as they appeared in sight the whole population
became greatly excited, and cutting down branches of willow-trees went
out to meet them. As a mark of special distinction the Emperor sent his
own horse for Hsüan Chuang to ride on, and the pilgrims were escorted
with royal honours into the city, where the Emperor and his grateful
Court were waiting to receive them. Hsüan Chuang’s queer trio of
converts at first caused great amusement among the crowds who thronged
to see them, but when they learned of Sun’s superhuman achievements, and
his brave defence of the Master, their amusement was changed into
wondering admiration.

But the greatest honours were conferred upon the travellers at a meeting
of the Immortals presided over by Mi-lo Fo, the Coming Buddha.
Addressing Hsüan Chuang, the Buddha said, “In a previous existence you
were one of my chief disciples. But for disobedience and for lightly
esteeming the great teaching your soul was imprisoned <span
id="page_368">p. 368</span> in the Eastern Land. Now a memorial has been
presented to me stating that you have obtained the True Classics of
Salvation, thus, by your faithfulness, completing your meritorious
labours. You are appointed to the high office of Controller of
Sacrifices to his Supreme Majesty the Pearly Emperor.”

Turning to Sun, the Buddha said, “You, Sun, for creating a disturbance
in the palace of Heaven, were imprisoned beneath the Mountain of the
Five Elements, until the fullness of Heaven’s calamities had descended
upon you, and you had repented and had joined the holy religion of
Buddha. From that time you have endeavoured to suppress evil and cherish
virtue. And on your journey to the West you have subjugated evil
spirits, ghosts, and demons. For your services you are appointed God of
Victorious Strife.”

For his repentance, and for his assistance to his Master, Chu Pa-chieh,
the Pig Fairy, was appointed Head Altar-washer to the Gods. This was the
highest office for which he was eligible, on account of his inherent
greed.

Sha Ho-shang was elevated to the rank of Golden Body Perpetual Saint.

Pai Ma, the white horse who had patiently carried Hsüan Chuang and his
burden of books, was led by a god down the Spirit Mountain to the banks
of the Pool of Dragon-transformation. Pai Ma plunged in, when he changed
at once into a four-footed dragon, with horns, scales, claws, and wings
complete. From this time he became the chief of the celestial dragon
tribe.

<span id="img_p368"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/p368.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/p368.jpg)</span>  
The Return to China

Sun’s first thought upon receiving his promotion was to get rid of the
Head-splitting Helmet. Accordingly he said to his Master, “Now that I
am, like yourself, a Buddha, I want you to relieve my head of the helmet
you <span id="page_369">p. 369</span> imposed upon me during the years
of my waywardness.” Hsüan Chuang replied, “If you have really become a
Buddha, your helmet should have disappeared of itself. Are you sure it
is still upon your head?” Sun raised his hand, and lo! the helmet was
gone.

After this the great assembly broke up, and each of the Immortals
returned in peace to his own celestial abode. <span id="page_370">p.
370</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[370:1](mlc16.htm#fr_32) A record of a journey
to the Western Paradise to procure the Buddhist scriptures for the
Emperor of China. The work is a dramatization of the introduction of
Buddhism into China.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[370:2](mlc16.htm#fr_33) See [p.
329](#page_329).

<span id="fn_34"></span>[370:3](mlc16.htm#fr_34) See [p.
195](mlc07.htm#page_195).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Fox Legends](mlc17)

</div>
