[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml04)  [Next](ml06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9ID18/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mazes and Labyriths*, by W. H. Matthews, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

# CHAPTER II

### THE EGYPTIAN LABYRINTH

\(i\) *Accounts of the Ancient Writers*

THE earliest structure of any kind to which we find the word labyrinth
applied was a huge building situated in the North of Egypt, a land
always noted for its stupendous monuments, and was probably constructed
more than 2000 years before the commencement of the Christian era.

We live in an age when the use of constructional steel enables the
dreams of the architect to materialise in many ways that would astonish
the builders of old; nevertheless, the modern citizen, whatever his
nationality, can rarely resist a feeling akin to awe when making his
first acquaintance with such works as the Pyramids of Egypt. One can
imagine, then, what a profound effect these massive edifices must have
exerted on the minds of travellers in earlier ages.

We find, as we might expect, many wild exaggerations in individual
descriptions and corresponding discrepancies between the various
accounts of any particular monument, and this is to some extent the case
with regard to the Egyptian Labyrinth.

A fairly detailed and circumstantial account has come down to us from
the Greek writer Herodotus.

Herodotus, who is rightly spoken of as the Father of History, was born
about 484 B.C. and lived about sixty

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

years, of which he spent a considerable number in travelling about over
most of the then known world. Those who are fortunate enough to be able
to read his works in their original tongue are charmed by their
freshness, simplicity, and harmonious rhythm, but those who look to him
for accurate information on any but contemporary events or matters with
which he was personally acquainted are apt to find a rather too
credulous acceptance of the wonderful. No doubt the poetical instinct in
Herodotus was stronger than the critical spirit of the true historian,
but, so far as the records of his personal observations are concerned,
there seems to be no reason to accuse him of gross exaggeration.

The Labyrinth of Egypt he himself visited, as he tells us in his second
book, and seems to have been consider-ably impressed by it. After
describing how the Egyptians divided the land into twelve parts, or
*nomes*, and set a king over each, he says that they agreed to combine
together to leave a memorial of themselves. They then constructed the
Labyrinth, just above Lake Moeris, and nearly opposite the city of
crocodiles (Crocodilopolis). "I found it," he says, "greater than words
could tell, for, although the temple at Ephesus and that at Samos are
celebrated works, yet all of the works and buildings of the Greeks put
together would certainly be inferior to this labyrinth as regards labour
and expense." Even the pyramids, he tells us, were surpassed by the
Labyrinth. "It has twelve covered courts, with opposite doors, six
courts on the North side and six on the South, all communicating with
one another and with one wall surrounding them all. There are two sorts
of rooms, one sort above, the other sort below ground, fifteen hundred
of each sort, or three thousand in all." He says that he was allowed to
pass through the upper rooms only, the lower range being strictly
guarded from visitors, as they contained the tombs of the kings who had
built the Labyrinth, also the tombs of the sacred crocodiles.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

The upper rooms he describes as being of super-human size, and the
system of passages through the courts, rooms, and colonnades very
intricate and bewildering. The roof of the whole affair, he says, is of
stone and the walls are covered with carvings. Each of the courts is
surrounded by columns of white stone, perfectly joined. Outside the
Labyrinth, and at one corner of it, is a pyramid about 240 feet in
height, with huge figures carved upon it and approached by an
underground passage.

Herodotus expresses even greater admiration, however, for the lake
beside the Labyrinth, which he describes as being of vast size and
artificially constructed, having two pyramids arising from its bed, each
supporting a colossal seated statue. The water for the lake, he says, is
brought from the Nile by a canal.

The Labyrinth and the lake are also described at some length by another
great traveller, Strabo, who lived about four centuries after Herodotus.
He wrote, amongst other works, a Geography of the World in seventeen
volumes, the last of which treats of Egypt and other parts of Africa.
Like Herodotus, he speaks of the Labyrinth from personal observation.
After referring to the lake and the manner in which it is used as a
storage reservoir for the water of the Nile, he proceeds to describe the
Labyrinth, "a work equal to the Pyramids." He says it is "a large palace
composed of as many palaces as there were formerly *nomes*. There are an
equal number of courts, surrounded by columns and adjoining one another,
all in a row and constituting one building, like a long wall with the
courts in front of it. The entrances to the courts are opposite the
wall; in front of these entrances are many long covered alleys with
winding intercommunicating passages, so that a stranger could not find
his way in or out unless with a guide. Each of these structures is
roofed with a single slab of stone, as are also the covered alleys, no
timber or any other material being used." If one

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

ascends to the roof, he says, one looks over "a field of stone." The
courts were in a line, supported by a row of twenty-seven monolithic
columns, the walls also being constructed of stones of as great a size.

"At the end of the building is the royal tomb, consisting of a square
pyramid and containing the body of *Imandes*."

Strabo says that it was the custom of the twelve nomes of Egypt to
assemble, with their priests and priestesses, each *nome* in its own
court, for the purpose of sacrificing to the gods and administering
justice in important matters.

He mentions that the inhabitants of the particular *nome* in the
vicinity worshipped the crocodile which was kept in the lake and
answered to the name of Suchus (Sebek). This animal was apparently quite
tame and used to be presented by visitors with offerings of bread,
flesh, wine, honey, and milk.

In certain parts of his works Strabo speaks rather disrespectfully of
Herodotus as a writer, classing him as a marvel-monger, but it will be
seen that in several important respects these two accounts of the
Egyptian Labyrinth are in fair agreement.

Another writer of about the same period as Strabo, known as Diodorus the
Sicilian, wrote a long, rambling compilation which he called a
"Historical Library" and in which he describes the Egyptian Labyrinth
and Lake Moeris. He says the latter was constructed by King Moeris, who
left a place in the middle where he built himself a sepulchre and two
pyramids—one for himself and one for his queen—surmounted by colossal
seated statues. Diodorus says that the king gave the money resulting
from the sale of the fish caught in the lake, amounting to a silver
talent a day, to his wife "to buy her pins."

A generation or so later the Roman writer Pomponius Mela gives a short
account of this labyrinth, probably at second-hand, and early in the
first century of the

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christian era
Pliny, in his "Natural History," has a good deal to say on the subject.
He refers to labyrinths generally as "the most stupendous works on which
mankind has expended its labours."

Regarding the Egyptian Labyrinth he says, "there exists still, in the
*nome* of Heracleopolites, a labyrinth first built, it is said, three
thousand six hundred years ago, by King Petesuchis or Tithoës," but he
goes on to quote Herodotus, to the effect that it was built by twelve
kings, the last of whom was Psammetichus, and two other writers who give
the king's name as Moiris and Moteris respectively, "whilst others,
again, assert that it was a building dedicated to the Sun-god, an
opinion which is generally accepted."

He also refers to the fact that the roof was of stone, and notes as a
surprising point that the parts around the entrance were constructed of
Parian marble, whilst the columns of the other parts were of syenite.
"This great mass is so solidly built that the lapse of time has been
quite unable to destroy it, but it has been badly ravaged by the people
of Heracleopolites, who have always detested it. To describe the whole
of it in detail would be quite impossible, as it is divided up into
regions and prefectures, called *nomes*, thirty in number, with a great
palace to each; in addition it must contain temples of all the gods of
Egypt and forty statues of Nemesis in the same number of sacred shrines,
as well as numerous pyramids." He describes it further as having
"banquet halls reached by steep ascents, flights of ninety steps leading
down from the porticoes, porphyritic columns, figures of gods and
hideous monsters, and statues of kings. Some of the palaces are so made
that the opening of a door makes a terrifying sound as of thunder. Most
of the buildings are in total darkness. Outside the labyrinth there is
another great heap of buildings, called the 'Pteron,' under which are
passages leading to other subterranean palaces."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Egyptian Labyrinth (*continued*)](ml06)
