[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml06)  [Next](ml08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9ID18/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mazes and Labyriths*, by W. H. Matthews, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

# CHAPTER IV

### THE CRETAN LABYRINTH

\(i\) *The Story of Theseus and the Minotaur*

CHARLES KINGSLEY in "The Heroes" and Nathaniel Hawthorne in "Tanglewood
Tales" have familiarised most English-speaking people with the story of
the exploits of Theseus, and doubtless most folk have some acquaintance
with the first volume of Plutarch's "Lives," but it will not be out of
place here to recall the portions of the legend which are associated
with our particular theme, the parts, that is to say, which concern the
Labyrinth of Crete. In doing so we will follow the version given by
Plutarch.

This Greco-Roman historian flourished in the latter half of the first
century of our era. His information as to the deeds of Theseus, already
for many centuries a staple ingredient in popular legendry, was drawn
from the accounts of the early Greek writers Bacchylides (fifth century
B.C.), Cleidemus (*circ.* 420-350 B.C.), Philochorus (*circ.* 306-260
B.C.), and others.

The Cretan exploit was perhaps the most romantic of the long series of
heroic ads attributed to Theseus. Let us briefly recall it.

Aegeus, the father of Theseus, was King of Athens. At that time there
reigned at Knossos, in Crete, a monarch called Minos, who held sway over
what was then

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

the most powerful maritime state in the Mediterranean. Minos had a son
named Androgeos, who, during his travels in Attica, was treacherously
set upon and slain, or so his father was informed. In consequence of
this Minos imposed a penalty on the Athenians in the form of a tribute
to be paid once every nine years, such tribute to consist of seven
youths and seven maidens, who were to be shipped to Knossos at the
appointed periods.

There was at the court of Minos an exceedingly clever and renowned
artificer or engineer, Daedalus by name, to whom all sorts of miraculous
inventions are ascribed. This Daedalus had devised an ingenious
structure, the "Labyrinth," so contrived that if anybody were placed
therein he would find it practically impossible to discover the exit
without a guide.

The Labyrinth was designed as a dwelling for, or at any rate was
inhabited by, a hideous and cruel being called the Minotaur, a monstrous
offspring of Queen Pasiphaë, wife of Minos. The Minotaur is described as
being half man and half bull, or a man with a bull's head, a ferocious
creature that destroyed any unfortunate human beings who might come
within its power. According to report, the youths and maidens of the
Athenian tribute were periodically, one by one, thrust into the
Labyrinth, where, after futile wanderings in the endeavour to find an
exit, they were finally caught and slain by the Minotaur.

When Theseus arrived at the court of Aegeus, having been brought up
hitherto by his mother in a distant seclusion, he was distressed to find
that his father's joy in the reunion was overcast by a deepening
sadness. On inquiring the reason for this, he learned of the vindictive
tribute laid upon the kingdom, and that the time for the third payment
was approaching.

"Let me make one of the fourteen," said the valiant youth. "I will find
a way to slay this Minotaur, and then there will be no further need for
the tribute."

 

<span id="img_fig005"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 5. Cretan
Labyrinth. (&lt;i&gt;Florentine Picture
Chronicle&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig005.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig005.jpg)  
Fig. 5. Cretan Labyrinth. (*Florentine Picture Chronicle*.)  
</span>

 

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

After various attempts to dissuade him, Aegeus at length consented, but
stipulated that if Theseus were successful in his design the tribute
ship should, on its return voyage, hoist a white sail in place of the
black one which it customarily bore.

In due course Theseus came to Knossos, where, shortly after his arrival,
he attracted the attention of Ariadne, the fair-haired daughter of
Minos. Youth and love conspired against age and rancour, and the fair
damsel arranged to provide the hero with a clue of thread and a sword
before he was cast into the Labyrinth. One end of this thread was to be
fastened at the entrance and the rest unrolled as he advanced.

Theseus followed his instructions, met the Minotaur in its lair and,
after a terrific combat, overcame and slew it, after which he retraced
his steps by means of the thread and made his escape from the Labyrinth.

By some means or other he contrived to liberate the other prisoners and
to obtain possession of the tribute ship. Then, with the fair Ariadne on
board, they set sail for Athens.

They do not appear to have been too eager to reach their destination,
however, for the party found time to celebrate their escape with dance
and song on the islands *en route*. It is said that on the island of
Delos they performed a peculiar dance called the *Geranos*, or "Crane
Dance," in which they went through the motions of threading the
Labyrinth, and that this dance was perpetuated by the natives of that
island until fairly recent times.

Theseus seems to have marred his home-coming by two little displays of
thoughtlessness that might be considered reprehensible in anybody but a
Greek hero. In the first place, he left fair Ariadne behind on the
island of Naxos; secondly, he entirely overlooked his father's request
concerning the change of sail, with the result that poor old Aegeus, on
the look-out for the returning ship,

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

saw the black sail in the distance, concluded that his son had failed in
his encounter with the Minotaur, threw himself into the sea and was
drowned. Hence that sea was called the Aegean, and is so called to this
day.

In [Fig. 5](#img_fig005) we reproduce an early Italian drawing in which
the various incidents in the story are seen simultaneously. This picture
is one of a remarkable series, attributed to Baccio Baldini and known as
the Florentine Picture Chronicle. The collection was for many years the
property of John Ruskin, but is now jealously treasured by the British
Museum. A contemporary engraving, of the school of Finiguerra, seems to
be based on this picture ([Fig. 6](#img_fig006)).

There are many versions of the legend, some of them greatly at variance
with others. For instance, Philochorus, an eminent writer on the
antiquities of Athens, gives in his "Atthis" a very rationalistic
account of the affair, stating that the Labyrinth was nothing but a
dungeon where Minos imprisoned the Athenian youths until such time as
they were given as prizes to the victors in the sports that were held in
honour of his murdered son. He held also that the monster was simply a
military officer, whose brutal disposition, in conjunction with his
name, Tauros, may have given rise to the Minotaur myth.

The Cretan poet Epimenides, who lived in the sixth century B.C., says
that Theseus was aided in his escape from the dark Labyrinth by means of
the light radiated by a crown of blazing gems and gold which Bacchus
gave to Ariadne.

Aristotle, according to Plutarch, stated in a work which has not come
down to us his belief that the Athenian youths were not put to death by
Minos but were retained as slaves. Plutarch, moreover, deplores the
abuse which Greek tradition had heaped upon the name of Minos, pointing
out that Homer and Hesiod had referred to him in very honourable terms,
and

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

that he was reputed to have laid down the principles of justice.

According to the classic faith, he was born of Zeus, the supreme God of
the Greeks, and Europa, daughter of man, both marriage and birth taking
place in the Dictaean Cave, not far from Knossos. He received the

<span id="img_fig006"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 6.—Cretan
Labyrinth. (Italian Engraving; School of
&lt;i&gt;Finiguerra&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig006.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig006.jpg)  
FIG. 6.—Cretan Labyrinth. (Italian Engraving; School of *Finiguerra*.)  
</span>

laws, like another Moses, direct from God, and after administering them
during his life on earth continued to do so in the underworld after his
death.

The probability is, as Professor Murray has suggested, that Minos was a
general name, like "Pharaoh" in Egypt, or "Caesar" in Rome, bestowed
upon each of a number of Cretan kings of a certain type. A mark either
of the respect in which the name was held or of the colonising power of
the monarch or monarchs in

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

question is seen in the application of the name Minoa to several towns
and villages scattered along the northern shores of the eastern
Mediterranean.

The name Daedalus has likewise been thought by some to have been applied
indiscriminately to various artificers and inventors of unusual
ingenuity. The principal feats associated with this name are, in
addition to the planning of the Labyrinth, the construction of a
*Choros*, or dancing-place, for Ariadne, the modelling of a great hollow
cow for Pasiphaë, wife of Minos, in order that she might interview the
great white bull for which she had conceived an unnatural affection (the
outcome being, in the words of Euripides, "A form commingled, and a
monstrous birth, half man, half bull, in twofold shape combined"), and
the invention of wings, wherewith Daedalus escaped from the Labyrinth
when imprisoned there by Minos for his share in the Pasiphaë episode.
Daedalus was also credited with the invention of the auger, the
plumb-line and other tools, and of masts and sails for ships.

The Theseus-Minotaur incident has been often celebrated in ancient and
mediaeval art, instances of which we shall later have occasion to
mention. Modern artists, also, have not disdained the theme; a
particularly fine example is the colossal marble group by Canova (1819),
now at the Museum of Art History at Vienna, formerly in the Theseus
Temple in the Volksgarten.

The question naturally arises: Was there actually such a thing as the
Labyrinth, and, if so, where was it and what was its nature?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Cretan Labyrinth (*continued*)](ml08)
