[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml23)  [Next](ml25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9ID18/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mazes and Labyriths*, by W. H. Matthews, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

# CHAPTER XXI

### LABYRINTH DESIGN AND SOLUTION OF MAZES

THERE is no limit to the number of patterns which, without any
metaphorical extension of terms, we may legitimately describe as coming
within the scope of the words "maze" and "labyrinth." In common speech
we use either word to describe any artificial design or natural pattern
presenting a convoluted appearance, or any path or channel of an
intricate nature, but when we come to consider the matter more carefully
we feel the need for some definition. As we have seen, the dictionaries
do not help us much in this respect. Let us, therefore, decide what
limitations we feel compelled to observe in our use of the terms from
the point of view of designers or unravellers of mazes and labyrinths.

In the first place we must limit ourselves to works of artifice, *i.e.*,
we must exclude the "labyrinths" of nature, such as forests, caverns,
and so forth, and agree that any application of our terms to such
objects is to be regarded as strictly metaphorical.

Secondly, we must require, as a practical corollary to our first
condition, that there shall be an element of purposefulness in the
design. The purpose may be the portrayal of the imagined course of the
sun through the heavens, the symbolisation of the folds of sin or of the
Christian's toilsome journey through life, the construction of a puzzle,
or the mere pleasure to be derived from packing

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

the maximum of path into the minimum of space, but there must be an
object of some sort. The aimless scribblings of an infant, like the
trail of an ink-dipped fly, may in this connection be considered as the
fortuitous meanderings of nature rather than the conscious design of
man. By imposing this condition we exclude the Indian pictograph shown
in [Fig. 132](ml20.htm#img_fig132), which, in the absence of any
indication as to its significance, can only by a loose extension of the
term be called a labyrinth.

(Our use of the words "aim," "design," and "purpose" will be quite clear
to everybody but the sciolist dabbling in metaphysics.)

Thirdly, there must be a certain degree of complexity in the design, a
degree which it is manifestly impossible to define as it must be
considered in conjunction with other characteristics in any particular
case. In the case of a unicursal labyrinth, *i.e.*, one in which there
is only one path, the complexity lies in the multiplicity of turnings
and the extent of the departure from pure geometrical figures such as
the meander, the zigzag, and the spiral; in the case of a puzzle-figure
it lies partly in this but partly also in the number and disposition of
branch-paths. It naturally follows that in a unicursal design there
cannot be absolute symmetry, although, with a little ingenuity, a very
pleasing *appearance* of symmetry may be obtained.

Fourthly, there must be communication between the component parts of the
design; in other words, the path must be continuous. This does not
preclude the occurrence in the design of closed "islands," but only
makes it clear that such inclusions do not form part of the labyrinth
proper.

Fifthly, there must be communication between the interior and the
exterior. We might not altogether with-hold the application of the term
"labyrinth" or "maze" in the case of a closed design, but we should have
to qualify it, *e.g.*, by prefixing the word "closed." In the

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

case of the beautiful and intricate mosaic pavement found in the *Casa
del Labirinto* at Pompeii mentioned on page [46](ml11.htm#page_46), for
example, although we know that the pattern was intended to convey an
allusion to the Cretan labyrinth, we cannot look upon it as a true
labyrinth design; not only is there no communication with the exterior,
but by its repetition of purely geometrical design it fails to satisfy
our third condition.

If the reader chooses to formulate for himself a working definition
based on the above remarks he is at liberty to do so, but he may take
for granted that nobody else will accept it. However, he will have
gained, at any rate, a clearer conception of the matter than he would
perhaps have gathered from any dictionary.

We have seen that mazes and labyrinths may be roughly divided into two
types as regards the principle of their design, namely, into *unicursal*
and *multicursal* types, or, as some say, into "non-puzzle" and "puzzle"
types respectively. The word "unicursal" has hitherto been chiefly used
by mathematicians to describe a class of problems dealing with the
investigation of the shortest route between two given points or of the
method of tracing a route between two points in a given figure without
covering any part of the ground more or less than once (*e.g.*, the
well-known "bridge" problems), but there is no reason why we should not
apply the adjective "unicursal" (= "single course" or "once run") to
denote those figures which consist of a single unbranched path, using
the term "multicursal" as its complement, or antonym. We must not draw
too hard a line between these two types; for instance, we could not
reasonably insist that the turf maze at Wing ([Fig.
60](ml13.htm#img_fig060)) is multicursal simply on account of the
dichotomy of its path to form the central loop. Where the loop is itself
relatively large and complex, as in the Poitiers example ([Fig.
55](ml12.htm#img_fig055)), there are better grounds for doing so, but it
is plain that in such cases the point is one to be decided by
common-sense.

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

Let us consider a little further the various *forms* of labyrinth design
and make some sort of a classification.

In the first place we may observe that a labyrinth (using this word, for
convenience, as embracing "maze") may be arranged in one plane, as we
commonly see it on a sheet of paper, or it may be disposed in two or
more intercommunicating planes, like the Egyptian labyrinth or a block
of flats. We may thus classify all labyrinths, for a start, as either
two-dimensional or three-dimensional. As the vast majority belong to the
first class and as, moreover, every subdivision of the first class may
be applied equally to the second, we need say no more concerning the
latter except to remark that the complexity of a garden maze may be
greatly increased, if desired, by introducing tunnels or bridges, thus
converting it into a three-dimensional maze.

Another general grouping of labyrinths would be into "compact" and
"diffuse" types, the former having, in a typical case, the whole of its
area occupied by the convolutions of its path and its bounding walls,
the latter having spaces between the bounding walls of the various
sections of the path, such spaces having no communication with the path
itself. Amongst unicursal labyrinths the Alkborough specimen ([Fig.
59](ml13.htm#img_fig059)) exemplifies the compact type and the Pimperne
maze ([Fig. 63](ml14.htm#img_fig063)) the diffuse type.

The Hampton Court maze ([Fig. 111](ml18.htm#img_fig111)) may serve as
the type of a compact and the Versailles example (Fig. 88) that of a
diffuse multicursal labyrinth.

With regard to the nature of the path itself, we may distinguish broadly
between labyrinths with curved and those with straight paths, allowing
for an intermediate "mixed" group in which part of the path is curved
and part straight. Examples of each kind will be found amongst the
figures given.

Multicursal mazes, again, may be subdivided according to the manner of
branching of the path, *e.g.*,

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

according to whether the branches are simple or sub-divided (the
occurrence of more than one branch at any point may be considered as the
case of a subdivided branch), whether the branches do or do not rejoin
the main path, forming "loops," and whether—a rather important point as
regards the solution of the maze—the "goal" is or is not situated within
a loop.

Finally we may create separate classes for those mazes in which there
are two or more equivalent routes between the entrance and the goal,
those which have two or more entrances, and those in which there is no
distinct goal (*e.g.*, the Versailles maze) or in which there are two or
more equivalent goals.

We can represent the branch system of any labyrinth whatever in a very
simple manner by means of a straight-line diagram, wherein the paths of
the labyrinth are represented by lines, to scale if need be, branches
being shown to the left or right respectively of the main straight line
representing the shortest path from the entrance to the goal. It will be
seen that no account is taken of the actual orientation or of changes of
direction of any part of the path.

A unicursal labyrinth will thus be represented by a single straight
line. Figs. [136](#img_fig136) and [137](#img_fig137) represent, roughly
to scale, the Hampton Court and Hatfield mazes respectively and should
be compared with those shown in Figs. [111](ml18.htm#img_fig111) and
[87](ml17.htm#img_fig087). Triangles and discs may be used, as shown, to
indicate entrances and goals respectively.

Such diagrams as these are just as useful as the actual plans of the
mazes for the purpose of serving as a clue for the visitor; in fact,
they are really more easily followed.

Amongst the many speculations that have from time to time been made
regarding the origin and significance of the design on the Knossian
coins, the suggestion was made by a contributor to *Knowledge* about
thirty years ago—somewhat similar theories having been expounded by a
German writer a decade earlier—that this figure

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

was a simplified diagram comparable with the diagrams described above.
According to this conception the figure was intended as a clue to the
actual labyrinth, the designs on the coins being perhaps copied from
those on "souvenir" tokens issued by the priests or curators of the
edifice, and indicated the right path to be taken, all other paths being
omitted. By splitting the circular dividing walls so as to form a
passage of the same width as the path shown in the figure, a maze of
much more intricate appearance was arrived at, which, it was thought,
might

<span id="img_fig136"></span> ![FIG. 136.—Straight-line Diagram, Hampton
Court Maze.](img/fig136.jpg)  
FIG. 136.—Straight-line Diagram, Hampton Court Maze.

<span id="img_fig137"></span> ![FIG. 137.—Straight-line Diagram,
Hatfield Maze.](img/fig137.jpg)  
FIG. 137.—Straight-line Diagram, Hatfield Maze.

bear some resemblance to the form of the original labyrinth.

On the other hand, Dr. E. Krause, in a book of about the same date,
showed how the Knossian design and certain other unicursal figures might
be derived from a series of concentric circles, with interruptions along
a radial line like the figures in the northern rock engravings described
in Chapter XVII, by means of one or two simple methods of
cross-connection ([Figs. 138 and 139](#img_fig138-9)).

Such speculations give food for thought, but we must remember that so
far they *are* speculations and not statements of fact.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

The use of the straight-line diagrams suggested above may be found
helpful not only as a means of facilitating the study of an existing
labyrinth, but also to some extent in designing a new one. It is not
necessary to describe here in detail how to design a maze:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"It is purely a matter of skill,  
Which all may attain if they will,"</span>

</div>

and, like most tasks requiring simply common-sense, patience, and
practice, it is much more trouble to explain than to perform. As regards
the design of hedge mazes,

<span id="img_fig138-9"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIGS. 138 and
139.—Derivation of Labyrinth Types from Rock-engraving Figures. (After
Krause.)](tn/fig138-9.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig138-9.jpg)  
FIGS. 138 and 139.—Derivation of Labyrinth Types from Rock-engraving
Figures. (After Krause.)  
</span>

the fact that the circumstances are hardly ever alike in any two actual
cases gives plenty of scope for individuality and ingenuity. The space
allowed may be strictly limited, or it may be of an awkward shape. The
materials avail-able for the walls may vary widely in character
according to the space they require for their proper growth and
maintenance, and thus affect the amount of path-area.

There are one or two points which are of general application and should
be borne in mind. For instance, if the object of the designer is to
provide a maze which shall offer a fair amount of puzzledom without
imposing undue fatigue on the visitor, he must take care that the
nearest route from the centre to the exterior be neither too long

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

nor too short. If the space to be covered by the maze is large the
tendency to over-elaboration of the design must be avoided.

Another feature which is likely to spoil an otherwise good design is the
inclusion of long stretches of path without bend or branching; these are
tedious and annoying, especially when they have to be retraced by reason
of their leading into a *cul-de-sac*.

In a large maze it is well to relieve monotony by means of occasional
variations in the mode of treatment of the hedge, the introduction of
arbours, statues, etc.; but these should not be of such a character as
to defeat one of the main objects of the design by providing easy clues.

If the maze is intended to be seen at all from above, some attempt
should be made to introduce a symmetrical and artistic element into its
design. Usually some vantage-point is available from which an attendant
or expert can observe and direct over-bewildered visitors, but if this
point be accessible to the visitors themselves the hedges should be
provided with pinnacles or balks, here and there, to prevent the
observer from solving the puzzle by unfair means. This is the case with,
for instance, the Saffron Walden maze; at Hampton Court, where there are
no balks, only the attendant is permitted to mount the rostrum.

The "solution" of mazes means the discovery of a route to their "goal."
(This word is preferable to "centre," as the object of quest is not
necessarily at the geometrical centre of the maze, but may be
considerably removed from it.)

It would be going too far to say the *shortest* route, as this would be
discoverable only from the plan or by prolonged experience, but the goal
in any maze will on the average be reached more certainly and quickly by
observing a little method than by fortuitous wandering.

The subject of the solution of mazes has been examined by various
mathematicians, in their lighter moods,

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

but we need not burden ourselves with more than a few simple
considerations.

In most cases it is not practicable to adopt a system of marking the
various paths as we reach them, but if this be permitted we can so
arrange our marks that we need never traverse any portion of the path
more than twice—*i.e.*, once in each direction—so that in any finite
maze we must eventually arrive at the goal, though not necessarily by
the shortest route.

Using the word *node* to signify a point of branching, and the terms
*odd* and *even* to describe respectively those nodes at which odd or
even numbers of paths are to be found, we see that there must be at
least three paths meeting at a point to form a node, for two paths
meeting at a point constitute only a change of direction of the path
without formation of branches, whilst the arrival of one path only at a
point also precludes the idea of "branching" at that point, and can only
occur at the end of a blind alley, at the entrance of the maze, or at
the goal. We find it convenient, however, to regard the latter
arrangement as an odd node of the lowest order, the lowest possible
order of even nodes being, of course, that at the meeting of four paths.

It will be clear that if the entrance and the goal are the only odd
nodes the maze will either be unicursal, in the sense in which we have
been using the term, or any branches must form loops on the main route;
in either case it will be possible to traverse the maze unicursally,
*i.e.*, to thread every portion of the path without going over any part
twice.

Supposing that we are able to make what marks we like, without danger of
their removal in our absence, we can adopt the following plan:

On arriving at a node which, by the absence of marks, you know you have
not already visited, mark the path by which you have just arrived by
three marks; if you see by marks on other paths that you have already
been to

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

that node, mark the arrival path with one mark only. If now there are no
unmarked paths at this node, it means that you have explored this
particular branch-system and must retrace your steps by the path by
which you have arrived. If, however, there are one or more unmarked
paths leading from the node, select one of them, and, as you enter it,
mark it with two marks.

We can now make certain of visiting every part of the maze if we make it
a rule that, on arrival at a node, we shall never take a path with three
marks unless there are no paths unmarked or with one mark only. When we
enter a one-mark path, we of course add the two marks which we always
make on leaving a node, and thus it becomes a three-mark path at that
node.

When it is impracticable to place marks, or even to use, like Theseus, a
clue of thread, it is still possible in the majority of cases to make
certain of finding the goal by the simple expedient of placing one hand
on the hedge on entering the maze, and consistently following the hedge
around, keeping contact all the time with the same hand. Blind turnings
present no difficulty, as they will only be traversed first in one
direction and then in the other. The traveller being guided by his
contact with the hedge alone is relieved of all necessity for making a
choice of paths when arriving at the nodes.

The only case in which this method breaks down is that in which the goal
is situated anywhere within a loop. Where this occurs the explorer
adopting the method described will discover the fact by finding himself
eventually back at the starting-point without having visited the goal.
He must then adopt different tactics, but unless it is practicable to
use a clue or a system of marks like that detailed above there is no
rule that will help him. One may, of course, thread the maze by
remembering a formula of some sort applicable to that particular maze,
*e.g.*, in the case of Hampton Court, "Left, right, right, left, left,
left, left," but this is equivalent to having a plan

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

of the maze. Such mnemonics, unless perfectly retained, are apt to prove
more of a nuisance than a help.

Can anybody who has once yielded to the exuberant mirth of "Three Men in
a Boat" forget the predicament of the over-confident Harris when he
volunteered to conduct a party, strangers as well, through the Hampton
Court maze? "We'll just go in here," he said, "so that you can say
you've been, but it's very simple. It's absurd to call it a maze. You
keep on taking the first turning to the right. We'll just walk round for
ten minutes and then go and get some lunch." Poor Harris!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. The Labyrinth in Literature](ml25)
