[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cht03)  [Next](cht05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

# 1. Cik<u>L</u>a

There were five brothers who had one younger sister. When she was grown
up the grizzly bear carried her away. One year her brothers did not find
her. Then her elder brother went to search for his younger sister. He
went some distance and met a pheasant (?). He shot it and hung it on to
the branch of a tree. He went on and found a house. He opened the door
and saw an old man and a boy inside. He entered. Then the child jumped
up and said: "Louse me, uncle!" He took the child and loused it. He
found a louse and squeezed it. Immediately the old man bit his neck and
cut off his head. Then the old man and the boy carried his body into the
woods and hid it. The bear's wife and his daughter had gone digging
gamass (camass) at that time.

Now four \[brothers\] only remained. One day the next eldest went. He
also found a pheasant. He shot it and hung it on to the branch of a
tree. He went a long distance and found a house. He opened the door and
saw in old man and a boy inside. Then he entered. The boy jumped up and
said: "Uncle, louse me!" He did so and found a louse. He squeezed it;
then the old man bit his neck and cut off his head. Then the old man and
the boy carried his body into the woods and hid it. The two women had
again gone digging gamass. Then the daughter said to her mother: "Come,
let us go home; somebody arrived at our house." The mother replied:
"Wait a while." After some time the two women went home. Then the girl
smelled blood in the house and knew at once what had happened. She grew
angry and struck her father and her brother with a firebrand.

Now three \[brothers\] only remained. One day the next brother said: "I
will go next." He went a long distance and he also found a pheasant.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He shot it and hung it on to the branch of a
tree. He went on and found a house. He opened the door and found all old
man and a boy inside. He entered and shared the fate of his brothers.
Then the girl said: "Come, let us go home; somebody arrived at our
house." Her mother replied: "Wait a while." Then she said to her: "Have
you no relatives? "She replied: "You have five uncles." Then the two
women went home. She became angry and struck her father and her brother.

Now it became day and one more made himself ready. He took his arrows
and he also went. He went a long distance; then he found a pheasant. He
shot it and hung it on to the branch of a tree. He went on and found a
house. Then he opened the door and saw an old man and a boy inside. He
entered. The boy jumped and said: "Louse me, uncle." He did so and found
a louse. He squeezed it. Then the old man bit his neck and cut off his
head. Then they carried the body inland and hid it. The girl \[who was
digging gamass with her mother\] said: "Come, let us go home; somebody
arrived at our house." But her mother replied: "Wait a while." Then they
went home. They opened the door and she smelled the blood. She became
angry and struck her father and her brother.

Now one only remained. He cried the whole night. When it became nearly
daylight he fell asleep. He dreamt: "When you will go you will meet a
pheasant. Do not shoot it. A monster carried away your younger sister
and killed all your elder brothers. When you will go you will find a
house. Do not enter at once. When you see two persons in there stay at
the door." Now it became day. He awoke and continued to cry. Then he
took his arrows and went. He went along distance and saw a pheasant. He
did not shoot it. He went on and found a house. He opened the door.
There was an old man and a boy inside. Then he stayed at the door. He
remained there a long time. Then the girl spoke and said to her mother:
"Come, let us go home; somebody arrived at our house." Her mother
replied: "Let us turn back!" Then they went home. They reached their
house and opened the door. Now there was a person. They entered. Then
the girl grew angry. In the evening the man said to his younger sister:
"All our brothers came here;" and she told her daughter: "All your
uncles came here." \[The daughter replied: \] "You did not believe me."
\[Her uncle asked:\] "What shall we do with the old man and the boy?
Shall we kill them? \[She replied:\] "Yes; they shall die." Then the
man. said: "I will go and get pitchwood." He went and brought pitchwood
into the house. Then the old man said: "What do you intend to do with
that pitchwood?" "We shall use it to make fire in winter." Now they
remained there a long time. \[One night\] he spoke to the old man a
longtime. When it became nearly day \[the old man\] fell asleep. Then he
said to his sister: "Arise! now we will burn them." She arose and left
the house. Her daughter also arose and went out. Then be set

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

fire to the pitchwood. He went out. Now the house began to burn. The old
man said: "Heh! brother-in-law! Rise! We are going to be burnt." He
arose and found that the door was locked. Now he himself and his son
were burnt.

Then she searched for her uncles. She found them in the woods and
carried them to the water. She blew some water on the bodies. Then they
all arose. They went home. They went a long distance and came to a lake.
They bathed in the lake. Now the woman \[their sister\] dived and said:
"Shall I dive?" The brothers replied: "Yes, dive!" "Do I look pretty in
this lake?" "Yes, you look pretty in the lake." She dived again. "Shall
I dive?" "Yes, dive." "Do I look pretty in this lake?" "Yes, you look
pretty in the lake." Then she dived again. After she had dived three
times hair began to grow on her. She said again: "Do I look pretty in
this lake?" "Oh, no! you do not look. pretty in this lake." "Eh, why did
you not tell me before?" Now she had dived five times, and she remained
always in the lake and became a monster. They took only their niece
along. They arrived at their house and stayed there. Now all the people
wanted to marry the girl, but the brothers did not give her away.
Finally a chief married her and she remained with him.

Now, Blue-Jay was discontented because she never laughed. After a time
she said \[to her husband\]: "I am getting tired. Go far away, then I
shall laugh." "No, no, don't laugh!" After some time she said again: "I
am getting tired." Then her husband replied: "Well, then laugh now." She
said: "I will laugh because Blue-jay makes me tired. Go into the woods!
Lie down on your knees and elbows and close your ears." Then early in
the morning she went to bathe. She took a comb and combed herself. Then
she went out. Now she said: "Where are you, Blue-jay? Now I shall laugh.
Hahaheh! Blue-Jay!" Then she devoured all her husband's people. In the
afternoon she came to herself and vomited all the bones. She searched
for her husband but did not find him. Then she searched for him among
the bones of all these people. She found him, but his legs up to the
knees were gone. Then she put him into a basket and moved a short
distance. She made a house and lived there. After some time she fell
sick and gave birth to two boys. When her children became older she said
to them: "Do not go there up the river; you must go only down the
river." They obeyed. When they became older the elder one said to his
brother: "Let us go there \[up the river\]." One day they went and found
the ground strewn with bones of people. "Oh, come, let us go home! "They
reached their home and the elder one said: "These poor people! How may
they have died?" Now they grew up. One day they bathed; now they missed
a comb. The elder one said: "O, brother! Perhaps we shall find a comb in
that basket." "Let us take down that basket." Now they took down the
basket and took out a mountain-goat blanket. Now they

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

found a person in that basket. \[The person said:\] "O my children! Your
mother is bad. You see me. I am only half now! Quick! Hang me up again,
else your mother will come and devour us!" They took their father and
hung him up again. In the evening their mother came back. Now the boys
were angry. They became young men; then they said to their father: "We
will cure you." "Well," he replied. Now they took him and carried him to
the river. They put him under water. Then they took their mother and
transformed her into a dog.

Now the two young men \[who were now called Cik<u>l</u>a\] traveled on.
They came to a lake in which they saw a swan with two heads. "I will
shoot that swan." "Oh, don't shoot it. Many monsters are in that lake."
He, however, took his arrows and shot the swan. "I will swim across the
lake and get it." He threw off his blanket, swam, and took hold of the
swan. Then he disappeared under water. His elder brother cried. He
picked up stones and made a fire in which he heated the stones. When
they were hot he threw them into the lake and made it boil. Then the
lake became dry. Then he said: "Oh, how many monsters there are! "Then
he took his knife and opened their bellies. When he opened them all he
said: "Oh, I cannot find my brother." He cried. Now only one small
monster remained. He cut its belly and found his brother who held the
swan in his hand. He carried him to the water and blew on him. Then he
arose: "Oh, I told you not to swim! \[I thought\] you would be
swallowed!"

They went on. They met a person who held his paddle in his hand and
danced. "What are you doing there?" "I catch flounders." \[The flounders
jumped into his canoe while he was dancing.\] "Come here; have you no
dipnet?" "I have one." "Bring it here! Step near! Drive the flounders.
Stand here! Put your dipnet into the water!" He did so and held the net
under water a very long time. "Now lift it." It was nearly full. "Thus
people shall always catch flounders."

Now they went on. They met a person who always made waâ'waâ'! "What are
you doing?" "I shoot the rain." "Stay here!" Now they took his house,
threw it away, and made a good house for him. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) They said: "Stay here; henceforth people
will not shoot the rain."

Then they went on. They found a country. There they bathed. Then they
rubbed their arms and made people \[of the dirt that they rubbed from
their skin\]. They blew upon them and they arose.

Now they came to Quinaielt. "Here people shall catch blue-back salmon."

They went on and found a person. \[He said:\] "I will sharpen my knives.
When these people come who make everything good I shall kill them with
these knives." Now they met him. "What are you doing, old man?" they
said. "I shall kill those who make everything

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

good." "Give me your knife." He gave it. "Give me the other one." He
gave it also. "Now put your head sideways." He put his head sideways.
Now they fastened one knife to one side of his head. "Put your head to
the other side." He did so, and they fastened the other knife to the
other side. They fastened two to his head and one to his backside. "Now
jump!" they said to him, and he jumped. "Turn round! You shall be called
deer. You will not kill man!"

They went on and came to Uq<u>!</u>ô'nexôn. "What are you doing? they
said. "I play." Then she took a child at its forearm and threw it into
the depth. "Let our dogs fight together," said the two men. She replied:
"Oh, their bitch is a monster. She devoured even her husband's people.
She will certainly kill my bitch." "What is the name of your bitch,"
they said. "Her name is Head-eater. What is the name of your bitch?"
"Her name is Flint-eater." Now the two dogs fought together and Cikla's
bitch cut off the head of Uq<u>!</u>ô'nexôn's bitch. Then one of the
young men said to her: "Now throw me down the precipice." He had said to
the boys \[down below\]: "When she throws me down you must say 'Return
to the land.'" She took him. Flint pieces stood upright \[at the foot of
the precipice\]. She took him at his forearms. She swung him around five
times; then she threw him down. She said to the boys: "Say 'Stay always
away from the land.'" He, however, said to the boys: "Say 'Return to the
land.'" \[When throwing him down Uq<u>!</u>ô'nexôn said:\] "Now come
these two people, your fathers!" He fell down and lay there \[at the
foot of the precipice\]. He arose whole. He was not hurt. He saw that
down below there was a multitude of boys. He took water and blew it on
all of them. Then they all arose. He said: "Watch her \[when she comes
down\]." They took stones. He went up and arrived on the top of the
rock. Then be said to Uq<u>!</u>ô'nexôn: "O, aunt, look! These people
whom you threw down are not dead. I saw them down there. I was there a
while. They dance and sing; they play itlukum and disks. Now I shall
throw you down." Now he placed his pieces of flint upright. He took her
at her hair and swung her around five times. Her belly burst. Now he
threw her down. She fell and lay there. Then the boys pelted her with
stones and cut her to pieces. Her body was scattered in all directions.
Her legs were thrown to Nehelim, her hair was thrown inland, her ribs
were thrown up the river \[therefore the Nehelim have strong legs, the
Cowlitz have long hair, and the tribes of the tipper river have bandy
legs\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[20:1](cht04.htm#fr_0) His house had no roof, and
he protected himself by shooting at the rain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Okulâ'm](cht05)
