[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cht01)  [Next](cht03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

# CHINOOK TEXTS

#### Told by

#### CHARLES CULTEE

#### Recorded and translated by

#### FRANZ BOAS

# INTRODUCTION.

### HISTORICAL ACCOUNT.

The following texts were collected in the Summers of 1890 and 1891.
While studying the Salishan languages of Washington and Oregon I learned
that the dialects of the lower Chinook were on the verge of
disappearing, and that only a few individuals survived who remembered
the languages of the once powerful tribes of the Clatsop and Chinook.
This fact determined me to make an effort to collect what little
remained of these languages.

I first went to Clatsop, where a small band of Indians are located near
Seaside, Clatsop county, Oregon. Although a number of them belonged to
the Clatsop tribe, they had all adopted the Nehelim language, a dialect
of the Salishan Tillamook. This change of language was brought about by
frequent intermarriages with the Nehelim. I found one middle-aged man
and two old women who still remembered the Clatsop language, bat it was
impossible to obtain more than a vocabulary and a few sentences. The man
had forgotten a great part of the language, while the women were not
able to grasp what I wanted; they claimed to have forgotten their myths
and traditions, and could not or would not give me any connected texts.
One old Clatsop woman, who had been married to a Mr. Smith, was too sick
to be seen, and died soon after my visit. The few remaining Clatsop had
totally forgotten the history of their tribe, and even maintained that
no allied dialect was spoken north. of Columbia river and on Shoalwater
bay. They assured me, that the whole country was occupied by the
Chehalis, another Salishan tribe. They told me, however, that a few of
their relatives, who still continued to speak Clatsop, lived on
Shoalwater bay among the Chehalis.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

I went to search for this remnant of the Clatsop and Chinook peoples,
and found them located at Bay Center, Pacific county, Washington. They
proved to be the last survivors of the Chinook, who at one time occupied
the greater part of Shoalwater bay and the northern bank of Columbia
river as far as Greys Harbor. The tribe has adopted the Chehalis
language in the same way in which the Clatsop have adopted the Nehelim.
The only individuals who spoke Chinook were Charles Cultee and
Catherine. While I was unable to obtain anything from the latter, Cultee
(or more properly Q<u>!</u>Eltê') proved to be a veritable storehouse of
information. His mother's mother was a Katlamat, and his mother's father
a Quilâ'pax; his father's mother was a Clatsop, and his father's father
a Tinneh of the interior. His wife is a Chehalis, and at present he
speaks Chehalis almost exclusively, this being also the language of his
children. He has lived for a long time in Katlamat, on the southern bank
of Columbia river, his mother's town, and for this reason speaks the
Katlamat dialect as well as the Chinook dialect. He uses the former
dialect in conversing with Samson, a Katlamat Indian, who is also
located at Bay Center. Until a few years ago he spoke Chinook with one
of his relatives, while he uses it now only rarely when conversing with
Catherine, who lives a few miles from Bay Center. Possibly this Chinook
is to a certain extent mixed with Katlamat expressions, but from a close
study of the material I conclude that it is on the whole pure and
trustworthy.

I have obtained from Cultee a series of Katlamat texts also, which
appear to me not quite so good as the Chinook texts, but nevertheless
give a good insight into the differences of the two dialects. It may be
possible to obtain material in this dialect from other sources.

My work of translating and explaining the texts was greatly facilitated
by Cultee's remarkable intelligence. After he had once grasped what I
wanted, he explained to me the grammatical structure of the sentences by
means of examples, and elucidated the sense of difficult periods. This
work was the more difficult as we conversed only by means of the Chinook
jargon.

The following pages contain nothing but the texts and translations. The
grammar and dictionary of the language will contain a comparison of all
the dialects of the Chinookan stock. I have translated the first text
almost verbatim, while in the later texts I endeavored only to render
the sense accurately, for which reason short sentences have been
inserted, others omitted. Still, the form of the Chinook sentences has
been preserved as nearly as possible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Alphabet](cht03)
