[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cht06)  [Next](cht08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

# 4. The Salmon

Once upon a time there was a chief who had a daughter. Many people
wanted to marry her, but he was unwilling to part with her. \[Finally he
arranged for a contest.\] He put \[a pair of\] elk antlers \[in the
middle of the house and said\]: "Whosoever breaks these antlers shall
have my daughter." He invited all the people. First the quadrupeds, then
the birds. \[When all were assembled\] the people said to the snail:
"You try first to break them." The snail went down to the middle of the
house and tried to break the antlers, but did not succeed.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then they said to the squirrel: "You try next to
break them." The squirrel bent the antlers a little, but was not able to
break them. Then they said to the otter: "Now you try to break them."
When the otter went down the girl thought: "I wish he would break them."
She liked him \[because he was so pretty\]. He tried to break them, but
did not succeed. He went up again. Next the beaver went down. He was
very stout, and Blue-Jay said: "Oh, certainly, he with his big belly, he
will break them." He took up the antlers and almost succeeded in
breaking them, but he grew tired and went back. Then the wolf went down
and almost succeeded in breaking the antlers, but he grew tired and went
up. Then the bear went down and almost succeeded in breaking the
antlers.

Now there was one person in the house whose body was full of sores and
boils. Then Blue-Jay said: "Let him try what he can do, the one whose
body is sore all over." But next the grizzly bear went down. He almost
broke it, when he also grew tired. Next the panther, the chief of all,
went down, but he did not succeed. Then Ipo'êpoê went down. Then the
girl thought: "O, if he would break them." He took them up, but did not
succeed at all. He went up. After that the sparrow-hawk went down. He
almost broke them, and went up; then another hawk went down. He almost
broke them, but then he grew tired. Now next the chicken-hawk went down.
He tried to move them, but they did not move. Then the owl went down.
They did not move. Then he went back. Then the eagle went down. He bent
them and almost broke them. Now all the quadrupeds and all the birds had
tried.

Then Blue-Jay said: "Give the antlers to that one who is full of sores;
let him try what he can do." All the people had given it up. He
continued: "Quick, stand up; \[let us see\] what can you accomplish?
Break those antlers." Five times he said so. Then that person arose,
shook his body, and shook his blanket. He shook his hair. \[Then his
body became clean, his hair long and full of dentalia, and he was very
beautiful. They saw that he was the salmon.\] Then he went to the middle
of the house, took up the antlers and broke them. He broke them into
five pieces and threw them down. Then he ran away. The people stared at
him. After a little while Blue-Jay said: "Let us pursue our chief's
niece." Then she took her dentalia and ran also. "Ah," said the wolf,
"we will pursue them." Then all the people went in pursuit. They
followed them a long distance. Then the man created a bay behind them.
The people reached it, but the couple was already on the other side.
After a while the people reached the other side of the bay. They
continued to pursue them. Again they pursued them a long distance. He
looked back and saw that the people were near overtaking them. Then he
made a middle-sized bay. Again the people reached the bay and saw the
two far away on the other side. Again the people reached the other side
of the bay and continued their pursuit.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He made five bays, then he gave it up. The
people crossed all five bays. Coyote and Badger, who were among the
pursuers, became tired, and Coyote said to his friend: "My friend, I am
getting tired. What do you think if I enchant my arrow?" Badger replied:
"All right." Then Coyote blew on his arrow \[singing\]: "Strike his
head, strike his head." Three times he sang to his arrow: "Strike his
head, strike his head." And five times he blew on it. Then he shot
upward and the arrow went "Halululululululu." The arrow struck the young
man right in the nape and he fell down dead. The wolves were first among
the pursuers, and they took the woman. The people devoured the salmon.
They gave coyote the salmon's bow. Then an egg fell down from him into a
hole in the rock. Then the people went home. Now the Crow learned that
her nephew had been killed. She went away and cried. She cried. Now she
arrived at the place where he had been killed. She \[looked for his
remains,\] turned over the stones, cried, and turned them again. Then
she found one salmon egg. She carried it to the river, made a small hole
\[in the bank of the river\] and put the egg into the water. In the
evening she went home.

Early next morning the Crow went again to look after that egg. It had
grown a little. Then she made a larger hole \[and put the egg into it\].
In the evening she went home again. She reached her house. She did not
sleep at all, and it grew day again. Early in the morning she went again
\[to look after the egg\]. She cried while going. She arrived at that
salmon egg. Now a small trout was swimming \[in the hole\]. This
gladdened her a little. She made a still larger hole. In the evening she
went home and slept a little. Early in the morning she went out again
the fourth time. She arrived at that salmon egg and saw a large trout
swimming there. Then the Crow was really glad. She made a large hole.
Early in the afternoon she, went home. She, arrived at home. When it
grew dark she fell asleep. Early in the morning she awoke, arose, and
went to look after the trout. She arrived and saw a small salmon
swimming there. Now she made a still larger hole and left it again. At
noon she went home. She arrived at home. She thought only of the salmon.
It grew dark. Early the next morning she went again. She arrived and now
there swam a large salmon. She took it, threw it ashore, and it was
transformed into a tall boy. Now the Crow was happy. They went home
together. She said to her grandnephew: "Bathe, that you may see
spirits." He bathed. First he bathed in the river and after that in the
sea. Every night he bathed. After he had finished bathing in the sea, he
bathed in \[ponds on\] the mountains. Now he became a young man.

Then his grandaunt told him: "Coyote and his friend Badger killed your
father. If it had not been for that woman they would not have killed
him. They took her to the wolves." He replied: "I will go and search for
Coyote." "Do not go, else they will kill you." After a while the Crow
told him: "They gave your father's bow to Coyote."

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "I will go and search for Coyote; I have seen
enough spirits." "Oh, tell me who is your spirit?" Then he said to his
grandaunt: "Let us go outside." The Crow went out with him. Then he shot
his arrow toward the forest and it caught fire. He shot his arrow toward
the prairie and it caught fire. Then the Crow said: "Indeed you have
seen spirits." She said: "You must go, but take care of yourself." The
next day he made himself ready. He put on his dentalia, and took his
arrows. Then it thundered, although the sky was clear. He went on and
crossed five prairies.

Then he saw a house \[a long way off \]. He went on and when he came
near the house he heard a person singing songs of victory. He stayed
outside. Somebody was singing there at the end of the house. Slowly he
opened the door and stood in the doorway. Then Coyote sneezed and sang
jestingly: "Salmon's son came; certainly he will kill me. But I jump
about much in my house; certainly he will kill me." He had put black
paint on his face. His face was blackened, and so was Badger's face. At
that moment the door made a noise and he looked back to the doorway.
Verily there stood the one in the door whom they had killed. "O, my
dear, my dear!" said Coyote, "they killed him whom I loved so well.
Somebody who looks just like him is walking about." Then the salmon's
son entered. He sat down on the bed and said: "Be quiet, Coyote! I know
that you killed my father." Then Coyote was quiet. Badger meanwhile
turned his face toward the wall and was rubbing it \[in order to remove
the paint\]. The salmon's son said: "Give me my father's bow." Coyote
replied: "I will give it to you, my dear!" He arose and took a bow out
\[of a box\]. \[The young man\] took it and spanned it. It broke to
pieces, and he struck Coyote with the pieces so that he fell down
headlong. His feet quivered. Then Coyote arose again. The salmon's son
said: "Give me my father's bow." Coyote replied: "I will give it to you,
my dear." He took out another bow and gave it to him. \[When the young
man tried to span it it broke and\] he struck Coyote's face with the
pieces. He fell on his back and his feet quivered. Again he arose \[and
the salmon's son said once more\]: "Give me my fathers bow! Why do you
deceive me?" Then Coyote gave him another bow to the back of which heads
of woodpeckers were glued. The young man spanned it with his left hand.
It did not break. Then he spanned it with his right hand and it broke to
pieces. He struck Coyote with the pieces and he fell on his back. Then
Coyote had given him four bows; and they all broke. The fifth one which
he gave him was his father's bow. Three times he spanned it with his
left hand; three times he spanned it with his right hand. It did not
break. The heads of red-headed woodpeckers were put by twos on the back
of that bow. Then the young man said to Badger: "Be quiet, Badger, I
know that you are a murderer." Badger replied: "I am no murderer; I
merely blackened my face for fun." Then the young man took hold of
Coyote and Badger

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

at their napes, hauled them out of the house, struck them together and
killed them. He threw down Coyote and said: "Coyote will be your name;
henceforth you will not kill chiefs." He threw down Badger and said:
"Badger will be your name; henceforth you will not kill chiefs. People
will fear only your winds. You will never go near men." He threw them
away and burned their house.

He went on. \[After traveling sometime\] he came to a prairie. He
crossed it and saw smoke arising at its end. He went on. He almost
reached a house, and heard a woman crying inside. He opened the door
slowly, but it made a noise. The woman looked up and saw him; \[he
looked like\] her husband whom they had killed. He entered. The house
was full of meat. He said: "I came to look for you; let us go home. The
one who was killed was my father." Then she replied: "The monsters will
kill you." "Let them kill me," he said. She gave him to eat and he ate.
In the afternoon he went outside and cut five pieces of flesh from his
nape. He tied them up. Then he ate alder-bark until his stomach became
full. He reentered the house and gave the woman the five bundles of
meat, saying: "When the monsters come home give each one of them a
bundle of meat. If they eat it I shall be able to win over them. Give it
to them when they notice me." Now he deceived them. He blew on the fire
until he was covered with ashes and looked like all old man.

In the evening the noise of falling objects was heard. A person entered
and when he came to the middle of the house he cried: "I smell salmon; I
smell salmon." When he saw the old man he kicked him many times, until
blood came out of his mouth. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) Then the
woman arose and gave him one bundle of meat, saying: "I am a human
being; do you think I have no relatives? This old man \[is one of my
family\]; he brought this for you." "O, my sister in-law's relative, why
did you not tell me before, I should not have hurt my sister-in law's
relative." After a little while a noise was heard again. Another person
appeared. He entered. When he was near the middle of the house he cried:
"I smell salmon; I smell salmon." When he noticed the old man he kicked
him many times, so that he flew about and blood came out of his mouth.
Then the woman arose and said: "I am a human being; do you think I have
no relatives? This old man brought this for you." And she gave him one
handle of meat. "O, my sister-in-law's relative, why did you not tell me
before, I should not have hurt my sister-in-law's relative." Again a
noise was heard outside and a, person appeared. He entered. Some
distance, before he reached the middle of the house he said: "I smell
salmon; I smell salmon." When he saw the old man he kicked him and he
flew about in the house and blood came out of his month. The woman
waited a little while, then she arose and took a bundle of meat and gave
it to her brother-in-law, saying: "I am a human being; do you think I
have no relatives? This

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

old man brought this for you." "O, my sister-in-law's relative, poor
man, why did you not tell me long ago? I should not have hurt my
sister-in-law's relative." Again a noise was heard and one more person
appeared. He had hardly entered the house when he said: "I smell salmon;
I smell salmon." When he saw the old man he kicked him so that he flew
about and blood came from his month. The woman waited a long time. Then
she said: "I am a human being. Do you think I have no relatives? This
old man brought this for you;" and she gave him one bundle of meat. "O,
my sister-in-law's relative, why did you not tell me long ago, I should
not have hurt my sister-in-law's relative." And he ate the piece of
salmon. Now only her husband remained \[outside\]. After a little while
a noise was heard and one more person appeared. He just opened the door
when he noticed the smell of salmon and said: "I smell salmon; I smell
salmon." When he saw the old man he kicked him many times, so that he
flew about and blood came from his mouth. The woman hesitated, and the
old man was kicked much. Then she arose and said: "I am a human being.
Do you think I have no relatives? This old man brought this for you."
She gave him that bundle. "O, my brother-in-law, why did you not tell me
long ago? I should not have hurt my brother-in-law."

Now they skinned and carved the elks and wanted to give some of the meat
to the old man, but he did not eat it. The woman said: "Perhaps you.
have broken his ribs, so that he can not eat." Early the following
morning the wolves made themselves ready and went hunting. Then the
young salmon arose and went bathing. The woman boiled food for him,
which he ate. After he had finished they went to bed. In the afternoon
he again blew into the fire \[so that he was covered with ashes\] and
became an old man. In the evening the wolves arrived at home and brought
elks. This time they did not kick him. In the evening they looked at his
arrows and said: "How pretty are the arrows of our sister-in -law's
relative!" He replied: "I made them." "Make one for me; make me a flint
arrowhead," said the eldest brother. The young salmon replied:
"Willingly; but sometimes I will break a piece or two of flint." Then he
gave him five pieces of flint. Early the next morning the wolves went
hunting again, When they had gone the salmon's son went to bathe and
then worked it the arrowheads. He finished them all. He took one and
kept it for himself. In the evening the wolves returned and brought home
elks. After they had carved them they looked at the arrowheads and said:
"How pretty are these arrowheads." The salmon replied: "\[That is
nothing,\] when I was a young man I knew how to make arrowheads." The
second wolf said: "Tomorrow you must make some for me." "Willingly."
Then he gave him five pieces of flint. Early the next morning the wolves
went hunting. After some time he arose and made the arrowheads. He

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

finished them all, but kept one for himself. In the evening they arrived
at home. When it had become dark they looked at the arrowheads which the
old man had made. He gave him four and kept one for himself. Then the
next said: "To-morrow you must make some for me, my sister-in-law's
relative." He also left five pieces of flint. Early the next morning
they left and went hunting. Now he worked again at the arrowheads and
finished all. He kept one for himself. In the evening the wolves arrived
at home. When it grew dark they looked at the old man's work. "Oh, how
pretty are these arrowheads," they said. Then the fourth wolf said:
"To-morrow you must make some for me, my sister-in-law's relative." He
gave him five pieces of flint. Early the next morning the wolves made
themselves ready and went hunting. Then the salmon's son arose. He
worked at the arrowheads and finished them all. One he kept for himself.
In the evening the wolves arrived at home. It grew dark and he gave them
four arrowheads, one he kept for himself. "Oh, how pretty are these
arrowheads." "To-morrow my brother-in-law will make some for me," said
the youngest wolf, the husband of that woman. "Willingly," replied he.
He left five pieces of flint for him. Early the next morning the wolves
made themselves ready and went hunting. Then the salmon's son arose; he
worked at the arrowheads and finished them; one he kept for himself. In
the evening they arrived at home and brought elks. Their house was full
of elk meat. When it grew dark they looked at the arrowheads which he
had made: "Oh, my brother-in-law, your arrowheads are pretty, they are
good." Early the next morning they arose again and went hunting. Then
the salmon said to the woman: "Arise, now I shall kill them." The woman
arose. "Take care," she said. Then they made themselves ready.

The five wolves had each a well. The salmon's son and his widow went out
of the house. He took his bow and spanned it; he pointed his arrow to
the mountains. Then it became hot and the wells dried up, except that of
the youngest wolf, in which a little water remained.

The eldest one was on his hunt; \[the heat dried the bows of the hunters
and when the eldest wolf spanned\] his bow it broke. Then he cried: "O,
certainly the salmon's son came in disguise." He went to the beach. He
became very thirsty and came to his well; he looked into it and it was
dry and empty. He looked into that of his younger brother; it was also
dry and empty. Then he looked into the well of the middle one; it was
dry and empty. He looked into the well of the next brother; it was dry
and empty. Then he looked into the well of his youngest brother, and
there he found a little water. He jumped down and began to drink. He
drank, and drank, and drank until he had enough. Then the salmon's son
shot him. He fell right where he stood. They hauled out the body and hid
it.

And the second brother was on his hunt \[etc., as before\]. He found a
little water. He looked at it. He looked and looked, but he did not

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

see anything and went into the well and began to drink. He drank, and
drank, and drank, until he had enough. Then. the salmon's son shot him
and he fell right where he stood. They hauled out the body and hid it.

And one more went out to hunt \[etc., as before\]. He found a little
water. He looked, and looked, and looked. He intended to go down, but
looked again. He went around the well once. Then he jumped down into it.
He drank a little and looked again. Then he drank again. He drank, and
drank, and drank, until he had enough. Then the salmon's son shot him.
He fell down right where he stood. They hauled out the body and hid it.

And still another went out to hunt \[etc., as before\]. A little water
was in the well. He looked, and looked, and looked. He observed
something suspicious, but decided to go down. He went around the well
many times, and waited a long time; then he went down. He drank a
little, then came up. At last he went down again, and drank, and drank,
and drank until he was full. Then the salmon's son shot him and he fell.
They hauled him out and hid him.

And the youngest one went out to hunt. Then he broke his bow. He cried:
"Oh, the salmon's son came to us in disguise." Then he went out of the
woods and looked into the wells of his elder brothers. They were dry and
empty. The wells of his four elder brothers were dry, but a little water
was in his own well. He saw a little blood. Then he went often around
his well and he searched for them. He looked about. He almost stepped on
them. Then he jumped down and drank. He jumped up again. Now he looked
up again and looked about. He jumped down again. Five times he jumped up
and down. Then he drank and got enough. Then the salmon's son shot him.
He killed the last one.

Now the man and the woman went down to the water and burnt their house.
He went home and took the woman along. They came to their canoe and went
down the river. When they had gone a distance he said: "I am getting
sleepy. I shall lie down in the canoe; you shall not awake me until
after five days." He lay down in the canoe, and they traveled on. He
slept two nights; then the woman noticed flies on his mouth. After three
nights she, saw that he was full of fly-blows, and after four nights she
saw maggots crawling around his month. Then she \[became afraid\] and
awoke him. She shook him. He awoke, took hold of her and said: "Why did
you awake me? Did I tell you to awake me?" He flung her into the water
and said: "Your name will be Pigeon; henceforth you will not be the wife
of a chief. Your cry will be heard in summer." Then the salmon jumped
into the water. The pigeon drifted away and somewhere she drifted
ashore. After awhile two ravens found her. One of them said: "I will
take one of her eyes and I will take one of her cheeks; we will divide
the intestines." "No," said the other, "I will take both

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

her eyes and one of her cheeks; we will divide the intestines." "You are
wrong," replied the other, "one eye for you, one eye for me, one check
for me, and one check for you; we will divide the intestines." While
they were talking she arose, flew away and left them.

Now the salmon swain away. After awhile he came to a country and went
ashore. He went a long way and came to a creek. He saw smoke arising on
the other side. Then he assumed the form of an old man. His whole body
and his head were full of scabs. He shouted. Five sisters were camping
there. \[When they heard him they said to the eldest one:\] "Who is
that? Go and fetch him." She went across the creek and when she saw him
she said: "Come down to the water, I came to fetch you." "Oh," he
replied, "carry me on your back." She returned and said to her sisters,
"It is an old man; he told me that I should carry him on my back, but
his body is all full of scabs." The next younger sister said: "I will go
and fetch him. He shall look after our fire." She went across the creek
and said: "I come to fetch you." "Oh, carry me on your back." She went
up and took him by his arm and was going to take him, but blood came out
at once. Therefore she left him and went home. She said: "He is too old,
I touched his arm. and blood came out at once." Then she said to her
younger sister: "Go and fetch him." The middle one went across the
creek. She arrived on the other side and said: "I come to fetch you,
come down to the water." "Oh, carry me on your back." Then she went up
and took hold of his arm. She lifted him and blood and matter came out
at once. Then she also left him. Then the next sister said: "I will go
and fetch him; he shall take care of our fire." She went across, and
when she arrived on the other side said: "Come down, old man, I came to
fetch you." "Oh, carry me on your back." She went up and took him on her
back. She carried him a short distance, and became full of blood and
matter. She left him. \[When she came back to her sisters she said:\]
"He is indeed too full of scabs and sores." Then the youngest sister
arose and went across the creek without saying a word. They said to her:
"You are not proud, you will certainly be willing to carry him." They
saw how their younger sister went across. Then the eldest one said:
"Look" The old man came and went to the canoe. He shook himself. Then
\[his scabs fell off and\] he had a fine sea-otter blanket on. He went
into the canoe and the girl carried him across. He was a beautiful
chief. He married the sisters and the youngest one became his head wife.
He married them all; but he loved only the youngest one.

Now they lived there for some time and the women went digging roots
every day. They left him alone. After several days the eldest sister
came home first. She did not find him in the camp, and when she went
down to the beach she saw him asleep in their canoe. He lay there. She
pushed the canoe slowly from the shore. There was a land-breeze and the
wind drifted it seaward. When the man

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

awoke he lifted his blanket and saw no land. Then he covered his face
again. He slept for two days. Then he awoke; he felt as though the canoe
was rocking. He took off his blanket and saw that he was on the beach of
an island. He went ashore. He hauled his canoe up, turned it over, and
lay down beneath it. In the morning he heard the noise of steps on the
beach, and he saw a woman coming. She stepped right up to where he lay
and said: "Rise! Let us go home." He arose. They hauled up his canoe and
she broke it to pieces. Now they went home. They reached a house which
was full of sea-otters. She hid him. After awhile \[another woman\] her
elder sister entered the house. She carried two sea-otters on her back.
Early the following morning they went again and the youngest one came
home before the other. She carried one sea-otter only. Then the elder
one said to her: "Lo! You are home already!" \[The younger one
replied:\] "Yes I came home because I did not find anything." Then the
elder sister thought: "What is the matter with her? She says that she
does not find anything." On the following morning they went the second
time. They always searched on the beach going around the island. The one
always went on one side of the island, the other on the other. At the
farther end of the island they used to meet. Now the younger one
returned long before she reached the place where they always met. The
elder one observed her. Again she came home first. Early the next
morning they went again. When the elder one got to the place where they
always met, she found no tracks of her younger sister. \[She went on and
saw\] she had turned back long ago. Then she observed her more closely.
She came home; she had found three sea-otters. She saw their smoke. Now
her younger sister's smoke did not arise straight, while her own smoke
arose straight. Then she noticed that something had happened. On the
fourth morning the two sisters started again. The youngest went a short
distance and returned. The eldest went around the island and saw that
her sister had turned back far from where they used to meet. Again she
saw their smoke, and saw that her sister's did not rise straight. Then
she went home. The younger sister was already there. She said: "You are
at home already." "Yes," she replied, "I did not find anything and
turned back." On the fifth morning they started again. Now the eldest
one went first. She hid herself and watched her younger sister who went
later. \[When she had left\] she returned and searched in her sister's
bed. She found a man lying down, and said: "Arise! indeed, you two are
foolish. Why did she hide you?" Soon her sister returned home and saw
that her \[sister had found her\] husband. Then the elder sister said:
"Indeed, you are foolish, you have no sense. Why did you always hide our
husband? If I had found him I should not have hid him." Then he married
both the sisters.

He stayed there a long time; then he said: "I am homesick." Then his
wives made him ready. They each gave him five baskets. Then

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

they told him: "To-morrow you will be taken home." The next morning he
saw a whale on the beach; it was a red whale. Now they carried sea-otter
skins to the canoe \[i. e., the whale\], and they said to him: "Now lie
down \[in the whale\] and do not look." After five nights he took off
his blanket. The whale lay on the beach. He cut five pieces of blubber
from the whale and carried his sea-otters and his baskets to the shore.
Then the whale returned.

After awhile a person met him on the beach. Near him lay the whale meat
and the sea-otters. He asked that person: "Where are my wives?" "They
are in their house." "Tell them to come down here." Then that person
went up to the house and said: "Oh, your husband has come home; he tells
you to come down to the beach." Two of the women had cut their hair.
Four of his wives went down to the beach. Only the eldest one did not
come. They carried up the whale and the sea-otter skins. He said: "Tell
your eldest sister to come down; she shall carry this whale." They went
tip to the house and said to their sister: "Come down and fetch that
whale." Then she combed herself, greased her hair, and painted her face.
She went down to the beach and lifted the whale. When she turned to go
home the man said: "Turn toward the sea." She turned seaward. He put the
whale meat on her back. The water reached up to her knees. They put
another piece of whale meat on her and the water reached to her hips.
Five times they did so, then \[the water reached up to her neck and\]
she began to swim. She moved her arms up and down. Now she began to fly
\[and the man said\]: "Coatch shall be your name; when it is calm you
will fly about. Henceforth you will not make chiefs miserable." Then he
went home to his wives. He gave them everything, the sea-otters and a
piece of whale meat each.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[81:1](cht07.htm#fr_1) In fact he was
expectorating, the juice of the alder bark which he had chewed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Raven and Gull](cht08)
