[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cht15)  [Next](cht17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

# 13. Robin and Blue-Jay

There were Blue-Jay and Robin. Once upon a time they were hungry.
Blue-Jay said: "Make yourself ready, Robin." And they went to the sea
where a slough was left by the receding tide. They were in their canoe.
Blue-Jay called: "Come ashore, sleeper!" \[name of a large fish\]. The
sleeper shouted \[in reply\], but it was far away from the shore.
Blue-Jay called again: "Why do you stay far from the, shore? Only the
heron can carry \[food\] to you \[if you stay that far from the
shore\]." Again the sleeper shouted; he was nearer the shore now.
Blue-Jay repeated: "Why do you stay far from the shore? Only the heron
can carry \[food\] to you \[if you stay that far from the shore\]."
Blue-Jay called him five times; then he came ashore. Blue-Jay speared
him and he and his brother went home after they had thrown the fish into
their canoe. They reached their home and went ashore. Blue-Jay said to
his brother, "Make a fire." Robin made a fire. Blue-Jay went and carried
the fish up to the house. He cut it and Robin said: "I will have its
tail, I will have its breast, I will have its head." Then Blue-Jay
became angry: "You want to have everything for yourself; the
Q<u>!</u>tê'nse <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) are going to eat what
at has been killed for you." Then Robin cried; he took his work and left
the house. He cried outside. Blue-Jay finished cutting the fish. Then he
called his elder brother \[and said\]: "Come in, come in, you poor one,
you shall have the breast, you shall have the head, you shall have the
tail." Then Robin came in. When the fish was roasted they began to eat.

After some time Blue-Jay dreamed, and he said to his elder brother:

Robin, I dreamed people sent for us; I was to cure a sick person." After
some time people came in a canoe, wailing. When they had almost

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

reached the shore they recognized the duck. She landed and said to
Blue-Jay: "O, your brother-in-law is choking. I came to fetch you; you
shall cure him." Blue-Jay replied: "We shall go." They made themselves
ready to go. They went, and he said to his elder brother: "Robin, you
must say, 'She shall give us in payment one lake and one-half of another
lake.' Thus you must say when I cure her." Robin said: "All right." They
landed. The duck's husband was breathing heavily. Now Blue Jay began to
cure him and Robin sang: "You shall pay us both sides of one lake and
one side of another lake." One of the ducks who sat at some distance
sang differently: "Qoê'x, one side shall be yours, my nephews." Then
Blue Jay took out the morsel which was choking the duck and made him
well. He recovered. Now \[Robin and his brother\] dug roots on the place
which they had received in payment. They gathered two canoes full and
went home. They arrived at home. They carried their roots up to the
house. They stayed there for some time. They ate all their roots. Then
Blue-Jay dreamed again. He said to his elder brother: "Robin, I dreamed
that people sent for us; I was to cure a sick person." In the afternoon
they saw a canoe coming; two persons were in it. They landed and two
young men came up to the house. They were the young wolves. They said to
Blue-Jay: "We come to call you; a girl of our family is choking."
Blue-Jay replied: "We shall go." After some time he and his brother made
themselves ready, and he said to his elder brother: "When I cure her you
must point to the largest basket and say, 'There is the spirit of the
disease.'" "All right," replied Robin. They landed, and when they came
to the house the girl was almost suffocated. Then Blue-Jay began to cure
her. He sang: "What is it that is in this girl? Her throat is all
twisted up." Then Robin said, pointing to the largest basket: "It is in
that large basket." The wolves took it down and placed it near Robin.
Robin continued to do so, and pointed to all the large baskets. Then
Blue-Jay took out what had choked the girl; it was the kneepan of an
elk. Then they gave them in payment two canoes full of meat and grease.
They went home and now they were satisfied and carried the meat up to
the house. Their house became full.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[151:1](cht16.htm#fr_2) All imaginary tribe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. Blue-Jay and Iô'i](cht17)
