[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cht22)  [Next](cht24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

# How Cultee's Grandfather Acquired a Guardian Spirit

My great-grandfather had the guardian spirit of the warriors. My
grandfather had seen the shaman's spirit, he had seen the wolf, he had
seen the bitch, he had seen the morning star. Now he came to be grown up
and he thought: "I will take a wife. Now I have many guardian spirits."
The women went digging roots and camped \[on the beach\]. His friends
said to him: "Let us follow the women who are going to camp out." He
said: "No, else I shall be scolded." His friends asked him again. Then
he thought: I must accompany them. Now he accompanied those young men.
They reached those women. An old woman said to him: "Does your father
know that you came here?" He said: "No, I shall tell him later on." The
young men slept there and he also slept there. He lay down near the
fire. At daybreak the young men returned. They arrived at home. Now he
stood outside. He was afraid to enter his father's house. He opened the
door. There were four fires on each side of the house. Eight fires were
in the house. Now he entered his father's house. He reached the first
fire. He thought: "When will he speak to me?" He arrived at the next
fire and passed it. He came near the third fire, then his father said:
"Stay there! Did you find all your guardian spirits and do you want to
take a wife?" He threw a cape at him: "Quick, climb that mountain and
\[do not\] come home \[until\] five nights \[have passed\]. There is the
female guardian spirit of your ancestors. There is Ut<u>!</u>ô'naqan."
His aunt said to him: "When you reach the top of that mountain, gather
some grass for me." He took the cape and went. He went, he went, and
went a long distance. It became dark and he slept there. He lay down and
it became day again. He had heard nothing and it became daylight. Now he
went and went again. He climbed that mountain. When it was nearly noon
he had almost climbed it. Now he heard something. He heard her howling.
At once he was chilled by fear and he went on for a little while, when
he heard her again howling. Now he heard the howling a little louder.
Then it became quiet again. Now leaves fell down. He thought: "O, I
shall meet the monster." He thought: "They intended that she should
devour me." He was on top of a tree and she howled. For a short while it
became quiet, then she howled again. Now she was quite near. The howling
stopped again. Leaves fell down again. Again she howled. Then he turned
back to go home. He thought: "I will go home." Now Ut<u>!</u>ô'naqan
pursued him. When he had gone some distance she came near him. She
howled and immediately he became weak. He thought: "She will devour me."
Then he thought of one of his guardian spirits and he left her far
behind. Then he became again tired. He threw

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

away his cape. She reached it and went around it often. He look at her
and he ran again. He looked for a cedar which he intended to climb. Then
he thought of his guardian spirit, the wolf. At once he felt fresh and
left her far behind. Then he became tired again. He looked back at her.
Her teats were along her belly, like those of a bitch. They reached down
to the middle of her legs and struck them often. When she went down hill
she went a little slower; when she went up hill she ran quickly. She
approached him. Then he thought of his guardian spirit, the bitch, and
left her far behind. In the afternoon he reached a small but deep creek.
The water reached up to here, near his armpits. He walked down stream in
the water. Then he went ashore. It is said that Ut<u>!</u>ô'naqan is
afraid of water. Now he saw her coming down to the creek. If she was
really afraid of the water, she would not step into it. Now she arrived
at the creek. She made an, a<sup>n</sup>, a<sup>n</sup>, and blew upon
the water like a deer that is about to drink. She stayed there and
howled: "Ua," and he fainted and fell asleep. Now he saw that she was a
human being. She spoke to him: "I am the one whom your family and whom
the Indians call Ut<u>!</u>ô'naqan. I come from the top of that
mountain. I like you. Look at me, Indian!" Her throat and her body were
full of arrow-heads. "You will be just as I am \[when you return to the
country of\] the Indians." Her body was full of \[arrows which had been
shot at her\]. "You will be just as I am \[when you return to the
country of\] the Indians." He slept. On the next day he awoke when the
sun was high up in the sky. Now he saw nothing. He bathed in that creek
and went house, and he came home quite naked. He entered the house. His
aunt said to him: "Did you gather grass for me?" He said to her: "I
returned before I reached there." Three days he stayed away. He did not
tell his father \[what he had seen.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Four Cousins](cht24)
