[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Utopia](../../utopia/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](uap06) 
[Next](uap08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0815602596/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Unveiling a Parallel*, by Alice Ilgenfritz Jones and Ella Merchant
\[1893\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

### CHAPTER 6.

### CUPID'S GARDENS.

"O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose."—SHAKESPEARE.

DURING the time that intervened before the arrival of the Caskians, to
make their proposed visit, I gleaned many more interesting hints from
Severnius relative to their life and conduct, which greatly whetted my
curiosity to meet them. For instance, we were one day engaged in a
conversation, he, Elodia, and myself, upon the subject of the province
of poetry in history,—but that does not matter,—when dinner was
announced in the usual way; that is, the way which assumes without doubt
that nothing else in the world is so important as dinner. It may be a
bell, or a gong, or a verbal call, but it is as imperative as the
command of an autocrat. It brings to the ground, with the suddenness of
a mental shock, the finest flights of the imagination. It wakes the soul
from transcendent dreams, cools the fervor of burning eloquence, breaks
the spell of music. More than this: it destroys the delicate combination
of mental states and forces sometimes induced when several highly
trained minds have fallen into an attitude of acute sympathy toward one
another,—a rare and ineffable thing!—and are borne aloft through mutual
<span id="page_73">p. 73</span> helpfulness to regions of thought and
emotion infinitely exalted, which can never be reproduced.

I have often had this experience myself, and have wished that the cook
was a creature of supernatural intuitions, so that he could divine the
right moment in which to proclaim that the soup was served! There is a
right moment, a happy moment, when the flock of intellectual birds, let
loose to whirl and circle and soar in the upper air, descend gracefully
and of their own accord to the agreeable level of soup.

On the occasion to which I have referred, I tried to ignore, and to make
my companions ignore, the discordant summons—by a kind of dominant
action of my mind upon theirs—in order that we might continue the talk a
little longer. We three had never before shown ourselves off to each
other to such striking advantage; we traveled miles in moments, we
expanded, we unrolled reams of intelligence which were apprehended in a
flash, as a whole landscape is apprehended in a glare of lightning. It
was as if our words were tipped with flame and carried their
illumination along with them. I knew that there never would, never
could, come another such time, but Elodia thwarted my effort to hold it
a moment longer.

"Come!" she cried gayly, rising to her feet and breaking off in the
middle of a beautiful sentence, the conclusion of which I was waiting
for with tremors of delight,—for her views, as it happened, accorded
with mine,—"the ideal may rule in art, but not in life; it is very
unideal to eat, but the stomach is the dial of the world."

"We make it so," said Severnius.

"Of course, we make all our sovereigns," she returned. "We set the dial
to point at certain hours, and it simply holds us to our agreement,—it
and the *chef*." <span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

"That reminds me of our Caskian friends," said Severnius, "They have
exceedingly well-ordered homes, but occasionally one of the three
Natures waits upon another; the Mind may yield to some contingency
connected with the Body, or the Body waive its right in favor of the
Spirit."

"I had supposed they were more machine-like," commented Elodia, with her
usual air of not being able to take a great interest in the Caskians.

"They are the farthest from that of any people I know," he answered.
"They have great moments, now and then, when a few people are gathered
together, and their thought becomes electrical and their minds mingle as
you have seen the glances of eyes mingle in a language more eloquent
than speech,—and, to tell the truth, we ourselves have such moments,
I'll not deny that; but the difference is, that they appreciate the
value of them and hold them fast, while we open our hands and let them
fly away like uncoveted birds, or worthless butterflies. I have actually
known a meal to be dropped out entirely in Calypso's house, forgotten in
the felicity of an intellectual or spiritual delectation!"

"Thank heaven, that we live in Thursia!" cried Elodia, "where such
lapses are impossible."

"They are next to impossible there," said Severnius; "But they do
happen, which proves a great deal. They are in the nature of miracles,
they are so wonderful,—and yet not so wonderful. We forget sometimes
that we have a soul, and they forget that they have a body; there's no
great difference."

"There is a mighty difference," answered Elodia. "We are put into a
material world, to enjoy material benefits. I should think those people
would miss a great deal of the actual good of life in the pursuit of the
unactual,—always taking their flights from lofty pinnacles, and skipping
the treasures that lie in the valleys." <span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

"On the contrary," he returned, "the humblest little flower that grows,
the tiniest pebble they pick up on the beach, the smallest voice in
nature, all have place in their economy. They miss nothing; they gather
up into their lives all the treasures that nature scatters about. If a
bird sings, they listen and say, 'That song is for me;' or, if a blossom
opens, 'I will take its beauty into my heart.' These things, which are
free to all, they accept freely. Their physical senses are
supplemented,—duplicated as it were, in finer quality,—by exquisite
inner perceptions."

The morning after this conversation, Severnius and I took a long drive
in a new direction. We went up the river a mile or so, the road winding
through an avenue of century-old elms, whose great, graceful branches
interlocked overhead and made a shade so dense that the very atmosphere
seemed green. We were so earnestly engaged in conversation that I did
not observe when we left the avenue and entered a wood. We drove some
distance through this, and then the road branched off and skirted round
a magnificent park,—the finest I had seen,—bordered by a thick hedge,
all abloom with white, fragrant flowers and fenced with a fretwork of
iron, finished with an inverted fringe of bristling points. Within, were
evidences of costly and elaborate care; the trees were of noble growth
and the greensward like stretches of velvet over which leaf-shadows
flickered and played. The disposition of shrubbery and flowers, the
chaste and beautiful statuary, the fountains, brooklets, arbors, and
retreats; the rustic efforts in bridges, caves, grottoes, and several
graceful arches, hidden in wreathed emerald, from which snow-white
cherubs with wings on their shoulders peeped roguishly, all betokened
ingenious design, and skilful and artistic execution.

Beyond, seen vaguely through the waving foliage, were handsome
buildings, of the elegant cream-colored stone so much in <span
id="page_76">p. 76</span> vogue in Thursia. Here and there, I espied a
fawn; one pretty creature, with a ribbon round its neck, was drinking at
a fountain, and at the same time some beautiful birds came and perched
upon the marble rim and dipped into the sparkling water.

"How lovely! how idyllic!" I cried. "What place is it, Severnius, and
why have I never seen it before?"

His answer came a little reluctantly, I thought. "It is called Cupid's
Gardens."

"And what does it mean?" I asked.

"Does not its name and those naked imps sufficiently explain it?" he
replied. As I looked at him, a blush actually mantled his cheek. "It is
a rendezvous," he explained, "where women meet their lovers."

"How curious! I never heard of such a thing," said I. "Do you mean that
the place was planned for that purpose, or did the name get fastened
upon it through accident? Surely you are joking, Severnius; women can
receive their lovers in their homes here, the same as with us!"

"Their suitors, not their lovers," he replied.

"You make a curious distinction!" said I.

"Women sometimes marry their suitors, never their lovers,—any more than
men marry their mistresses."

"Great heavens, Severnius!" I felt the blood rush to my face and then
recede, and a cold perspiration broke out all over me. There was a
question in my mind which I did not dare to ask, but Severnius divined
it.

"Is it a new idea to you?" said he. "Have you no houses of prostitution
in your country, licensed by law, as this is?" "For men, not for women,"
said I.

"Ah! another of your peculiar discriminations!" he returned. <span
id="page_77">p. 77</span>

"Well, surely you will agree with me that in this matter, at least,
there should be discrimination?" I urged.

He shook his head with that exasperating stubbornness one occasionally
finds in sweet-tempered people.

"No, I cannot agree with you, even in this," he replied. "What possible
reason is there why men, more than women, should be privileged to
indulge in vice?"

"Why, in the very nature of things!" I cried. "There is a hygienic
principle involved; you know,—it is a statistical fact,—that single men
are neither so vigorous nor so long-lived as married men, and a good
many men do not marry."

"Well, a good many more women do not marry; what of those?"

"Severnius! I cannot believe you are in earnest. Women!—that is quite
another matter. Women are differently constituted from men; their
nature—"

"O, come!" he interrupted; "I thought we had settled that question—that
their nature is of a piece with our own. It happens in your world, my
friend, that your women were kept to a strict line of conduct, according
to your account, by a severe discipline,—including even the death
penalty,—until their virtue, from being long and persistently enforced,
grew into a habit and finally became a question of honor."

"Yes, stronger than death, thank God!" I affirmed.

"Well, then, it seems to me that the only excuse men have to offer for
their lack of chastity—I refer to the men on your planet—is that they
have not been hedged about by the wholesome restraints that have
developed self-government in women. I cannot admit your 'hygienic'
argument in this matter; life is a principle that needs encouragement,
and a man of family has <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> more incentives
to live, and usually his health is better cared for, than a single man,
that is all."

We rode in silence for some time. I finally asked, nodding toward the
beautiful enclosure still in view:

"How do they manage about this business; do they practice any secrecy?"

"Of course!" he replied. "I hope you do not think we live in open and
shameless lawlessness? Usually it is only the very wealthy who indulge
in such 'luxuries,' and they try to seal the lips of servants and
go-betweens with gold. But it does not always work; it is in the nature
of those things to leak out."

"And if one of these creatures is found out, what then?" I asked.

He answered with some severity:

"'Creatures' is a harsh name to apply to women, some of whom move in our
highest circles!"

"I beg your pardon! Call them what you like, but tell me, what happens
when there is an exposé? Are they denounced, ostracized, sat upon?" I
inquired.

"No, not so bad as that," said he. "Of course there is a scandal, but it
makes a deal of difference whether the scandal is a famous or an
infamous one. If the woman's standing is high in other respects,—if she
has money, political influence, talent, attractiveness,—there is very
little made of it; or if society feels itself particularly insulted, she
may conciliate it by marrying an honest man whose respectability and
position protect her."

"What! does an honest man—a gentleman—ever marry such a woman as that?"
I cried.

"Frequently; and sometimes they make very good wives. But it is risky. I
have a friend, a capital fellow, who was so unfortunate <span
id="page_79">p. 79</span> as to attract such a woman, and who finally
yielded to her persuasions and married her."

"Heavens! do the women propose?"

"Certainly, when they choose to do so; what is there objectionable in
that?"

I made no reply, and he continued, "My friend, as I said, succumbed to
her pleadings partly—as I believe—because she threw herself upon his
mercy, though she is a beautiful women, and he might have been
fascinated to some extent. She told him that his love and protection
would be her salvation, and that his denial of her would result in her
total ruin; and that for his sake she would reform her life. He is both
chivalrous and tender, and, withal, a little romantic, and he consented.
My opinion is that, if she could have had him without marriage, she
would have preferred it; but he is a true man, a man of honor. Women of
her sort like virtuous men, and seldom marry any other. Her love proved
to be an ephemeral passion—such as she had had before—and the result has
been what you might expect, though Claris is not, by any means, the
worst woman in the world."

"Claris?" I exclaimed.

"Ah! I did not mean to speak her name," he returned in some confusion;
"and I had forgotten that you knew her. Well, yes, since I have gone so
far, it is my friend Massilia's wife that I have been speaking of. In
some respects she is an admirable woman, but she has broken her
husband's heart and ruined his life."

"Admirable!" I repeated with scorn; "why, in my country, such conduct
would damn a woman eternally, no matter what angelic qualities she might
possess. She would be shown no quarter in any society—save the very
lowest." <span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

"And how about her counterpart of the other sex?" asked Severnius,
slyly.

I disregarded this, and returned:

"Did he not get a divorce?"

"No; the law does not grant a divorce in such a case. There was where
Claris was shrewder than her husband; she made herself safe by
confessing her misdeeds to him, and cajoling him into marrying her in
spite of them."

"I beg your pardon, but what a fool he was!"

Severnius acquiesced in this. "I tried to dissuade him," he said,
"before the miserable business was consummated,—he made me his
confidant,—but it was too late, she had him under her influence."

Another silence fell upon us, which I broke by asking, "Who were those
pretty youngsters we saw lounging about on the lawn back there?" I
referred to several handsome young men whom I had observed strolling
through the beautiful grounds.

He looked at me in evident surprise at the question, and replied:

"Why, those are some of the professional 'lovers'." "Great Caesar's
ghost!"

"Yes," he went on; "some of our most promising youths are decoyed into
those places. It is a distressing business,—a hideous business! And, on
the other hand, there are similar institutions where lovely young girls
are the victims. I do not know which is the more deplorable,—sometimes I
think the latter is. A tender mother would wish that her daughter had
never been born, if she should take up with such a life; and an
honorable father would rather see his son gibbeted than to find him
inside that railing." <span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

"I should think so!" I responded, and inquired, "What kind of standing
have these men in the outside world?"

"About the same that a leper would have. They are ignored and despised
by the very women who court their caresses here. In fact, they are on a
level with the common, paid courtesan,—the lowest rank there is. I have
often thought it a curious thing that either men or women should so
utterly despise these poor instruments of their sensual delights!"

My friend saw that I was too much shocked to moralize on the subject,
and he presently began to explain, and to modify the facts a little.

"You see, these fellows, when they begin this sort of thing, are mostly
mere boys, with the down scarcely started on their chins; in the
susceptible, impressionable stage, when a woman's honeyed words—ay, her
touch, even—may turn the world upside down to them. The life, of course,
has its attractions,—money and luxury; to say nothing of the flattery,
which is sweeter. Still, few, if any, adopt it deliberately. Often they
are wilily drawn into 'entanglements' outside; for the misery of it is,
that good society, as I have said before, throws its cloak around these
specious beguilers, and the unfortunate dupe does not dream whither he
is being led,—youth has such a sincere faith in beauty, and grace, and
feminine charm! Sometimes reverses and disaster, of one kind or another,
or a cheerless home environment, drive a young man into seeking refuge
and lethean pleasures here. It is a form of dissipation similar to the
drink habit, only a thousand times worse."

"Worse?" I cried. "It is infernal, diabolical, damnable! And it is woman
who accomplishes this horrible ruin!—and is 'received' in society,
which, if too flagrantly outraged, will not forgive her unless she
marries some good man!" <span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

"O, not always that," protested Severnius; "the unlucky sinner sometimes
recovers caste by a course of penitence, by multiplying her
subscriptions to charities, and by costly peace-offerings to the
aforesaid outraged society."

"What sort of peace-offerings?" I asked.

"Well, an entertainment, perhaps, something superb, something out of the
common; or maybe a voyage in her private yacht. Bait of that sort is too
tempting for any but the high and mighty, the real aristocrats, to
withstand. The simply respectable, but weak-hearted,—who are a little
below her level in point of wealth, position, or ancestry,—fall into her
net. I have observed that a woman who has forfeited her place in the
highest rank of society usually begins her reascent by clutching hold of
the skirts of honest folk who are flattered by her condescension, and
whose sturdy arms assist her to rise again."

"I have observed the same thing myself," I rejoined, but he had not
finished; there was a twinkle in his eye as he went on:

"If you were to reveal the secret of your air-ship to a woman of this
kind she would probably seize upon it as a means of salvation; she would
have one constructed, on a large and handsome scale, and invite a party
to accompany her on an excursion to the Earth. And though she were the
worst of her class, every mother's son—and daughter—of us would accept!
For none of us hold our self-respect at a higher figure than that, I
imagine."

"Yes, Severnius, you do," I replied emphatically.

"I beg your pardon! I would knock off a good deal for a visit to your
planet," he said, laughing.

By this time we had left Cupid's Gardens far behind. The road bent in
again toward the river, which we presently crossed. If it had not been
for the dreadful things I had just listened to, I think I should have
been in transports over the serene loveliness <span id="page_83">p.
83</span> of the prospect around us. The view was especially fine from
the summit of the bridge; it is a "high" bridge, for the Gyro is
navigated by great steam-ships and high-masted schooners.

Severnius bade the driver stop a moment that we might contemplate the
scene, but I had little heart for its beauties. And yet I can recall the
picture now with extraordinary clearness. The river has many windings,
and the woods often hide it from view; but it reappears, again and
again, afar off, in green meadows and yellowing fields,—opalescent
jewels in gold or emerald setting. Here and there, in the distance,
white sails were moving as if on land. Far beyond were vague mountain
outlines, and over all, the tender rose-blush of the sky. The sweetness
of it, contrasted with the picture newly wrought in my mind, saddened
me.

Some distance up the river, on the other side, we passed an old,
dilapidated villa, or group of buildings jumbled together without regard
to effect evidently, but yet picturesque. They were half hidden in
mammoth forest trees that had never been trimmed or trained, but spread
their enormous limbs wheresoever they would. Unpruned shrubbery and
trailing vines rioted over the uneven lawn, and the rank, windblown
grass, too long to stand erect, lay in waves like a woman's hair.

In a general way, the lawn sloped downward toward the road, so that we
could see nearly the whole of it over the high, and ugly, board fence
which inclosed it. Under the trees, a little way back, I observed a
group of young girls lolling in hammocks and idling in rustic chairs.
They caught sight of us and sprang up, laughing boisterously. I thought
they were going to run away in pretended and playful flight; but
instead, they came toward us, and blew kisses at us off their fingers.

I looked at Severnius. "What does this mean?" I asked. <span
id="page_84">p. 84</span>

"Why," he said, and the blush mantled his handsome face again, "this
place is the counterpart of Cupid's Gardens—a resort for men."

"I thought so," I replied.

By-and-by he remarked, "I hope you will not form too bad an opinion of
us, my friend! You have learned to-day what horrible evils exist among
us, but I assure you that the sum total of the people who practice them
constitutes but a small proportion of our population. And the good
people here, the great majority, look upon these things with the same
aversion and disgust that you do, and are doing their best—or they think
they are—to abolish them."

"How?—by legislation?" I asked.

"Partly; but more through education. Our preachers and teachers have
taken the matter up, but they are handicapped by the delicacy of the
question and the privacy involved in it, which seems to hinder
discussion even, and to forestall advice; though this is the only way to
accomplish anything, I think. I have very little faith in legislative
measures against secret vices; it is like trying to dam a stream which
cannot be dammed but must break out somewhere. I am convinced that my
friends, the Caskians, have solved the question in the only possible
way—by elevating and purifying the marriage relation. I hope some good
may be accomplished by the visit of the few who are coming here!"

"Will they preach or lecture?" I asked, with what seemed to me a moment
later to be stupid simplicity.

"O, no!" replied Severnius, with the same air of modest but emphatic
protest which they themselves would have doubtless assumed had the
question been put to them. "It was simply their personal influence I had
reference to. I do not know that I can make you understand, but their
presence always seemed to me <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> like a
disinfectant of evil. With myself, when I was among them, all the good
that was in me responded to their nobility; the evil in me slept, I
suppose."

I made a skeptical rejoinder to the implication in his last sentence,
for to me he seemed entirely devoid of evil; and we finished the drive
in silence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7. New Friends](uap08)
