[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ctdi02)  [Next](ctdi04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### AWIKUNCHI, A FAIR-WEATHER-MAKING CEREMONY.

Where all is fragmentary, the connections between external objects and
the ideas they stand for must become obliterated by time; and if the
story is given at second-hand, little can be learned with precision.
Most of the writer's material has been gathered directly from the old
men who are the only real authorities; but Sant, the Diegueño
interpreter, told the little that he remembers to have heard about the
Awikunchi ceremony.'

Awikunchi is the name of a certain rock in the middle of which there had
been carved the figure of a tiny coiled snake. When a man makes a hole
in this rock, it will grow together again. It is the only rock that is
known to have this property.

Finding that it was within accessible distance, I went to see it. It is
a large, low, sloping rock of soft, loose granite; but it was with
difficulty that the carved figure of the snake could be seen, for this
had been damaged by some iconoclast who had dug it partly away, perhaps
in the expectation of seeing it grow again.

In the old days no one could be found so sacrilegious as to deface such
an object; but American influence is shown in the younger generation,
who have been robbed of their past and preserve no reverence for it.

The connection between the rock and the song-series which bears its name
could not be discovered. This series was sung for fair weather. If it
rains for some time, they may say, "Let us sing Awikunchi to end

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

the rain." So they sing all night to the accompaniment of a basket
rubbed by a stick; and perhaps the rain stops in the morning.

The story of the songs is forgotten; but Sant recalls a mere fragment. A
certain number refer to a boy named Kwilyu, who could eat more than any
one in the world. His father grew tired of a son who ate so much, and
planned to run away and leave him. So he made himself a boat. And he
went out in it to the islands of the ocean. He thought the boy could not
catch him there; but he could not escape in this way, for Kwilyu
overtook him. The forgotten sequel of the story may never be known.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[231:1](ctdi02.htm#fr_6) It is said that in this
dance the singers alternate, one man taking up the song when the other
stops.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[231:2](#fr_-1) Wi means "rock" in Diegueño.
Wily, with the sound of Spanish liquid *ll*, is another form of the
word. The initial w is pronounced so as to give the sound of a before
it, but the vowel does not actually belong there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Beliefs](ctdi04)
