[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080401)  [Next](0080403) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.ix.xxxv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ix.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.ix.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXV.—Desiring the Salvation of
Others.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.ix.xxxv-p2"></span>Then said I:  “I pray you, my lord
Peter, tell us what is that declaration which you say afforded you
evidence of her faith?”  Then Peter:  “It is her asking that her
hostess, whose kindnesses she wishes to requite, may be baptized along
with her.  Now she would not ask that this grace be bestowed upon her
whom she loves, unless she believed that there is some great boon in
baptism.  Whence, also, I find fault with very many, who, when they are
themselves baptized and believe, yet do nothing worthy of faith with
those whom they love, such as wives, or children, or friends, whom they
do not exhort to that which they themselves have attained, *as they
would do* if indeed they believed that eternal life is thereby
bestowed.  In short, if they see them to be sick, or to be subject to
any danger bodily, they grieve and mourn, because they are sure that in
this destruction threatens them.  So, then, if they were sure of this,
that the punishment of eternal fire awaits those who do not worship God,
when would they cease warning and exhorting?  Or, if they refused, how
would they not mourn and bewail them, being sure that eternal torments
awaited them?  Now, therefore, we shall send for that woman at once, and
see if she loves the faith of our religion; and as we find, so shall we
act.  But since your mother has judged so faithfully concerning baptism,
let her fast only one day before baptism.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI](0080403)
