[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080423)  [Next](0080425) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—The Concourse of Atoms
Could Not Make the World.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xviii-p2"></span>“Then, in the next place, if they
are ceaselessly borne about, and always coming, and being added to
things whose measure is already complete, how can the universe stand,
when new weights are always being heaped upon so vast weights?  And this
also I ask:  If this expanse of heaven which we see was constructed by
the gradual concurrence of atoms, how did it not collapse while it was
in construction, if indeed the yawning top of the structure was not
propped and bound by any stays?  For as those who build circular domes,
unless they bind the fastening of the central top, the whole falls at
once; so also the circle of the world, which we see to be brought
together in so graceful a form, if it was not made at once, and under
the influence of a single forth-putting of divine energy by the power of
a Creator, but by atoms gradually concurring and constructing it, not as
reason demanded, but as a fortuitous issue befell, how did it not fall
down and crumble to pieces before it could be brought together and
fastened?  And further, I ask this:  What is the pavement on which the
foundations of such an immense mass are laid?  And again, what you call
the pavement, on what does it rest?  And again that other, what supports
it?  And so I go on asking, until the answer comes to nothing and
vacuity!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](0080425)
