[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080372)  [Next](0080374) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.ix.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ix.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.ix.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—Peter’s Simplicity of
Life.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.ix.vi-p2"></span>Then Peter, laughing, said:  “And do
you not think, Clement, that very necessity must make you my servant? 
For who else can spread my sheets, and arrange my beautiful coverlets? 
Who will be at hand to keep my rings, and prepare my robes, which I must
be constantly changing?  Who shall superintend my cooks, and provide
various and choice meats to be prepared by most recondite and various
art; and all those things which are procured at enormous expense, and
are brought together for men of delicate up-bringing, yea rather, for
their appetite, as for some enormous beast?  But perhaps, although you
live with me, you do not know my manner of life.  I live on bread alone,
with olives, and seldom even with pot-herbs; and my dress is what you
see, a tunic with a pallium:  and having these, I require nothing more. 
This is sufficient for me, because my mind does not regard things
present, but things eternal, and therefore no present and visible thing
delights me.  Whence I embrace and admire indeed your good mind towards
me; and I commend you the more, because, though you have been accustomed
to so great abundance, you have been able so soon to abandon it, and to
accommodate yourself to this life of ours, which makes use of necessary
things alone.  For we—that is, I and my brother Andrew—have grown up
from our childhood not only orphans, but also extremely poor, and
through necessity have become used to labour, whence now also we easily
bear the fatigues of our journeyings.  But rather, if you would consent
and allow it, I, who am a working man, could more easily discharge the
duty of a servant to you.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](0080374)
