[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080066)  [Next](0080068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.v"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—His Design to Test the
Immortality of the Soul.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.v-p2"></span>What, then, shall I do?  This shall I
do.  I shall proceed to Egypt, and there I shall cultivate the
friendship of the hierophants or prophets, who preside at the shrines. 
Then I shall win over a magician by money, and entreat him, by what they
call the necromantic art, to bring me a soul from the infernal regions,
as if I were desirous of consulting it about some business.  But this
shall be my consultation, whether the soul be immortal.  Now, the proof
that the soul is immortal will be put past doubt, not from what it says,
or from what I hear, but from what I see:  for seeing it with my eyes, I
shall ever after hold the surest conviction of its immortality; and no
fallacy of words or uncertainty of hearing shall ever be able to disturb
the persuasion produced by sight.  However, I related this project to a
certain philosopher with whom I was intimate, who counselled me not to
venture upon it; “for,” said he, “if the soul should not obey the call
of the magician, you henceforth will live more hopelessly, as thinking
that there is nothing after death, and also as having tried things
unlawful.  If, however, you seem to see anything, what religion or what
piety can arise to you from things unlawful and impious?  For they say
that transactions of this sort are hateful to the Divinity, and that God
sets Himself in opposition to those who trouble souls after their
release from the body.”  When I heard this, I was indeed staggered in my
purpose; yet I could not in any way either lay aside my longing, or cast
off the distressing thought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](0080068)
