[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080477)  [Next](0080479) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xi.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xi.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—“Conceived in Sin.”</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.ix-p2"></span>“From this, therefore, it sometimes
happens, that if any persons have acted incontinently, and have been
willing not so much to resist as to <span id="page_185">p. 185</span>
<span id="vi.iii.xi.ix-Page_185"></span>yield, and to give harbour to
these *demons* in themselves, by their noxious breath an intemperate,
ill-conditioned, and diseased progeny is begotten.  For while lust is
wholly gratified, and no care is taken in the copulation, undoubtedly a
weak generation is affected with the defects and frailties of those
demons by whose instigation these things are done.  And therefore
parents are responsible for their children’s defects of this sort,
because they have not observed the law of intercourse.  Though there are
also more secret causes, by which souls are made subject to these evils,
which it is not to our present purpose to state, yet it behoves every
one to acknowledge the law of God, that he may learn from it the
observance of generation, and avoid causes of impurity, that that which
is begotten may be pure.  For it is not right, while in the planting of
shrubs and the sowing of crops a suitable season is sought for, and the
land is cleaned, and all things are suitably prepared, lest haply the
seed which is sown be injured and perish, that in the case of man only,
who is over all these things, there should be no attention or caution in
sowing his seed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](0080479)
