[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080948)  [Next](0080950) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xiv.xv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiv.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xiv.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV.—Heathen Worshippers Under the
Power of the Demon.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiv.xv-p2"></span>“And why do ye take pleasure in these
doings?  Since the serpent which lurks in you, which has sown in you
fruitless lust, will not tell you, I shall speak and put it on record. 
Thus the case stands.  According to the worship of God, the proclamation
is made to be sober, to be chaste, to restrain passion, not to pilfer
other men’s goods, to live uprightly, moderately, fearlessly, gently;
rather to restrain one’s self in necessities, than to supply his wants
by wrongfully taking away the property of another.  But with the
so-called gods the reverse is done.  And ye renounce some things *as
done by you*, in order to the admiration of *your* righteousness;
whereas, although you did all that you are commanded, ignorance with
respect to God is alone sufficient for your condemnation.  But meeting
together in the places which you have dedicated to them, you delight in
making yourselves drunk, and you kindle your altars, of which the
diffused odour through its influence attracts the blind and deaf spirits
to the place of their fumigation.  And thus, of those who are present,
some are filled with inspirations, and some with strange fiends, and
some betake themselves to lasciviousness, and some to theft and murder. 
For the exhalation of blood, and the libation of wine, <span
id="page_288">p. 288</span> <span
id="vi.iv.xiv.xv-Page_288"></span>satisfies even these unclean spirits,
which lurk within you and cause you to take pleasure in the things that
are transacted there, and in dreams surround you with false phantasies,
and punish you with myriads of diseases.  For under the show of the
so-called sacred victims you are filled with dire demons, which,
cunningly concealing themselves, destroy you, so that you should not
understand the plot that is laid for you.  For, under the guise of some
injury, or love, or anger, or grief, or strangling you with a rope, or
drowning you, or throwing you from a precipice, or by suicide, or
apoplexy, or some other disease, they deprive you of life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](0080950)
