[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080064)  [Next](0080066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—His Dissatisfaction with
the Schools of the Philosophers.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iii-p2"></span>Having therefore such a bent of mind
from my earliest years, the desire of learning something led me to
frequent the schools of the philosophers.  There I saw that nought else
was done, save that doctrines were asserted and controverted without
end, contests were waged, and the arts of syllogisms and the subtleties
of conclusions were discussed.  If at any time the doctrine of the
immortality of the soul prevailed, I was thankful; if at any time it was
impugned, I went away sorrowful.  Still, neither doctrine had the power
of truth over my heart.  This only I understood, that opinions and
definitions of things were accounted true or false, not in accordance
with their nature and the truth of the arguments, but in proportion to
the talents of those who supported them.  And I was all the more
tortured in the bottom of my heart, because I was neither able to lay
hold of any of those things which were spoken as firmly established, nor
was I able to lay aside the desire of inquiry; but the more I
endeavoured to neglect and despise them, so much the more eagerly, as I
have said, did a desire of this sort, creeping in upon me secretly as
with a kind of pleasure, take possession of my heart and mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](0080066)
