[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080616)  [Next](0080618) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—The Gospel in Rome.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p2"></span>And then in the same year, in the
autumn season, a certain one, standing in a public place, cried and
said, “Men of Rome, hearken.  The Son of God is come in Judæa,
proclaiming eternal life to all who will, if they shall live according
to the counsel of the Father, who hath sent Him.  Wherefore change your
manner of life from the worse to the better, from things temporal to
things eternal; for know ye that there is one God, who is in heaven,
whose world ye unrighteously dwell in before His righteous eyes.  But if
ye be changed, and live according to His counsel, then, being born into
the other world, and becoming eternal, ye shall enjoy His unspeakable
good things.  But if ye be unbelieving, your souls, after the
dissolution of the body, shall be thrown into the place of fire, where,
being punished eternally, they shall repent of their unprofitable
deeds.  For every one, the term of repentance is the present life.”  I
therefore, when I heard these things, was grieved, because no one among
so great multitudes, hear<span id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-Page_225"></span>ing such an announcement, said:  I
shall go into Judæa, that I may know if this man who tells us these
things speaks the truth, that the Son of God has come into Judæa, for
the sake of a good and eternal hope, revealing the will of the Father
who sent Him.  For it is no small matter which they say that He
preaches:  for He asserts that the souls of some, being *themselves*
immortal, shall enjoy eternal good things; and that those of others,
being thrown into unquenchable fire, shall be punished for ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](0080618)
