[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080251)  [Next](0080253) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.v.xlii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.v.xlii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LII.—False Signs and
Miracles.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.xlii-p2"></span>Then Niceta said:  “I give you
abundant thanks, O most clement Peter; but this is what I desire to
learn, how Simon, who is the enemy <span id="page_128">p. 128</span>
<span id="vi.iii.v.xlii-Page_128"></span>of God, is able to do such and
so great things?  For indeed he told no lie in his declaration of what
he has done.”  To this the blessed Peter thus answered:  “God, who is
one and true, has resolved to prepare good and faithful friends for His
first begotten; but knowing that none can be good, unless they have in
their power that perception by which they may become good, that they may
be of their own intent what they choose to be,—and otherwise they could
not be truly good, if they were kept in goodness not by purpose, but by
necessity,—has given to every one the power of his own will, that he may
be what he wishes to be.  And again, foreseeing that that power of will
would make some choose good things and others evil, and so that the
human race would necessarily be divided into two classes, He has
permitted each class to choose both a place and a king, whom they
would.  For the good King rejoices in the good, and the wicked one in
the evil.  And although I have expounded those things more fully to you,
O Clement, in that treatise in which I discoursed on predestination and
the end, yet it is fitting that I should now make clear to Niceta also,
as he asks me, what is the reason than Simon, whose thoughts are against
God, is able to do so great marvels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIII](0080253)
