[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080541)  [Next](0080543) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV.—Other
Allegories.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxxiv-p2"></span>“And of Venus they give forth an
allegory to this effect.  When, say they, the sea was put under the air,
and when the brightness of the heavens shone more pleasantly, being
reflected from the waters, the loveliness of things, which appeared
fairer from the waters, was called Venus; and she, *it,* being united
with the air as with her, *its,* own brother, so as to produce beauty,
which might be the object of desire, is said to have given birth to
Cupid.  In this way, therefore, as we have said, they teach that
Chronos, who is Saturn, is allegorically time; Rhea is matter;
Aides—that is, Orcus—is the depth of the infernal regions; Neptune is
water; Jupiter is air—that is, the element of heat; Venus is the
loveliness of things; Cupid is desire, which is in all things, and by
which posterity is propagated, or even the reason of things, which gives
delight when wisely looked into.  Hera—that is, Juno—is said to be that
middle air which descends from heaven to earth.  To Diana, whom they
call Proserpine, they hand over the air below.  They say that Apollo is
the Sun himself, which goes round the heaven; that Mercury is speech, by
which a reason is rendered for everything; that Mars is unrestrained
fire, which consumes all things.  But not to delay you by enumerating
everything, those who have the more abstruse intelligence concerning
such things think that they give fair and just reasons, by applying this
sort of allegory to every one of their objects of worship.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV](0080543)
