[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080434)  [Next](0080436) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxix"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX.—Symmetry of the
Body.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxix-p2"></span>“And mark in this the work of the
Designer, how He has inserted the bones like pillars, on which the flesh
might be sustained and carried.  Then, again, how an equal measure is
preserved on either side, that is, the right and the left, so that foot
answers to foot, hand to hand, and even finger to finger, so that each
agrees in perfect equality with each; and also eye to eye, and ear to
ear, which not only are suitable to and matched with each other, but
also are formed fit for necessary uses.  The hands, for instance, are so
made as to be fit for work; the feet for walking; the eyes, protected
with sentinel eyebrows, to serve the purpose of sight; the ears so
formed for hearing, that, like a cymbal, they vibrate the sound of the
word that falls upon them, and send it inward, and transmit it even in
the understanding of the heart; whereas the tongue, striking against the
teeth in speaking, performs the part of a fiddle-bow.  The teeth also
are formed, some for cutting and dividing the food, and handing it over
to the inner ones; and these, in their turn, bruise and grind it like a
mill, that it may be more conveniently digested when it is conveyed into
the stomach; whence also they are called grinders.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX](0080436)
