[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080492)  [Next](0080494) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.—Different Customs of
Different Countries.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xxiv-p2"></span>“In the regions of Britain several
men have one wife; in Parthia many women have one husband; and each part
of the world adheres to its own manners and institutions.  None of the
Amazons have husbands, but, like animals, they go out from their own
territories once a year about the vernal equinox, and live with the men
of the neighbouring nation, observing a sort of solemnity the while, and
when they have conceived by them they return; and if they bring forth a
male child, they cast him away, and rear only females.  Now, since the
birth of all is at one season, it is absurd to suppose that in the case
of males Mars is at the time in equal portions with Saturn, but never in
the <span class="c9"><span
id="vi.iii.xi.xxiv-p2.1"></span>Genesis</span> of females; and that they
have not Mercury placed with Venus in his own houses, so as to produce
either painters, or sculptors, or money-changers; or in the houses of
Venus, so that perfumers, or singers, or poets might be produced.  Among
the Saracens, and Upper Libyans, and Moors, and the dwellers about the
mouths of the ocean, and also in the remote districts of Germany, and
among the Sarmatians and Scythians, and all the nations who dwell in the
regions of the Pontic shore, and in the island Chrysea, there is never
found a money-changer, nor a sculptor, nor a painter, nor an architect,
nor a geometrician, nor a tragedian, nor a poet.  Therefore the
influence of Mercury and Venus must be wanting among them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](0080494)
