[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080799)  [Next](0080801) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.viii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.viii.xiii-p1"></span> <span id="page_259">p. 259</span>
<span id="vi.iv.viii.xiii-Page_259"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.viii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—Jupiter’s Amours
Continued.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.viii.xiii-p2"></span>“‘Then he committed incest with his
sister, who was born of Kronos and Thalasse, after the dismemberment of
Kronos, and of whom were born Eros and Cypris, whom they call also
Dodone.  Then, in the likeness of a satyr, he had intercourse with
Antiope the daughter of Nycteus, of whom were born Amphion and Zethus. 
And he embraced Alcmene, the wife of Amphitryon, in the form of her
husband Amphitryon, of whom was born Hercules.  And, changed into an
eagle, he approached Ægina, the daughter of Asclepius, of whom Æacus was
born.  And in the form of a bear he lay with Amalthea the daughter of
Phocus; and in a golden shower he fell upon Danae, the daughter of
Acrisius, of whom sprang Perseus.  He became wild as a lion to Callisto
the daughter of Lycaon and begat Arcus the second.  And with Europa the
daughter of Phœnix he had intercourse by means of a bull, of whom sprang
Minos, and Rhadamanthus, and Sarpedon; and with Eurymedusa the daughter
of Achelous, changing himself into an ant, of whom was born Myrmidon. 
With a nymph of Hersæus, in the form of a vulture, from whom sprang the
wise men of old in Sicily.  He came to Juno the earth-born in Rhodes,
and of her were born Pargæus, Kronius, Kytis.  And he deflowered Ossia,
taking the likeness of her husband Phœnix, of whom Anchinous was born to
him.  Of Nemesis the daughter of Thestius, who is also thought to be
Leda, he begot Helena, in the form of a swan or goose; and again, in the
form of a star, he produced Castor and Polydeuces.  With Lamia he was
transformed into a hoopoo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](0080801)
