[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080245)  [Next](0080247) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.v.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.v.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLVI.—Simon’s Rage.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.xxxvi-p2"></span>But when Simon heard this, he
assailed Peter with curses and reproaches, saying:  “Oh most wicked and
most deceitful of men, to whom fortune, not truth, hath given the
victory.  But I sought repentance not for defect of knowledge, but in
order that you, thinking that by repentance I should become your
disciple, might entrust to me all the secrets of your profession, and so
at length, knowing them all, I might confute you.  But as you cunningly
understood for what reason I had pretended penitence, and acquiesced as
if you did not understand my stratagem, that you might first expose me
in presence of the people as unskilful, then foreseeing that being thus
exposed to the people, I must of necessity be indignant, and confess
that I was not truly penitent, you anticipated me, that you might say,
that I should, after my penitence, again return to my infidelity, that
you might seem to have conquered on all sides, both if I continued in
the penitence which I had professed, and if I did not continue; and so
you should be believed to be wise, because you had foreseen these
things, while I should seem to be deceived, because I did not foresee
your trick.  But you foreseeing mine, have used subtlety and
circumvented me.  But, as I said, your victory is the result of fortune,
not of truth:  yet I know why I did not foresee this; because I stood by
you and spoke with you in my goodness, and bore patiently with you.  But
now I shall show you the power of my divinity, so that you shall quickly
fall down and worship me.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVII](0080247)
