[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080566)  [Next](0080568) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.lix"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.lix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.lix-p1.1"></span>Chapter LIX.—A Scene of Mourning.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.lix-p2"></span>“And when he said this, I said to
him, ‘And what advantage will you gain from this deed?’  Then Simon
said:  ‘In the first place, that those who are seeking me may lay hold
on him, and so give over the search for me.  But if he be punished by
Cæsar, that his sons may have much sorrow, who forsook me, and fled to
Peter, and are now his assistants.’  Now I confess to you, Peter, what
is true.  I did not dare then tell Faustinianus; but neither did Simon
give us opportunity of speaking with him in private, and disclosing to
him fully Simon’s design.  Meantime, about the middle of the night,
Simon has fled away, making for Judæa.  And Athenodorus and Appion have
gone to convoy him; but I pretended bodily indisposition, that I might
remain at home, and make him return quickly to you, if haply he may in
any way be concealed with you, lest, being seized by those who are in
quest of Simon, he be brought before Cæsar, and perish without cause. 
And now, in my anxiety about him, I have come to see him, and to return
before those who have gone to convoy Simon come back.”  And turning to
us, Anubion said:  “I, Anubion, indeed see the true countenance of your
father, because I was previously anointed by Simon himself, as I have
told you, that the real face of Faustinianus might appear to my eyes;
whence I am astonished and wonder at the art of Simon Magus, because you
standing here do not recognise your father.”  And while my father and
mother, and all of us, wept for the things which had befallen, Anubion,
moved with compassion, also wept.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LX](0080568)
