[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080221)  [Next](0080223) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.v.xii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.v.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII.—Responsibility.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.xii-p2"></span>Then Simon said:  “I know not whether
I know even this; for every one, according as it is decreed to him by
fate, either does, or understands, or suffers.”  Then Peter said:  “See,
my brethren, into what absurdities Simon has fallen, who before my
coming was teaching that men have it in their power to be wise and to do
what they will, but now, driven into a corner by the force of my
arguments, he denies that man has any power either of perceiving or of
acting; and yet he presumes to profess himself to be a teacher!  But
tell me how then God judges according to truth every one for his doings,
if men have it not in their own power to do anything?  If this opinion
be held, all things are torn up by the roots; vain will be the desire of
following after goodness; yea, even in vain do the judges of the world
administer laws and punish those who do amiss, for they had it not in
their power not to sin; vain also will be the laws of nations which
assign penalties to evil deeds.  Miserable also will those be who
laboriously keep righteousness; but blessed those who, living in
pleasure, exercise tyranny, living in luxury and wickedness.  According
to this, therefore, there can be neither righteousness, nor goodness,
nor any virtue, nor, as you would have it, any God.  But, O Simon, I
know why you have spoken thus:  truly because you wished to avoid
inquiry, lest you should be openly confuted; and therefore you say that
it is not in the power of man to perceive or to discern anything.  But
if this had really been your opinion, you would not surely, before my
coming, have professed yourself before the people to be a teacher.  I
say, therefore, that man is under his own control.”  Then said Simon: 
“What is the meaning of being under his own control?  Tell us.”  To this
Peter:  “If nothing can be learned, why do you wish to hear?”  And Simon
said:  “You have nothing to answer to this.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](0080223)
