[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080569)  [Next](0080571) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.lxii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.lxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.lxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXII.—A Case of
Conscience.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.lxii-p2"></span>When Peter made this intimation to
my father, he answered:  “I know what you wish; do not trouble yourself
further:  for I understand and know what I am to undertake when I come
to the place.”  And Peter gave him further instruction, saying:  “When
therefore you come to the place, and see the people turned by your
discourse, and laying aside their hatred, and returning to their longing
for me, send and tell me, and I shall come immediately; and when I come,
I shall without delay set you free from this strange countenance, and
restore to you your own, which is known to all your friends.”  And
having said this, he ordered my brothers to go with him, and at the same
time our mother Matthidia, and some of our friends.  But my mother
refused to go along with him, and said:  “It seems as if I should be an
adulteress if I were to associate with the countenance of Simon; but if
I be compelled to go along with him, it is at all events impossible that
I can lie in the same bed with him; but I do not know if I can consent
even to go with him.”  And when she stoutly refused, Anubion began to
exhort her, saying:  “Believe me and Peter.  But does not even his voice
persuade you that he is your husband Faustinianus, whom truly I love not
less than you do?  And, in short, I also myself shall come with you.” 
And when Anubion had said this, my mother promised that she would go
with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIII](0080571)
