[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080586)  [Next](0080588) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p1"></span> <span id="page_216">p. 216</span>
<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-Page_216"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.—An Adjuration Concerning the
Receivers of the Book.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>1.  Therefore James, having read the
epistle, sent for the elders; and having read it to them, said:  “Our
Peter has strictly and becomingly charged us concerning the establishing
of the truth, that we should not communicate the books of his
preachings, which have been sent to us, to any one at random, but to one
who is good and religious, and who wishes to teach, and who is
circumcised, and faithful.  And these are not all to be committed to him
at once; that, if he be found injudicious in the first, the others may
not be entrusted to him.  Wherefore let him be proved not less than six
years.  And then according to the initiation of Moses, he *that is to
deliver the books* should bring him to a river or a fountain, which is
living water, where the regeneration of the righteous takes place, and
should make him, not swear—for that is not lawful—but to stand by the
water and adjure, as we ourselves, when we were re-generated, <span
id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891) were made to do for the sake of not
sinning.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p4"></span>2.  “And let him say:  ‘I take to
witness heaven, earth, water, in which all things are comprehended, and
in addition to all these, that air also which pervades all things, and
without which I cannot breathe, that I shall always be obedient to him
who gives me the books of the preachings; and those same books which he
may give me, I shall not communicate to any one in any way, either by
writing them, or giving them in writing, or giving them to a writer,
either myself or by another, or through any other initiation, or trick,
or method, or by keeping them carelessly, or placing them before *any
one,* or granting him permission *to see them,* or in any way or manner
whatsoever communicating them to another; unless I shall ascertain one
to be worthy, as I myself have been judged, or even more so, and that
after a probation of not less than six years; but to one who is
religious and good, chosen to teach, as I have received them, so I will
commit them, doing these things also according to the will of my bishop.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p5"></span>3.  “‘But otherwise, though he were my
son or my brother, or my friend, or otherwise in any way pertaining to
me by kindred, if he be unworthy, that I will not vouchsafe the favour
to him, as is not meet; and I shall neither be terrified by plot nor
mollified by gifts.  But if even it should ever seem to me that the
books of the preachings given to me are not true, I shall not so
communicate them, but shall give them back.  And when I go abroad, I
shall carry them with me, whatever of them I happen to possess.  But if
I be not minded to carry them about with me, I shall not suffer them to
be in my house, but shall deposit them with my bishop, having the same
faith, and setting out from the same persons *as myself. <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892)  * But if it befall me to be sick, and
in expectation of death, and if I be childless, I shall act in the same
manner.  But if I die having a son who is not worthy, or not yet
capable, I shall act in the same manner.  For I shall deposit them with
my bishop, in order that if my son, when he grows up, be worthy of the
trust, he may give them to him as his father’s bequest, according to the
terms of this engagement.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p7"></span>4.  “‘And that I shall thus do, I again
call to witness heaven, earth, water, in which all things are enveloped,
and in addition to all these, the all-pervading air, without which I
cannot breathe, that I shall always be obedient to him who giveth me
these books of the preachings, and shall observe in all things as I have
engaged, or even something more.  To me, therefore, keeping this
covenant, there shall be a part with the holy ones; but to me doing
anything contrary to what I have covenanted, may the universe be hostile
to me, and the all-pervading ether, and the God who is over all, to whom
none is superior, than whom none is greater.  But if even I should come
to the acknowledgment of another God, I now swear by him also, be he or
be he not, that I shall not do otherwise.  And in addition to all these
things, if I shall lie, I shall be accursed living and dying, and shall
be punished with everlasting punishment.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p8"></span>“And after this, let him partake of
bread and salt with him who commits them to him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_891"></span>[216:892](0080587.htm#fr_891) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p3"></span> \[The form of adjuration has some
points of resemblance with the baptismal forms given by Hippolytus, as
those of the Elkesaites.  See Introductory Notice to *Recognitions*, and
comp. *Recognitions*, i. 45–48.—R.\]

<span id="fn_892"></span>[216:893](0080587.htm#fr_892) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p6"></span> Unless the reading be corrupt here, I
suppose the reference must be to episcopal succession.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](0080588)
