[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080431)  [Next](0080433) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.—Germination of
Seeds.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxvi-p2"></span>“And what occasion is there to
mention more instances in which divine providence has ordained the
production of animals to be effected in various ways, that order being
superseded which is thought to be assigned by nature, from which not an
irrational course of things, but one arranged by his own reason, might
be evinced?  And in this also is there not a full work of providence
shown, when seeds sown are prepared by means of earth and water for the
sustenance of men?  For when these seeds are committed to the earth, the
soil milks upon the seeds, as from its teats, the moisture which it has
received into itself by the will of God.  For there is in water a
certain power of the spirit given by God from the beginning, by whose
operation the structure of the body that is to be begins to be formed in
the seed itself, and to be developed by means of the blade and the ear;
for the grain of seed being swelled by the moisture, that power of the
spirit which has been made to reside in water, running as an incorporeal
substance through certain strait passages of veins, excites the seeds to
growth, and forms the species of the growing plants.  By means,
therefore, of the moist element in which that vital spirit is contained
and inborn, it is caused that not only is it revived, but also that an
appearance and form in all respects like to the seeds that had been sown
is reproduced.  Now, who that has even a particle of sense will think
that this method depends upon irrational nature, and not upon divine
wisdom?  Lastly, also these things are done in a resemblance of the
birth of men; for the earth seems to take the place of the womb, into
which the seed being cast, is both formed and nourished by the power of
water and spirit, as we have said above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII](0080433)
