[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080408)  [Next](0080410) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—A Friendly Conference.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.iii-p2"></span>But Peter, walking along leisurely
while conversing, was looking out for a suitable place for a
conference.  And when he saw a quiet recess near the harbour, he made us
sit down; and so he himself first began.  Nor did he hold the old man in
any contempt, nor did he look down upon him because his dress was poor
and mean.  He said, therefore:  “Since you seem to me to be a learned
man, and a compassionate, inasmuch as you have come to us, and wish that
to be known to us which you consider to be good, we also wish to expound
to you what things we believe to be good and right; and if you do not
think them true, you will take in good part our good intentions towards
you, as we do yours towards us.”  While Peter was thus speaking, a great
multitude assembled.  Then said the old man:  “Perhaps the presence of a
multitude disconcerts you.”  Peter replied:  “Not at all, except only on
this account, that I am afraid lest haply, when the truth is made
manifest in the course of our discussion, you be ashamed in presence of
the multitude to yield and assent to the things which you may have
understood to be spoken truly.”  To this the old man answered:  “I am
not such a fool in my old age, that, understanding what is true, I
should deny it for the favour of the rabble.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](0080410)
