[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080197)  [Next](0080199) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iv.lxi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.lxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iv.lxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXI.—Imagination.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.lxi-p2"></span>To this Simon answered:  “Apply your
mind to those things which I am going to say, and cause it, walking in
peaceable paths, to attain to those things which I shall demonstrate. 
Listen now, therefore.  Did you never in thought reach forth your mind
into regions or islands situated far away, and remain so fixed in them,
that you could not even see the people that were before you, or know
where yourself were sitting, by reason of the delightfulness of those
things on which you were gazing?”  And Peter said:  “It is true, Simon,
this has often occurred to me.”  Then Simon said:  “In this way now
reach forth your sense into heaven, yea above the heaven, and behold
that there must be some place beyond the world, or outside the world, in
which there is neither heaven nor earth, and where no shadow of these
things produces darkness; and consequently, since there are neither
bodies in it, nor darkness occasioned by bodies, there must of necessity
be immense light; and consider of what sort that light must be, which is
never succeeded by darkness.  For if the light of this sun fills this
whole world, how great do you suppose that bodiless and infinite light
to be?  So great, doubtless, that this light of the sun would seem to be
darkness and not light, in comparison.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXII](0080199)
