[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080414)  [Next](0080416) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Simple and Compound.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.ix-p2"></span>Then Niceta began as follows: <span
id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813)   “Everything that is, is either
simple or compound.  That which is simple is without number, division,
colour, difference, roughness, smoothness, weight, lightness, quality,
quantity, and therefore without end.  But that which is compound is
either compounded of two, or of three, or even of four *elements*, or at
all events of several; and things which are compounded can also of
necessity be divided.”  The old man, hearing this, said:  “You speak
most excellently and learnedly, my son.”  Then Niceta went on: 
“Therefore that which is simple, and which is without any of those
things by which that which subsists can be dissolved, is without doubt
incomprehensible and infinite, knowing neither beginning nor end, and
therefore is one and alone, and subsisting without an author.  But that
which is compound is subject to number, and diversity, and division,—is
necessarily compounded by some author, and is a diversity collected into
one species.  That which is infinite is therefore, in respect of
goodness, a Father; in respect of power, a Creator.  Nor can the power
of creating cease in the Infinite, nor the goodness be quiescent; but He
is impelled by goodness to change existing things, and by power to
arrange and strengthen them.  Therefore some things, as we have said,
are changed, and composed of two or three, some of four, others of more
elements.  But since our inquiry at present is concerning the method of
the world and its substance, which, it is agreed, is compounded of four
elements, to which all those ten differences belong which we have
mentioned above, let us begin at these lower steps, and come to the
higher.  For a way is afforded us to intellectual and invisible things
from those which we see and handle; as is contained in arithmetical
instructions, where, when inquiry is made concerning divine things, we
rise from the lower to the higher numbers; but when the method
respecting present and visible things is expounded, the order is
directed from the higher to the lower numbers.  Is it not so?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_813"></span>[168:814](0080415.htm#fr_813) <span
id="vi.iii.x.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.ix-p3"></span> \[The argument of Niceta (chaps.
9–34), while it necessarily includes statements occurring elsewhere in
this literature, is, as a whole, peculiar to the *Recognitions*.  In
order of arrangement and logical force it is much superior to most of
the discourses.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](0080416)
