[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080945)  [Next](0080947) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xiv.xii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiv.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xiv.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Idols Unprofitable.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiv.xii-p2"></span>“But others say, God does not care
for us.  This also is false.  For if really He did not care, He would
neither cause His sun to rise on the good and the evil, nor send His
rain on the just and the unjust.  But others say, We are more pious
*than you*, since we worship both him and images.  I do not think, if
one were to say to a king, ‘I give you an equal share of honour with
that which I give to corpses and to worthless dung,’—I do not think that
he would profit by it.  But some one will say, Do you call our objects
of worship dung?  I say Yes, for you have made them useless to
yourselves by setting them aside for worship, whereas their substance
might perhaps have been serviceable for some other purpose, or for the
purpose of manure.  But now it is not useful even for this purpose,
since you have changed its shape and worship it.  And how do you say
that you are more pious, you who are the most wicked of all, who deserve
destruction of your souls by this very one incomparable sin, at the
hands of Him who is true, if you abide in it?  For as if any son having
received many benefits from his father, give to another, who is not his
father, the honour that is due to his father, he is certainly
disinherited; but if he live according to the judgment of his father,
and so thanks him for his kindnesses, he is with good reason made the
heir.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](0080947)
