[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080344)  [Next](0080346) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.vii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vii.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.vii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXI.—Paganism, Its
Enormities.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.vii.xxxi-p2"></span>“But some say, These things are
instituted for the sake of joy, and for refreshing our minds; and they
have been devised for this end, that the human mind may be relaxed for a
little from cares and sorrows.  See now what a charge you yourselves
bring upon the things which you practise.  If these things have been
invented for the purpose of lightening sorrow and affording enjoyment,
how is it that the invocations of demons are performed in groves and
woods?  What is the meaning of the insane whirlings, and the slashing of
limbs, and the cutting off of members?  How is it that mad rage is
produced in them?  How is insanity produced?  How is it that women are
driven violently, raging with dishevelled hair?  Whence the shrieking
and gnashing of teeth?  Whence the bellowing of the heart and the
bowels, and all those things which, whether they are pretended or are
contrived by the ministration of demons, are exhibited to the terror of
the foolish and ignorant?  Are these things done for the sake of
lightening the mind, or rather for the sake of oppressing it?  Do ye not
yet perceive nor understand, that these are the counsels of the serpent
lurking within you, which draws you away from the apprehension of truth
by irrational suggestions of errors, that he may hold you as slaves and
servants of lust and concupiscence and every disgraceful thing?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII](0080346)
