[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080447)  [Next](0080449) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xlii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xlii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLII.—Types and Forms.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xlii-p2"></span>Then said Aquila:  “If anything is
expressed from a type and form, it is at once understood that it is from
reason, and that it could not be made without mind; since the type
itself, which expresses figures and forms, was not made without mind. 
For example, if wax be applied to an engraved ring, it takes the stamp
and figure from the ring, which undoubtedly is without sense; but then
the ring, which expresses the figure, was engraven by the hand of a
workman, and it was mind and reason that gave the type to the ring.  So
then the bow also is expressed in the air; for the sun, impressing its
rays on the clouds in the process of rarefaction, and affixing the type
of its circularity to the cloudy moisture, as it were to soft wax,
produces the appearance of a bow; and this, as I have said, is effected
by the reflection of the sun’s brightness upon the clouds, and
reproducing the brightness of its circle from them.  Now this does not
always take place, but only when the opportunity is presented by the
rarefaction of moistened clouds.  And consequently, when the clouds
again are condensed and unite, the form of the bow is dissolved and
vanishes.  Finally, the bow never is seen without sun and clouds, just
as the image is not produced, unless there be the type, and wax, or some
other material.  Nor is it wonderful if God the Creator in the beginning
made types, from which forms and species may now be expressed.  But this
is similar to that, that in the beginning God created insensible
elements, which He might use for forming and developing all other
things.  But even those who form statues, first make a mould of clay or
wax, and from it the figure of the statue is produced.  And then
afterwards a shadow is also produced from the statue, which shadow
always bears the form and likeness of the statue.  What shall we say
then?  That the insensible statue forms a shadow finished with as
diligent care as the statue itself?  Or shall the finishing of the
shadow be unhesitatingly ascribed to him who has also fashioned the
statue?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII](0080449)
