[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080481)  [Next](0080483) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xi.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—Retribution Here or
Hereafter.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xiii-p2"></span>“But some one will say, Many have
committed even murder, and adultery, and other crimes, and have suffered
no evil.  This indeed rarely happens to men, but to those who know not
the counsel of God it frequently seems to happen.  But God, who knows
all things, knows how and why he who sins does sin, and what cause leads
each one to sin.  This, however, is in general to be noticed, that if
any are evil, not so much in their mind as in their doings, and are not
borne to sin under the incitement of purpose, upon them punishment is
inflicted more speedily, and more in the present life; for everywhere
and always God renders to every one according to his deeds, as He judges
to be expedient.  But those who practise wickedness of purpose, so that
they sometimes even rage against those from whom they have received
benefits, and who take no thought for repentance—their punishment He
defers to the future.  For these men do not, like those of whom we spoke
before, deserve to end the punishment of their crimes in the present
life; but it is allowed them to occupy the present time as they will,
because their correction is not such as to need temporal chastisements,
but such as to demand the punishment of eternal fire in hell; and there
their souls shall seek repentance, where they shall not be able to find
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](0080483)
