[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080995)  [Next](0080997) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xv.xxv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xv.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xv.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—Philanthropy and
Friendship.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xv.xxv-p2"></span>And when we were arrived and had
partaken of food, and given thanks according to our custom, there being
still time, <span id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147) I said to Peter: 
“My lord Peter, my mother has done a work of philanthropy in remembering
the woman her hostess.”  And Peter answered, “Have you indeed, O
Clement, thought truly that your mother did a work of philanthropy in
respect of her treatment of the woman who took her in after her
shipwreck, or have you spoken this word by way of greatly complimenting
your mother?  But if you spoke truly, and not by way of compliment, you
seem to me not to know what the greatness of philanthropy is, which is
affection towards any one whatever in respect of his being a man, apart
from physical persuasion.  But not even do I venture to call the hostess
who received your mother after her shipwreck, philanthropic; for she was
impelled by pity, and persuaded to become the benefactress of a woman
who had been shipwrecked, who was grieving for her children,—a stranger,
naked, destitute, and greatly deploring her misfortunes.  When,
therefore, she was in such circumstances, who that saw her, though he
were impious, could but pity her?  So that it does not seem to me that
even the stranger-receiving woman did a work of philanthropy, but to
have been moved to assist her by pity for her innumerable misfortunes. 
And how much more is it true of your mother, than when she was in
prosperous circumstances and requited her hostess, she did a deed, not
of philanthropy, but of friendship! for there is much difference between
friendship and philanthropy, because friendship springs from requital. 
But philanthropy, apart from physical persuasion, loves and benefits
every man as he is a man.  If, therefore, while she pitied her hostess,
she also pitied and did good to her enemies who have wronged her, she
would be philanthropic; but if, on one account she is friendly or
hostile, and on another account is hostile or friendly, such an one is
the friend or enemy of some quality, not of man as man.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[297:1148](0080996.htm#fr_1147) <span
id="vi.iv.xv.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xv.xxv-p3"></span> \[The remainder of this Homily has no
parallel in the *Recognitions*.  The views presented are peculiar, and
indicate a speculative tendency, less marked in the *Recognitions*.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](0080997)
