[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080517)  [Next](0080519) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.x"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—How to Make Progress.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.x-p2"></span>Then my father said:  “Truly you have
shown briefly and incomparably that there are evils in actions; but
still I should wish to learn this, how God justly judges those who sin,
as you say, if <span class="c9"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.x-p2.1"></span>Genesis</span> compels them to sin?”  Then
I answered:  “I am afraid to speak anything to you, my father, because
it becomes me to hold you in all honour, else I have an answer to give
you, if it were becoming.”  Then says my father:  “Speak what occurs to
you, my son; for it is not you, but the method of inquiry, that does the
wrong, as a modest woman to an incontinent man, if she is indignant for
her safety and her honour.”  Then I answered:  “If we do not hold by the
principles that we have acknowledged and confessed, but if those things
which have been defined are always loosened by forgetfulness, we shall
seem to be weaving Penelope’s web, undoing what we have done.  And
therefore we ought either not to acquiesce too easily, before we have
diligently examined the doctrine propounded; or if we have once
acquiesced, and the proposition has been agreed to, then we ought to
keep by what has been once determined, that we may go on with our
inquiries respecting other matters.”  And my father said:  “You say
well, my son; and I know why you say this:  it is because in the
discussion yesterday on natural causes, you showed that some malignant
power, transferring itself into the order of the stars, excites the
lusts of men, provoking them in various ways to sin, yet not compelling
or producing sins.”  To this I answered:  “It is well that you remember
it; and yet, though you do remember it, you have fallen into error.” 
Then said my father:  “Pardon me, my son; for I have not yet much
practice in these things:  for indeed your discourses yesterday, by
their truth, shut me up to agree with you; yet in my consciousness there
are, as it were, some remains of fevers, which for a little hold me back
from faith, as from health.  For I am distracted, because I know that
many things, yea, almost all things, have befallen me according to <span
class="c9"><span id="vi.iii.xii.x-p2.2"></span>Genesis</span>.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](0080519)
