[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080070)  [Next](0080072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Clement’s Interposition on
Behalf of Barnabas.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.ix-p2"></span>When he had thus spoken, all, as with
one consent, with rude voice raised a shout of derision, to put him to
shame, and to silence him, crying out that he was a barbarian and a
madman.  When I saw matters going on in this way, being filled, I know
not whence, with a certain zeal, and inflamed with religious enthusiasm,
I could not keep silence, but cried out with all boldness, “Most
righteously does Almighty God hide His will from you, whom He foresaw to
be unworthy of the knowledge of Himself, as is manifest to those who are
really wise, from what you are now doing.  For when you see that
preachers of the will of God have come amongst you, because their speech
makes no show of knowledge of the grammatical art, but in simple and
unpolished language they set before you the divine commands, so that all
who hear may be able to follow and to understand the things that are
spoken, you deride the ministers and messengers of your salvation, not
knowing that it is the condemnation of you who think yourselves skilful
and eloquent, that rustic and barbarous men have the knowledge of the
truth; whereas, when it has come to you, it is not even received as a
guest, while, if your intemperance and lust did not oppose, it ought to
have been a citizen and a native.  Thus you are convicted of not being
friends of truth and philosophers, but followers of boasting and vain
speakers.  Ye think that truth dwells not in simple, but in ingenious
and subtle words, and produce countless thousands of words which are not
to be rated at the worth of one word.  What, then, do ye think will
become of you, all ye crowd of Greeks, if there is to be, as he says, a
judgment of God?  But now give over laughing at this man to your own
destruction, and let any one of you who pleases answer me; for, indeed,
by your barking you annoy the ears even of those who desire to be saved,
and by your clamour you turn aside to the fall of infidelity the minds
that are prepared for faith.  What pardon can there be for you who
deride and do violence to the messenger of the truth when he offers to
you the knowledge of God? whereas, even if he brought you nothing of
truth, yet, even for the kindness of his intentions towards you, you
ought to receive with gratitude and welcome.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](0080072)
