[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080009)  [Next](0080011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c29"><span
id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>VI.—The Testament of Zebulun Concerning
Compassion and Mercy.</span>

<span id="iii.viii-p2"></span>1.  <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.viii-p2.1"></span>The</span> record of Zebulun, which he
enjoined his children in the hundred <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) and fourteenth year of his life,
thirty-two years after the death of Joseph.  And he said to them: 
Hearken to me sons of Zebulun, attend to the words of your father.  I am
Zebulun, a good gift <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) to my
parents.  For when I was born our father was increased very exceedingly,
both in flocks and herds, when with the streaked rods he had his
portion.  I know not, my children, that in all my days I have sinned,
save only in thought.  Nor do I remember that I have done any iniquity,
except the sin of ignorance which I committed against Joseph; for I
screened my brethren, not telling to my father what had been done.  And
I wept sore in secret, for I feared my brethren, because they had all
agreed together, that if any one should declare the secret, he should be
slain with the sword.  But when they wished to kill him, I adjured them
much with tears not to be guilty of this iniquity.

<span id="iii.viii-p5"></span>2.  For Simeon and Gad came against Joseph
to kill him.  And Joseph fell upon his face, and said unto them, Pity
me, my brethren, have compassion upon the bowels of Jacob our father: 
lay not upon me your hands to shed innocent blood, for I have not sinned
against you; yea, if I have sinned, with chastening chastise me, but lay
not upon me your hand, for the sake of Jacob our father.  And as he
spoke these words, I pitied him and began to weep, and my heart melted
within me, and all the substance of my bowels was loosened within my
soul.  And Joseph also wept, and I too wept with him; and my heart
throbbed fast, and the joints of my body trembled, and I was not able to
stand.  And when he saw me weeping with him, and them coming against him
to slay him, he fled behind me, beseeching them.  And Reuben rose and
said, My brethren, let us not slay him, but let us cast him into one of
these dry pits which our fathers digged and found no water.  For for
this cause the Lord forbade that water should rise up in them, in order
that Joseph might be preserved; and the Lord appointed it so, until they
sold him to the Ishmaelites.

<span id="iii.viii-p6"></span>3.  For in the price of Joseph, my
children, I had no share; but Simeon and Gad and six other of our
brethren took the price of Joseph, and bought sandals <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) for themselves, their wives, and their
children, saying, We will not eat of it, for it is the price of our
brother’s blood, but will tread it down under foot, because he said that
he was king over us, and so let us see what his dreams mean.  Therefore
is it written in the writing of the law of Enoch, that whosoever will
not raise up seed to his brother, his sandal shall be unloosed, and they
shall spit into his face. <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131)   And
the brethren of Joseph wished not that their brother should live, and
the Lord loosed unto them the sandal of Joseph.  For when they came into
Egypt they were unloosed by the servants of Joseph before the gate, and
so made obeisance to Joseph after the fashion of Pharaoh.  And not only
did they make obeisance to him, but were spit upon also, falling down
before him forthwith, and so they were put to shame before the
Egyptians; for after this the Egyptians heard all the evils which we had
done to Joseph.

<span id="iii.viii-p9"></span>4.  After these things they brought forth
food; for I through two days and two nights tasted nothing, through pity
for Joseph.  And Judah ate not with them, but watched the pit; for he
feared lest Simeon and Gad should run back and slay him.  And when they
saw that I also ate not, <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span
id="iii.viii-Page_24"></span>they set me to watch him until he was
sold.  And he remained in the pit three days and three nights, and so
was sold famishing.  And when Reuben heard that while he was away Joseph
had been sold, he rent his clothes about him, and mourned, saying, How
shall I look in the face of Jacob my father?  And he took the money, and
ran after the merchants, and found no one; for they had left the main
road, and journeyed hastily through rugged byways. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132)   And Reuben ate no food on that day. 
Dan therefore came to him, and said, Weep not, neither grieve; for I
have found what we can say to our father Jacob.  Let us slay a kid of
the goats, and dip in it the coat of Joseph; and we will say, Look, if
this is the coat of thy son:  for they stripped off from Joseph the coat
of our father when they were about to sell him, and put upon him an old
garment of a slave.  Now Simeon had the coat, and would not give it up,
wishing to rend it with his sword; for he was angry that Joseph lived,
and that he had not slain him.  Then we all rose up together against
him, and said, If thou give it not up, we will say that thou alone didst
this wickedness in Israel; and so he gave it up, and they did even as
Dan had said.

<span id="iii.viii-p11"></span>5.  And now, my children, I bid you to
keep the commands of the Lord, and to show mercy upon your neighbour,
and to have compassion towards all, not towards men only, but also
towards beasts.  For for this thing’s sake the Lord blessed me; and when
all my brethren were sick I escaped without sickness, for the Lord
knoweth the purposes of each.  Have therefore compassion in your hearts,
my children, because even as a man doeth to his neighbour, even so also
will the Lord do to him.  For the sons of my brethren were sickening,
were dying on account of Joseph, because they showed not mercy in their
hearts; but my sons were preserved without sickness, as ye know.  And
when I was in Canaan, by the sea-coast, I caught spoil of fish for Jacob
my father; and when many were choked in the sea, I abode unhurt.

<span id="iii.viii-p12"></span>6.  I was the first who made a boat to
sail upon the sea, for the Lord gave me understanding and wisdom
therein; and I let down a rudder behind it, and I stretched a sail on an
upright mast in the midst; and sailing therein along the shores, I
caught fish for the house of my father until we went into Egypt; and
through compassion, I gave of my fish to every stranger.  And if any man
were a stranger, or sick, or aged, I boiled the fish and dressed them
well, and offered them to all men as every man had need, bringing them
together and having compassion upon them.  Wherefore also the Lord
granted me to take much fish:  for he that imparteth unto his neighbour,
receiveth manifold more from the Lord.  For five years I caught fish,
and gave thereof to every man whom I saw, and brought sufficient for all
the house of my father.  In the summer I caught fish, and in the winter
I kept sheep with my brethren.

<span id="iii.viii-p13"></span>7.  Now I will declare unto you what I
did, I saw a man in distress and nakedness in wintertime, and had
compassion upon him, and stole away <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) a garment secretly from my house, and
gave it to him who was in distress.  Do you therefore, my children, from
that which God bestoweth upon you, show compassion and mercy impartially
to all men, and give to every man with a good heart.  And if ye have not
at the time wherewith to give to him that asketh you, have compassion
for him in bowels of mercy.  I know that my hand found not at the time
wherewith to give to him that asked me, and I walked with him weeping
for more than seven furlongs, and my bowels yearned towards him unto
compassion.

<span id="iii.viii-p15"></span>8.  Have therefore yourselves also, my
children, compassion towards every man with mercy, that the Lord also
may have compassion upon you, and have mercy upon you; because also in
the last days God sendeth His compassion on the earth, and wheresoever
He findeth bowels of mercy, He dwelleth in him.  For how much compassion
a man hath upon his neighbours, so much also hath the Lord upon him. 
For when we went down into Egypt, Joseph bore no malice against us, and
when he saw me he was filled with compassion.  And looking towards him,
do ye also, my children, approve yourselves without malice, and love one
another; and reckon not each one the evil of his brother, for this
breaketh unity, and divideth all kindred, and troubleth the soul:  for
he who beareth malice hath not bowels of mercy.

<span id="iii.viii-p16"></span>9.  Mark the waters, that they flow
together, and sweep along stones, trees, sand; but if they are divided
into many streams, the earth sucketh them up, and they become of no
account.  So also shall ye be if ye be divided.  Divide not yourselves
into two heads, for everything which the Lord made hath but one head; He
gave two shoulders, hands, feet, but all the members are subject unto
the one head.  I have learnt by the writing of my fathers, that in the
last days ye will depart from the Lord, and be divided in Israel, and ye
will follow two kings, and will work every abomination, and every idol
will ye worship, and your enemies shall lead you captive, and ye shall
dwell among the nations with all infirmities and tribulations and
anguish of soul.  And after these things ye will remember the Lord, and
will repent, and He will lead you back; for He is <span id="page_25">p.
25</span> <span id="iii.viii-Page_25"></span>merciful and full of
compassion, not imputing evil to the sons of men, because they are
flesh, and the spirits of error deceive them in all their doings.  And
after these things shall the Lord Himself arise to you, <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) the Light of righteousness, and
healing <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) and compassion shall be
upon His wings.  He shall redeem all captivity of the sons of men from
Beliar, and every spirit of error shall be trodden down.  And He shall
bring back all the nations to zeal for Him, and ye shall see God in the
fashion of a man <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) whom the Lord
shall choose, Jerusalem is His name.  And again with the wickedness of
your words will ye provoke Him to anger, and ye shall be cast away, even
unto the time of consummation.

<span id="iii.viii-p20"></span>10.  And now, my children, grieve not
that I am dying, nor be troubled in that I am passing away from you. 
For I shall arise once more in the midst of you, as a ruler in the midst
of his sons; and I will rejoice in the midst of my tribe, as many as
have kept the law of the Lord, and the commandments of Zebulun their
father. <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137)   But upon the ungodly
shall the Lord bring everlasting fire, and will destroy them throughout
all generations.  I am hastening away unto my rest, as did my fathers;
but do ye fear the Lord your God with all your strength all the days of
your life.  And when he had said these things he fell calmly asleep, and
his sons laid him in a coffin; and afterwards they carried him up to
Hebron, and buried him with his fathers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_128"></span>[23:129](0080010.htm#fr_128) <span
id="iii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p3"></span> The Ox. <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.viii-p3.1"></span>ms</span>. reads 150, and refers the event to
two years after Joseph’s death.  The text of the Cam. <span
class="c9"><span id="iii.viii-p3.2"></span>ms</span>. gives an
impossible result here, as it would make Zebulun twenty-eight years
younger than Joseph, who died at the age of 110.  According to the Ox.
<span class="c9"><span id="iii.viii-p3.3"></span>ms.</span>, Reuben (cf.
c. 1) and Zebulun would die in the same year, the former at 125, the
latter 150.  A comparison of *Test. Reub*., c. 1 shows the most probable
solution to be to give the numerals, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii-p3.4"></span>ριδ', β'</span>.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[23:130](0080010.htm#fr_129) <span
id="iii.viii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p4"></span> The derivation of Zebulun seems to be
from <span class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.viii-p4.1"></span>לבז</span>, a
collateral form of <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.viii-p4.2"></span>דבז</span>, to give.  Hence Leah plays on the
double meaning of the former verb, [Gen. xxx.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#020)<span id="iii.viii-p4.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[23:131](0080010.htm#fr_130) <span
id="iii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p7"></span> Cf. the Targum Ps. Jon. on [Gen. xxxvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028)<span id="iii.viii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[23:132](0080010.htm#fr_131) <span
id="iii.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p8"></span> \[[Deut.
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#009)<span id="iii.viii-p8.1"></span>. 
See Lardner on the *animus* of these quotations from Enoch, as it
strikes him, vol. ii. p. 350.\]

<span id="fn_132"></span>[24:133](0080010.htm#fr_132) <span
id="iii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p10"></span> Cam. <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.viii-p10.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii-p10.2"></span>διὰ τραγλοκολπητῶν</span> ; Ox. <span
class="c9"><span id="iii.viii-p10.3"></span>ms.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii-p10.4"></span>διὰ τρωγλοδυτῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[24:134](0080010.htm#fr_133) <span
id="iii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p14"></span> \[“Finis *non* determinat probitatem
actus.”\]

<span id="fn_134"></span>[25:135](0080010.htm#fr_134) <span
id="iii.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p17"></span> [Mal. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="iii.viii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[25:136](0080010.htm#fr_135) <span
id="iii.viii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p18"></span> The Ox. <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.viii-p18.1"></span>ms.</span> reads:  “And ye shall return from
your land, and ye shall see the Lord in Jerusalem for His name’s sake.” 
\[[Heb. vii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#002)<span
id="iii.viii-p18.2"></span>.  At least, <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.viii-p18.3"></span>Salem</span> is His name.\]

<span id="fn_136"></span>[25:137](0080010.htm#fr_136) <span
id="iii.viii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p19"></span> \[Another of those unequivocal passages
which refute Lardner’s charge of “Unitarianism” in this book.\]

<span id="fn_137"></span>[25:138](0080010.htm#fr_137) <span
id="iii.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p21"></span> \[[Ezek.
48:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#027)<span id="iii.viii-p21.1"></span>. 
An important example of Hebrew exposition of this prophet.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Testament VII](0080011)
