[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080847)  [Next](0080849) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.x.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.x.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.x.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—The Remedy.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.x.iii-p2"></span>“Now I have been told, that after he
had sacrificed an ox he feasted you in the middle of the forum, and that
you, being carried away with much wine, made friends with not only the
evil demons, but their prince also, and that in this way the most of you
were seized by these sicknesses, unwittingly drawing upon yourselves
with your own hands the sword of destruction.  For the demons would
never have had power over you, had not you first supped with their
prince.  For thus from the beginning was a law laid by God, the Creator
of all things, on each of the two princes, him of the right hand and him
of the left, that neither should have power over any one whom they might
wish to benefit or to hurt, unless first he had sat down at the same
table with them.  As, then, when you partook of meat offered to idols,
you became servants to the prince of evil, in like manner, if you cease
from these things, and flee for refuge to God through the good Prince of
His right hand, honouring Him without sacrifices, by doing whatsoever He
wills, know of a truth that not only will your bodies be healed, but
your souls also will become healthy.  For He only, destroying with His
left hand, can quicken with His right; He only can both smite and raise
the fallen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](0080849)
