[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080506)  [Next](0080508) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span id="page_192">p.
192</span> <span id="vi.iii.xi.xxxviii-Page_192"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="vi.iii.xi.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter
XXXVIII.—“Angels Unawares.”</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xxxviii-p2"></span>When Peter had said this, the
crowds dispersed; and when we also were intending to go to our lodging,
the master of the house said to us: <span
id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855)   “It is base and wicked that such and
so great men should stay in a hostelry, when I have almost my whole
house empty, and very many beds spread, and all necessary things
provided.”  But when Peter refused, the wife of the householder
prostrated herself before him with her children, and besought him,
saying, “I entreat you, stay with us.”  But not even so did Peter
consent, until the daughter of those people who asked him, who had been
for a long time vexed with an unclean spirit, and bound with chains, who
had been shut up in a closet, having had the demon expelled from her,
and the door of the closet opened, came with her chains and fell down at
Peter’s feet, saying:  “It is right, my lord, that you keep my
deliverance-feast here to-day, and not sadden me or my parents.”  But
when Peter asked what was the meaning of her chains and of her words,
her parents, gladdened beyond hope by the recovery of their daughter,
were, as it were, thunderstruck with astonishment, and could not speak;
but the servants who were in attendance said:  “This girl has been
possessed of a demon from her seventh year, and used to cut, and bite,
and even to tear in pieces, all who attempted to approach her, and this
she has never ceased to do for twenty years till the present time.  Nor
could any one cure her, or even approach her, for she rendered many
helpless, and even destroyed some; for she was stronger than any man,
being doubtless strengthened by the power of the demon.  But now, as you
see, the demon has fled from your presence, and the doors which were
shut with the greatest strength have been opened, and she herself stands
before you in her sound mind, asking of you to make the day of her
recovery gladsome both to herself and her parents, and to remain with
them.”  When one of the servants had made this statement, and the chains
of their own accord were loosened from her hands and feet, Peter, being
sure that it was by his means that soundness was restored to the girl,
consented to remain with them.  And he ordered those also who had
remained in the lodging, with his wife, to come over; and every one of
us having got a separate bed-chamber, we remained; and having taken food
in the usual manner, and given praises to God, we went to sleep in our
several apartments.

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xxxviii-p4"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_855"></span>[192:856](0080507.htm#fr_855) <span
id="vi.iii.xi.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xxxviii-p3"></span> \[This chapter is peculiar to
the *Recognitions*; the detailed description of the exorcism is a
curious piece of literature.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book X](0080508)
