[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080980)  [Next](0080982) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xv.x"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xv.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—The Seeker Lost.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xv.x-p2"></span>“Then my father, hearing this, and being
stupefied with excessive grief, and not knowing where to go in quest of
them, used to take me with him and go down to the harbour, and inquire
of many where any one of them had seen or heard of a shipwreck four
years ago.  And one turned one place, and another another.  Then he
inquired whether they had seen the body of a woman with *two* children
cast ashore.  And when they told him they had seen many corpses. in many
places, my father groaned at the information.  But, with his bowels
yearning, he asked unreasonable questions, that he might try to search
so great an extent of sea.  However, he was pardonable, because, through
affection towards those whom he was seeking for, he fed on vain hopes. 
And at last, placing me under guardians, and leaving me at Rome when I
was twelve years old, he himself, weeping, went down to the harbour, and
went on board ship, and set out upon the search.  And from that day till
this I have neither received a letter from him, nor do I know whether he
be alive or dead.  But I rather suspect that he is dead somewhere,
either overcome by grief, or perished by shipwreck.  And the proof of
that is that it is now the twentieth year that I have heard no true
intelligence concerning him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](0080982)
