[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080422)  [Next](0080424) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xvii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—Doctrine of Atoms
Untenable.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xvii-p2"></span>“But you will say, according to the
opinion of Epicurus, that successions of atoms coming in a ceaseless
course, and mixing with one another, and conglomerating through
unlimited and endless periods of time, are made solid bodies.  I do not
treat this opinion as a pure fiction, and that, too, a badly contrived
one; but let us examine it, whatever be its character, and see if what
is said can stand.  For they say that those corpuscles, which they call
atoms, are of different qualities:  that some are moist, and therefore
heavy, and tending downwards; others dry and earthy, and therefore still
heavy; but others fiery, and therefore always pushing upwards; others
cold and inert, and always remaining in the middle.  Since then some, as
being fiery, always tend upward, and others, as being moist and dry,
always downwards, and others keep a middle and unequal course, how could
they meet together and form one body?  For if any one throw down from a
height small pieces of straw, for example, and pieces of lead of the
same size, will the light straws be able to keep up with the pieces of
lead, though they be equal in size?  Nay; the heavier reach the bottom
far more quickly.  So also atoms, though they be equal in size, yet,
being unequal in weight, the lighter will never be able to keep pace
with the heavier; but if they cannot keep pace, certainly neither can
they be mixed or form one body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](0080424)
