[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080411)  [Next](0080413) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—The Other Side of the Question
Stated.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.vi-p2"></span>When Niceta had thus spoken, those who
had assembled conversed among themselves:  “Is this that Peter of whom
we heard, the most approved disciple of Him who appeared in Judæa, and
wrought many signs and miracles?”  And they stood gazing upon him with
great fear and veneration, as conferring upon the Lord the honour of His
good servant.  Which when Peter observed, he said to them:  “Let us hear
with all attention, holding an impartial judgment of what shall be said
by each; and after their encounter we also shall add what may seem
necessary.”  And when Peter had said this, the crowds rejoiced.  Then
Niceta began to speak as follows:  “You have laid down, my father, that
the world is not governed by the providence of God, but that all things
are subject to *genesis*, whether the things which relate to the
dispositions, or those which relate to the doings of every one.  This I
could answer immediately; but because it is right to observe order, we
also lay down what we hold, as you yourself requested should be done.  I
say that the world is governed by the providence of God, at least in
those things which need His government.  For He it is alone who holds
all things in His hand, who also made the world; the just God, who shall
at some time render to every one according to his deeds.  Now, then, you
have our position; go on as you please, either overthrowing mine or
establishing your own, that I may meet your statements.  Or if you wish
me to speak first, I shall not hesitate.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](0080413)
