[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080449)  [Next](0080451) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xliv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xliv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xliv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLIV.—Ordinate and
Inordinate.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xliv-p2"></span>Then the old man:  “I should like to
hear from you why those useless things are made by the will of that
supreme mind?”  “If,” said he, “it is fully manifest to you that there
is in them the work of mind and reason, then you will not hesitate to
say also why they were made, and to declare that they have been rightly
made.”  To this the old man answered:  “I am not able, my son, to say
that those things which seem formed by art are made by mind, by reason
of other things which we see to be done unjustly and disorderly in the
world.”  “If,” says Aquila, “those things which are done disorderly do
not allow you say that they are done by the providence of God, why do
not those things which are done orderly compel you to say that they are
done by God, and that irrational nature cannot produce a rational work? 
For it is certain, nor do we at all deny, that in this world some things
are done orderly, and some disorderly.  Those things, therefore, that
are done rationally, believe that they are done by providence; but those
that are done irrationally and inordinately, that they befall naturally,
and happen accidentally.  But I wonder that men do not perceive, that
where there is sense things may be done ordinately and inordinately, but
where there is no sense neither the one nor the other can be done; for
reason makes order, and the course of order necessarily produces
something inordinate, if anything contrary happen to disturb order.” 
Then the old man:  “This very thing I wish you to show me.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV](0080451)
