[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081376)  [Next](0081378) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxxv"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p1"></span> <span id="page_553">p. 553</span> <span
id="vii.xxxv-Page_553"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Martyrdom of the Holy and Glorious Apostle
Bartholomew.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxxv-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxv-p3.1"></span>Historians</span> declare that India is
divided into three parts; and the first is said to end at Ethiopia, and
the second at Media, and the third completes the country; and the one
portion of it ends in the dark, and the other in the ocean.  To this
India, then, the holy Bartholomew the apostle of Christ went, and took
up his quarters in the temple of Astaruth, and lived there as one of the
pilgrims and the poor.  In this temple, then, there was an idol called
Astaruth, which was supposed to heal the infirm, but rather the more
injured all.  And the people were in entire ignorance of the true God;
and from want of knowledge, but rather from the difficulty *of going to
any other*, they all fled for refuge to the false god.  And he brought
upon them troubles, infirmities, damage, violence, and much affliction;
and when any one sacrificed to him, the demon, retiring, appeared to
give a cure to the person in trouble; and the foolish people, seeing
this, believed in him.  But the demons retired, not because they wished
to cure men, but that they might the more assail them, and rather have
them altogether in their power; and thinking that they were cured
bodily, those that sacrificed to them were the more diseased in soul.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p4"></span>And it came to pass, that while the holy
apostle of Christ, Bartholomew, stayed there, Astaruth gave no response,
and was not able for curing.  And when the temple was full of sick
persons, who sacrificed to him daily, Astaruth could give no response;
and sick persons who had come from far countries were lying there. 
When, therefore, in that temple not even one of the idols was able to
give a response, and was of benefit neither to those that sacrificed to
them nor to those who were in the agonies of death on their account,
they were compelled to go to another city, where there was a temple of
idols, where their great and most eminent god was called Becher. <span
id="fr_2408"></span>[2409](#fn_2408)   And having there sacrificed, they
demanded, asking why their god Astaruth had not responded to them.  And
the demon Becher answered and said to them:  From the day and hour that
the true God, who dwelleth in the heavens, sent his apostle Bartholomew
into the regions here, your god Astaruth is held fast by chains of fire,
and can no longer either speak or breathe.  They said to him:  And who
is this Bartholomew?  He answered:  He is the friend of the Almighty
God, and has just come into these parts, that he may take away all the
worship of the idols in the name of his God.  And the servants of the
Greeks said to him:  Tell us what he is like, that we may be able to
find him.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p6"></span>And the demon answered and said:  He has
black hair, a shaggy head, a fair skin, <span
id="fr_2409"></span>[2410](#fn_2409) large eyes, beautiful nostrils, his
ears hidden by the hair of his head, with a yellow beard, a few grey
hairs, of middle height, and neither tall nor stunted, but middling,
clothed with a white undercloak bordered with purple, and upon his
shoulders a very white cloak; and his clothes have been worn twenty-six
years, but neither are they dirty, nor have they waxed old.  Seven
times <span id="fr_2410"></span>[2411](#fn_2410) a day he bends the knee
to the Lord, and seven times <span id="fr_2411"></span>[2412](#fn_2411)
a night does he pray to God.  His voice is like the sound of a strong
trumpet; there go along with him angels of God, who allow him neither to
be weary, nor to hunger, nor to thirst; his face, and his soul, and his
heart are always glad and rejoicing; he foresees everything, he knows
and speaks every tongue of every nation.  And behold now, as soon as you
ask me, and I answer you about him, behold, he knows; for the angels of
the Lord tell him; and if you wish to seek him, if he is willing he will
appear to you; but if he shall not be willing, you will not be able to
find him.  I entreat you, therefore, if you shall find him, entreat him
not to come here, lest his angels do to me as they have done to my
brother Astaruth.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p10"></span>And when the demon had said this, he held
his peace.  And they returned, and set to work to look into every face
of the pilgrims and poor men, and for two days they could find him
nowhere.  And it came to pass, that one who was <span id="page_554">p.
554</span> <span id="vii.xxxv-Page_554"></span>a demoniac set to work to
cry out:  Apostle of the Lord, Bartholomew, thy prayers are burning me
up.  Then said the apostle to him:  Hold thy peace, and come out of
him.  And that very hour, the man who had suffered from the demon for
many years was set free.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p11"></span>And Polymius, the king of that country,
happened to be standing opposite the apostle; and he had a daughter a
demoniac, that is to say, a lunatic.  And he heard about the demoniac
that had been healed, and sent messengers to the apostle, saying:  My
daughter is grievously torn; I implore thee, therefore, as thou hast
delivered him <span id="fr_2412"></span>[2413](#fn_2412) who suffered
for many years, so also to order my daughter to be set free.  And the
apostle rose up, and went with them.  And he sees the king’s daughter
bound with chains, for she used to tear in pieces all her limbs; and if
any one came near her, she used to bite, and no one dared to come near
her.  The servants say to him:  And who is it that dares to touch her? 
The apostle answered them:  Loose her, and let her go.  They say to him
again:  We have her in our power when she is bound with all our force,
and dost thou bid us loose her?  The apostle says to them:  Behold, I
keep her enemy bound, and are you even now afraid of her?  Go and loose
her; and when she has partaken of food, let her rest, and early
to-morrow bring her to me.  And they went and did as the apostle had
commanded them; and thereafter the demon was not able to come near her.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p13"></span>Then the king loaded camels with gold and
silver, precious stones, pearls, and clothing, and sought to see the
apostle; and having made many efforts, and not found him, he brought
everything back to his palace.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p14"></span>And it happened, when the night had
passed, and the following day was dawning, the sun having risen, the
apostle appeared alone with the king in his bed-chamber, and said to
him:  Why didst thou seek me yesterday the whole day with gold and
silver, and precious stones, pearls, and raiment?  For these gifts those
persons long for who seek earthly things; but I seek nothing earthly,
nothing carnal.  Wherefore I wish to teach thee that the Son of God
deigned to be born as a man out of a virgin’s womb.  He was conceived in
the womb of the virgin; He took to Himself her who was always a virgin,
having within herself Him who made the heaven and the earth, the sea,
and all that therein is.  He, born of a virgin, like mankind, took to
Himself a beginning in time, He who has a beginning neither of times nor
days; but He Himself made every beginning, and everything created,
whether in things visible or invisible.  And as this virgin did not know
man, so she, preserving her virginity, vowed a vow <span
id="fr_2413"></span>[2414](#fn_2413) to the Lord God.  And she was the
first who did so.  For, from the time that man existed from the
beginning of the world, no woman made a vow of this mode of life; but
she, as she was the first among women who loved this in her heart, said,
I offer to Thee, O Lord, my virginity.  And, as I have said to thee,
none of mankind dared to speak this word; but she being called for the
salvation of many, observed this—that she might remain a virgin through
the love of God, pure and undefiled.  And suddenly, when she was shut up
in her chamber, the archangel Gabriel appeared, gleaming like the sun;
and when she was terrified at the sight, the angel said to her, Fear
not, Mary; for thou hast found favour in the sight of the Lord, and thou
shalt conceive.  And she cast off fear, and stood up, and said, How
shall this be to me, since I know not man?  The angel answered her, The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall
overshadow thee; wherefore also that holy thing which is born of thee
shall be called Son of God. <span id="fr_2414"></span>[2415](#fn_2414)  
Thus, therefore, when the angel had departed from her, she escaped the
temptation of the devil, who deceived the first man when at rest.  For,
having tasted of the tree of disobedience, when the woman said to him,
Eat, he ate; and thus the first man was cast out of paradise, and
banished to this life.  From him have been born the whole human race. 
Then the Son of God having been born of the virgin, and having become
perfect man, and having been baptized, and after His baptism having
fasted forty days, the tempter came and said to Him:  If thou art the
Son of God, tell these stones to become loaves.  And He answered:  Not
on bread alone shall man live, but by every word of God. <span
id="fr_2415"></span>[2416](#fn_2415)   Thus therefore the devil, who
through eating had conquered the first man, was conquered through the
fasting of the second man; and as he through want of self-restraint had
conquered the first man, the son of the virgin earth, so we shall
conquer through the fasting of the second Adam, the Son of the Virgin
Mary.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p18"></span>The king says to him:  And how is it that
thou saidst just now that she was the first virgin of whom was born God
and man?  And the apostle answered:  I give thanks to the Lord that thou
hearest me gladly.  The first man, then, was called Adam; he was formed
out of the earth.  And the earth, his mother out of which he was, was
virgin, because it had neither been polluted by the blood of man nor
opened for the burial of any one.  The earth, then, was like the virgin,
in order that he who conquered the <span id="page_555">p. 555</span>
<span id="vii.xxxv-Page_555"></span>son of the virgin earth might be
conquered by the Son of the Virgin Mary.  And, behold, he did conquer;
for his wicked craft, through the eating of the tree by which man, being
deceived, came forth from paradise, kept paradise shut.  Thereafter this
Son of the virgin conquered all the craft of the devil.  And his craft
was such, that when he saw the Son of the virgin fasting forty days, he
knew in truth that He was the true God.  The true God and man,
therefore, hath not given Himself out to be known, except to those who
are pure in heart, <span id="fr_2416"></span>[2417](#fn_2416) and who
serve Him by good works.  The devil himself, therefore, when he saw that
after the forty days He was again hungry, was deceived into thinking
that He was not God, and said to Him, Why hast thou been hungry? tell
these stones to become loaves, and eat.  And the Lord answered him,
Listen, devil; although thou mayst lord it over man, because he has not
kept the commandment of God.  I have fulfilled the righteousness of God
in having fasted, and shall destroy thy power, so that thou shalt no
longer lord it over man.  And when he saw himself conquered, he again
takes Jesus to an exceeding high mountain, and shows Him all the
kingdoms of the world, and says, All these will I give thee, if thou
wilt fall down and worship me.  The Lord says to him, Get thee behind
me, Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and
Him only shalt thou serve.  And there was a third temptation for the
Lord; for he takes Him up to the pinnacle of the temple, and says, If
thou art the Son of God, cast thyself down.  The Lord says to him, Thou
shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.  And the devil disappeared.  And he
indeed that once conquered Adam, the son of the virgin earth, was thrice
conquered by Christ, the Son of the Virgin Mary.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p20"></span>And when the Lord had conquered the
tyrant, He sent His apostles into all the world, that He might redeem
His people from the deception of the devil; and one of these I am, an
apostle of Christ.  On this account we seek not after gold and silver,
but rather despise them, because we labour to be rich in that place
where the kingdom of Him alone endureth <span
id="fr_2417"></span>[2418](#fn_2417) for ever, where neither trouble,
nor grief, nor groaning, nor death, has place; where there is eternal
blessedness, and ineffable joy, and everlasting exultation, and
perpetual repose.  Wherefore also the demon sitting in your temple, who
makes responses to you, is kept in chains through the angel of the Lord
who has sent me.  Because if thou shalt be baptized, and wishest thyself
to be enlightened, I will make thee behold Him, and learn from how great
evils thou hast been redeemed.  At the same time hear also by what means
he injures all those who are lying sick in the temple.  The devil
himself by his own art causes the men to be sick, and again to be
healed, in order that they may the more believe in the idols, and in
order that he may have place the more in their souls, in order that they
may say to the stock and the stone, Thou art our God. <span
id="fr_2418"></span>[2419](#fn_2418)   But that demon who dwells in the
idol is held in subjection, conquered by me, and is able to give no
response to those who sacrifice and pray there.  And if thou wishest to
prove that it is so, I order him to return into the idol, and I will
make him confess with his own mouth that he is bound, and able to give
no response.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p23"></span>The king says to him:  To-morrow, at the
first hour of the day, the priests are ready to sacrifice in the temple,
and I shall come there, and shall be able to see this wonderful work.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p24"></span>And it came to pass on the following day,
as they were sacrificing, the devil began to cry out:  Refrain, ye
wretched ones, from sacrificing to me, lest ye suffer worse for my sake;
because I am bound in fiery chains, and kept in subjection by an angel
of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, whom the Jews crucified:  for,
being afraid of him, they condemned him to death.  And he put to death
Death himself, our king, and he bound our prince in chains of fire; and
on the third day, having conquered death and the devil, rose in glory,
and gave the sign of the cross to his apostles, and sent them out into
the four quarters of the world; and one of them is here just now, who
has bound me, and keeps me in subjection.  I implore you, therefore,
supplicate him on my account, that he may set me free to go into other
habitations.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p25"></span>Then the apostle answered:  Confess,
unclean demon, who is it that has injured all those that are lying here
from heavy diseases?  The demon answered:  The devil, our ruler, he who
is bound, he sends us against men, that, having first injured their
bodies, we may thus also make an assault upon their souls when they
sacrifice to us.  For then we have complete power over them, when they
believe in us and sacrifice to us.  And when, on account of the mischief
done to them, we retire, we appear curing them, and are worshipped by
them as gods; but in truth we are demons, and the servants of him who
was crucified, the Son of the virgin, have bound us.  For from that day
on which the Apostle Bartholomew came I am punished, kept bound in
chains of fire.  And for this reason I speak, because he has commanded
me.  At the same time, I dare not utter more when the apostle is
present, neither I nor our rulers.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p26"></span>The apostle says to him:  Why dost thou
not <span id="page_556">p. 556</span> <span
id="vii.xxxv-Page_556"></span>save all that have come to thee?  The
demon says to him:  When we injure their bodies, unless we first injure
their souls, we do not let their bodies go.  The apostle says to him: 
And how do you injure their souls?  The demon answered him:  When they
believe that we are gods, and sacrifice to us, God withdraws from those
who sacrifice, and we do not take away the sufferings of their bodies,
but retire into their souls.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p27"></span>Then the apostle says to the people: 
Behold, the god whom you thought to cure you, does the more mischief to
your souls and bodies.  Hear even now your Maker who dwells in the
heavens, and do not believe in lifeless stones and stocks.  And if you
wish that I should pray for you, and that all these may receive health,
take down this idol, and break it to pieces; and when you have done
this, I will sanctify this temple in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ;
and having baptized all of you who are in it in the baptism of the Lord,
and sanctified you, I will save all.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p28"></span>Then the king gave orders, and all the
people brought ropes and crowbars, and were not at all able to take down
the idol.  Then the apostle says to them:  Unfasten the ropes.  And when
they had unfastened them, he said to the demon dwelling in it:  In the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, come out of this idol, and go into a
desert place, where neither winged creature utters a cry, nor voice of
man has ever been heard.  And straightway he arose at the word of the
apostle, and lifted it up from its foundations; and in that same hour
all the idols that were in that place were broken to pieces.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p29"></span>Then all cried out with one voice,
saying:  He alone is God Almighty whom Bartholomew the apostle
proclaims.  Then the holy Bartholomew, having spread forth his hands to
heaven, said:  God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, who for the
salvation of men hast sent forth Thine only begotten Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ, in order that He might redeem by His own blood all of us
enslaved by sin, and declare us to be Thy sons, that we may know Thee,
the true God, that Thou existest always to eternity God without end: 
one God, the Father, acknowledged in Son and Holy Spirit; one God, the
Son, glorified in Father and Holy Spirit; one God, the Holy Spirit,
worshipped in Father and Son; and acknowledged to be truly one, <span
id="fr_2419"></span>[2420](#fn_2419) the Father unbegotten, the Son
begotten, the Holy Spirit proceeding; and in Thee the Father, and in the
Holy Spirit, Thine only begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ is, in whose
name Thou hast given us power to heal the sick, to cure paralytics, to
expel demons, and raise the dead:  for He said to us, Verily I say unto
you, that whatever ye shall ask in my name ye shall receive. <span
id="fr_2420"></span>[2421](#fn_2420)   I entreat, then, that in His name
all this multitude may be saved, that all may know that Thou alone art
God in heaven, and in the earth, and in the sea, who seekest the
salvation of men through that same Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom Thou
livest and reignest in unity of the Holy Spirit for ever and ever.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p32"></span>And when all responded to the Amen,
suddenly there appeared an angel of the Lord, shining brighter than the
sun, winged, and other four angels holding up the four corners of the
temple; and with his finger the one sealed the temple and the people,
and said:  Thus saith the Lord who hath sent me, As you have all been
purified from all your infirmity, so also this temple shall be purified
from all uncleanness, and from the demons dwelling in it, whom the
apostle of God has ordered to go into a desert place; for so hath God
commanded me, that I may manifest Him to you.  And when ye behold Him,
fear nothing; but when I make the sign of the cross, so also do ye with
your finger seal your faces, and these evil things will flee from you. 
Then he showed them the demon who dwelt in the temple, like an
Ethiopian, black as soot; his face sharp like a dog’s, thin-cheeked,
with hair down to his feet, eyes like fire, sparks coming out of his
mouth; and out of his nostrils came forth smoke like sulphur, with wings
spined like a porcupine; and his hands were bound with fiery chains, and
he was firmly kept in.  And the angel of the Lord said to him:  As also
the apostle hath commanded, I let thee go; go where voice of man is not
heard, and be there until the great day of judgment.  And when he let
him go, he flew away, groaning and weeping, and disappeared.  And the
angel of the Lord went up into heaven in the sight of all.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p33"></span>Then the king, and also the queen, with
their two sons, and with all his people, and with all the multitude of
the city, and every city round about, and country, and whatever land his
kingdom ruled over, were saved, and believed, and were baptized in the
name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit.  And the king laid
aside his diadem, and followed Bartholomew the apostle of Christ.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p34"></span>And after these things the unbelievers of
the Greeks, having come together to Astreges <span
id="fr_2421"></span>[2422](#fn_2421) the king, who was the elder brother
of the king who had been baptized, say to him:  O king, thy brother
Polymius has become disciple to a certain magician, who has taken down
our temples, and broken our gods to pieces.  And while they were thus
speaking and weeping, behold, again there came also some others from the
cities round about, both priests <span
id="fr_2422"></span>[2423](#fn_2422) and people; and <span
id="page_557">p. 557</span> <span id="vii.xxxv-Page_557"></span>they set
about weeping and making accusations <span
id="fr_2423"></span>[2424](#fn_2423) before the king.  Then King
Astreges in a rage sent a thousand armed men along with those priests,
in order that, wherever they should find the apostle, they might bring
him to him bound.  And when they had done so, and found him, and brought
him, he says to him:  Art thou he who has perverted my brother from the
gods?  To whom the apostle answered:  I have not perverted him, but have
converted him to God.  The king says to him:  Art thou he who caused our
gods to be broken in pieces?  The apostle says to him:  I gave power to
the demons who were in them, and they broke in pieces the dumb and
senseless idols, that all men might believe in God Almighty, who
dwelleth in the heavens.  The king says to him:  As thou hast made my
brother deny his gods, and believe in thy God, so I also will make you
reject thy God and believe in my gods.  The apostle says to him:  If I
have bound and kept in subjection the god which thy brother worshipped,
and at my order the idols were broken in pieces, if thou also art able
to do the same to my God, thou canst persuade me also to sacrifice to
thy gods; but if thou canst do nothing to my God, I will break all thy
gods in pieces; but do thou believe in my God.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p38"></span>And when he had thus spoken, the king was
informed that this god Baldad <span id="fr_2424"></span>[2425](#fn_2424)
and all the other idols had fallen down, and were broken in pieces. 
Then the king rent the purple in which he was clothed, and ordered the
holy apostle Bartholomew to be beaten with rods; and after having been
thus scourged, to be beheaded.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p40"></span>And innumerable multitudes came from all
the cities, to the number of twelve thousand, who had believed in him
along with the king; and they took up the remains of the apostle with
singing of praise and with all glory, and they laid them in the royal
tomb, and glorified God.  And the king Astreges having heard of this,
ordered him to be thrown into the sea; and his remains were carried into
the island of Liparis.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p41"></span>And it came to pass on the thirtieth day
after the apostle was carried away, that the king Astreges was
overpowered by a demon and miserably strangled; and all the priests were
strangled by demons, and perished on account of their rising
against <span id="fr_2425"></span>[2426](#fn_2425) the apostle, and thus
died by an evil fate.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p43"></span>And there was great fear and trembling,
and all came to the Lord, and were baptized by the presbyters who had
been ordained by the holy apostle Bartholomew.  And according to the
commandment of the apostle, all the clergy of the people made King
Polymius bishop; and in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ he received
the grace of healing, and began to do signs.  And he remained in the
bishopric twenty years; and having prospered in all things, and governed
the church well, and guided it in right opinions, <span
id="fr_2426"></span>[2427](#fn_2426) he fell asleep in peace, and went
to the Lord:  to whom be glory and strength for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2408"></span>[553:2409](0081377.htm#fr_2408) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p5"></span> The history of Abdias gives the name as
Berith, after [Judg. ix. 46](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#046)<span
id="vii.xxxv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2409"></span>[553:2410](0081377.htm#fr_2409) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p7"></span> Lit., white flesh.

<span id="fn_2410"></span>[553:2411](0081377.htm#fr_2410) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p8"></span> Pseudo-Abdias says:  a hundred times.

<span id="fn_2411"></span>[553:2412](0081377.htm#fr_2411) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p9"></span> Pseudo-Abdias says:  a hundred times.

<span id="fn_2412"></span>[554:2413](0081377.htm#fr_2412) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p12"></span> Abdias calls him Pseustius.

<span id="fn_2413"></span>[554:2414](0081377.htm#fr_2413) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p15"></span> Or, prayed a prayer.

<span id="fn_2414"></span>[554:2415](0081377.htm#fr_2414) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p16"></span> Comp. [Luke i.
26-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026)<span
id="vii.xxxv-p16.1"></span>.  Abdias goes on:  He then, after His birth,
suffered Himself to be tempted by that devil who had overcome the first
man, persuading him to eat of the tree forbidden by God.

<span id="fn_2415"></span>[554:2416](0081377.htm#fr_2415) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p17"></span> Comp. [Luke iv.
1-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)<span id="vii.xxxv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2416"></span>[555:2417](0081377.htm#fr_2416) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p19"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxxv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2417"></span>[555:2418](0081377.htm#fr_2417) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p21"></span> Lit., reigneth.

<span id="fn_2418"></span>[555:2419](0081377.htm#fr_2418) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p22"></span> [Jer. ii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027)<span id="vii.xxxv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2419"></span>[556:2420](0081377.htm#fr_2419) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p30"></span> Or, unity.

<span id="fn_2420"></span>[556:2421](0081377.htm#fr_2420) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p31"></span> [Matt. xxi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#022)<span id="vii.xxxv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2421"></span>[556:2422](0081377.htm#fr_2421) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p35"></span> Abdias calls him Astyages; elsewhere he
is called Sanathrugus.

<span id="fn_2422"></span>[556:2423](0081377.htm#fr_2422) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p36"></span> Lit., no-priests—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxv-p36.1"></span>μιερεῖς</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxv-p36.2"></span>μὴ ἱερεῖς</span>—a name
given in scorn to heathen priests by Christian writers.

<span id="fn_2423"></span>[557:2424](0081377.htm#fr_2423) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p36.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p37"></span> Lit., calling out.

<span id="fn_2424"></span>[557:2425](0081377.htm#fr_2424) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p39"></span> Abdias calls him Vualdath.

<span id="fn_2425"></span>[557:2426](0081377.htm#fr_2425) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p42"></span> Or it may mean:  that the apostle might
be established.

<span id="fn_2426"></span>[557:2427](0081377.htm#fr_2426) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p44"></span> Or, in orthodoxy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts of the Holy Apostle Thaddæus.](0081378)
