[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081301)  [Next](0081303) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xv.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xv.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.</span>

<span id="vii.xv.ii-p2"></span>Annas and Caiaphas, Summas and Datam,
Gamaliel, Judas, Levi, Neptalim, Alexander and Jairus, and the rest of
the Jews, came to Pilate, accusing the Lord Jesus Christ of many things,
and saying:  We know him to be the son of Joseph the carpenter, born of
Mary; and he says that he is the Son of God, and a king.  Not only so,
but he also breaks the Sabbath, and wishes to do away with the law of
our fathers.  Pilate says:  What is it that he does, and wishes to
destroy the law?  The Jews say:  We have a law, not to heal any one on
the Sabbath; but he, by evil arts, heals on the Sabbath the lame and the
hunchbacked, the blind, the palsied, the lepers, and the demoniacs. 
Pilate says to them:  By what evil arts?  They say to him:  He is a
sorcerer; and by Beelzebub, prince of the demons, he casts out demons,
and they are all subject to him.  Pilate says to them:  It is not in an
unclean spirit to cast out demons, but in the god of Scolapius.

<span id="vii.xv.ii-p3"></span>The Jews say:  We pray thy majesty to set
him before thy tribunal to be heard.  Pilate, calling the Jews to him,
says to them:  How can I, seeing that I am a governor, <span
id="fr_1953"></span>[1954](#fn_1953) hear a king?  They say to him:  We
do not say that he is a king, but he himself says he is.  And Pilate,
calling a runner, says to him:  Let Jesus be brought in with kindness. 
And the runner, going out and recognising Him, adored Him, and spread on
the ground the cloak which he carried in his hand, saying:  My lord,
walk upon this, and come in, because the governor calls thee.  But the
Jews, seeing what the runner did, cried out against Pilate, saying:  Why
didst not thou make him come in by the voice of a crier, but by a
runner? for the runner, too, seeing him, has adored him, and has spread
out before him on the ground the cloak which he held in his hand, and
has said to him:  My lord, the governor calls thee.

<span id="vii.xv.ii-p5"></span><span id="page_440">p. 440</span> <span
id="vii.xv.ii-Page_440"></span>And Pilate, calling the runner, says to
him:  Wherefore hast thou done this, and honoured Jesus, who is called
Christ?  The runner says to him:  When thou didst send me into Jerusalem
to Alexander, I saw him sitting upon an ass, and the children of the
Hebrews breaking branches from the trees, strewing them in the way; and
others held branches in their hands; and others spread their garments in
the way, shouting and saying, Save, therefore, Thou who art in the
highest; blessed *is He* that cometh in the name of the Lord!

<span id="vii.xv.ii-p6"></span>The Jews cried out, saying against the
runner:  The children of the Hebrews indeed cried out in Hebrew.  How
canst thou, a Gentile, know this?  The runner says to them:  I asked one
of the Jews, and said, What is it that they cry out in Hebrew? and he
explained to me.  Pilate says to them:  And how did they cry out in
Hebrew?  The Jews said:  Osanna in the highest!  Pilate says to them: 
What is the meaning of Osanna in the highest?  They say to him:  Save
us, Thou who art in the highest.  Pilate says to them:  If you
yourselves bear witness to the terms and words in which the children
cried out, in what has the runner sinned?  And they were silent.  The
governor says to the runner:  Go out, and lead him in, in whatever way
thou wilt.  And the runner, going forth, did after the same form as
before, and says to Jesus:  My lord, go in, because the governor calls
thee.

<span id="vii.xv.ii-p7"></span>As Jesus, then, was going in, and the
standard-bearers bearing the standards, the heads of the standards were
bowed of themselves, and adored Jesus.  And the Jews, seeing the
standards, how they bowed themselves and adored Jesus, cried out the
more against the standard-bearers.  And Pilate says to the Jews:  Do you
not wonder at the way in which the standards have bowed themselves and
adored Jesus?  The Jews say to Pilate:  we saw how the men carrying the
standards bowed themselves and adored Jesus.  And the governor, calling
the standard-bearers, says to them:  Why have you so done?  They say to
Pilate:  We are Gentile men, and slaves of the temples:  how had
we <span id="fr_1954"></span>[1955](#fn_1954) to adore him? for when we
were holding the figures, <span id="fr_1955"></span>[1956](#fn_1955)
they themselves bowed and adored him.

<span id="vii.xv.ii-p10"></span>Pilate says to the chiefs of the
synagogue and the elders of the people:  Choose ye men powerful and
strong, and let them hold the standards, and let us see whether they
will bow of themselves.  And the elders of the Jews, taking twelve men
very strong and powerful, made them hold the standards, six and six; and
they stood before the governor’s tribunal.  Pilate says to the runner: 
Take out Jesus outside of the prætorium, and bring him in again, in
whatever way thou wilt.  And Jesus and the runner went outside of the
prætorium.  And Pilate, calling those who had formerly held the
standards, said to them:  By the health of Cæsar, if the standards do
not bow themselves when Jesus comes in, I will cut off your heads.  And
the governor ordered Jesus to come in a second time.  And the runner did
after the same form as before, and besought Jesus much that He would go
up and walk upon his cloak.  And He walked upon it, and went in.  And as
Jesus was going in, immediately the standards bowed themselves, and
adored Jesus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1953"></span>[439:1954](0081302.htm#fr_1953) <span
id="vii.xv.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.ii-p4"></span> The word in the original is the general
term *præses*, which the Vulgate uses for procurator.

<span id="fn_1954"></span>[440:1955](0081302.htm#fr_1954) <span
id="vii.xv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.ii-p8"></span> i.e., was it possible for us.

<span id="fn_1955"></span>[440:1956](0081302.htm#fr_1955) <span
id="vii.xv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.ii-p9"></span> *Vultus*.  He seems to have read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv.ii-p9.1"></span>πρόσωπα</span>, and not
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv.ii-p9.2"></span>προτομαι</span>, as
in the Greek.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](0081303)
