[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081464)  [Next](0081466) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_676">p. 676</span> <span
id="ix.ix.i-Page_676"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p1.1"></span>Ancient Syriac Documents.</span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.ix.i-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p3.1"></span>Acts of Sharbil, <span
id="fr_3146"></span>[3147](#fn_3146) Who Was a Priest of Idols, and Was
Converted to the Confession of Christianity in Christ. <span
id="fr_3147"></span>[3148](#fn_3147) </span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p7"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p7.1"></span>In</span> the fifteenth year of the Sovereign
Ruler <span id="fr_3148"></span>[3149](#fn_3148) Trajan Cæsar, <span
id="fr_3149"></span>[3150](#fn_3149) and in the third year of King Abgar
the Seventh, <span id="fr_3150"></span>[3151](#fn_3150) which is the
year 416 of the kingdom of Alexander king of the Greeks, and in the
priesthood of Sharbil and Barsamya, <span
id="fr_3151"></span>[3152](#fn_3151) Trajan Cæsar commanded the
governors of the countries under his dominion that sacrifices and
libations should be increased in all the cities of their administration,
and that those who did not sacrifice should be seized and delivered over
to stripes, and to *the tearing of* combs, and to bitter inflictions of
all *kinds of* tortures, and should afterwards receive the punishment of
the sword.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p12"></span>Now, when the command arrived at the town
of Edessa of the Parthians, there was a great festival, on the eighth of
Nisan, on the third *day* of the week:  the whole city was gathered
together by the great altar <span id="fr_3152"></span>[3153](#fn_3152)
which was in the middle of the town, opposite the Record office, <span
id="fr_3153"></span>[3154](#fn_3153) all the gods having been brought
together, and decorated, and sitting in honour, both Nebu and Bel
together with their fellows.  And all the priests were offering incense
of spices and libations, <span id="fr_3154"></span>[3155](#fn_3154) and
an odour of sweetness was diffusing itself around, and sheep and oxen
were being slaughtered, and the sound of the harp and the drum was heard
in the whole town.  And Sharbil was chief and ruler of all the priests;
and he was honoured above all his fellows, and was clad in splendid and
magnificent vestments; and a headband embossed with figures of gold was
set upon his head; and at the bidding of his word everything that he
ordered was done.  And Abgar the king, son of the gods, was standing at
the head of the people.  And they obeyed Sharbil, because he drew nearer
to all the gods than any of his fellows, and as being the one who
*according to* that which he had heard from the gods returned an answer
to every man.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p16"></span>And, while these things were being done by
the command of the king, Barsamya, the bishop of the Christians, went up
to Sharbil, he and Tiridath the elder and Shalula the deacon; and he
said to Sharbil, the high priest:  The King Christ, to whom belong
heaven and earth, will demand an account at thy hands of all these souls
against whom thou art sinning, and whom thou art misleading, and turning
away from the God of verity and of truth to idols *that are* made and
deceitful, which are not able to do anything with their hands—moreover
also thou hast no pity on thine own soul, which is destitute of the true
life of God; and thou declarest to this people that the dumb idols talk
with thee; and, as if thou wert listening to something from them, thou
puttest thine ear near to one and another of them, and sayest to this
people:  The god Nebu bade me say to you, “On account of your sacrifices
and oblations I cause peace in this your country;” and:  Bel saith, “I
cause great plenty in your land;” and those who hear *this* from thee do
not discern that thou art greatly deceiving them—because “they have a
mouth and speak not, and they have eyes and see not with them;” it is ye
who bear up them, and not they who bear up <span
id="fr_3155"></span>[3156](#fn_3155) you, as ye suppose; and it is ye
who set tables before them, and not <span id="page_677">p. 677</span>
<span id="ix.ix.i-Page_677"></span>they who feed you.  And now be
persuaded by me touching that which I say to thee and advise thee.  If
thou be willing to hearken to me, abandon idols made, and worship God
the Maker *of all things*, and His Son Jesus Christ.  Do not, because He
put on a body and became man and was stretched out on the cross of
death, be ashamed of Him and refuse to worship Him:  for, all these
things which He endured—it was for the salvation of men and for their
deliverance.  For this *One* who put on a body is God, the Son of God,
Son of the essence of His Father, and Son of the nature of Him who begat
Him:  for He is the adorable brightness of His Godhead, and is the
glorious manifestation of His majesty, and together with His Father He
existed from eternity and from everlasting, His arm, and His right hand,
and His power, and His wisdom, and His strength, and the living Spirit
which is from Him, the Expiator and Sanctifier of all His worshippers. 
These *are the* things which Palut taught us, with whom thy venerable
self <span id="fr_3156"></span>[3157](#fn_3156) was acquainted; and thou
knowest that Palut was the disciple of Addæus the apostle.  Abgar the
king also, who was older than this Abgar, who himself worshippeth idols
as well as thou, he too believed in the King Christ, the Son of Him whom
thou callest Lord of all the gods. <span
id="fr_3157"></span>[3158](#fn_3157)   For it is forbidden to Christians
to worship anything that is made, and is a creature, and in its nature
is not God:  even as *ye* worship idols made by men, <span
id="fr_3158"></span>[3159](#fn_3158) who themselves also are made and
created.  Be persuaded, therefore, by these things which I have said to
thee, which things are the belief of the Church:  for I know that all
this population are looking to thee, and I am well assured that, if thou
be persuaded, many also will persuaded with thee. <span
id="fr_3159"></span>[3160](#fn_3159)

<span id="ix.ix.i-p22"></span>Sharbil said to him:  Very acceptable to
me are these thy words which thou hast spoken before me; yea,
exceedingly acceptable are they to me.  But, as for me, I know that I am
outcast from <span id="fr_3160"></span>[3161](#fn_3160) all these
things, and there is no longer any remedy for me.  And, now that hope is
cut off from me, why weariest thou thyself about a man dead and
buried, <span id="fr_3161"></span>[3162](#fn_3161) for whose death there
is no hope of resuscitation?  For I am slain by paganism, and am become
a dead man, *the property* of the Evil One:  in sacrifices and libations
of imposture have I consumed all the days of my life.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p25"></span>And, when Barsamya the bishop heard these
things, <span id="fr_3162"></span>[3163](#fn_3162) he fell down before
his feet, and said to him:  There *is* hope for those who turn, and
healing for those that are wounded.  I myself will be surety to thee for
the abundant mercies of the Son Christ:  that He will pardon thee all
the sins which thou hast committed against Him, in that thou hast
worshipped and honoured His creatures instead of Himself.  For that
Gracious One, who extended Himself on the cross of death, will not
withhold His grace from the souls that comply *with His precepts* and
take refuge in His kindness which has been *displayed* towards us.  Like
as He did towards the robber, *so* is He able to do to thee, and also to
those who are like thee.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p27"></span>Sharbil said to him:  Thou, like a skilful
physician, who suffers pain from the pain of the afflicted, hast done
well in that thou hast been concerned about me.  But at present, because
it is the festival to-day of this people, of every one *of them*, I
cannot go down with thee to-day to the church.  Depart thou, and go down
with honour; and to-morrow at night I will come down to thee:  I too
have henceforth renounced for myself the gods made *with hands*, and I
will confess the Lord Christ, the Maker of all men.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p28"></span>And the next day Sharbil arose and went
down to Barsamya by night, he and Babai his sister; and he was received
by the whole church.  And he said to them:  Offer for me prayer and
supplication, that Christ may forgive me all the sins that I have
committed against Him in all this long course of years.  And, because
they were in dread of the persecutors, they arose and gave him the seal
of salvation, <span id="fr_3163"></span>[3164](#fn_3163) whilst he
confessed the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. <span
id="fr_3164"></span>[3165](#fn_3164)

<span id="ix.ix.i-p32"></span>And, when all the city had heard that he
was gone down to the church, there began to be a consternation among the
multitude; and they arose and went down to him, and saw him clad in the
fashion of the Christians. <span id="fr_3165"></span>[3166](#fn_3165)  
And he said to them:  May the Son Christ forgive me all the sins that I
have committed against you, and all *in* which I made you think that the
gods talked with me, whereas they did not talk; and, forasmuch as I have
been to you a cause of abomination, may I now be to you a cause of
good:  instead of worshipping, as formerly, idols made *with hands*, may
ye henceforth worship God the Maker.  And, when they had heard these
things, there remained with him a great congregation <span
id="page_678">p. 678</span> <span id="ix.ix.i-Page_678"></span>of men
and of women; and Labu also, and Hafsai, and Barcalba, and Avida, chief
persons of the city.  They all said to Sharbil:  Henceforth we also
renounce that which thou hast renounced, and we confess the King Christ,
whom thou hast confessed.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p34"></span>But Lysanias, <span
id="fr_3166"></span>[3167](#fn_3166) the judge of the country, when he
heard <span id="fr_3167"></span>[3168](#fn_3167) that Sharbil had done
this, <span id="fr_3168"></span>[3169](#fn_3168) sent by night <span
id="fr_3169"></span>[3170](#fn_3169) and carried him off from the
church.  And there went up with him many Christians.  And he sat down,
to hear him and to judge him, before the altar which is in the middle of
the town, where he used to sacrifice to the gods.  And he said to him: 
Wherefore hast thou renounced the gods, whom thou didst worship, and to
whom thou didst sacrifice, and to whom thou wast made chief of the
priests, and lo! dost today confess Christ, whom thou didst formerly
deny?  For see how those Christians, to whom thou art gone, renounce not
that which they have held, <span id="fr_3170"></span>[3171](#fn_3170)
like as thou hast renounced that in which thou wast born.  If thou art
assured of the gods, how is it that thou hast renounced them this day? 
But, if on the contrary thou art not assured, as thou declarest
concerning them, how is it that thou didst *once* sacrifice to them and
worship them?

<span id="ix.ix.i-p40"></span>Sharbil said:  When I was blinded in my
mind, I worshipped that which I knew not; but to-day, inasmuch as I have
obtained the clear eyes of the mind, it is henceforth impossible that I
should stumble at carved stones, or that I should any longer be the
cause of stumbling to others.  For it is a great disgrace to him whose
eyes are open, if he goes and falls into the pit of destruction.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p41"></span>The judge said:  Because thou hast been
priest of the venerable gods, and hast been partaker of the mystery of
those whom the mighty emperors <span
id="fr_3171"></span>[3172](#fn_3171) worship, I will have patience with
thee, in order that thou mayest be persuaded by me, and not turn away
from the service of the gods; but, if on the contrary thou shalt not be
persuaded by me, by those same gods whom thou hast renounced I swear
that, even as on a man that is a murderer, so will I inflict tortures on
thee, and will avenge on thee the wrong done to the gods, whom thou hast
rebelled against and renounced, and also the insult which thou hast
poured upon them; nor will I leave *untried* any kind of tortures which
I will not inflict on thee; and, like as thine honour formerly was
great, so will I make thine ignominy great this day.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p43"></span>Sharbil said:  I too, on my part, am not
content that thou shouldest look upon me as formerly, when I worshipped
gods made *with hands*; but look thou upon me to-day and question me as
a Christian man renouncing idols and confessing the King Christ.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p44"></span>The judge said:  How is it that thou art
not afraid of the emperors, nor moved to shame by those who are
listening to thy trial, that thou sayest, “I am a Christian”?  But
promise that thou wilt sacrifice to the gods, according to thy former
custom, so that thy honour may be great, as formerly—lest I make to
tremble at thee all those who have believed like thyself.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p45"></span>Sharbil said:  Of the King of kings I am
afraid, but at *any* king of earth I tremble not, nor yet at thy threats
towards me, which lo! thou utterest against the worshippers of Christ: 
whom I confessed yesterday, and lo! I am brought to trial for His sake
to-day, like as He Himself was brought to trial for the sake of sinners
like me.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p46"></span>The judge said:  Although thou have no
pity on thyself, still I will have pity on thee, and refrain from
cutting off those hands of thine with which thou hast placed incense
before the gods, and from stopping with thy blood those ears of thine
which have heard their mysteries, and thy tongue which has interpreted
and explained to us their secret things.  Of those *gods* lo! I am
afraid, and I have pity on thee.  But, if thou continue thus, those gods
be my witnesses that I will have no pity on thee!

<span id="ix.ix.i-p47"></span>Sharbil said:  As a man who art afraid of
the emperors and tremblest at idols, have thou no pity on me.  For, as
for me, I know not what thou sayest:  therefore also is my mind not
shaken or terrified by those things which thou sayest.  For by thy
judgments shall all they escape from the judgment to come who do not
worship that which is not God in its own nature.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p48"></span>The judge said:  Let him be scourged with
thongs, <span id="fr_3172"></span>[3173](#fn_3172) because he has dared
to answer me thus, and has resisted the command of the emperors, and has
not appreciated the honour which the gods conferred on him:  inasmuch
as, lo! he has renounced them.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p50"></span>And he was scourged by ten *men*, who laid
hold on him, according to the command of the judge.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p51"></span>Sharbil said:  Thou art not aware of the
scourging of justice in that world which is to come.  For thou wilt
cease, and thy judgments also will pass away; but justice will not pass
away, nor will its retributions come to an end.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p52"></span><span id="page_679">p. 679</span> <span
id="ix.ix.i-Page_679"></span>The judge <span
id="fr_3173"></span>[3174](#fn_3173) said:  Thou art so intoxicated with
this same Christianity, that thou dost not even know <span
id="fr_3174"></span>[3175](#fn_3174) before whom thou art judged, and by
whom it is that thou art scourged—*even* by those who formerly held thee
in honour, and paid adoration to thy priesthood in the gods.  Why dost
thou hate honour, and love this ignominy?  For, although thou speakest
contrary to the law, yet I myself cannot turn aside from the laws of the
emperors.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p55"></span>Sharbil said:  As *thou* takest heed not
to depart from the laws of the emperors, and if moreover thou depart
*from them* thou knowest what command they will give concerning thee, so
do I also take heed not to decline from the law of Him who said,  “Thou
shalt not worship any image, nor any likeness;” and therefore will I not
sacrifice to idols made *with hands:*  for long enough was the time in
which I sacrificed to them, when I was in ignorance.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p56"></span>The judge said:  Bring not upon thee
punishment <span id="fr_3175"></span>[3176](#fn_3175) in addition to the
punishment which thou hast *already* brought upon thee.  Enough is it
for thee to have said, “I will not sacrifice:”  do not dare to insult
the gods, by calling them *manufactured* idols whom even the emperors
honour.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p58"></span>Sharbil said:  But, if on behalf of the
emperors, who are far away and not near at hand and not conscious of
those who treat their commands with contempt, thou biddest me sacrifice,
how is it that on behalf of idols, who lo! are present and are seen, but
see not, thou biddest me sacrifice?  Why, hereby thou hast declared
before all thy attendants <span id="fr_3176"></span>[3177](#fn_3176)
that, because they have a mouth and speak not, lo! thou art become a
pleader for them:  *dumb idols* “to whom their makers shall be like,”
and “every one that trusteth upon them” *shall be* like thee.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p60"></span>The judge said:  It was not for this that
thou wast called before me—that, instead of *paying* the honour which is
due, thou shouldst despise the emperors.  But draw near to the gods and
sacrifice, and have pity on thyself, thou self-despiser!

<span id="ix.ix.i-p61"></span>Sharbil said:  Why should it be requisite
for thee to ask me many questions, after that which I have said to
thee:  “I will not sacrifice”?  Thou hast called me a self-despiser? 
But would that from my childhood I had had this mind and had thus
despised myself, <span id="fr_3177"></span>[3178](#fn_3177) which was
perishing!

<span id="ix.ix.i-p63"></span>The judge said:  Hang him up, and tear him
with combs on his sides.—And while he was *thus* torn he cried aloud and
said:  *It is* for the sake of Christ, who has secretly caused His light
to arise upon the darkness of my mind.  And, when he had thus spoken,
the judge commanded again that he should be torn with combs on his face.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p64"></span>Sharbil said:  It is better that *thou*
shouldest inflict tortures upon me for not sacrificing, than that I
should be judged *there* for having sacrificed to the work of men’s
hands.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p65"></span>The judge said:  Let his body be bent
backwards, and let straps be tied to his hands and his feet; and, when
he has been bent backwards, let him be scourged on his belly.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p66"></span>And they scourged him in this manner,
according to the command of the judge.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p67"></span>Then he commanded that he should go up to
the prison, and that he should be cast into a dark dungeon.  And the
executioners, <span id="fr_3178"></span>[3179](#fn_3178) and the
Christians who had come up with him from the church, carried him,
because he was not able to walk upon his feet in consequence of his
having been bent backwards.  And he was in the gaol many days.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p69"></span>But on the second of Ilul, <span
id="fr_3179"></span>[3180](#fn_3179) on the third day of the week, the
judge arose and went down to his judgment-hall by night; and the whole
body of his attendants was with him; and he commanded the keeper of the
prison, and they brought him before him.  And the judge said to him: 
This long while hast thou been in prison:  what has been thy
determination concerning those things on which thou wast questioned
before me?  Dost thou consent to minister to the gods according to thy
former custom, agreeably to the command of the emperors?

<span id="ix.ix.i-p71"></span>Sharbil said:  This has been my
determination in the prison, that that with which I began before thee, I
will finish even to the last; nor will I play false with my word.  For I
will not again confess idols, which I have renounced; nor will I
renounce the King Christ, whom I have confessed.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p72"></span>The judge said:  Hang him up by his right
hand, because he has withdrawn it from the gods that he may not again
offer incense with it, until his hand with which he ministered to the
gods be dislocated, because he persists in this saying of his.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p73"></span>And, while he was suspended by his hand,
they asked him and said to him:  Dost thou consent to sacrifice to the
gods?  But he was not able to return them an answer, on account of the
dislocation of his arm.  And the judge commanded, and they loosed him
and took him down.  But he was not able to bring his arm up to his side,
<span id="page_680">p. 680</span> <span
id="ix.ix.i-Page_680"></span>until the executioners pressed it and
brought it up to his side.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p74"></span>The judge said:  Put on incense, and go
whithersoever thou wilt, and no one shall compel thee to be a priest
again.  But, if thou wilt not, I will show thee *tortures* bitterer than
these.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p75"></span>Sharbil said:  *As for* gods that made not
the heavens and the earth, may they perish from under these heavens! 
But thou, menace me not with words of threatening; but, instead of
words, show upon me the deeds of threatening, that I hear thee not again
making mention of the detestable name of gods!

<span id="ix.ix.i-p76"></span>The judge said:  Let him be branded with
the brand of bitter fire between his eyes and upon his cheeks.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p77"></span>And the executioners did so, until the
smell of the branding reeked forth in the midst of the judgment-hall: 
but he refused to sacrifice.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p78"></span>Sharbil said:  Thou hast heard for thyself
from me, when I said to thee “Thou art not aware of the smoke of the
roasting of the fire which is prepared for those who, like thee, confess
idols made *by hands*, and deny the living God, after thy fashion.”

<span id="ix.ix.i-p79"></span>The judge said:  Who taught thee all these
things, that thou shouldest speak before me thus—a man who was a friend
of the gods and an enemy of Christ, whereas, lo! thou art become his
advocate.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p80"></span>Sharbil said:  Christ whom I have
confessed, He it is that hath taught me to speak thus.  But there
needeth not that I should be His advocate, for His own mercies are
eloquent advocates for guilty ones like me, and these will avail to
plead <span id="fr_3180"></span>[3181](#fn_3180) on my behalf in the day
when the sentences shall be eternal.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p82"></span>The judge said:  Let him be hanged up, and
let him be torn with combs upon his former wounds; also let salt and
vinegar be rubbed into the wounds upon his sides.  Then he said to him: 
Renounce not the gods whom thou didst *formerly* confess.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p83"></span>Sharbil said:  Have pity on me *and spare
me* again from saying that there be gods, and powers, and fates, and
nativities.  On the contrary, I confess one God, who made the heavens,
and the earth, and the seas, and all that is therein; and the Son who is
from Him, the King Christ.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p84"></span>The judge said:  It is not about this that
thou art questioned before me—*viz*.:  what is the belief of the
Christians which thou hast confessed; but this *is what* I said to thee,
“Renounce not those gods to whom thou wast made priest.”

<span id="ix.ix.i-p85"></span>Sharbil said:  Where is that wisdom of
thine and of the emperors of whom thou makest thy boast, that ye worship
the work of the hands of the artificers and confess them, whilst the
artificers themselves, who made the idols, ye insult by the burdens and
imposts which ye lay upon them?  The artificer standeth up at thy
presence, to do honour to *thee;* and thou standest up in the presence
of the work of the artificer, and dost honour it and worship it.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p86"></span>The judge said:  Thou art not the man to
call *others* to account for <span id="fr_3181"></span>[3182](#fn_3181)
these things; but from thyself a strict account is demanded, as to the
cause for which thou hast renounced the gods, and refusest to offer them
incense like thy fellow-priests.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p88"></span>Sharbil said:  Death on account of this is
true life:  those who confess the King Christ, He also will confess
before His glorious Father.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p89"></span>The judge said:  Let lighted candles <span
id="fr_3182"></span>[3183](#fn_3182) be brought, and let them be passed
round about his face and about the sides of his wounds.  And they did so
a long while.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p91"></span>Sharbil said:  It is well that thou
burnest me with this fire, that *so* I may be delivered from “that fire
which is not quenched, and the worm that dieth not,” which is threatened
to those <span id="fr_3183"></span>[3184](#fn_3183) who worship things
made instead of the Maker:  for it is forbidden to the Christians to
honour or worship anything except the nature of Him who is God Most
High.  For that which is made and is created is *designed to be* a
worshipper of its Maker, and is not to be worshipped along with its
Creator, as thou supposest.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p93"></span>The governor said:  It is not this for
which the emperors have ordered me to demand an account at thy hands,
whether there be judgment and the rendering of an account after the
death of men; nor yet about *this* do I care, whether that which is made
is to be honoured or not to be honoured.  What the emperors have
commanded *me* is this:  that, whosoever will not sacrifice to the gods
and offer incense to them, I should employ against him stripes, and
combs, and sharp swords.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p94"></span>Sharbil said:  The kings of this world are
conscious of this world only; but the King of all kings, He hath
revealed and shown to us that there is another world, and a judgment in
reserve, in which a recompense will be made, on the one hand to those
who have served God, and on the other to those who have not served Him
nor confessed Him.  Therefore do I cry aloud, that I will not again
sacrifice to idols, nor will I offer oblations to devils, nor will I do
honour to demons!

<span id="ix.ix.i-p95"></span>The judge said:  Let nails of iron be
driven in between the eyes of the insolent *fellow*, and let <span
id="page_681">p. 681</span> <span id="ix.ix.i-Page_681"></span>him go to
that world which he is looking forward to, like a fanatic. <span
id="fr_3184"></span>[3185](#fn_3184)

<span id="ix.ix.i-p97"></span>And the executioners did so, the sound of
the driving in of the nails being heard as they were being driven in
sharply.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p98"></span>Sharbil said:  Thou hast driven in nails
between my eyes, even as nails were driven into the hands of the
glorious Architect of the creation, and by reason of this did all orders
of the creation tremble and quake at that season.  For these tortures
which lo! thou art inflicting on me are nothing in view of that judgment
which is to come.  For those “whose ways are always firm,” because “they
have not the judgment of God before their eyes,” <span
id="fr_3185"></span>[3186](#fn_3185) and *who* on this account do not
even confess that God exists—neither will He confess them.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p100"></span>The judge said:  *Thou* sayest in words
that there is a judgment; but I will show thee in deeds:  so that,
instead of that judgment which is to come, thou mayest tremble and be
afraid of this one which is before thine eyes, in which lo! thou art
involved, and not multiply thy speech before me.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p101"></span>Sharbil said:  Whosoever is resolved to
set God before his eyes in secret, God will also be at his right hand;
and I too am not afraid of thy threats of tortures, with which thou dost
menace me and seek to make me afraid.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p102"></span>The judge said:  Let Christ, whom thou
hast confessed, deliver thee from all the tortures which I have
inflicted on thee, and am about further to inflict on thee; and let Him
show His deliverance towards thee openly, and save thee out of my hands.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p103"></span>Sharbil said:  This is the true
deliverance of Christ *imparted* to me—this secret power which He has
given me to endure all the tortures thou art inflicting on me, and
whatsoever it is settled in thy mind still further to inflict upon me;
and, although thou hast plainly seen *it to be* so, thou hast refused to
credit my word.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p104"></span>The judge said:  Take him away from
before me, and let him be hanged upon a beam the contrary way, head
downwards; and let him be beaten with whips while he is hanging.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p105"></span>And the executioners did so to him, at
the door of the judgment-hall.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p106"></span>Then the governor commanded, and they
brought him in before him.  And he said to him:  Sacrifice to the gods,
and do the will of the emperors, thou priest that hatest honour and
lovest ignominy instead!

<span id="ix.ix.i-p107"></span>Sharbil said:  Why dost thou again repeat
thy words, and command me to sacrifice, after the many *times* that thou
hast heard from me that I will not sacrifice again?  For it is not any
*compulsion* on the part of the Christians that has kept me back from
sacrifices, but the truth they hold:  this it is that has delivered me
from the error of paganism.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p108"></span>The judge said:  Let him be put into a
chest <span id="fr_3186"></span>[3187](#fn_3186) of iron like a
murderer, and let him be scourged with thongs like a malefactor.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p110"></span>And the executioners did so, until there
remained not a sound place on him.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p111"></span>Sharbil said:  *As for* these tortures,
which thou supposest to be bitter, out of the midst of their bitterness
will spring up for me fountains of deliverance and mercy in the day of
the eternal sentences.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p112"></span>The governor said:  Let small round
pieces of wood be placed between the fingers of his hands, <span
id="fr_3187"></span>[3188](#fn_3187) and let these be squeezed upon them
vehemently. <span id="fr_3188"></span>[3189](#fn_3188)

<span id="ix.ix.i-p116"></span>And they did so to him, until the blood
came out from under the nails of his fingers.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p117"></span>Sharbil said:  If thine eye be not
satisfied with the tortures of the body, add still further to its
tortures whatsoever thou wilt.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p118"></span>The judge said:  Let the fingers of his
hands be loosed, and make him sit upon the ground; and bind his hands
upon his knees, and thrust a piece of wood under his knees, and let it
pass over the bands of his hands, and hang him up by his feet, *thus*
bent, head downwards; and let him be scourged with thongs.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p119"></span>And they did so to him.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p120"></span>Sharbil said:  They cannot conquer who
fight against God, nor may they be overcome whose confidence is God; and
therefore do I say, that “neither fire nor sword, nor death nor life,
nor height nor depth, can separate my heart from the love of God, which
is in our Lord Jesus Christ.”

<span id="ix.ix.i-p121"></span>The judge said:  Make hot a ball of lead
and of brass, and place it under his armpits.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p122"></span>And they did so, until his ribs began to
be seen.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p123"></span>Sharbil said:  The tortures thou dost
inflict upon me are too little for thy rage against me—unless thy rage
were little and thy tortures were great.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p124"></span>The judge said:  Thou wilt not hurry me
on by these things which thou sayest; for I have room in my mind <span
id="fr_3189"></span>[3190](#fn_3189) to bear long *with thee*, and to
behold every evil and shocking and bitter thing <span id="page_682">p.
682</span> <span id="ix.ix.i-Page_682"></span>which <span
id="fr_3190"></span>[3191](#fn_3190) I shall exhibit in the torment of
thy body, because thou wilt not consent to sacrifice to the gods whom
thou didst *formerly* worship.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p127"></span>Sharbil said:  Those things which I have
said and repeated before thee, thou in thine unbelief knowest not how to
hear:  now, supposest thou that thou knowest those things which are in
my mind?

<span id="ix.ix.i-p128"></span>The judge said:  The answers which thou
givest will not help thee, but will multiply upon thee inflictions
manifold.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p129"></span>Sharbil said:  If the several stories of
thy several gods are by thee accepted as true, *yet* is it matter of
shame to us to tell of what sort they are.  For one had intercourse with
boys, which is not right; and another fell in love with a maiden, who
fled for refuge into a tree, as your shameful stories tell.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p130"></span>The judge said:  This *fellow*, who was
formerly a respecter of the gods, but has now turned to insult them and
has not been afraid, and has also despised the command of the emperors
and has not trembled—set him to stand upon a gridiron <span
id="fr_3191"></span>[3192](#fn_3191) heated with fire.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p132"></span>And the executioners did so, until the
under part of his feet was burnt off.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p133"></span>Sharbil said:  If thy rage is excited at
*my mention of* the abominable and obscene tales of thy gods, how much
more does it become thee to be ashamed of their acts!  For lo! if a
person were to do what one of thy gods did, and they were to bring him
before thee, thou wouldest pass sentence of death upon him.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p134"></span>The judge said:  This day will I bring
thee to account for thy blasphemy against the gods, and thine audacity
in insulting also the emperors; nor will I leave thee alone until thou
offer incense to them, according to thy former custom.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p135"></span>Sharbil said:  Stand by thy threats,
then, and speak not falsely; and show towards me in deeds the authority
of the emperors which they have given thee; and do not thyself bring
reproach on the emperors with thy falsehood, and be thyself also
despised in the eyes of thine attendants!

<span id="ix.ix.i-p136"></span>The judge said:  Thy blasphemy against
the gods and thine audacity towards the emperors have brought upon thee
these tortures which thou art undergoing; and, if thou add further to
thine audacity, there shall be further added to thee inflictions
bitterer than these.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p137"></span>Sharbil said:  Thou hast authority, as
judge:  do whatsoever thou wilt, and show no pity.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p138"></span>The judge said:  How can he that hath had
no pity on his own body, so as to avoid suffering in it these tortures,
be afraid or ashamed of not obeying the command of the emperors?

<span id="ix.ix.i-p139"></span>Sharbil said:  Thou hast well said that I
am not ashamed:  because near at hand is He that justifieth me, and my
soul is caught up in rapture towards him.  For, whereas I *once*
provoked Him to anger by the sacrifices of idols, I am this day
pacifying Him by the inflictions *I endure* in my person:  for my soul
is a captive to God who became man.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p140"></span>The judge said:  It is a captive, then,
that I am questioning, and a madman without sense; and with a dead man
who is burnt, lo! am I talking.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p141"></span>Sharbil said:  If thou art assured that I
am mad, question me no further:  for it is a madman that is being
questioned; nay, rather, I am a dead man who is burnt, as thou hast
said.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p142"></span>The judge said:  How shall I count thee a
dead man, When lo! thou hast cried aloud, “I will not sacrifice?”

<span id="ix.ix.i-p143"></span>Sharbil said:  I myself, too, know not
how to return thee an answer, since thou hast called me a dead man and
*yet* turnest to question me again as if alive.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p144"></span>The judge said:  Well have I called thee
a dead man, because thy feet are burnt and thou carest not, and thy face
is scorched and thou holdest thy peace, and nails are driven in between
thine eyes and thou takest no account of it, and thy ribs are seen
between the *furrows of the* combs and thou insultest the emperors, and
thy whole body is mangled and maimed with stripes and thou blasphemest
against the gods; and, because thou hatest thy body, lo! thou sayest
whatsoever pleaseth thee.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p145"></span>Sharbil said:  If thou callest *me*
audacious because I have endured these things, it is fit that thou, who
hast inflicted them upon me, shouldest be called a murderer in thy acts
and a blasphemer in thy words.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p146"></span>The judge said:  Lo! thou hast insulted
the emperors, and likewise the gods; and lo! thou insultest me also, in
order that I may pronounce sentence of death upon thee quickly.  But
instead of this, which thou lookest for, I am prepared yet further to
inflict upon thee bitter and severe tortures.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p147"></span>Sharbil said:  Thou knowest what I have
said to thee many times:  instead of denunciations of threatening,
proceed to show upon me the performance of the threat, that thou mayest
be known to do the will of the emperors.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p148"></span>The judge said:  Let him be torn with
combs upon his legs and upon the sides of his thighs.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p149"></span>And the executioners did so, until his
blood flowed and ran down upon the ground.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p150"></span>Sharbil said:  Thou hast well done in
treating me thus:  because I have heard that one of the <span
id="page_683">p. 683</span> <span id="ix.ix.i-Page_683"></span>teachers
of the Church hath said, <span id="fr_3192"></span>[3193](#fn_3192)
“Scars *are* on my body, that I may come to the resurrection from the
place of the dead.”  Me too, who was a dead man out of sight, lo! thine
inflictions bring to life again.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p152"></span>The judge said:  Let him be torn with
combs on his face, since he is not ashamed of the nails which are driven
in between his eyes.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p153"></span>And they tore him with combs upon his
cheeks, and between the nails which were driven into them.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p154"></span>Sharbil said:  I will not obey the
emperors, who command that to be worshipped and honoured which is not of
the nature of God, and is not God in its nature, but is the work of him
that made it.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p155"></span>The judge said:  Like as the emperors
worship, so also worship thou; and that honour which the judges render,
do thou render also.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p156"></span>Sharbil said:  Even though *I* insult
that which is the work of men and has no perception and no feeling of
anything, *yet* do not *thou* insult God, the Maker of all, nor worship
along with Him that which is not of Him, and is foreign to His nature.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p157"></span>The judge said:  Does this your doctrine
so teach you, that you should insult the very luminaries which give
light to all the regions of the earth?

<span id="ix.ix.i-p158"></span>Sharbil said:  Although it is not
enjoined upon us to insult them, yet it is enjoined upon us not to
worship them nor honour them, seeing that they are things made:  for
this were an insufferable <span id="fr_3193"></span>[3194](#fn_3193)
wrong, that a thing made should be worshipped along with its Maker; and
it is an insult to the Maker that His creatures should be honoured along
with Himself.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p160"></span>The judge said:  Christ whom thou
confessest was hanged on a tree; and on a tree will I hang thee, like
thy Master.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p161"></span>And they hanged him on a tree <span
id="fr_3194"></span>[3195](#fn_3194) a long while.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p163"></span>Sharbil said:  *As for* Christ, whom lo!
thou mockest—see how thy many gods were unable to stand before Him:  for
lo! they are despised and rejected, and are made a laughing-stock and a
jest by those who used formerly to worship them.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p164"></span>The judge said:  How is it that thou
renouncest the gods, and confessest Christ, who was hanged on a tree?

<span id="ix.ix.i-p165"></span>Sharbil said:  This cross of Christ is
the great boast of the Christians, since it is by this that the
deliverance of salvation has come to all His worshippers, and by this
that they have had their eyes enlightened, so as not to worship
creatures along with the Creator.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p166"></span>The governor said:  Let thy boasting of
the cross be kept within thy own mind, and let incense be offered by thy
hands to the gods.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p167"></span>Sharbil said:  Those who have been
delivered by the cross cannot any longer worship and serve the idols of
error made *with hands*:  for creature cannot worship creature, because
it is itself also *designed to be* a worshipper of Him who made it; and
that it should be worshipped along with its Maker is an insult to its
Maker, as I have said before.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p168"></span>The governor said:  Leave alone thy books
which have taught thee *to speak* thus, and perform the command of the
emperors, that thou idle not by the emperors’ law.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p169"></span>But Sharbil said:  Is this, then, the
justice of the emperors, in whom thou takest such pride, that we should
leave alone the law of God and keep their laws?

<span id="ix.ix.i-p170"></span>The governor said:  The citation of the
books in which thou believest, and from which thou hast quoted—it is
this which has brought upon thee these afflictions:  for, if thou hadst
offered incense to the gods, great would have been thine honour, like as
it was formerly, as priest of the gods.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p171"></span>Sharbil said:  To thine unbelieving heart
these things seem as if they were afflictions; but to the true heart
“affliction imparts patience, and from it *comes* also experience, and
from experience likewise the hope” <span
id="fr_3195"></span>[3196](#fn_3195) of the confessor. <span
id="fr_3196"></span>[3197](#fn_3196)

<span id="ix.ix.i-p174"></span>The governor said:  Hang him up and tear
him with combs upon his former wounds.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p175"></span>And, from the fury with which the judge
urged on the executioners, his very bowels were almost seen.  And, lest
he should die under the combs and escape from still further tortures, he
gave orders and they took him down.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p176"></span>And, when the judge saw that he was
become silent and was not able to return him any further answer, he
refrained from him a little while, until he began to revive.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p177"></span>Sharbil said:  Why hast thou had pity
upon me for even this little time, and kept me back from the gain of a
confessor’s death? <span id="fr_3197"></span>[3198](#fn_3197)

<span id="ix.ix.i-p179"></span>The governor said:  I have not had pity
on thee at all in refraining for a little while:  thy silence it was
that made me pause a little; and, if I had power beyond the law of the
emperors, I should like to lay *other* tortures upon thee, so as to be
more fully avenged on thee for thine insult toward the gods:  for in
despising me thou hast despised the gods; and I, on my part, have borne
with thee and tortured thee thus, as a man who so deserves.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p180"></span>And the judge gave orders, and suddenly
the curtain <span id="fr_3198"></span>[3199](#fn_3198) fell before him
for a short time; and <span id="page_684">p. 684</span> <span
id="ix.ix.i-Page_684"></span>he settled and drew up the sentence <span
id="fr_3199"></span>[3200](#fn_3199) which he should pronounce against
him publicly.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p183"></span>And suddenly the curtain was drawn back
again; and the judge cried aloud and said:  As regards this Sharbil, who
was formerly priest of the gods, but has turned this day and renounced
the gods, and has cried aloud “I am a Christian,” and has not trembled
at the gods, but has insulted them; and, further, has not been afraid of
the emperors *and* their command; and, though I have bidden him
sacrifice to the gods according to his former custom, has not
sacrificed, but has treated them with the greatest insult:  I have
looked *into the matter*, and decided, that towards a man who doeth
these things, even though he were *now* to sacrifice, it is not fit that
any mercy should be shown; and that it is not fit that he should *any
longer* behold the sun of his lords, because he has scorned their laws. 
I give sentence that, according to the law of the emperors, a
strap <span id="fr_3200"></span>[3201](#fn_3200) be thrust into the
mouth of the insulter, as into the mouth of a murderer, and that he
depart outside of the city of the emperors with haste, as one who has
insulted the lords of the city and the gods who hold authority over it. 
I give sentence that he be sawn with a saw of wood, and that, when he is
near to die, then his head be taken off with the sword of the headsmen.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p185"></span>And forthwith a strap was thrust into his
mouth with all speed, and the executioners hurried him off, and made him
run quickly upon his burnt feet, and took him away outside of the city,
a crowd of people running after him.  For they had been standing looking
on at his trial all day, and wondering that he did not suffer under his
afflictions:  for his countenance, which was cheerful, testified to the
joy of his heart.  And, when the executioners arrived at the place where
he was to receive the punishment of death, the people of the city were
with them, that they might see whether they did according as the judge
had commanded, and hear what Sharbil might say at that season, so that
they might inform the judge of the country.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p186"></span>And they offered him some wine to drink,
according to the custom of murderers to drink.  But he said to them:  I
will not drink, because I wish to feel the saw with which ye saw me, and
the sword which ye pass over my neck; but instead of this wine, which
will not be of any use to me, give me a little time to pray, while ye
stand.  And he stood up, and looked toward the east, <span
id="fr_3201"></span>[3202](#fn_3201) and lifted up his voice and said: 
Forgive me, Christ, all the sins I have committed against Thee, and all
*the times in* which I have provoked Thee to anger by the polluted
sacrifices of dead idols; and have pity on me and save me, <span
id="fr_3202"></span>[3203](#fn_3202) and deliver me from the judgment to
come; and be merciful to me, as Thou wast merciful to the robber; and
receive me like the penitents who have been converted and have turned to
Thee, as Thou also hast turned to them; and, whereas I have entered into
Thy vineyard, at the eleventh hour, instead of judgment, deliver me from
justice:  let Thy death, which was for the sake of sinners, restore to
life again my slain body in the day of Thy coming.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p189"></span>And, when the Sharirs of the city heard
these things, they were very angry with the executioners for having
given him leave to pray.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p190"></span>And, while the nails were remaining which
had been driven in between his eyes, and his ribs were seen between the
*wounds of the* combs, and while from the burning on his sides and the
soles of his feet, which were scorched and burnt, and from the *gashes
of the* combs on his face, and on his sides, and on his thighs, and on
his legs, the blood was flowing and running down, they brought
carpenters’ instruments, and thrust him into a wooden vice, and
tightened it upon him until the bones of his joints creaked with the
pressure; then they put upon him a saw of iron, and began sawing him
asunder; and, when he was just about to die, because the saw had reached
to his mouth, they smote him with the sword and took off his head, while
he was still squeezed down in the vice.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p191"></span>And Babai his sister drew near and spread
out her skirt and caught his blood; and she said to him:  May my spirit
be united with thy spirit in the presence of Christ, whom thou hast
known and believed.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p192"></span>And the Sharirs of the city ran and came
and informed the judge of the things which Sharbil had uttered in his
prayer, and how his sister had caught his blood.  And the judge
commanded them to return and give orders to the executioners that, on
the spot where she had caught the blood of her brother, she also should
receive the punishment of death.  And the executioners laid hold on her,
and each one of them severally put her to torture; and, with her
brother’s blood upon her, her soul took its flight from her, and they
mingled her blood with his.  And, when the executioners were entered
into the city, the brethren and young men <span
id="fr_3203"></span>[3204](#fn_3203) ran and stole away their two
corpses; and they laid them in the burial-place of the father of
Abshelama the bishop, on the fifth of Ilul, the eve *of the Sabbath*.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p194"></span>I wrote these Acts on paper—I, Marinus,
and Anatolus, the notaries; and we placed them <span id="page_685">p.
685</span> <span id="ix.ix.i-Page_685"></span>in the archives of the
city, where the papers of the kings are placed. <span
id="fr_3204"></span>[3205](#fn_3204)

<span id="ix.ix.i-p196"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.ix.i-p197"></span>This Barsamya, <span
id="fr_3205"></span>[3206](#fn_3205) the bishop, made a disciple of
Sharbil the priest.  And he lived in the days of Binus, <span
id="fr_3206"></span>[3207](#fn_3206) bishop of Rome; in whose days the
whole population of Rome assembled together, and cried out to the
prætor <span id="fr_3207"></span>[3208](#fn_3207) of their city, and
said to him:  There are too many strangers in this our city, and these
cause famine and dearness of everything:  but we beseech thee to command
them to depart out of the city.  And, when he had commanded them to
depart out of the city, these strangers assembled themselves together,
and said to the prætor:  We beseech thee, my lord, command also that the
bones of our dead may depart with us.  And he commanded them to take the
bones of their dead, and to depart.  And all the strangers assembled
themselves together to take the bones of Simon Cephas and of Paul, the
apostles; but the people of Rome said to them:  We will not give you the
bones of the apostles.  And the strangers said to them:  Learn ye and
understand that Simon, who is called Cephas, is of Bethsaida of Galilee,
and Paul the apostle is of Tarsus, a city of Cilicia.  And, when the
people of Rome knew that this matter was so, then they let them alone. 
And, when they had taken them up and were removing them from their
places, immediately there was a great earthquake; and the buildings of
the city were on the point of falling down, and *the city* was near
being overthrown.  And, when the people of Rome saw it, they turned and
besought the strangers to remain in their city, and that the bones might
be laid in their places *again*.  And, when the bones of the apostles
were returned to their places, there was quietness, and the earthquakes
ceased, and the winds became still, and the air became bright, and the
whole city became cheerful.  And when the Jews and pagans saw it, they
also ran and fell at the feet of Fabianus, the bishop of their city, the
Jews crying out:  We confess Christ, whom we crucified:  He is the Son
of the living-God, of whom the prophets spoke in their mysteries.  And
the pagans also cried out and said to him:  We renounce idols and carved
images, which are of no use, and we believe in Jesus the King, the Son
of God, who has come and is to come again.  And, what ever other
doctrines there were in Rome and in all Italy, *the followers of* these
also renounced their doctrines, like as the pagans had renounced theirs,
and confessed the Gospel of the apostles, which was preached in the
church.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p201"></span>*Here* end the Acts of Sharbil the
confessor.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p202"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3146"></span>[676:3147](0081465.htm#fr_3146) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p4"></span> There are two<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p4.1"></span>mss.</span> from which this piece is taken. 
The first is Cod. Add. 14,644, fol. 72 vers.  This, which is referred to
as A., has been copied exactly, except that a few manifest errors have
been corrected and some deficiencies supplied from the other.  This
latter, quoted as B., is Cod. Add. 14,645.  It is some three or four
centuries later than the first.  They were first taken down by
shorthand-writers, called *notarii* (notaries), or *exceptores*, by
which name they are mentioned towards the end of this extract; the
Greeks called them <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p4.2"></span>ταχυγράφοι</span>.  They were then arranged in
proper order by persons called by the Greeks <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p4.3"></span>ὑπομνηματογράφοι</span>, and by the Romans *Ab
Actis*.—The use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p4.4"></span>ὑπομνήματα</span> and other Greek words seems
to show that these Acts were originally written in that language.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p5"></span>Notaries, i.e., *actuarii*, or at a later
day *exceptores*.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p5.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3147"></span>[676:3148](0081465.htm#fr_3147) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p6"></span> The Latin *Acta*, to which the Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix.i-p6.1"></span>ὑπομνήματα</span> here
employed corresponds, was used to denote the authorized records of
judicial proceedings.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p6.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3148"></span>[676:3149](0081465.htm#fr_3148) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p8.1"></span>Αὐτοκράτωρ</span> .—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p8.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3149"></span>[676:3150](0081465.htm#fr_3149) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p9"></span> That is, <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 112.  But the Greek era commences
311 or 312 <span class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p9.2"></span>b.c</span>.,
and therefore <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p9.3"></span>a.g</span>. 416 would answer to <span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p9.4"></span>a.d.</span> 105.  There
appears to be some error in the date.

<span id="fn_3150"></span>[676:3151](0081465.htm#fr_3150) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p9.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p10"></span> The king reigning in the fifteenth year
of Trajan was Maanu Bar Ajazath, the seventh king of Edessa after Abgar
the Black.

<span id="fn_3151"></span>[676:3152](0081465.htm#fr_3151) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p11"></span> It would thus appear that Paganism and
Christianity were tolerated together in Edessa at this time, equal
honour being attributed to the head of each religious party.  Cf.
*Teaching of Addæus*, p. 661:  “Neither did King Abgar compel any man by
force to believe in Christ.”

<span id="fn_3152"></span>[676:3153](0081465.htm#fr_3152) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p13"></span> A little before the passage quoted in the
last note it is said that this altar was left standing when the altars
to Bel and Nebu were thrown down.

<span id="fn_3153"></span>[676:3154](0081465.htm#fr_3153) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p14"></span> Perhaps this is the same as the
“Archives” mentioned p. 007, note 14.

<span id="fn_3154"></span>[676:3155](0081465.htm#fr_3154) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p15"></span> B. adds, “before the god Zeus.”

<span id="fn_3155"></span>[676:3156](0081465.htm#fr_3155) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p17"></span> B. adds here:  “And in all these things
thou hast forgotten God, the Maker of all men, and because of His
long-suffering hast exalted thyself against His mercy, and hast not been
willing to turn to Him, so that He might turn to thee and deliver thee
from this error, in which thou standest.”

<span id="fn_3156"></span>[677:3157](0081465.htm#fr_3156) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p18"></span> Lit. “thy old age.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p18.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3157"></span>[677:3158](0081465.htm#fr_3157) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p19"></span> The Peshito, for <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix.i-p19.1"></span>Ζεύς</span> in [Acts xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#012)<span id="ix.ix.i-p19.2"></span>,
has “Lord of the gods.”

<span id="fn_3158"></span>[677:3159](0081465.htm#fr_3158) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p20"></span> B. has “the work of men’s hands.” 
\[[Jer. xvi. 20](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#020)<span
id="ix.ix.i-p20.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3159"></span>[677:3160](0081465.htm#fr_3159) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p21"></span> B. makes a considerable addition here,
which it is hardly necessary to quote, the words being in all
probability only an interpolation.  Cureton elsewhere remarks:  “I have
almost invariably found in these Syriac <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p21.1"></span>mss.</span> that the older are the shorter,
and that subsequent editors or transcribers felt themselves at liberty
to add occasionally, or paraphrase the earlier application in regard to
early Christian literature.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p21.2"></span>Tr.</span>  \[But Cureton is speaking for his
pet idea.\]

<span id="fn_3160"></span>[677:3161](0081465.htm#fr_3160) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p23"></span> Or “destitute of.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p23.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3161"></span>[677:3162](0081465.htm#fr_3161) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p24"></span> Lit. “a hidden dead man.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p24.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3162"></span>[677:3163](0081465.htm#fr_3162) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p26"></span> B. adds, “from Sharbil, his tears flowed
and he wept.”

<span id="fn_3163"></span>[677:3164](0081465.htm#fr_3163) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p29"></span> B. adds, “of baptism, baptizing him.”

<span id="ix.ix.i-p30"></span>The “seal” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p30.1"></span>σφραγίς</span>) is probably explained by such
passages as [Eph. iv. 30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030)<span
id="ix.ix.i-p30.2"></span>, that which bore the seal being regarded as
the property of him whose seal it was.  Thus Gregory Naz. (Orat. 40)
speaks of baptism.  See Riddle’s *Christian Antiqq*., p. 484.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p30.3"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3164"></span>[677:3165](0081465.htm#fr_3164) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p30.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p31"></span> \[This identifies the “seal” with
baptism.\]

<span id="fn_3165"></span>[677:3166](0081465.htm#fr_3165) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p33"></span> B. adds, “and he sat and listened to the
Scriptures of the Church, and the testimonies which are spoken in them,
touching the birth and the passion and the resurrection and the
ascension of Christ; and, when he saw those that came down to him—”

<span id="fn_3166"></span>[678:3167](0081465.htm#fr_3166) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p35"></span> In B., in a passage added further on, he
is styled “Lysinas,” and in the *Martyrdom of Barsamya*, *infra*,
“Lysinus” or “Lucinus.”  In the *Martyrologium Romanum* he is called
“Lysias præses.”  Tillemont supposes him to be Lusius Quietus.  But the
time does not agree.  The capture of Edessa under this man was in the
nineteenth year of Trajan, four years later than the martyrdom.

<span id="fn_3167"></span>[678:3168](0081465.htm#fr_3167) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p36"></span> B. adds, “from the Sharirs of the city.”

<span id="fn_3168"></span>[678:3169](0081465.htm#fr_3168) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p37"></span> B. has added several lines here.

<span id="fn_3169"></span>[678:3170](0081465.htm#fr_3169) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p38"></span> B. adds, “the Sharirs of the city.”

<span id="fn_3170"></span>[678:3171](0081465.htm#fr_3170) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p39"></span> Lit. “in which they stand.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p39.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3171"></span>[678:3172](0081465.htm#fr_3171) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p42"></span> Lit. “kings:”  and so throughout.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p42.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3172"></span>[678:3173](0081465.htm#fr_3172) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p49"></span> The Syriac is \*\*\* (*toris*), and is a
foreign word, probably the Latin *loris*, which the Syriac translator,
not understanding it or not having an equivalent, may have written
*loris*, and a subsequent transcriber have written *toris*.  It is plain
that the latter copyist to whom the text B. is due did not know what is
meant:  for he has omitted the word, and substituted “Sharbil.”

<span id="fn_3173"></span>[679:3174](0081465.htm#fr_3173) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p53"></span> B. reads “governor” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix.i-p53.1"></span>ἡγεμών</span>), and so
generally in the corresponding places below.

<span id="fn_3174"></span>[679:3175](0081465.htm#fr_3174) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p54"></span> B. reads “discern.”

<span id="fn_3175"></span>[679:3176](0081465.htm#fr_3175) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p57"></span> Or “judgment.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p57.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3176"></span>[679:3177](0081465.htm#fr_3176) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p59"></span> The word used is the Latin “officium” (=
officiales, or corpus offialium—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p59.1"></span>Tr.</span>), which denoted the officers that
attended upon presidents and chief magistrates.  The equivalent Gk.
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix.i-p59.2"></span>τάξίς</span> is used
below \[in the *Martyrdom of Habib*, “attendants”\].

<span id="fn_3177"></span>[679:3178](0081465.htm#fr_3177) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p62"></span> Or “soul.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p62.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3178"></span>[679:3179](0081465.htm#fr_3178) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p68"></span> Those who officiated at a “quæstio,” or
examination by torture.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p68.1"></span>Tr.</span>  The Latin “quæstionarii.”

<span id="fn_3179"></span>[679:3180](0081465.htm#fr_3179) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p70"></span> i.e., Heb. <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p70.1"></span>לּוּלאֱ</span><span
id="ix.ix.i-p70.2"></span>, from the new moon of September to that of
October.  \[See p. 666, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3180"></span>[680:3181](0081465.htm#fr_3180) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p81"></span> Lit. “to be a plea.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p81.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3181"></span>[680:3182](0081465.htm#fr_3181) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p87"></span> Or “thou art not the avenger of.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p87.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3182"></span>[680:3183](0081465.htm#fr_3182) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p90"></span> Lit. “candles of fire.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p90.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3183"></span>[680:3184](0081465.htm#fr_3183) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p92"></span> The passage from this place to “in the
eyes,” below, is lost in A., and supplied from B.

<span id="fn_3184"></span>[681:3185](0081465.htm#fr_3184) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p96"></span> Or “dealer in fables,” if the word
employed here, which is a foreign one, be the Latin “fabularius,” which
is not certain.

<span id="fn_3185"></span>[681:3186](0081465.htm#fr_3185) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p99"></span> [Ps. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005)<span
id="ix.ix.i-p99.1"></span>.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p99.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3186"></span>[681:3187](0081465.htm#fr_3186) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p109"></span> So Cureton.  Dr. Payne Smith remarks: 
“Cureton’s ‘chest’ is a guess from \*\*\*.  The only sense of \*\*\*
with which I am acquainted is *cadus*, a cask.”  The word occurs again
in the *Martyrdom of Habib*.  In both places it seems to refer to some
contrivance for *holding fast* the person to be scourged.  The root
appears to be \*\*\*, *custodivit*, *retinuit* (Castel).—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p109.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3187"></span>[681:3188](0081465.htm#fr_3187) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p113"></span> The martyr Minias, about <span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p113.1"></span>a.d.</span> 240, had the
same torture inflicted on him:  “ligneis verubus præcutis sub ungues
ejus infixis, omnes digitos ejus præcepit pertundi.”  See Surius,
*Sanctt. Vit*.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p114"></span>Not “the same,” perhaps.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p114.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3188"></span>[681:3189](0081465.htm#fr_3188) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p114.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p115"></span> Or “bitterly.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p115.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3189"></span>[681:3190](0081465.htm#fr_3189) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p125"></span> Here a few lines have been torn out of
A., and are supplied from B.

<span id="fn_3190"></span>[682:3191](0081465.htm#fr_3190) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p126"></span> “Which” is not in the printed
text.—<span class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p126.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3191"></span>[682:3192](0081465.htm#fr_3191) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p131"></span> The word used looks like a corruption of
the Latin *craticula*.  Eusebius, *Hist. Eccl*. v. 1, uses the Gk. word
for this (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p131.1"></span>τήγανον</span>) in describing the martyrdom
of Attalus, who “was set in the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p131.2"></span>τήγανον</span>, and scorched all over, till
the savour of his burnt flesh ascended from his body.”

<span id="fn_3192"></span>[683:3193](0081465.htm#fr_3192) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p150.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p151"></span> \[St. Paul’s *Stigmata*.  [Gal.
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017), [Phil.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#011)<span
id="ix.ix.i-p151.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3193"></span>[683:3194](0081465.htm#fr_3193) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p159"></span> Or “bitter.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p159.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3194"></span>[683:3195](0081465.htm#fr_3194) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p162"></span> Or “beam.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p162.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3195"></span>[683:3196](0081465.htm#fr_3195) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p171.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p172"></span> [Rom. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004)<span
id="ix.ix.i-p172.1"></span>.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p172.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3196"></span>[683:3197](0081465.htm#fr_3196) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p172.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p173"></span> Lit. “of confessorship.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p173.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3197"></span>[683:3198](0081465.htm#fr_3197) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p177.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p178"></span> Lit. “of confessorship.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p178.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3198"></span>[683:3199](0081465.htm#fr_3198) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p180.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p181"></span> The Latin “velum,” or rather its plur.
“vela.”

<span id="fn_3199"></span>[684:3200](0081465.htm#fr_3199) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p181.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p182"></span> The Gk. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p182.1"></span>ἀπόφασις</span>.

<span id="fn_3200"></span>[684:3201](0081465.htm#fr_3200) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p183.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p184"></span> This expression <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix.i-p184.1"></span>χαλινὸν ἐμβαλεῖν</span>
is used similarly in the life of Euthymus in *Eccl. Græc. Monumenta*,
vol. ii. p. 240.

<span id="fn_3201"></span>[684:3202](0081465.htm#fr_3201) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p186.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p187"></span> See *Teaching of the Apostles*, Ord. 1,
p. 668, note 1.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p187.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3202"></span>[684:3203](0081465.htm#fr_3202) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p187.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p188"></span> Lit. “have pity on my salvation.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.i-p188.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3203"></span>[684:3204](0081465.htm#fr_3203) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p192.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p193"></span> By a transposition of letters, B. reads
“laics.”

<span id="fn_3204"></span>[685:3205](0081465.htm#fr_3204) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p194.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p195"></span> B. has several lines here in addition.

<span id="fn_3205"></span>[685:3206](0081465.htm#fr_3205) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p197.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p198"></span> The passage hence to the end is
evidently a later addition by a person unacquainted with chronology: 
for it is stated at the beginning of these Acts that the transactions
took place in the fifteenth year of Trajan, <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p198.1"></span>a.d.</span> 112; but Fabianus (see next note)
was not made bishop of Rome till the reign of Maximinus Thrax, about the
year 236.  \[An index of the history of this postscript.\]

<span id="fn_3206"></span>[685:3207](0081465.htm#fr_3206) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p198.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p199"></span> B. reads “Fabianus:”  in A. the first
syllable, or rather letter, has been dropped.—The mention of Fabianus
probably arose from the fact of his having instituted notaries for the
express purpose of searching for and collecting the Acts of Martyrs.

<span id="fn_3207"></span>[685:3208](0081465.htm#fr_3207) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p199.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p200"></span> The Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p200.1"></span>ἔπαρχος</span>.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p200.2"></span> Tr.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Further, the Martyrdom of Barsamya, the Bishop of the Blessed
City Edessa.](0081466)
