[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081329)  [Next](0081331) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xvi.xii"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xvi.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12 (28).</span>

<span id="vii.xvi.xii-p2"></span>After this, Pilate going into the
temple of the Jews, assembled all the chief priests, and learned men,
and scribes, and teachers of the law, and went in with them into the
sanctuary of the temple, and ordered that all the gates should be shut,
and said to them:  We have heard that you have a certain great
collection of books in this temple:  therefore I ask you that it be
presented before us.  And when four officers brought in that collection
of books, adorned with gold and precious gems, Pilate said to all:  I
adjure you by the God of your fathers, who ordered you to build this
temple in the place of his sanctuary, not to conceal the truth from me. 
You all know what is written in that collection of books; but now say
whether you have found in the writings that Jesus, whom you have
crucified, to be the Son of God that was to come for the salvation of
the human race, and in how many revolutions of the seasons he ought to
come.  Declare to me whether you crucified him in ignorance of this, or
knowing it.

<span id="vii.xvi.xii-p3"></span>Being thus adjured, Annas and Caiaphas
ordered all the others who were with them to go out of the sanctuary;
and themselves shut all the gates of the temple and the sanctuary, and
said to Pilate:  We have been adjured by thee, O good judge, by the
building of this temple, to give thee the truth, and a clear account *of
this matter*.  After we had crucified Jesus, not knowing Him to be the
Son of God, thinking that He did miracles by means of some charm, we
made a great synagogue in this temple.  And conferring with each other
of the signs of the miracles which Jesus had done, we found many
witnesses of our nation who said that they had seen Jesus alive after
suffering death, and that He had penetrated into the height of heaven. 
And we have seen two witnesses, whom Jesus raised up again from the
dead, who told us many wonderful things that Jesus did among the dead,
which we have in our hands, written out.  And our custom is, every year
before our synagogue, to open that holy collection of books, and seek
out the testimony of God.  And we have found in the first book of the
LXX., where the archangel Michael spoke to the third son of Adam, the
first man, of five thousand and five hundred years, in which the Christ,
the most beloved Son of God, was to come from the heavens; and upon this
we have considered that perhaps He was the God of Israel who said to
Moses, <span id="fr_1996"></span>[1997](#fn_1996) Make to thee the ark
of the covenant, two cubits and a half in length, one cubit and a half
in breadth, one cubit and a half in height.  In these five and a half
cubits we have understood and recognised, from the structure of the ark
of the old covenant, that in five and a half thousands of years, Jesus
Christ was to come in the ark of the body; and we have found Him to be
the God of Israel, the Son of God.  Because after His passion, we, the
chief priests, wondering at the signs which happened on account of Him,
opened this collection of books, searching out all the generations, even
to the generation of Joseph, and reckoning that Mary the mother of
Christ was of the seed of David; and we have found that from the time
that God made the heaven and the earth and the first man, to the deluge,
are two thousand two hundred and twelve <span
id="fr_1997"></span>[1998](#fn_1997) years; and from the deluge to the
building of the tower, five hundred and thirty-one <span
id="fr_1998"></span>[1999](#fn_1998) years; and from the building of the
tower to Abraham, six hundred and six <span
id="fr_1999"></span>[2000](#fn_1999) years; and from Abraham to the
arrival of the children of Israel from Egypt, four hundred and seventy
years; from the coming of the children of Israel out of Egypt to the
building of the temple, five hundred and eleven years; and from the
building of the temple to the destruction of the same temple, four
hundred and sixty-four years.  Thus far have we found in the book of
Esdras.  After searching, we find that from the burning of the temple to
the advent of Christ, and His birth, there are six hundred and
thirty-six <span id="fr_2000"></span>[2001](#fn_2000) years, which
together were five thousand five hundred years, as we have found written
in the book that Michael the <span id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span
id="vii.xvi.xii-Page_454"></span>archangel foretold to Seth the third
son of Adam, that in five and a half thousands of years Christ the Son
of God would come. <span id="fr_2001"></span>[2002](#fn_2001)   Even
until now we have told no one, that there might be no dissension in our
synagogues.  And now thou hast adjured us, O good judge, by this holy
book of the testimonies of God, and we make it manifest to thee.  And
now we adjure thee, by thy life and safety, to make manifest these words
to no one in Jerusalem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1996"></span>[453:1997](0081330.htm#fr_1996) <span
id="vii.xvi.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi.xii-p4"></span> [Ex. xxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010)<span id="vii.xvi.xii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1997"></span>[453:1998](0081330.htm#fr_1997) <span
id="vii.xvi.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi.xii-p5"></span> Should be 2262—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xvi.xii-p5.1"></span>βσοβ</span> in place of
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xvi.xii-p5.2"></span>βσιβ</span>.

<span id="fn_1998"></span>[453:1999](0081330.htm#fr_1998) <span
id="vii.xvi.xii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi.xii-p6"></span> This includes the second Cainan.

<span id="fn_1999"></span>[453:2000](0081330.htm#fr_1999) <span
id="vii.xvi.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi.xii-p7"></span> Should be 676.

<span id="fn_2000"></span>[453:2001](0081330.htm#fr_2000) <span
id="vii.xvi.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi.xii-p8"></span> Should be 586—<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xvi.xii-p8.1"></span>dlxxxvi</span>. instead of <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xvi.xii-p8.2"></span>dcxxxvi</span>.

<span id="fn_2001"></span>[454:2002](0081330.htm#fr_2001) <span
id="vii.xvi.xii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi.xii-p9"></span> Lit., has come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](0081331)
