[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081487)  [Next](0081489) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p1"></span> <span id="page_739">p. 739</span> <span
id="ix.xviii-Page_739"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="ix.xviii-p1.1"></span>Ancient Syriac Documents.</span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.xviii-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="ix.xviii-p3.1"></span>Ambrose. <span
id="fr_3494"></span>[3495](#fn_3494) </span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xviii-p5.1"></span>A memorial <span
id="fr_3495"></span>[3496](#fn_3495) </span> a which Ambrose, a chief
man of Greece, wrote:  who became a Christian, and all his
fellow-senators raised an outcry against him; and he fled from them, and
wrote and pointed out to them all their foolishness.

<span id="ix.xviii-p7"></span>Beginning his discourse, <span
id="fr_3496"></span>[3497](#fn_3496) he answered and said:—

<span id="ix.xviii-p9"></span>Think not, men of Greece, that my
separation from your customs has been made without a just and proper
reason.  For I acquainted myself with all your wisdom, *consisting* of
poetry, of oratory, of philosophy; and when I found not *there* anything
*agreeable to what is* right, or that is worthy of the divine nature, I
resolved to make myself acquainted with the wisdom of the Christians
also, and to learn and see who *they are*, and when *they took their
rise*, and what is *the nature of* this new and strange wisdom *of
theirs*, <span id="fr_3497"></span>[3498](#fn_3497) or on what good
*hopes* those who are imbued with it rely, that they speak *only* that
which is true.

<span id="ix.xviii-p11"></span>Men of Greece, when I came to examine
*the Christian writings*, I found not any folly <span
id="fr_3498"></span>[3499](#fn_3498) *in them*, as I had found in the
celebrated Homer, who has said concerning the wars of the two
trials: <span id="fr_3499"></span>[3500](#fn_3499)   “Because of Helen,
many of the Greeks perished at Troy, away from their beloved
home.” <span id="fr_3500"></span>[3501](#fn_3500)   For, first of all,
we are told <span id="fr_3501"></span>[3502](#fn_3501) concerning
Agamemnon their king, that by reason of the foolishness of his brother
Menelaus, and the violence of his madness, and the uncontrollable nature
of his passion, he resolved to go and rescue Helen from *the hands* of a
certain leprous <span id="fr_3502"></span>[3503](#fn_3502) shepherd; and
*afterwards*, when the Greeks had become victorious in the war, and
burnt cities, and taken women and children captive, and the land was
filled with blood, and the rivers with corpses, Agamemnon himself also
was found to be taken captive by *his* passion for Briseis.  Patroclus,
again, we are told, was slain, and Achilles, the son of the goddess
Thetis, mourned over him; Hector was dragged *along the ground*, and
Priam and Hecuba together were weeping over the loss of their children;
Astyanax, the son of Hector, was thrown down from the walls of Ilion,
and his mother Andromache the mighty Ajax bore away *into captivity*;
and that which was taken as booty was after a little while, *all*
squandered in sensual indulgence.

<span id="ix.xviii-p17"></span>Of the wiles of Odysseus the son of
Laertes, and of his murders, who shall tell the tale?  For of a hundred
and ten suitors did his house in one day become the grave, and it was
filled with corpses and blood.  He, too, *it was* that by his wickedness
gained the praises *of men*, because through *his* pre-eminence in craft
he escaped detection; he, too, *it was* who, you say, sailed upon the
sea, and heard *not* the voice of the Sirens *only* because he stopped
his ears with wax. <span id="fr_3503"></span>[3504](#fn_3503)

<span id="ix.xviii-p19"></span>The famous Achilles, again, the son of
Peleus, who bounded across the river, and routed <span
id="fr_3504"></span>[3505](#fn_3504) the Trojans, and slew Hector,—this
said hero of yours became the slave of Philoxena, and was overcome by an
Amazon *as she lay* dead and stretched *upon her bier;* and he put off
his armour, and arrayed himself in nuptial garments, and finally fell a
sacrifice to love.

<span id="ix.xviii-p21"></span><span id="page_740">p. 740</span> <span
id="ix.xviii-Page_740"></span>Thus much concerning *your* great
“men;” <span id="fr_3505"></span>[3506](#fn_3505) and thou, Homer, hadst
deserved forgiveness, if thy silly story-telling had gone so far *only*
as to prate about men, and not about the gods.  As for what *he says*
about the gods, I am ashamed even to speak of it:  for the stories that
have been invented about them are very wicked and shocking; passing
strange, <span id="fr_3506"></span>[3507](#fn_3506) too, and not to be
believed; and, if the truth must be told, <span
id="fr_3507"></span>[3508](#fn_3507) fit only to be laughed at.  For a
person will *be compelled to* laugh when he meets with them, and will
not believe them when he hears them.  For *think of* gods who did not
one of them observe the laws of rectitude, or of purity, or of modesty,
but *were* adulterers, and spent their time in debauchery, and *yet*
were not condemned to death, as they ought to have been!

<span id="ix.xviii-p25"></span>Why, the sovereign of the gods, the very
“father of gods and men,” not only, as ye say, was an adulterer (this
was but a light thing), but even slew his own father, and was a
pæderast.  I will first of all speak of *his* adultery, though I blush
*to do so:*  for he appeared to Antiope as a satyr, and descended upon
Danaë as a shower of gold, and became a bull for Europa, and a swan for
Leda; whilst the love of Semele, the mother of Dionysus, exposed both
his own ardency *of passion* and the jealousy of the chaste Hera. 
Ganymede the Phrygian, too, he carried off *disguised* as an eagle, that
the fair and comely boy, forsooth, might serve as cup-bearer to him.
 This said sovereign of the gods, moreover killed his father Kronos,
that he might seize upon his kingdom.

<span id="ix.xviii-p26"></span>Oh! to how many charges is the sovereign
of the gods amenable, <span id="fr_3508"></span>[3509](#fn_3508) and how
many deaths does he deserve *to die*, as an adulterer, and as a
sorcerer, <span id="fr_3509"></span>[3510](#fn_3509) and as a pæderast! 
Read to the sovereign of the gods, O men of Greece, the law concerning
parricide, and the condemnation pronounced on adultery, and *about* the
shame that attaches to the vile sin of pæderasty.  How many adulterers
has the sovereign of the gods indoctrinated *in sin!*  Nay, how many
pæderasts, and sorcerers, and murderers!  So that, if a man be found
indulging his passions, he must not be put to death:  because he has
done this that he may become like the sovereign of the gods; and, if he
be found a murderer, he has an excuse *in* the sovereign of the gods;
and, if a man be a sorcerer, he has learned it from the sovereign of the
gods; and, if he be a pæderast, the sovereign of the gods is his
apologist.  Then, again, if one should speak of courage, Achilles was
more valiant that this said sovereign of the gods:  for he slew the man
that slew his friend; but the sovereign of the gods wept over Sarpedon
his son when he was dying, being distressed *for him*.

<span id="ix.xviii-p29"></span>Pluto, again, who is a god, carried off
Kora, <span id="fr_3510"></span>[3511](#fn_3510) and the mother of Kora
was hurrying hither and thither searching for her daughter in all desert
places; and, *although* Alexander Paris, when he had carried off Helen,
paid the penalty of vengeance, as *having made himself* her lover by
force, yet Pluto, who is a god, when he carried off Kora, remained
without rebuke; and, *although* Menelaus, who is a man, knew how to
search for Helen his wife, yet Demeter, who is a goddess, knew not where
to search for Kora her daughter.

<span id="ix.xviii-p31"></span>Let Hephæstus put away jealousy from him,
and not indulge resentment. <span id="fr_3511"></span>[3512](#fn_3511)  
For he was hated, <span id="fr_3512"></span>[3513](#fn_3512) because he
was old and lame; while Ares was loved, because he was a youth and
beautiful in form.  There was, however, a reproof *administered in
respect* of the adultery.  Hephæstus was not, indeed, *at first* aware
of the love existing between Venus <span
id="fr_3513"></span>[3514](#fn_3513) his wife and Ares; but, when he did
become acquainted with it, Hephæstus said:  “Come, see a ridiculous and
senseless piece of behaviour—how to me, who am her own, Venus, the
daughter of the sovereign of the gods, is offering insult—to me, *I
say*, who am her own, and is paying honour to Ares, who is a stranger to
her.”  But to the sovereign of the gods it was not displeasing:  for he
loved such as were like these.  Penelope, moreover, remained a widow
twenty years, because she was expecting *the return of* her husband
Odysseus, and busied herself with cunning tasks, <span
id="fr_3514"></span>[3515](#fn_3514) and persevered in works of skill,
while all those suitors kept pressing her *to marry them;* but Venus,
who is a goddess, when Hephæstus her husband was close to her, deserted
him, because she was overcome by love for Ares.  Hearken, men of
Greece:  which of you would have dared to do this, or would even have
endured to see it?  And, if any one “should” dare *to act so*, what
torture would be in store for him, or what scourgings!

<span id="ix.xviii-p36"></span>Kronos, again, who is a god, who devoured
all those children *of his*, was not even brought before a court of
justice.  They further tell *us* that the sovereign of the gods, his
son, was the only <span id="page_741">p. 741</span> <span
id="ix.xviii-Page_741"></span>one that escaped from him; and that the
madness of Kronos his father was cheated *of its purpose* because Rhea
his wife, the mother of the sovereign of the gods, offered him a stone
in the place of the said sovereign of the gods, his son, to prevent him
from devouring him.  Hearken, men of Greece, and reflect upon this
madness!  Why, *even* the dumb animal that grazes in the field knows its
*proper* food, and does not touch strange food; the wild beast, too, and
the reptile, and the bird, know their food.  As for men, I need not say
anything about them:  ye yourselves are acquainted with their food, and
understand it *well*.  But Kronos, who is a god, not knowing his
*proper* food, ate up a stone!

<span id="ix.xviii-p37"></span>Therefore, O men of Greece, if ye will
have such gods as these, do not find fault with one another when ye do
such-like things.  Be not angry with thy son when he forms the design to
kill thee:  because he *thus* resembles the sovereign of the gods.  And,
if a man commit adultery with thy wife, why dost thou think of him as an
enemy, and yet to the sovereign of the gods, who is like him, doest
worship and service?  Why, too, dost thou find fault with thy wife when
she has committed adultery and leads a dissolute life, <span
id="fr_3515"></span>[3516](#fn_3515) and *yet* payest honour to Venus,
and placest her *images* in shrines?  Persuade *your* Solon to repeal
his laws; Lycurgus, also, to make no laws; let the Areopagus
repeal <span id="fr_3516"></span>[3517](#fn_3516) theirs, and judge no
more; and let the Athenians have councils no longer.  Let the Athenians
discharge Socrates *from his office:*  for no one like Kronos has *ever*
come before him.  Let them not put to death Orestes, who killed his
mother:  for, lo! the sovereign of the gods did worse things than these
to his father.  Œdipus also *too* hastily inflicted mischief on himself,
in depriving his eyes of sight, because he had killed his mother
unwittingly:  for he did not think about <span
id="fr_3517"></span>[3518](#fn_3517) the sovereign of the gods, who
killed his father and *yet* remained without punishment.  Medea, again,
who killed her children, the Corinthians banish *from their country;*
and *yet* they do service and honour to Kronos, who devoured his
children.  Then, too, as regards Alexander Paris—he was right in
carrying off Helen:  *for he did it* that he might become like Pluto,
who carried off Kora.  Let *your* men be set free from law, and let
*your* cities be *the abode* of wanton women, and a dwelling-place for
sorcerers.

<span id="ix.xviii-p41"></span>Wherefore, O men of Greece, seeing that
your gods are grovelling like yourselves, and your heroes destitute of
courage, <span id="fr_3518"></span>[3519](#fn_3518) as your dramas tell
and your stories declare—then, again, *what shall be said* of the
tribulations of Orestes; and the couch of Thyestes; and the foul taint
*in the family* of Pelops; and concerning Danaus, who through jealousy
killed his sons-*in-law*, and deprived them of offspring; the banquet of
Thyestes, too, *feeding upon* the corpse *set before him by way* of
vengeance for her *whom he had wronged; about* Procne also, to this hour
screaming as she flies; her sister too, warbling, with her tongue cut
out? <span id="fr_3519"></span>[3520](#fn_3519)   What, moreover, is it
fitting to say about the murder committed by Œdipus, who took his own
mother *to wife*, and whose brothers killed one another, they being *at
the same time* his sons?

<span id="ix.xviii-p44"></span>Your festivals, too, I hate; for there is
no moderation where they are; the sweet flutes also, dispellers of care,
which play as an incitement to dancing; <span
id="fr_3520"></span>[3521](#fn_3520) and the preparation of ointments,
wherewith ye anoint yourselves; and the chaplets which ye put on.  In
the abundance of your wickedness, too, ye have forgotten shame, and your
understandings have become blinded, and ye have been infuriated <span
id="fr_3521"></span>[3522](#fn_3521) by the heat *of passion*, and have
loved the adulterous bed. <span id="fr_3522"></span>[3523](#fn_3522)

<span id="ix.xviii-p48"></span>Had these things been said by another,
perhaps *our adversaries* would have brought an accusation against him,
*on the plea* that they were untrue.  But your own poets say them, and
your own hymns and dramas declare them.

<span id="ix.xviii-p49"></span>Come, therefore, and be instructed in the
word of God, and in the wisdom which is fraught with comfort.  Rejoice,
and become partakers of it.  Acquaint yourselves with the King Immortal,
and acknowledge His servants.  For not in arms do they make their boast,
nor do they commit murders:  because our Commander has no delight in
abundance of strength, nor yet in horsemen and their gallant array, nor
yet in illustrious descent; but He delights in the pure soul, fenced
round by a rampart of righteousness.  The word of God, moreover, and the
promises of our good King, and the works of God, are ever teaching us. 
Oh *the blessedness of* the soul that is redeemed by the power of the
word!  Oh *the blessedness of* the trumpet of peace without war!  Oh
*the blessedness of* the teaching which quenches the fire of appetite!
which, *though it* makes not poets, nor fits *men* to be philosophers,
nor has *among its votaries* the orators of the crowd; yet instructs
*men*, and makes the dead not to die, and lifts men from the earth *as*
gods up to the region which is above the firmament.  Come, be
instructed, and be like me:  for I too was *once* as ye are.

<span id="ix.xviii-p50"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3494"></span>[739:3495](0081488.htm#fr_3494) <span
id="ix.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p4"></span> This piece has much in common with the
*Discourse to the Greeks* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xviii-p4.1"></span>Λόγος πρὸς ῞Ελληνας</span>), ascribed by many
to Justin, which is contained in vol. i. pp. 271–272 of this series. 
Two things seem to be evident:  (1) That neither of the two pieces is
the original composition:  for each contains something not found in the
other; (2) That the original was in Greek:  for the Syriac has in some
instances evidently mistranslated the Greek.

<span id="fn_3495"></span>[739:3496](0081488.htm#fr_3495) <span
id="ix.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p6"></span> The Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xviii-p6.1"></span>ὑπομνήματα</span>.

<span id="fn_3496"></span>[739:3497](0081488.htm#fr_3496) <span
id="ix.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p8"></span> Lit., “and in the beginning of his
words.”

<span id="fn_3497"></span>[739:3498](0081488.htm#fr_3497) <span
id="ix.xviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p10"></span> Lit. “what is the newness and
strangeness of it.”

<span id="fn_3498"></span>[739:3499](0081488.htm#fr_3498) <span
id="ix.xviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p12"></span> The word also means “sin;” and this
notion is the more prominent of the two in what follows.

<span id="fn_3499"></span>[739:3500](0081488.htm#fr_3499) <span
id="ix.xviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p13"></span> It is difficult to assign any
satisfactory meaning to the word \*\*\*, which appears, however, to be
the reading of the <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xviii-p13.1"></span>ms.</span>, since Cureton endeavours to
justify the rendering given.  “Calamities,” a sense the word will also
bear, seems no easier of explanation.  If we could assume the meaning to
be “nations” (*nationes*), a word similar in sound to that found in the
text, explaining it of *heathen* peoples, Gentiles (comp. Tertullian,
*De Idol*., 22, “per deos nationum”), this might seem to meet the
difficulty.  But there is no trace in this composition of a *Latin*
influence:  if a foreign word *must* be used, we should rather have
expected the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xviii-p13.2"></span>ἔθνη</span>.

<span id="fn_3500"></span>[739:3501](0081488.htm#fr_3500) <span
id="ix.xviii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p14"></span> *Il*., ii. 177 sq.

<span id="fn_3501"></span>[739:3502](0081488.htm#fr_3501) <span
id="ix.xviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p15"></span> Lit., “they say.”

<span id="fn_3502"></span>[739:3503](0081488.htm#fr_3502) <span
id="ix.xviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p16"></span> It has been proposed to substitute in
the Greek copy <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xviii-p16.1"></span>λιπαροῦ</span>, “dainty,” for <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.xviii-p16.2"></span>λεπροῦ</span>.  But the
Syriac confirms the <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xviii-p16.3"></span>ms.</span> reading.  The term is thought to
be expressive of the contempt in which shepherds were held.  See vol. i.
p. 271, note 1.

<span id="fn_3503"></span>[739:3504](0081488.htm#fr_3503) <span
id="ix.xviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p18"></span> In the Greek this is adduced as an
evidence of his weakness:  “because he was unable to stop his ears by
*his* self-control (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xviii-p18.1"></span>φρονήσει</span>).”

<span id="fn_3504"></span>[739:3505](0081488.htm#fr_3504) <span
id="ix.xviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p20"></span> \*\*\*, the reading of the text, which
can only mean “fled,” is manifestly incorrect.  The Aphel of this verb,
\*\*\*, “caused to flee,” is suggested by Dr. Payne Smith, who also
proposes \*\*\*, “exstirpavit.”

<span id="fn_3505"></span>[740:3506](0081488.htm#fr_3505) <span
id="ix.xviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p22"></span> Or, “*your* heroes.”

<span id="fn_3506"></span>[740:3507](0081488.htm#fr_3506) <span
id="ix.xviii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p23"></span> This is not intended as a translation of
\*\*\*, which is literally “conquered.”  Dr. Payne Smith thinks it just
possible that there was in the Greek some derivative of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.xviii-p23.1"></span>ὑπερβάλλω</span> ="to
surpass belief,” which the Syrian translator misunderstood.

<span id="fn_3507"></span>[740:3508](0081488.htm#fr_3507) <span
id="ix.xviii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p24"></span> This is conjectured to be the meaning of
what would be literally rendered, “*et id quod coactum est*.”

<span id="fn_3508"></span>[740:3509](0081488.htm#fr_3508) <span
id="ix.xviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p27"></span> Lit., “of how many censures is…full.”

<span id="fn_3509"></span>[740:3510](0081488.htm#fr_3509) <span
id="ix.xviii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p28"></span> Since he could change his form to suit
his purpose.

<span id="fn_3510"></span>[740:3511](0081488.htm#fr_3510) <span
id="ix.xviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p30"></span> That is, “the Daughter” (namely, of
Demeter), the name under which Proserpine was worshipped in Attica.

<span id="fn_3511"></span>[740:3512](0081488.htm#fr_3511) <span
id="ix.xviii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p32"></span> Because the behaviour of which he had to
complain was sanctioned by the highest of the gods.

<span id="fn_3512"></span>[740:3513](0081488.htm#fr_3512) <span
id="ix.xviii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p33"></span> For \*\*\*, “was tried,” read \*\*\*. 
The Greek has <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xviii-p33.1"></span>μεμίσητο</span>.  Cureton:  “forgotten.”

<span id="fn_3513"></span>[740:3514](0081488.htm#fr_3513) <span
id="ix.xviii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p34"></span> The word is “Balthi.”

<span id="fn_3514"></span>[740:3515](0081488.htm#fr_3514) <span
id="ix.xviii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p35"></span> Dr. Payne Smith reads \*\*\* instead of
\*\*\*, word which, as Cureton says, is not in the lexicons.

<span id="fn_3515"></span>[741:3516](0081488.htm#fr_3515) <span
id="ix.xviii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p38"></span> The reading of the Greek copy, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.xviii-p38.1"></span>ἀκολάστως ζῶσαν</span>,
is here given.  The Syrian adapter, misunderstanding <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.xviii-p38.2"></span>ἀκολάστως</span>,
renders:  “and is without punishment.”

<span id="fn_3516"></span>[741:3517](0081488.htm#fr_3516) <span
id="ix.xviii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p39"></span> Cureton, “break.”

<span id="fn_3517"></span>[741:3518](0081488.htm#fr_3517) <span
id="ix.xviii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p40"></span> Lit. “look at.”

<span id="fn_3518"></span>[741:3519](0081488.htm#fr_3518) <span
id="ix.xviii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p42"></span> So in the Greek copy.  The Syriac, which
has “valiant,” appears to have mistaken <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xviii-p42.1"></span>ἄνανδροι</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xviii-p42.2"></span>ἀνδρεῖοι</span>.

<span id="fn_3519"></span>[741:3520](0081488.htm#fr_3519) <span
id="ix.xviii-p42.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p43"></span> The tradition seems to be followed which
makes Procne to have been changed into a swallow, and her sister
(Philomela) into a nightingale.

<span id="fn_3520"></span>[741:3521](0081488.htm#fr_3520) <span
id="ix.xviii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p45"></span> Cureton:  “play with a tremulous
motion.”  But the Syriac very well answers to the Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.xviii-p45.1"></span>ἐκκαλούμενοι πρὸς
οῖστρώδεις κινήσεις</span>, if we take \*\*\* to denote *result*: 
*q.d*., “so as to produce *movement*.”

<span id="fn_3521"></span>[741:3522](0081488.htm#fr_3521) <span
id="ix.xviii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p46"></span> Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xviii-p46.1"></span>ἐκβακχευόμενοι</span>.

<span id="fn_3522"></span>[741:3523](0081488.htm#fr_3522) <span
id="ix.xviii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p47"></span> Lit. “bed of falsity.”  \[Compare notes
on vol. i. pp. 271, 272.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elucidations.](0081489)
