[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081324)  [Next](0081326) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xvi.vii"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xvi.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7 (23).</span>

<span id="vii.xvi.vii-p2"></span>Then Hades, receiving Prince Satan,
said to him, with vehement revilings:  O prince of perdition, and leader
of extermination, Beelzebub, derision of angels, to be spit upon by the
just, why didst thou wish to do this?  Didst thou wish to crucify the
King of glory, in whose death thou didst promise us so great spoils? 
Like a fool, thou didst not know what thou wast doing.  For, behold,
that Jesus by the splendour of His divinity is putting to flight all the
darkness of death, and He has broken into the strong lowest depths of
our dungeons, and has brought out the captives, and released those who
were bound.  And all who used to groan under our torments insult us, and
by their prayers our dominions are taken by storm, and our realms
conquered, and no race of men has now any respect for us.  Moreover,
also, we are grievously threatened by the dead, who have never been
haughty to us, and who have not at any time been joyful as captives.  O
Prince Satan, father of all impious wretches and renegades, why didst
thou wish to do this?  Of those who from the beginning, even until now,
have despaired of salvation and life, no bellowing after the usual
fashion is now heard here; and no groaning of theirs resounds, nor in
any of their faces is a trace of tears found.  O Prince Satan, possessor
of the keys of the lower regions, all thy riches which thou hadst
acquired by the tree of transgression and the loss of paradise, thou
hast now lost by the tree of the cross, and all thy joy has perished. 
When thou didst hang up that Christ Jesus the King of glory, thou wast
acting against thyself and against me.  Henceforth thou shalt know what
eternal torments and infinite punishments thou art to endure in my
everlasting keeping.  O Prince Satan, author of death, and source of all
pride, thou oughtest first to have inquired into the bad cause of that
Jesus.  Him in whom thou perceivedst no fault, why, without reason,
didst thou dare unjustly to crucify? and why hast thou brought to our
regions one innocent and just, and lost the guilty, the impious, and the
unjust of the whole world?

<span id="vii.xvi.vii-p3"></span>And when Hades had thus spoken to
Prince Satan, then the King of glory said to Hades:  Satan the prince
will be in thy power for ever, in place of Adam and his sons, my just
ones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](0081326)
