[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081238)  [Next](0081240) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.x.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.x.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.x.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.—What the Lord Jesus Did in the
City of Nazareth.</span>

<span id="vii.x.iv-p2"></span>It is glorious that Thomas the Israelite
and apostle of the Lord gives an account also of the works of Jesus
after He came out of Egypt into Nazareth.  Understand all of you, my
dearest brethren, what the Lord Jesus did when He was in the city of
Nazareth; the first chapter of which is as follows:—

<span id="vii.x.iv-p3"></span>And when Jesus was five years old, there
fell a great rain upon the earth, and the boy Jesus walked up and down
through it.  And there was a terrible rain, and He collected it into a
fish-pond, and ordered it by His word to become clear.  And immediately
it became so.  Again He took of the clay which was of that fish-pond,
and made of it to the number of twelve sparrows.  And it was the Sabbath
when Jesus did this among the boys of the Jews.  And the boys of the
Jews went away, and said to Joseph His father:  Behold, thy son was
playing along with us, and he took clay and made sparrows, which it was
not lawful to do on the Sabbath; and he has broken it.  And Joseph went
away to the boy Jesus, and said to Him:  Why hast thou done this, which
it was not lawful to do on the Sabbath?  And Jesus opened His hands, and
ordered the sparrows, saying:  Go up into the air, and fly; nobody shall
kill you.  And they flew, and began to cry out, and praise God
Almighty.  And the Jews seeing what had hap<span id="page_401">p.
401</span> <span id="vii.x.iv-Page_401"></span>pened, wondered, and went
away and told the miracles which Jesus had done.  But a Pharisee who was
with Jesus took an olive branch, and began to let the water out of the
fountain which Jesus had made.  And when Jesus saw this, He said to him
in a rage:  Thou impious and ignorant Sodomite, what harm have my works
the fountains of water done thee?  Behold, thou shalt become like a dry
tree, having neither roots, nor leaves, nor fruit.  And immediately he
dried up, and fell to the ground, and died.  And his parents took him
away dead, and reproached Joseph, saying:  See what thy son has done;
teach him to pray, and not to blaspheme.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](0081240)
