[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081104)  [Next](0081106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxi.x"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxi.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xxi.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—Peter’s Reply to Simon.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxi.x-p2"></span>And Peter said:  “Since you have thus
spoken to please the multitudes who are present, I shall speak to them,
not to please them, but to tell them the truth.  Tell me how you know
all those who are present to be worthy, when not even one of them agreed
with your exposition of the subject; for the giving of applause to me in
opposition to you is not the act of those who agree with you, but of
those who agree with me, to whom they gave the applause for having
spoken the truth.  But since God, who is just, judges the mind of each
one—a doctrine which you affirm to be true—He would not have wished this
to be given through the left hand to those on the right hand, exactly as
the man who receives anything from a robber is himself guilty.  So that,
on this account, He did not wish them to receive what is brought by you;
but they are to receive the revelation through the Son, who has been set
apart for this work.  For to whom is it reasonable that the Father
should give a revelation, but to His only Son, because He knows Him to
be worthy of such a revelation?  And so this is a matter which one
cannot teach or be taught, but it must be revealed by the ineffable hand
to him who is worthy to know it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](0081106)
