[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081362)  [Next](0081364) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p1.1"></span>Acts of Saint Philip the Apostle When He
Went to Upper Hellas.</span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p2.1"></span>And</span> it came to pass in those days,
when Philip entered into the city of Athens called Hellas, there
assembled to him three hundred philosophers, saying:  Let us go and see
what his wisdom is; for they say about the wise men of Asia, that their
wisdom is great.  For they thought that Philip was a philosopher, since
he was travelling in the dress of a recluse; and they did not know that
he was an apostle of Christ.  For the dress which Jesus gave to His
disciples was a mantle only, and a linen cloth. <span
id="fr_2184"></span>[2185](#fn_2184)   Thus, then, Philip was going
about.  On this account, therefore, when the philosophers of Hellas saw
him, they were afraid.  They assembled therefore into one place, and
said to each other:  Come, let us look into our books, lest somehow this
stranger overcome us, and put us to shame.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p4"></span>And having done so, they came
together to the same place, and say to Philip:  We have doctrines of our
fathers in which we are pleased, seeking after knowledge; but if thou
hast anything new, O stranger, show it to us without envy boldly:  for
we have need of nothing else, but only to hear something new. <span
id="fr_2185"></span>[2186](#fn_2185)

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p6"></span>And Philip answering, said to them: 
O philosophers of Hellas, if you wish to hear some new thing, and are
desirous of something new, you ought to throw away from you the
disposition of the old man; as my Lord said, It is impossible to put new
wine into old bottles, since the bottle is burst, and the wine spilled,
and the bottle destroyed. <span id="fr_2186"></span>[2187](#fn_2186)  
But they put new wine into fresh bottles, so that both may be
preserved.  And these <span id="page_504">p. 504</span> <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-Page_504"></span>things the Lord said in parables,
teaching us in His holy wisdom, that many will love the new wine, not
having a bottle fresh and new.  And I love you, O men of Hellas, and I
congratulate you for having said, We love something new.  For
instruction really new and fresh my Lord has brought into the world, in
order that He might sweep away all worldly instruction.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p8"></span>The philosophers say:  Who is it that
thou callest thy Lord?  Philip says:  My Lord is Jesus in heaven.  And
they said to him:  Show him to our comprehension without envy, that we
also may believe in him.  And Philip said:  He with whom I am about to
make you acquainted as Lord, is above every name; there is no
other. <span id="fr_2187"></span>[2188](#fn_2187)   And this only I
say:  As you have said, Do not refuse us through envy, let it not be
that I should refuse you; but rather in great exultation and in great
joy I have to reveal to you that name, for I have no other work in this
world than this proclamation. <span id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188)
  For when my Lord came into this world, He chose us, being twelve in
number, having filled us with the Holy Spirit; from His light He made us
know who He was, and commanded us to preach all salvation through Him,
because there is no other name named out of heaven than this. <span
id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189)   On this account I have come to
you, to make you fully assured, not in word only, but also in the
showing forth of wonderful works in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p12"></span>And when the philosophers heard
this, they say to Philip:  This name that has been heard of by us from
thee we have never found in the books of our fathers; now, therefore,
how can we know about thy words?  And moreover, in addition, they say to
him:  Allow us three days, that we may consult with each other about
this name; for we lay no little stress upon this—to apostatize from our
fathers’ religion.  Philip therefore says to them:  Consult as you wish;
for there is no deceit in the matter.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p13"></span>And the three hundred philosophers
having assembled, spoke with each other, saying:  You know that this man
has brought a strange philosophy, and the words spoken by him bring us
to distraction.  What, then, shall we do about him, or about the name of
him who is called Jesus, the king of the ages, whom he speaks of?  And
moreover they say to each other:  Assuredly we cannot reason with him,
but the high priest of the Jews can.  If therefore it seem good, let us
send to him, in order that he may stand up to this stranger, and that we
may learn accurately the name that is preached.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p14"></span>They wrote therefore to Jerusalem
after this manner:—The philosophers of Hellas to Ananias, the great high
priest of the Jews in Jerusalem.  There being between thee and us at all
times great <span id="fr_2190"></span>[2191](#fn_2190) …as thou knowest
that we Athenians are searchers after truth.  A certain foreigner has
come to Hellas, Philip by name; and, in a word, he has disturbed us
exceedingly, both by words and by extraordinary miracles, and he
introduces a glorious name, Jesus, professing himself to be his
disciple.  And he does also wonders of which we write to you, in that he
has cast out demons that have been long in men, and makes the deaf hear,
the blind see; and what is more wonderful—which also we should have
first mentioned—he has raised up men after they were dead, that have
fairly completed the number of their days. <span
id="fr_2191"></span>[2192](#fn_2191)   And the fame of him has gone
abroad into all Hellas and Macedonia; and there are many coming to him
from the cities round about, bringing those who are ill with various
diseases, and he heals them all through the name of Jesus.  On this
account, therefore, come to us without any reluctance, that thou thyself
mayst announce to us what Jesus, this name which he teaches, means.  For
on this account also we have sent this letter to thee, O high priest.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p17"></span>And when he had read, he was filled
with great wrath, and rent his clothes, and said:  Has that deceiver
gone even to Athens, among the philosophers, to lead them astray?  And
the Mansemat—that is, Satan—entered into Ananias unawares, and filled
him with anger and rage; and he said:  If I allow that Philip himself,
and those with him, to live, the law will be entirely destroyed, and
their teaching will likely fill the whole earth.  And the high priest
went into his own house, and the teachers of the law, and the Pharisees;
and they consulted with each other, saying:  What shall we do about
these things? <span id="fr_2192"></span>[2193](#fn_2192)   And they say
to the high priest Ananias:  Stand up and arm thyself, and five hundred
able men out of the people, and go away to Athens, and by all means kill
Philip, and thus thou shalt overturn his teaching.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p19"></span>And having put on the high priest’s
robe, he came to Hellas in great pomp, with the five hundred men.  And
Philip was in the house of a certain chief man of the city, with the
brethren who had believed.  And the high priest and those with him, and
the three hundred philosophers, went up to the gateway of the house
where Philip was; and it was told Philip that they were outside.  And he
rose up and went out.  And when the high priest saw him, he says to
him:  O Philip, sorcerer and magician, for I know thee, that in
Jerusalem thy master the deceiver called thee Son of Thunder. <span
id="fr_2193"></span>[2194](#fn_2193)   Was <span id="page_505">p.
505</span> <span id="vii.xxviii.ii-Page_505"></span>not the whole of
Judæa sufficient for you, but you have come here also to deceive men who
are searchers after wisdom?  And Philip said:  Would that, O Ananias,
thy covering of unbelief were taken away from thy heart, that thou
mightst know my words, and from them learn whether I am a deceiver, or
thou!

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p21"></span>Ananias having heard this, said to
Philip:  I shall give answer to all.  And Philip said:  Speak.  The high
priest says:  O men of Hellas, this Philip believes in a man called
Jesus, who was born among us, who also taught this heresy, and destroyed
the law and the temple, and brought to nought the purification through
Moses, and the new moons, because he says, These have not been commanded
by God.  And when we saw that he thus destroyed the law, we stood up
against him, and crucified him, that his teaching might not be
fulfilled.  For many changes were brought in by him; and he gave an evil
testimony, for he ate all things in common, and mixed with blood, after
the manner of the Gentiles. <span id="fr_2194"></span>[2195](#fn_2194)  
And having given him up, we put him to death, and buried him in a tomb;
and these disciples of his having stolen him, have proclaimed everywhere
that he has risen from the dead, and have led astray a great multitude
by professing that he is at the right hand of God in heaven. <span
id="fr_2195"></span>[2196](#fn_2195)   But now these men, themselves
having the circumcision as we also have, have not followed it, since
they began to do many deeds of power in Jerusalem through the name of
Jesus; and having been cast out of Jerusalem, they go about the world,
and deceive all men by the magic of that Jesus, as also now this Philip
has come to you to deceive you by the same means.  But I shall carry him
away with myself to Jerusalem, because Archelaus the king is also
searching for him to kill him.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p24"></span>And when the multitude standing
round heard this, those indeed who had been confirmed in the faith were
not shaken nor made to waver; for they knew that Philip would conquer in
the glory of Jesus.  Philip therefore stated his case in the power of
Christ with great boldness, exulting and saying:  I, O men of Athens,
and those of you who are philosophers, have come to you, not to teach
you with words, but by the showing forth of miracles; and in part you
have quickly seen <span id="fr_2196"></span>[2197](#fn_2196) the things
that have come to pass through me, in that name by which the high priest
himself is cast off. <span id="fr_2197"></span>[2198](#fn_2197)   For,
behold, I shall cry to my God, and teach you, and you will prove the
words of both.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p27"></span>The high priest having heard this,
ran to Philip, wishing to scourge him, and that same hour his whole hand
was dried up, and his eyes were blinded; and in like manner also the
five hundred who were with him were also themselves blinded.  And they
reviled and cursed the high priest, saying:  Coming out of Jerusalem we
said to thee, Refrain; for, being men, we cannot fight against
God. <span id="fr_2198"></span>[2199](#fn_2198)   But we entreat thee, O
Philip, apostle of the God Jesus, give us the light that is through him,
that we also may truly be his slaves.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p29"></span>And Philip, having seen what had
come to pass, said:  O weak nature! which has thrown itself upon us, but
straightway has been brought down low into itself; O bitter sea! which
rouses its waves against us, and thinks to cast us out, but which by
itself lulls its waves to rest.  Now therefore, O our good steward
Jesus, the holy light, Thou hast not overlooked us who are all together
crying up to Thee in all good works, but hast come to finish them
through us.  Now therefore come, Lord Jesus; reprove the folly of these
men.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p30"></span>The high priest says to Philip: 
Dost thou then think to turn us away from the traditions of our fathers,
and the God of the desert, and Moses; and dost thou imagine that thou
wilt make us followers of Jesus the Nazarene?  Then Philip says to him: 
Behold, I shall pray to my God to come and manifest Himself before thee
and the five hundred, and before all here; for perhaps thou wilt change
thy mind, and believe.  But if even to the end thou remain in unbelief,
there is coming upon thee an extraordinary thing, which shall be spoken
of to generations of generations—that also thou shalt go down alive,
down into Hades, before the face of all seeing thee, because thou yet
abidest in unbelief, because also thou seekest to turn away this
multitude from the true life.  And Philip prayed, saying:  O holy Father
of the holy Son Jesus Christ, who hast granted to me to believe in Him,
send Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ to reprove the unbelieving high
priest, that Thy name may be glorified in Christ the Beloved.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p31"></span>And while Philip was yet crying out
this, suddenly the heavens were opened, and Jesus appeared coming down
in most excellent glory, and in lightning; and His face was shining
sevenfold more than the sun, and His garments were whiter than snow, so
that also all the idols of Athens fell suddenly to the ground.  And the
people fled in anguish; and the demons dwelling among them cried out: 
Behold, we also flee because of Him who has appeared to the city, Jesus
the Son of God.  Then Philip says to the high priest:  Hearest thou the
demons crying out because of Him who has been seen, and believest thou
not in Him who is present that He <span id="page_506">p. 506</span>
<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-Page_506"></span>is Lord of all?  The high
priest says:  I have no other God than the one in the desert.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p32"></span>And as Jesus was going up into
heaven there happened a very great earthquake, so that the place on
which they stood was cleft; and the crowds ran and fell at the feet of
the apostle, crying out:  Have mercy upon us, O man of God!  In like
manner also the five hundred men cried out themselves also again:  Have
mercy upon us, O Philip, that we may know thee, and through thee Jesus
the light of life:  for we said to this unbelieving high priest, Being
sinful men, we cannot fight against God.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p33"></span>Then Philip says:  There is no
hatred in us, but the grace of Christ will make you receive your sight;
but I will make the high priest receive his sight before you, that at
this you may the more believe.  And a voice out of heaven was brought to
Philip:  O Philip, son once of thunder, but now of meekness, whatever
thou mayst ask of my Father, He shall do for thee.  And all the crowd
was terror-struck at the voice, for the sound of it was greater than
that of thunder.  Then Philip says to the high priest:  In the name of
the power of the voice of my Lord, receive thy sight, Ananias.  And
immediately he received his sight, and looked round, and said:  What is
there in the magic of Jesus, that this Philip within a short time has
made me blind, and again within a short time has made me receive my
sight?  Dost thou then, said Philip, believe in Jesus?  The high priest
says:  You do not think, do you, that you can bewitch me, and persuade
me?  And the five hundred who were with him, having heard that their
high priest, having received his sight, was yet unbelieving, said to the
bystanders to pray Philip that he should make them receive their sight,
that, *said they*, we may cut off this unbelieving high priest.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p34"></span>And Philip said:  Do not avenge
yourselves upon the wicked.  And he says to the high priest:  There will
be a certain great sign upon thee.  He says to Philip:  I know that thou
art a sorcerer and a disciple of Jesus:  thou dost not bewitch me.  And
the apostle said to Jesus:  <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p34.1"></span>Sabarthan, sabathabt, bramanuch</span>,
come quickly.  And immediately the earth was cleft in the place where
Ananias was, and swallowed him up as far as the knees.  And Ananias
cried out:  O great *is the* power of the true witchcraft, because it
has cleft the earth, when Philip threatened it in Hebrew, and adjured
it; and it holds me even to the knees, and by the heels some hooks as it
were drag me downwards, that I may believe in Philip; but he cannot
persuade me, for from Jerusalem I know his magic tricks.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p35"></span>And Philip, enraged, said:  O earth,
lay fast hold of him, even to the navel.  And immediately it dragged him
down.  And he said:  The one of my feet underneath is turned into ice,
and the other is frightfully hot; but by thy magic, Philip, I will not
be overcome.  Except, therefore, that I am sore tortured underneath, I
do not believe at all.  And the crowds wished to stone him.  And Philip
says:  Not so; for this has in the meantime happened, that he has been
swallowed up as far as the navel, that the salvation of your souls may
be effected, because he would almost have drawn you by his wicked words
into unbelief.  But if even he repented, I should bring him up out of
the earth to the salvation of his soul; but assuredly he is not worthy
of salvation.  If, then, he remain in unbelief, you shall see him sunk
down into the abyss, unless the Lord intends to raise those who are in
Hades, that they may confess that Jesus is Lord.  For in that day every
tongue shall confess that Jesus is Lord, <span
id="fr_2199"></span>[2200](#fn_2199) and that there is one glory of the
Father, and the Son, with the Holy Spirit for evermore.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p37"></span>And Philip, having said this,
extended his right hand, stretching it through the air over the five
hundred men in the name of Jesus.  And their eyes were opened, and they
all praised God with one mouth, saying:  We bless Thee, O Christ Jesus,
the God of Philip, that thou hast driven the blindness away from us, and
hast given us Thy light, the Gospel.  And Philip rejoiced exceedingly at
their words, because they were thus confirmed in the faith.  And after
this, Philip, having turned to the high priest, said:  Confess thou also
in a pure heart that Jesus is Lord, that thou mayst be saved, like those
with thee.  But the high priest laughed at Philip, and remained in
unbelief.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p38"></span>Philip then, seeing that he remained
in unbelief, having looked at him, says to the earth:  Open thy mouth,
and swallow him up as far as his neck in the presence of those who have
believed in Christ Jesus.  And in the same hour the earth, having opened
its mouth, received him as far as the neck.  And the multitude communed
with each other on account of the wonders that had happened.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p39"></span>A certain chief man of the city came
crying out, and saying:  O blessed apostle, a certain demon has assailed
my son, and cried out, saying to me, Since thou hast allowed a foreigner
to come into your city, thou who hast been the first to do away
with <span id="fr_2200"></span>[2201](#fn_2200) our worship and our
sacrifices, what shall I do for thee, except to kill this thine only
begotten son?  And after he said this, he strangled my son.  Now
therefore, I beseech thee, O apostle of Christ, do not allow my joy to
be turned into sorrow, because I also have believed thy words.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p41"></span>And the apostle, having heard this,
said:  I <span id="page_507">p. 507</span> <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-Page_507"></span>wonder at the activity of the demons,
that it is active in every place, and dares to assail those to whose
help I have not been able to come, <span
id="fr_2201"></span>[2202](#fn_2201) as now they have tried you, wishing
to cause you to offend.  And he says to the man:  Bring me thy son, and
I will give him to thee alive, through my Christ.  And rejoicing, he ran
to bring his son.  And when he came near his house, he cried out,
saying:  My son, I have come to thee to carry thee to the apostle, so
that he may present thee to me living.  And he ordered his slaves to
carry the bed; and his son was twenty-three years old.  And when Philip
saw him, he was moved; and he turned to the high priest, and said:  This
has happened as a chance for thee:  if, therefore, I shall raise him up,
wilt thou henceforth believe?  And he says:  I know your magic arts,
that thou wilt raise him up; but I will not believe thee.  And Philip,
enraged, said:  A curse upon thee! then go down altogether into the
abyss before the face of all these.  And at the same hour he went down
into Hades alive, except that the high priest’s robe flew off from him;
and because of this, from that day, no one knew what became of the
priest’s robe.  And the apostle turned round and prayed for the boy; and
having driven the demon away from him, he raised him up, and set him
beside his father alive.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p43"></span>And the multitude having beheld
this, cried out:  The God of Philip is the only God, who has punished
the unbelief of the high priest, and driven away the demon from the
young man, and raised him up from the dead.  And the five hundred having
seen the high priest swallowed up into the abyss, and the other
miracles, besought Philip, and he gave them the seal in Christ.  And
Philip abode in Athens two years; and having founded a church, appointed
a bishop and a presbyter, and so went away to Parthia, preaching
Christ.  To whom be glory for ever.  Amen.

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p44"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2184"></span>[503:2185](0081363.htm#fr_2184) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p3"></span> Comp. [Matt.
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010), [Mark
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2185"></span>[503:2186](0081363.htm#fr_2185) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p5"></span> [Acts xvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#021)<span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2186"></span>[503:2187](0081363.htm#fr_2186) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p7"></span> Comp. [Matt. ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#017)<span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p7.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_2187"></span>[504:2188](0081363.htm#fr_2187) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p9"></span> [Eph. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021)<span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[504:2189](0081363.htm#fr_2188) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p10"></span> Or, preaching.

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[504:2190](0081363.htm#fr_2189) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p11"></span> [Acts iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[504:2191](0081363.htm#fr_2190) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p15"></span> There seems to be some omission in
the <span class="c9"><span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p15.1"></span>mss.</span>
here.

<span id="fn_2191"></span>[504:2192](0081363.htm#fr_2191) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p16"></span> Lit., of life.

<span id="fn_2192"></span>[504:2193](0081363.htm#fr_2192) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p18"></span> Or, these men.

<span id="fn_2193"></span>[504:2194](0081363.htm#fr_2193) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p20"></span> It was James and John who were
called sons of thunder ([Mark iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#017)<span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p20.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_2194"></span>[505:2195](0081363.htm#fr_2194) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p22"></span> This last sentence is very corrupt
in the original.  A few changes give it the meaning above.

<span id="fn_2195"></span>[505:2196](0081363.htm#fr_2195) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p23"></span> [Rom. viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p23.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_2196"></span>[505:2197](0081363.htm#fr_2196) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p25"></span> Better <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p25.1"></span>ταχ ἂν θεάσεσθε</span>—you will perhaps
see.

<span id="fn_2197"></span>[505:2198](0081363.htm#fr_2197) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p26"></span> Or, which the high priest casts off
for himself.

<span id="fn_2198"></span>[505:2199](0081363.htm#fr_2198) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p28"></span> Comp. [Acts
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#039), [Acts
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p28.1"></span> in Textus Receptus.

<span id="fn_2199"></span>[506:2200](0081363.htm#fr_2199) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p36"></span> [Phil. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2200"></span>[506:2201](0081363.htm#fr_2200) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p40"></span> Or, thou being a chief man who has
done away with.

<span id="fn_2201"></span>[507:2202](0081363.htm#fr_2201) <span
id="vii.xxviii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.ii-p42"></span> There is some doubt about the
reading here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Addition to Acts of Philip.](0081364)
