[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081467)  [Next](0081469) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xi"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p1"></span> <span id="page_690">p. 690</span> <span
id="ix.xi-Page_690"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="ix.xi-p1.1"></span>Ancient Syriac Documents.</span>

<span id="ix.xi-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.xi-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="ix.xi-p3.1"></span>Martyrdom of Habib the Deacon. <span
id="fr_3234"></span>[3235](#fn_3234) </span>

<span id="ix.xi-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p5.1"></span>In</span> the month Ab, <span
id="fr_3235"></span>[3236](#fn_3235) of the year six hundred and twenty
of the kingdom of Alexander the Macedonian, in the consulate of Licinius
and Constantine, <span id="fr_3236"></span>[3237](#fn_3236) which is the
year in which he <span id="fr_3237"></span>[3238](#fn_3237) was born, in
the magistracy <span id="fr_3238"></span>[3239](#fn_3238) of Julius and
Barak, in the days of Cona, <span id="fr_3239"></span>[3240](#fn_3239)
bishop of Edessa, Licinius made a persecution against the Church and all
the people of the Christians, after that first persecution which
Diocletian the emperor had made.  And Licinius the emperor commanded
that there should be sacrifices and libations, and that the altars in
every place should be restored, that they might burn sweet spices and
frankincense before Zeus.

<span id="ix.xi-p11"></span>And, when many were persecuted, they cried
out of their own accord:  We are Christians; and they were not afraid of
the persecution, because these who were persecuted were more numerous
than those who persecuted *them*.

<span id="ix.xi-p12"></span>Now Habib, who was of the village of
Telzeha <span id="fr_3240"></span>[3241](#fn_3240) and had been made a
deacon, went secretly into the churches which were in the villages, and
ministered and read the Scriptures, and encouraged and strengthened many
by his words, and admonished them to stand fast in the truth of their
belief, and not to be afraid of the persecutors; and gave them
directions.

<span id="ix.xi-p14"></span>And, when many were strengthened by his
words, and received his addresses affectionately, being careful not to
renounce the covenant they had made, and when the Sharirs of the city,
the men who had been appointed with reference to this particular matter,
heard of it, they went in and informed Lysanias, the governor who was in
the town of Edessa, and said to him:  Habib, who is a deacon in the
village of Telzeha, goes about and ministers secretly in every place,
and resists the command of the emperors, and is not afraid.

<span id="ix.xi-p15"></span>And, when the governor heard these things,
he was filled with rage against Habib; and he made a report, and sent
and informed Licinius the emperor of all those things which Habib was
doing; *he wished* also to ascertain <span
id="fr_3241"></span>[3242](#fn_3241) what command would be issued
respecting him and *the rest of* those who would not sacrifice.  *For*
although a command had been issued that every one should sacrifice, yet
it had not been commanded what should be done to those who did not
sacrifice:  because they had heard that Constantine, the commander <span
id="fr_3242"></span>[3243](#fn_3242) in Gaul and Spain, was become a
Christian and did not sacrifice.  And Licinius the emperor *thus*
command Lysanias the governor:  Whoever it is that has been so daring as
to transgress our command, our Majesty has commanded that he shall be
burned <span id="fr_3243"></span>[3244](#fn_3243) with fire; and that
all others who do not consent to sacrifice shall be put to death by the
sword.

<span id="ix.xi-p19"></span>Now, when this command came to the town of
Edessa, Habib, in reference to whom the report had been made, was gone
across *the river* to the country of the people of Zeugma, <span
id="fr_3244"></span>[3245](#fn_3244) to minister there also secretly. 
And, when the governor sent and inquired for him in his village, and in
all the country round about, and he was not to be found, he commanded
that all his family should be arrested, and also the inhabitants of his
village; and they arrested them and put them in irons, his mother and
the rest of his family, and also some of the people of his village; and
they brought them to the city, and shut them up in prison.

<span id="ix.xi-p21"></span>And, when Habib heard what had taken place,
he considered in his mind and pondered anxiously in his thoughts:  It is
expedient for me, *said he*, that I should go and appear before the
judge of the country, rather than that I should remain in secret and
others should be brought in *to him* and be crowned *with martyrdom*
be<span id="page_691">p. 691</span> <span
id="ix.xi-Page_691"></span>cause of me, and that I should find myself in
great shame.  For in what respect will the name of Christianity help him
who flees from the confession of Christianity?  Lo! if he flee from
this, the death of nature is before him whithersoever he goes, and
escape from it he cannot, because this is decreed against all the
children of Adam.

<span id="ix.xi-p22"></span>And Habib arose and went to Edessa secretly,
having prepared his back for the stripes and his sides for the combs,
and his person for the burning of fire.  And he went immediately <span
id="fr_3245"></span>[3246](#fn_3245) to Theotecna, <span
id="fr_3246"></span>[3247](#fn_3246) a veteran <span
id="fr_3247"></span>[3248](#fn_3247) who was chief of the band of
attendants <span id="fr_3248"></span>[3249](#fn_3248) on the governor;
and he said to him:  I am Habib of Telzeha, whom ye are inquiring for. 
And Theotecna said to him:  If so be that no one saw thee coming to me,
hearken to me in what I say to thee, and depart and go away to the place
where thou hast been, and remain there in this time *of persecution*;
and of this, that thou camest to me and spakest with me and that I
advised thee thus, let no one know or be aware.  And about thy family
and the inhabitants of thy village, be not at all anxious:  for no one
will at all hurt them; but they will be in prison a few days only, and
*then* the governor will let them go:  because against them the emperors
have not commanded anything serious or alarming.  But, if on the
contrary thou wilt not be persuaded by me in regard to these things
which I have said to thee, I am clear of thy blood:  because, if so be
that thou appear before the judge of the country, thou wilt not escape
from death by fire, according to the command of the emperors which they
have issued concerning thee.

<span id="ix.xi-p27"></span>Habib said to Theotecna:  It is not about my
family and the inhabitants of my village that I am concerned, but for my
own salvation, lest it should be forfeited.  About this too I am much
distressed, that I did not happen to be in my village on the day that
the governor inquired for me, and that on my account lo! many are put in
irons, and I have been looked upon by him as a fugitive.  Therefore, if
so be that thou wilt not consent to my request and take me in before the
governor, I will go alone and appear before him.

<span id="ix.xi-p28"></span>And, when Theotecna heard him speak thus to
him, he laid hold of him firmly, and handed him over to his
assistants, <span id="fr_3249"></span>[3250](#fn_3249) and they went
together to conduct him to the judgment-hall of the governor.  And
Theotecna went in and informed the governor, and said to him:  Habib of
Telzeha, whom thine Excellency was inquiring for, is come.  And the
governor said:  Who is it that has brought him? and where did they find
him? and what did he do where he was?  Theotecna said to him:  He came
hither himself, of his own accord, and without the compulsion of any
one, since no one knew anything about him.

<span id="ix.xi-p30"></span>And when the governor heard *this*, he was
greatly exasperated against him; and thus he spoke:  This *fellow*, who
has so acted, has shown great contempt towards me and has despised me,
and has accounted me as no judge; and, because he has so acted, it is
not meet that any mercy should be shown towards him; nor yet either that
I should hasten to pass sentence of death against him, according to the
command of the emperors concerning him; but it is meet for me to have
patience with him, so that the bitter torments and punishments
*inflicted on him* may be the more abundant, and that through him I may
terrify many *others* from daring again to flee.

<span id="ix.xi-p31"></span>And, many persons being collected together
and standing by him at the door of the judgment-hall, some of whom were
members of the body of attendants, and some people of the city, there
were some of them that said to him:  Thou hast done badly in coming and
showing thyself to those who were inquiring for thee, without the
compulsion of the judge; and there were *others*, again, who said to
him:  Thou hast done well in coming and showing thyself of thine own
accord, rather than that the compulsion of the judge should bring thee: 
for now is thy confession of Christ known to be of thine own will, and
not from the compulsion of men.

<span id="ix.xi-p32"></span>And those things which the Sharirs of the
city had heard from those who were speaking to him as they stood at the
door of the judgment-hall—and this circumstance also in particular, that
he had gone secretly to Theotecna and that he had not been willing to
denounce him, had been heard by the Sharirs of the city—everything that
they had heard they made known to the judge.

<span id="ix.xi-p33"></span>And the judge was enraged against those who
had been saying to Habib:  Wherefore didst thou come and show thyself to
the judge, without the compulsion of the judge himself?  And to
Theotecna he said:  It is not seemly for a man who has been made chief
over his fellows to act deceitfully in this manner towards his superior,
and to set at nought the command of the emperors, which they issued
against Habib the rebel, that he should be burned with fire.

<span id="ix.xi-p34"></span>Theotecna said:  I have not acted
deceitfully against my fellows, neither was it my purpose to set at
naught the command which the emperors have issued:  for what am I before
thine Excellency, that I should have dared to do this?  But I strictly
questioned him as to that for which <span id="page_692">p. 692</span>
<span id="ix.xi-Page_692"></span>thine Excellency also has demanded an
account at my hands, that I might know and see whether it was of his own
free will that he came hither or whether the compulsion of thine
Excellency brought him by the hand of others; and, when I heard from him
that he came of his own accord, I carefully brought him to the
honourable door of the judgment-hall of thy Worship. <span
id="fr_3250"></span>[3251](#fn_3250)

<span id="ix.xi-p36"></span>And the governor hastily commanded, and they
brought in Habib before him.  The officers said:  Lo! he standeth before
thine Excellency,

<span id="ix.xi-p37"></span>And he began to question him thus, and said
to him:  What is thy name?  And whence art thou?  And what art thou?

<span id="ix.xi-p38"></span>He said to him:  My name is Habib, and I am
from the village of Telzeha, and I have been made a deacon.

<span id="ix.xi-p39"></span>The governor said:  Wherefore hast thou
transgressed the command of the emperors, and dost minister in thine
office of deacon, which thou art forbidden by the emperors to do, and
refusest to sacrifice to Zeus, whom the emperors worship?

<span id="ix.xi-p40"></span>Habib said:  We are Christians; we do not
worship the works of men, who are nothing, whose works also are nothing;
but we worship God, who made the men.

<span id="ix.xi-p41"></span>The governor said:  Persist not in that
daring mind with which thou art come into my presence, and insult not
Zeus, the great boast of the emperors.

<span id="ix.xi-p42"></span>Habib said:  But this Zeus is an idol, the
work of men.  It is very well for thee to say that I insult him.  But,
if the carving of him out of wood and the fixing of him with nails
proclaim aloud concerning him that he is made, how sayest thou to me
that I insult him? since lo! his insult is from himself, and against
himself.

<span id="ix.xi-p43"></span>The governor said:  By this very thing, that
thou refusest to worship him, thou insultest him.

<span id="ix.xi-p44"></span>Habib said:  But, if because I do not
worship him I insult him, how great an insult, then, did the carpenter
inflict on him, who carved him with an axe of iron; and the smith, who
smote him and fixed him with nails!

<span id="ix.xi-p45"></span>And, when the governor heard him speak thus
he commanded him to be scourged without pity.  And, when he had been
scourged by five *men*, he said to him:  Wilt thou now obey the
emperors?  For, if thou wilt not obey *them*, I will tear thee severely
with combs, and I will torture thee with all *kinds of* tortures, and
then at last I will give command concerning thee that thou be burned
with fire.

<span id="ix.xi-p46"></span>Habib said:  These threats with which lo!
thou art seeking to terrify me, are much meaner and paltrier than those
which I had already settled it in my mind to endure:  therefore <span
id="fr_3251"></span>[3252](#fn_3251) came I and made my appearance
before thee.

<span id="ix.xi-p48"></span>The governor said:  Put him into the iron
cask <span id="fr_3252"></span>[3253](#fn_3252) for murderers, and let
him be scourged as he deserves.  And, when he had been scourged, they
said to him:  Sacrifice to the gods.  But he cried aloud, and said: 
Accursed are your idols, and so are they who join with you in
worshipping them like you.

<span id="ix.xi-p50"></span>And the governor commanded, and they took
him up to the prison; but they refused him permission to speak with his
family, or with the inhabitants of his village, according to the command
of the judge.  On that day was the festival of the emperors.

<span id="ix.xi-p51"></span>And on the second of Ilul the governor
commanded, and they brought him from the prison.  And he said to him: 
Wilt thou renounce the profession thou hast made <span
id="fr_3253"></span>[3254](#fn_3253) and obey the command which the
emperors issue?  For, if thou wilt not obey, with the bitter tearings of
combs will I make thee obey them.

<span id="ix.xi-p53"></span>Habib said:  I have not obeyed them, and
moreover it is settled in my mind that I will not obey them—no, not even
if thou lay upon me punishments still worse than those which the
emperors have commanded.

<span id="ix.xi-p54"></span>The governor said:  By the gods I swear,
that, if thou do not sacrifice, I will leave no harsh and bitter
*sufferings untried* with which I will not torture thee:  and we shall
see whether Christ, whom thou worshippest, will deliver thee.

<span id="ix.xi-p55"></span>Habib said:  All those who worship Christ
are delivered through Christ, because they worship not creatures along
with the Creator of creatures.

<span id="ix.xi-p56"></span>The governor said:  Let him be stretched out
and be scourged with whips, until there remain not a place in his body
on which he has not been scourged.

<span id="ix.xi-p57"></span>Habib said:  *As for* these inflictions,
which thou supposest to be *so* bitter with their lacerations, <span
id="fr_3254"></span>[3255](#fn_3254) out of them are plaited crowns of
victory for those who endure them.

<span id="ix.xi-p59"></span>The governor said:  How call ye afflictions
ease, and account the torments of your bodies a crown of victory?

<span id="ix.xi-p60"></span>Habib said:  It is not for thee to ask me
concerning these things, because thine unbelief is not worthy to hear
the reasons of them.  That I will not sacrifice I have said *already*,
and I say *so still*.

<span id="ix.xi-p61"></span>The governor said:  Thou art subjected to
these punishments because thou deservest them:  I will put out thine
eyes, which look upon this Zeus and are not afraid of him; and I will
stop thine ears, which hear the laws of the emperors and tremble not.

<span id="ix.xi-p62"></span><span id="page_693">p. 693</span> <span
id="ix.xi-Page_693"></span>Habib said:  To the God whom thou deniest
here belongs that other world; and there wilt thou *be made to* confess
Him with scourgings, though thou hast again denied Him.

<span id="ix.xi-p63"></span>The governor said:  Leave alone that world
of which thou hast spoken, and consider anxiously now, that from this
punishment to which lo! thou art being subjected there is no one that
can deliver thee; unless indeed the gods deliver thee, on thy
sacrificing to them.

<span id="ix.xi-p64"></span>Habib said:  Those who die for the sake of
the name of Christ, and worship not those objects that are made and
created, will find their life in the presence of God; <span
id="fr_3255"></span>[3256](#fn_3255) but those who love the life of time
more than that—their torment will be for ever.

<span id="ix.xi-p66"></span>And the governor commanded, and they hanged
him up and tore him with combs; and, while they were tearing him with
the combs, they knocked him about.  And he was hanging a long while,
until the shoulder blades of his arms creaked.

<span id="ix.xi-p67"></span>The governor said to him:  Wilt thou comply
even now, and put on incense before Zeus there? <span
id="fr_3256"></span>[3257](#fn_3256)

<span id="ix.xi-p69"></span>Habib said:  Previously to these sufferings
I did not comply with thy demands:  *and* now that lo! I have undergone
them, how thinkest thou that I shall comply, and thereby lose that which
I have gained by them?

<span id="ix.xi-p70"></span>The governor said:  By punishments fiercer
and bitterer than these I am prepared to make thee obey, according to
the command of the emperors, until thou do their will.

<span id="ix.xi-p71"></span>Habib said:  Thou art punishing me for not
obeying the command of the emperors, when lo! thou thyself also, whom
the emperors have raised to greatness and made a judge, hast
transgressed their command, in that thou hast not done to me that which
the emperors have commanded thee.

<span id="ix.xi-p72"></span>The governor said:  Because I have had
patience with thee, *therefore* hast thou spoken thus, like a man that
brings an accusation.

<span id="ix.xi-p73"></span>Habib said:  Hadst thou not scourged me, and
bound me, and torn me with combs, and put my feet in fetters, <span
id="fr_3257"></span>[3258](#fn_3257) there *would* have been room to
think that thou hadst had patience with me.  But, if these things take
place in the meanwhile, where is the patience towards me of which thou
hast spoken?

<span id="ix.xi-p75"></span>The governor said:  These things which thou
hast said will not help thee, because they all go against thee, and they
will bring upon thee inflictions bitterer even than those which the
emperors have commanded.

<span id="ix.xi-p76"></span>Habib said:  Had I not been sensible that
they would help me, I should not have spoken a single word about them
before thee.

<span id="ix.xi-p77"></span>The governor said:  *I* will silence thy
speeches, and at the same time as regards thee pacify the gods, whom
thou hast not worshipped; and I will satisfy the emperors in respect to
thee, as regards thy rebellion against their commands.

<span id="ix.xi-p78"></span>Habib said:  I am not afraid of the death
with which thou seekest to terrify me; for, had I been afraid of it, I
should not have gone about from house to house and ministered:  on which
account I did so minister. <span id="fr_3258"></span>[3259](#fn_3258)

<span id="ix.xi-p80"></span>The governor said:  How is it that thou
worshippest and honourest a man, but refusest to worship and honour Zeus
there?

<span id="ix.xi-p81"></span>Habib said:  I worship not a man, because
the Scripture <span id="fr_3259"></span>[3260](#fn_3259) teaches
me, <span id="fr_3260"></span>[3261](#fn_3260) “Cursed is every one that
putteth his trust in man;” but God, who took upon Him a body and became
a man, *Him* do I worship, and glorify.

<span id="ix.xi-p84"></span>The governor said:  Do thou that which the
emperors have commanded; and, as for that which is in thy own mind, if
thou art willing to give it up, *well;* but, if thou art not willing,
*then* do not abandon it.

<span id="ix.xi-p85"></span>Habib said:  To do both these things is
impossible:  because falsehood is contrary to truth, and it is
impossible that that should be banished from my thoughts which is firmly
fixed in my mind.

<span id="ix.xi-p86"></span>The governor said:  By inflictions bitter
and severe will I make thee dismiss from thy thoughts that of which thou
hast said, It is firmly fixed in my mind.

<span id="ix.xi-p87"></span>Habib said:  *As for* these inflictions by
which thou thinkest that it will be rooted out of my thoughts, by means
of these it is that it grows within my thoughts, like a tree which bears
fruit.

<span id="ix.xi-p88"></span>The governor said:  What help will stripes
and combs give to that tree of thine? and more especially at the time
when I shall command fire against it, to burn it up without pity.

<span id="ix.xi-p89"></span>Habib said:  It is not on those things at
which thou lookest that I look, because I contemplate the things which
are out of sight; and therefore I do the will of God, the Maker *of all
things*, and not that of an idol made *with hands*, which is not
sensible of anything whatever.

<span id="ix.xi-p90"></span>The governor said:  Because he thus denies
the gods whom the emperors worship, let him be torn with combs in
addition to his former tearings:  for, amidst the many questions which I
have had the patience to ask him, he has forgotten his former tearings.

<span id="ix.xi-p91"></span><span id="page_694">p. 694</span> <span
id="ix.xi-Page_694"></span>And, while they were tearing him, he cried
aloud and said:  “The sufferings of this time are not equal to that
glory which shall be revealed in” <span
id="fr_3261"></span>[3262](#fn_3261) those who love Christ.

<span id="ix.xi-p93"></span>And, when the governor saw that even under
these inflictions he refused to sacrifice, he said to him:  Does your
doctrine so teach you, that you should hate your own bodies?

<span id="ix.xi-p94"></span>Habib said:  Nay, we do not hate our
bodies:  the Scripture distinctly teaches us, “Whosoever shall lose his
life shall find it.” <span id="fr_3262"></span>[3263](#fn_3262)   But
another thing too it teaches us:  that we should “not cast that which is
holy to dogs, nor cast pearls before swine.” <span
id="fr_3263"></span>[3264](#fn_3263)

<span id="ix.xi-p97"></span>The governor said:  I know that in speaking
thus thy sole object is that my rage and the wrath of my mind may be
excited, and that I may pronounce sentence of death against thee
speedily.  I am not going, then, to be hurried on to that which thou
desirest; but I will have patience:  not; indeed, for thy relief, but so
that the tortures inflicted on thee may be increased, and that thou
mayest see thy flesh falling off before thy face by means of the combs
that are passing over thy sides.

<span id="ix.xi-p98"></span>Habib said:  I myself also am looking for
this, that thou shouldst multiply thy tortures upon me, even as thou
hast said.

<span id="ix.xi-p99"></span>The governor said:  Submit to the emperors,
who have power to do whatsoever they choose.

<span id="ix.xi-p100"></span>Habib said:  It is not of men to do
whatsoever they choose, but of God, whose power is in the heavens, and
over all the dwellers upon earth; “nor is there any that may rebuke His
hands <span id="fr_3264"></span>[3265](#fn_3264) and say to Him, ‘What
doest Thou?’”

<span id="ix.xi-p102"></span>The governor said:  For this insolence of
thine, death by the sword is too small.  I, however, am prepared to
command *the infliction* upon thee of a death more bitter than that of
the sword.

<span id="ix.xi-p103"></span>Habib said:  And I, too, am looking for a
death which is more lingering than that of the sword, which thou mayest
pronounce upon me at any time thou choosest.

<span id="ix.xi-p104"></span>And thereupon the governor proceeded to
pass sentence of death upon him.  And he called out aloud before his
attendants, and said, whilst they were listening to him, as were also
the nobles of the city:  This Habib, who has denied the gods, as ye have
also heard from him, and furthermore has reviled the emperors, deserves
that his life should be blotted out from beneath this glorious Sun, and
that he should not *any longer* behold this luminary, associate of gods;
and, had it not been commanded by former emperors that the corpses of
murderers should be buried, it would not be right that the corpse of
this *fellow* either should be buried, because he has been so insolent. 
I command, that a strap be put into his mouth, as into the mouth of a
murderer, and that he be burned by a slow lingering fire, so that the
torment of his death may be increased.

<span id="ix.xi-p105"></span>And he went out from the presence of the
governor, with the strap thrust into his mouth; and a multitude of the
people of the city ran after him.  And the Christians were rejoicing,
forasmuch as he had not turned aside nor quitted his post; <span
id="fr_3265"></span>[3266](#fn_3265) but the pagans were threatening
him, for refusing to sacrifice.  And they led him forth by the western
archway, over against the cemetery, <span
id="fr_3266"></span>[3267](#fn_3266) which was built by <span
id="fr_3267"></span>[3268](#fn_3267) Abshelama, <span
id="fr_3268"></span>[3269](#fn_3268) the son of Abgar.  And his mother
was clad in white, and she went out with him.

<span id="ix.xi-p110"></span>And, when he was arrived at the place where
they were going to burn him, he stood up and prayed, as did all those
who came out with him; and he said:  “O King Christ, since Thine is this
world, and Thine the world to come, behold and see, that, while I might
have fled from these afflictions, I did not flee, in order that I might
not fall into the hands of Thy justice:  may this fire, in which I am to
be burned, serve me for a recompense before Thee, so that I may be
delivered from that fire which is not quenched; and receive Thou my
spirit into Thy presence, through Thy Divine Spirit, O glorious Son of
the adorable Father!”  And, when he had prayed, he turned and blessed
them; and they weeping gave him the salutation, both men and women; and
they said to him:  Pray for us in the presence of thy Lord, that He
would cause peace among His people, and restoration to His churches
which are overthrown.

<span id="ix.xi-p111"></span>And, while Habib was standing, they dug a
place, and brought him and set him within it; and they fixed up by him a
stake.  And they came to bind him to the stake; but he said to them:  I
will not stir from this place in which ye are going to burn me.  And
they brought fagots, and set them in order, and placed them on all sides
of him.  And, when the fire blazed up and the flame of it rose fiercely,
they called out to him:  Open thy mouth.  And the moment he opened his
mouth his soul mounted up.  And they cried aloud, both men and women,
with the voice of weeping.

<span id="ix.xi-p112"></span>And they pulled and drew him out of the
fire, throwing over him fine linen cloths and choice ointments and
spices.  And they snatched away <span id="page_695">p. 695</span> <span
id="ix.xi-Page_695"></span>some of the pieces of wood *which had been
put* for his burning, and the brethren and some persons of the
laity <span id="fr_3269"></span>[3270](#fn_3269) bore him away.  And
they prepared him for interment, and buried him by Guria and Shamuna the
martyrs, in the same grave in which they were laid, on the hill which is
called Baith Allah Cucla, <span id="fr_3270"></span>[3271](#fn_3270)
repeating over him psalms and hymns, and conveying his burnt body
affectionately and honourably *to the grave*.  And even some of the Jews
and pagans took part with the Christian brethren in winding up and
burying his body.  At the time, too, when he was burned, and also at the
time when he was buried, there was one spectacle of grief over spreading
those within and those without; tears, too, were running down from all
eyes:  while every one gave glory to God, because for His name’s sake he
had given his body to the burning of fire.

<span id="ix.xi-p115"></span>The day on which he was burned was the eve
*of the Sabbath*, <span id="fr_3271"></span>[3272](#fn_3271) the second
of the month Ilul—the day on which the news came that Constantine the
Great had set out from the interior of Spain, to proceed to Rome, the
city of Italy, that he might carry on war with Licinius, that *emperor*
who at this day rules over the eastern portion of the territories of the
Romans; and lo! the countries on all sides are in commotion, because no
man knows which of them will conquer and continue in his imperial
power.  And through this report the persecution slackened for a little
while from the Church.

<span id="ix.xi-p117"></span>And the notaries wrote down everything
which they had heard from the judge; and the Sharirs of the city wrote
down all the other things which were spoken outside the door of the
judgment-hall, and, according to the custom that existed, they reported
to the judge all that they had seen and all that they had heard, and the
decisions of the judge were written down in their Acts.

<span id="ix.xi-p118"></span>I, Theophilus, who have renounced the evil
inheritance of my fathers, and confessed Christ, carefully wrote out a
copy of these Acts of Habib, even as I had formerly written out *those*
of Guria and Shamuna, <span id="fr_3272"></span>[3273](#fn_3272) his
fellow-martyrs.  And, whereas he had felicitated them upon their death
by the sword, he himself also was made like them by the fire in which he
was burnt, and received his crown.  And, whereas I have written down the
year, and the month, and the day, of the coronation of these martyrs, it
is not for the sake of those who, like me, were spectators of the deed,
but with the view that those who come after us may learn at what time
these martyrs suffered, and what manner of men they were; *as they may
learn* also from the Acts of the former martyrs, who *suffered* in the
days of Domitianus and of all the other emperors who likewise also
raised a persecution against the Church, and put a great many to death,
by stripes and by *tearing with* combs, and by bitter inflictions, and
by sharp swords, and by burning fire, and by the terrible sea, and by
the merciless mines.  And all these things, and things like them, *they
suffered* for the hope of the recompense to come.

<span id="ix.xi-p120"></span>Moreover, the afflictions of these martyrs,
and of those of whom I had heard, opened the eyes of me, Theophilus, and
enlightened my mind, and I confessed Christ, that He is the Son of God,
and is God.  And may the dust of the feet of these martyrs, which I
received as I was running after them at the time when they were
departing to be crowned, procure me pardon for having denied Him, and
may He confess me before His worshippers, seeing that I have confessed
Him now!

<span id="ix.xi-p121"></span>And at the twenty-seventh question which
the judge put to Habib, he gave sentence against him of death by the
burning of fire.

<span id="ix.xi-p122"></span>*Here* endeth the martyrdom of Habib the
deacon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3234"></span>[690:3235](0081468.htm#fr_3234) <span
id="ix.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p4"></span> This is found in the same <span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p4.1"></span>ms.</span> as the preceding: 
Cod. Add. 14,645, fol. 238, vers.

<span id="fn_3235"></span>[690:3236](0081468.htm#fr_3235) <span
id="ix.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p6"></span> August.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p6.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3236"></span>[690:3237](0081468.htm#fr_3236) <span
id="ix.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p7"></span> They were consuls together in <span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span> 312, 313, 315.

<span id="fn_3237"></span>[690:3238](0081468.htm#fr_3237) <span
id="ix.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p8"></span> It does not appear who is meant.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p8.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3238"></span>[690:3239](0081468.htm#fr_3238) <span
id="ix.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p9"></span> The Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xi-p9.1"></span>στρατηγία</span>, with a Syriac termination. 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.xi-p9.2"></span>Στρατηγοί</span> was
used for the Latin *Magistratus* or *Duumviri*.

<span id="fn_3239"></span>[690:3240](0081468.htm#fr_3239) <span
id="ix.xi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p10"></span> He laid the foundation of the church at
Edessa <span class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 313: 
see Assem., *Bibl. Orient*., vol. i. p. 394.

<span id="fn_3240"></span>[690:3241](0081468.htm#fr_3240) <span
id="ix.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p13"></span> Called “Thelsæa” by Metaphrastes, p. 700,
*infra*.

<span id="fn_3241"></span>[690:3242](0081468.htm#fr_3241) <span
id="ix.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p16"></span> Lit. “learn and see.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p16.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3242"></span>[690:3243](0081468.htm#fr_3242) <span
id="ix.xi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p17"></span> The word used is probably <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.xi-p17.1"></span>ἐντολικός</span> =
*præfectus*:  see Dr. Payne Smith, *Thes. Syr*.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p17.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3243"></span>[690:3244](0081468.htm#fr_3243) <span
id="ix.xi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p18"></span> Dr. Wright’s reading, by the change of a
letter, for “shall perish.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p18.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3244"></span>[690:3245](0081468.htm#fr_3244) <span
id="ix.xi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p20"></span> This place was on the right bank of the
Euphrates, and derived its name from a bridge of boats laid across the
river there.  It was about forty miles from Edessa.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p20.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3245"></span>[691:3246](0081468.htm#fr_3245) <span
id="ix.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p23"></span> Cureton has \*\*\*, which he renders
“alone.”  Dr. Payne Smith considers this a mistake for \*\*\*.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p23.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3246"></span>[691:3247](0081468.htm#fr_3246) <span
id="ix.xi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p24"></span> In Latin, “Theotecnus.”

<span id="fn_3247"></span>[691:3248](0081468.htm#fr_3247) <span
id="ix.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p25"></span> Or “an old man.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p25.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3248"></span>[691:3249](0081468.htm#fr_3248) <span
id="ix.xi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p26"></span> The Gk. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xi-p26.1"></span>τάξις</span> here used corresponds to the Latin
*officium*.  See note 4 on p. 679.

<span id="fn_3249"></span>[691:3250](0081468.htm#fr_3249) <span
id="ix.xi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p29"></span> Or “domestics.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p29.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3250"></span>[692:3251](0081468.htm#fr_3250) <span
id="ix.xi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p35"></span> Lit. “rectitude.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p35.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3251"></span>[692:3252](0081468.htm#fr_3251) <span
id="ix.xi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p47"></span> Lit. “then.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p47.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3252"></span>[692:3253](0081468.htm#fr_3252) <span
id="ix.xi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p49"></span> See note 3 on p. 681.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p49.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3253"></span>[692:3254](0081468.htm#fr_3253) <span
id="ix.xi-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p52"></span> Lit. “Wilt thou renounce that in which thou
standest?”—<span class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p52.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3254"></span>[692:3255](0081468.htm#fr_3254) <span
id="ix.xi-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p58"></span> Lit. “scourgings.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p58.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3255"></span>[693:3256](0081468.htm#fr_3255) <span
id="ix.xi-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p65"></span> \[Seems to be a reference to [Rev. xx.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004)<span id="ix.xi-p65.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3256"></span>[693:3257](0081468.htm#fr_3256) <span
id="ix.xi-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p68"></span> Pointing to the image.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p68.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3257"></span>[693:3258](0081468.htm#fr_3257) <span
id="ix.xi-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p74"></span> Or “the stocks.”  The word is of the most
indefinite kind, answering to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xi-p74.1"></span>ξύλον</span> and *lignum*.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p74.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3258"></span>[693:3259](0081468.htm#fr_3258) <span
id="ix.xi-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p79"></span> For this sense, which appears to be the one
intended, it is necessary to change \*\*\* into \*\*\*.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p79.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3259"></span>[693:3260](0081468.htm#fr_3259) <span
id="ix.xi-p81.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p82"></span> \[[Jer. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)<span id="ix.xi-p82.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3260"></span>[693:3261](0081468.htm#fr_3260) <span
id="ix.xi-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p83"></span> Lit. “it is written for me.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p83.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3261"></span>[694:3262](0081468.htm#fr_3261) <span
id="ix.xi-p91.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p92"></span> [Rom. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)<span
id="ix.xi-p92.1"></span>.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p92.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3262"></span>[694:3263](0081468.htm#fr_3262) <span
id="ix.xi-p94.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p95"></span> [Matt. x.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039)<span
id="ix.xi-p95.1"></span>.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p95.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3263"></span>[694:3264](0081468.htm#fr_3263) <span
id="ix.xi-p95.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p96"></span> [Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="ix.xi-p96.1"></span>.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p96.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3264"></span>[694:3265](0081468.htm#fr_3264) <span
id="ix.xi-p100.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p101"></span> Chaldee, “restrain (literally, *smite*)
His hand.”  See [Dan. iv. 35](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#035)<span
id="ix.xi-p101.1"></span>.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p101.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3265"></span>[694:3266](0081468.htm#fr_3265) <span
id="ix.xi-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p106"></span> Or “departed from his covenant.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p106.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3266"></span>[694:3267](0081468.htm#fr_3266) <span
id="ix.xi-p106.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p107"></span> The Gk. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xi-p107.1"></span>κοιμητήριον</span> .—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p107.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3267"></span>[694:3268](0081468.htm#fr_3267) <span
id="ix.xi-p107.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p108"></span> Cureton’s “for” seems not so good, the
reference not being to a single tomb.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xi-p108.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3268"></span>[694:3269](0081468.htm#fr_3268) <span
id="ix.xi-p108.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p109"></span> Probably that in which Sharbil and Babai
were buried:  see p. 684, above.

<span id="fn_3269"></span>[695:3270](0081468.htm#fr_3269) <span
id="ix.xi-p112.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p113"></span> Lit. “secular persons,” or “men of the
world.”—<span class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p113.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3270"></span>[695:3271](0081468.htm#fr_3270) <span
id="ix.xi-p113.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p114"></span> In Simeon Metaphrastes, whose copy would
seem to have had a slightly different reading, it is written
*Bethelabicla*, and is said to lie on the north side of the city.

<span id="fn_3271"></span>[695:3272](0081468.htm#fr_3271) <span
id="ix.xi-p115.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p116"></span> i.e., the sixth day of the week.  See note
9 on p. 668.—<span class="c9"><span id="ix.xi-p116.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3272"></span>[695:3273](0081468.htm#fr_3272) <span
id="ix.xi-p118.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p119"></span> As Simeon Metaphrastes, *infra*, evidently
made use of these *Acts of Habib* in his account of that martyr, it is
probable that his narrative of the martyrdom of Guria and Shamuna also
was founded on the copy of their *Acts* to which Theophilus here refers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Martyrdom of the Holy Confessors Shamuna, Guria, and Habib, from
Simeon Metaphrastes.](0081469)
