[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081465)  [Next](0081467) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c6"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p1.1"></span>Further, the Martyrdom of Barsamya, <span
id="fr_3208"></span>[3209](#fn_3208) the Bishop of the Blessed City
Edessa.</span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p3.1"></span>In</span> the year four hundred and sixteen of
the kingdom of the Greeks, that is the fifteenth year of the reign of
the sovereign ruler, our lord, Trajan Cæsar, in the consulship of
Commodus and Cyrillus, <span id="fr_3209"></span>[3210](#fn_3209) in the
month Ilul, on the fifth day of the month, the day after Lysinus, <span
id="fr_3210"></span>[3211](#fn_3210) the judge of the country, had heard
*the case of* Sharbil the priest; as the judge was sitting in his
judgment-hall, the Sharirs of the city came before him and said to him: 
We give information before thine Excellency concerning Barsamya, the
leader of the Christians, that he went up to Sharbil, the priest, as he
was standing and ministering before the venerable gods, and sent and
called him to him secretly, and spoke to him, *quoting* from the books
in which he reads in the church where their congregation meets, and
recited to him the belief of the Christians, and said to him, “It is not
right for thee to worship many gods, but *only* one God, and His Son
Jesus Christ”—until he made him a disciple, and induced him to renounce
the gods whom he had formerly worshipped; and by means of Sharbil
himself also many have become disciples, and are gone down to the
church, and lo! this day they confess Christ; and even Avida, and
Nebo, <span id="fr_3211"></span>[3212](#fn_3211) and Barcalba, and
Hafsai, honourable and chief persons of the city, have yielded to
Sharbil in this.  We, accordingly, as Sharirs of the city, make *this*
known before thine Excellency, in order that we may not receive
punishment as offenders for not having declared before thine Excellency
the things which were spoken in secret to Sharbil by Barsamya the guide
of the church.  Thine Excellency now knoweth what it is right to command
in respect of this said matter.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p7"></span>And, immediately that the judge heard
these things, he sent the Sharirs of the city, and some of his
attendants with them, to go down to the church and bring up Barsamya
from the church.  And they led him and brought him up to the
judgment-hall of the judge; and there went up many Christians with him,
saying:  We also will die with Barsamya, because we too are of one mind
with him in respect to the doctrine of <span id="page_686">p. 686</span>
<span id="ix.ix.ii-Page_686"></span>which he made Sharbil a disciple,
and in all that he spoke to him, and in all *the instruction* that
Sharbil received from him, so that he was persuaded by him, and died for
the sake of that which he heard from him.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p8"></span>And the Sharirs of the city came, and said
to the judge:  Barsamya, as thine Excellency commanded, lo! is standing
at the door of the judgment-hall of thy Lordship; <span
id="fr_3212"></span>[3213](#fn_3212) and honourable chief-persons of the
city, who became disciples along with Sharbil, lo! are standing by
Barsamya, and crying out, “We will all die with Barsamya, who is our
teacher and guide.”

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p10"></span>And, when the judge heard those things
which the Sharirs of the city had told him, he commanded them to go out
and write down the names of the persons who were crying out, “We will
die with Barsamya.”  And, when they went out to write down *the names
of* these persons, those who so cried out were too many for them, and
they were not able to write down their names, because they were so
many:  for the cry kept coming to them from all sides, that they “would
die for Christ’s sake along with Barsamya.”

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p11"></span>And, when the tumult of the crowd became
great, the Sharirs of the city turned back, and came in to the judge,
and said to him:  We are not able to write down the names of the persons
who are crying aloud outside, because they are too many to be numbered. 
And the judge commanded that Barsamya should be taken up to the prison,
so that the crowd might be dispersed which was collected together about
him, lest through the tumult of the multitude there should be some
mischief in the city.  And, when he went up the gaol, those who had
become disciples along with Sharbil continued with him.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p12"></span>And after many days were passed the judge
rose up in the morning and went down to his judgment-hall, in order that
he might hear *the case of* Barsamya.  And the judge commanded, and they
brought him from the prison; and he came in and stood before him.  The
officers said:  Lo, he standeth before thine Excellency.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p13"></span>The judge said:  Art thou Barsamya, who
hast been made ruler and guide of the people of the Christians, and
didst make a disciple of Sharbil, who was chief-priest of the gods, and
used to worship them?

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p14"></span>Barsamya said:  It is I who have done
this, and I do not deny it; and I am prepared to die for the truth of
this.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p15"></span>The judge said:  How is it that thou wast
not afraid of the command of the emperors, *so* that, when the emperors
commanded that every one should sacrifice, thou didst induce Sharbil,
when he was standing and sacrificing to the gods and offering incense to
them, to deny that which he had confessed, and confess Christ whom he
had denied?

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p16"></span>Barsamya said:  I was assuredly <span
id="fr_3213"></span>[3214](#fn_3213) made a shepherd of men, not for the
sake of those only who are found, but also for the sake of those who
have strayed from the fold of truth, and become food for the wolves of
paganism; and, had I not sought to make Sharbil a disciple, at my hands
would his blood have been required; and, if he had not listened to me, I
should have been innocent of his blood.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p18"></span>The judge said:  Now, therefore, since
thou hast confessed that it was thou that madest Sharbil a disciple, at
thy hands will I require his death; and on this account it is right that
thou rather than he shouldest be condemned before me, because by thy
hands he has died the horrible deaths of grievous tortures for having
abandoned the command of the emperors and obeyed thy words.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p19"></span>Barsamya said:  Not to my words did
Sharbil become a disciple, but to the word of God which He spoke:  “Thou
shalt not worship images and the likenesses of men.”  And it is not I
alone that am content to die the death of Sharbil for his confession of
Christ, but also all the Christians, members of the Church, are likewise
eager for this, because they know that they will secure their salvation
before God thereby.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p20"></span>The judge said:  Answer me not in this
manner, like Sharbil thy disciple, lest thine own torments be worse than
his; but promise that thou wilt sacrifice before the gods on his behalf.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p21"></span>Barsamya said:  Sharbil, who knew not
God, I taught to know *Him:*  and dost thou bid *me*, who have known God
from my youth, to renounce God?  God forbid that I should do this thing!

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p22"></span>The judge said:  Ye have made the whole
creation disciples of the teaching of Christ; and lo! they renounce the
many gods whom the many worshipped.  Give up this way of thinking, <span
id="fr_3214"></span>[3215](#fn_3214) lest I make those who are near
tremble at thee as they behold thee to-day, and those also that are afar
off as they hear of the torments to which thou art condemned.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p24"></span>Barsamya said:  If God is the help of
those who pray to Him, who is he that can resist them?  Or what is the
power that can prevail against them?  Or thine own threats—what can they
do to them:  to men who, before thou give commandment concerning them
that they shall die, have their death *already* set before their eyes,
and are expecting it every day?

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p25"></span>The judge said:  Bring not the subject of
Christ before my judgment-seat; but, instead of this, obey the command
of the emperors, who command to sacrifice to the gods.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p26"></span><span id="page_687">p. 687</span> <span
id="ix.ix.ii-Page_687"></span>Barsamya said:  Even though we should not
lay the subject of Christ before thee, *yet* the sufferings of Christ
are portrayed indelibly <span id="fr_3215"></span>[3216](#fn_3215) in
the worshippers of Christ; and, even more than thou hearkenest to the
commands of the emperors, do we Christians hearken to the commands of
Christ the King of kings.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p28"></span>The judge said:  Lo! thou hast obeyed
Christ and worshipped him up to his day:  henceforth obey the emperors,
and worship the gods whom the emperors worship.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p29"></span>Barsamya said:  How canst thou bid me
renounce that in which I was born? when lo! thou didst exact
*punishment* for this at the hand of Sharbil, and saidst to him:  Why
hast thou renounced the paganism in which thou wast born, and confessed
Christianity to which thou wast a stranger?  Lo! even before I came into
thy presence thou didst thyself give testimony *on the matter*
beforehand, and saidst to Sharbil:  The Christians, to whom thou art
gone *over*, do not renounce that in which they were born, but continue
in it.  Abide, therefore, by the word, which thou hast spoken.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p30"></span>The judge said:  Let Barsamya be
scourged, because he has rebelled against the command of the emperors,
and has caused those also who were obedient to the emperors to rebel
with him.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p31"></span>And, when he had been scourged by five
*men*, he said to him:  Reject not the command of the emperors, nor
insult the emperors’ gods.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p32"></span>Barsamya said:  Thy mind is greatly
blinded, O judge, and so also is that of the emperors who gave thee
authority; nor are the things that are manifest seen by you; nor do ye
perceive that lo! the whole creation worships Christ; and thou sayest to
me, Do not worship Him, as if I alone worshipped Him—Him whom the
watchers <span id="fr_3216"></span>[3217](#fn_3216) above worship on
high.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p34"></span>The judge said:  But if *ye* have taught
*men* to worship Christ, who is it that has persuaded those above to
worship Christ?

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p35"></span>Barsamya said:  Those above have
themselves preached, and have taught those below concerning the living
worship of the King Christ, seeing that they worship Him, and His
Father, together with His divine Spirit. <span
id="fr_3217"></span>[3218](#fn_3217)

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p37"></span>The judge said:  Give up these things
which your writings teach you, and which ye teach also to others, and
obey those things which the emperors have commanded, and spurn not their
laws—lest ye be spurned by means of the sword from the light of this
venerable sun.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p38"></span>Barsamya said:  The light which passeth
away and abideth not is not the true light, but is *only* the similitude
of that true light, to whose beams darkness cometh not near, which is
reserved and standeth fast for the true worshippers of Christ.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p39"></span>The judge said:  Speak not before me of
anything *else* instead of that about which I have asked thee, lest I
dismiss thee from life to death, for denying this light which is seen
and confessing that which is not seen.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p40"></span>Barsamya said:  I cannot leave alone that
about which thou askest me, and speak of that about which thou dost not
ask me.  It was thou that spakest to me about the light of the sun, and
I said before thee that there is a light on high which surpasses in its
brightness that of the sun which thou dost worship and honour.  For an
account will be required of thee for worshipping thy fellow-*creature*
instead of God thy Creator.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p41"></span>The judge said:  Do not insult the very
sun, the light of creatures, nor set thou at nought the command of the
emperors, nor contentiously resist the lords of the country, who have
authority in it.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p42"></span>Barsamya said:  Of what avail is the
light of the sun to a blind man that cannot see it?  For without the
eyes of the body, it is not possible for its beams to be seen.  *So*
that by this thou mayest know that it is the work of God, forasmuch as
it has no power *of its own* to show its light to the sightless.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p43"></span>The judge said:  When I have tortured
thee as thou deservest, then will I write word about thee to the
Imperial government, *reporting* what insult thou hast offered to the
gods, in that thou madest a disciple of Sharbil the priest, one who
honoured the gods, and that ye despise the laws of the emperors, and
that ye make no account of the judges of the countries, and live like
barbarians, *though* under the authority of the Romans.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p44"></span>Barsamya said:  Thou dost not terrify me
by these things which thou sayest.  It is true, I am not in the presence
of the emperors to-day; yet lo! before the authority which the emperors
have given thee I am now standing, and I am brought to trial, because I
said, I will not renounce God, to whom the heavens and the earth belong,
nor His Son Jesus Christ, the King of all the earth.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p45"></span>The judge said:  If thou art indeed
assured of this, that thou art standing and being tried before the
authority of the emperors, obey their commands, and rebel not against
their laws, lest like a rebel thou receive the punishment of death.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p46"></span>Barsamya said:  But if those who rebel
against the emperors, *even* when they justly rebel, are deserving of
death, as thou sayest; for those who rebel against God, the King of
kings, even the punishment of death by the sword is too little.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p47"></span>The judge said:  It was not that thou
shouldest <span id="page_688">p. 688</span> <span
id="ix.ix.ii-Page_688"></span>expound in my judgment-hall that thou wast
brought in before me, because the trial on which thou standest has but
little concern with expounding, but much concern with the punishment of
death, for those who insult the emperors and comply not with their laws.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p48"></span>Barsamya said:  Because God is not before
your eyes, and ye refuse to hear the word of God; and graven images that
are of no use, “which have a mouth and speak not,” are accounted by you
as though they spake, because your understanding is blinded by the
darkness of paganism in which ye stand—

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p49"></span>The judge *interrupting* said:  Leave off
those things thou art saying, for they will not help thee at all, and
worship the gods, before the bitter *tearings of* combs and harsh
tortures come upon thee.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p50"></span>Barsamya said:  Do thou *too* leave off
the many questions which lo! thou askest me, and give command for the
stripes and the combs with which thou dost menace me:  for thy words
will not help thee so much as thy inflictions will help me.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p51"></span>The judge said:  Let Barsamya be hanged
up and torn with combs.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p52"></span>And at that very moment there came to him
letters from Alusis <span id="fr_3218"></span>[3219](#fn_3218) the chief
proconsul, father of emperors. <span
id="fr_3219"></span>[3220](#fn_3219)   And he commanded, and they took
down Barsamya, and he was not torn with combs; and they took him outside
of the hall of judgment.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p55"></span>And the judge commanded that the nobles,
and the chief persons, and the princes, and the honourable persons of
the city, should come before him, that they might hear what was the
order that was issued by the emperors, by the hand of the proconsuls,
the rulers of the countries under the authority of the Romans.  And it
was found that the emperors had written by the hand of the proconsuls to
the judges of the countries: <span id="fr_3220"></span>[3221](#fn_3220)
  “Since our Majesty commanded that there should be a persecution
against the people of the Christians, we have heard and learned, from
the Sharirs whom we have in the countries under the dominion of our
Majesty, that the people of the Christians are persons who eschew
murder, and sorcery, and adultery, and theft, and bribery and fraud, and
those things for which the laws of our Majesty also exact punishment
from those who commit them.  We, therefore, in our impartial justice,
have commanded that on account of these things the persecution of the
sword shall cease from them, and that there shall be rest and quietness
in all our dominions, they continuing to minister according to their
custom and no man hindering them.  It is not, however, towards them that
we show clemency, but towards their laws, agreeing as they do with the
laws of our Majesty.  And, if any man hinder them after this our
command, that sword which is ordered by us to descend upon those who
despise our command, the same do we command to descend upon those who
despise this decree of our clemency.”

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p57"></span>And, when this command of the emperor’s
clemency was read, the whole city rejoiced that there was quietness and
rest for every man.  And the judge commanded, and they released
Barsamya, that he might go down to his church.  And the Christians went
up in great numbers to the judgment-hall, together with a great
multitude of the population of the city, and they received Barsamya with
great and exceeding honour, repeating psalms before him, according to
their custom; *there went* also the wives of the chief of the wise men. 
And they thronged *about him*, and saluted him, and called him “the
persecuted confessor,” “the companion of Sharbil the martyr.”  And he
said to them:  Persecuted I am, like yourselves; but from the tortures
and combs of Sharbil and his companions I am clean escaped. <span
id="fr_3221"></span>[3222](#fn_3221)   And they said to him:  We have
heard from thee that a teacher of the Church has said, “The will,
according to what it is, so is it accepted.” <span
id="fr_3222"></span>[3223](#fn_3222)   And, when he was entered into the
church, he and all the people that were with him, he stood up and
prayed, and blessed them and sent them away to their homes rejoicing and
praising God for the deliverance which He had wrought for them and for
the Church.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p60"></span>And the day after Lysinas <span
id="fr_3223"></span>[3224](#fn_3223) the judge of the country had set
his hand to these Acts, he was dismissed from his authority.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p62"></span>I Zenophilus and Patrophilus are the
notaries who wrote these Acts, Diodorus and Euterpes, <span
id="fr_3224"></span>[3225](#fn_3224) Sharirs of the city, bearing
witness with us by setting-to their hand, as the ancient laws of the
ancient kings command.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p64"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p65"></span>This <span
id="fr_3225"></span>[3226](#fn_3225) Barsamya, bishop of Edessa, who
made a disciple of Sharbil, the priest of the same city, lived in the
days of Fabianus, bishop of the city of Rome.  And ordination to the
priesthood was received by Barsamya from Abshelama, who was bishop in
Edessa; and by Abshelama ordination was received from Palut the First;
and by Palut ordination was received from Serapion, bishop of Antioch;
and by Serapion ordination was received from Zephyrinus, bishop of Rome;
and Zephyrinus of Rome received ordination from Victor of the <span
id="page_689">p. 689</span> <span id="ix.ix.ii-Page_689"></span>same
place, *viz*., Rome; and Victor received ordination from Eleutherius;
and Eleutherius received it from Soter; and Soter received it from
Anicetus; and Anicetus received it from Dapius; <span
id="fr_3226"></span>[3227](#fn_3226) and Dapius received it from
Telesphorus; and Telesphorus received it from Xystus; <span
id="fr_3227"></span>[3228](#fn_3227) and Xystus received it from
Alexander; and Alexander received it from Evartis; <span
id="fr_3228"></span>[3229](#fn_3228) and Evartis received it from
Cletus; and Cletus received it from Anus; <span
id="fr_3229"></span>[3230](#fn_3229) and Anus received it from Simon
Cephas; and Simon Cephas received it from our Lord, together with his
fellow-apostles, on the first day of the week, *the day* of the
ascension of our Lord to His glorious Father, which was the fourth day
of Heziran, <span id="fr_3230"></span>[3231](#fn_3230) which was is the
nineteenth <span id="fr_3231"></span>[3232](#fn_3231) year of the reign
of Tiberius Cæsar, in the consulship of Rufus and Rubelinus, which year
was the year 341; for in the year 309 occurred the advent <span
id="fr_3232"></span>[3233](#fn_3232) of our Saviour in the world,
according to the testimony which we ourselves have found in a correct
register <span id="fr_3233"></span>[3234](#fn_3233) among the archives,
which errs not at all in whatever it sets forth.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p75"></span>*Here* endeth the martyrdom of Barsamya,
bishop of Edessa.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p76"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3208"></span>[685:3209](0081466.htm#fr_3208) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p2"></span> This is taken from the <span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> cited as B. in the
*Acts of Sharbil*.  There is an Armenian version or extract of this
still in existence:  see Dr. Alishan’s letter referred to on p. 665. 
\[See elucidation, p. 689, *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_3209"></span>[685:3210](0081466.htm#fr_3209) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p4"></span> This is a mistake for Cerealis, and the
consulate meant must be that of Commodus Verus and Tutilius Cerealis,
which was in the ninth (not fifteenth) year of Trajan, which agreed with
the 416th year of the Greeks, or <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 105.

<span id="fn_3210"></span>[685:3211](0081466.htm#fr_3210) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p5"></span> See note on p. 678.

<span id="fn_3211"></span>[685:3212](0081466.htm#fr_3211) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p6"></span> Called Labu at p. 678.

<span id="fn_3212"></span>[686:3213](0081466.htm#fr_3212) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p9"></span> Lit. “authority.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p9.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3213"></span>[686:3214](0081466.htm#fr_3213) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p17"></span> See note 6 on p. 658.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p17.1"></span>Tr.</span>  \[The Syriac for
“assuredly.”\]

<span id="fn_3214"></span>[686:3215](0081466.htm#fr_3214) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p23"></span> Lit. “this mind.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p23.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3215"></span>[687:3216](0081466.htm#fr_3215) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p27"></span> Lit. “portrayed and fixed.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p27.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3216"></span>[687:3217](0081466.htm#fr_3216) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p33"></span> \[Guardian angels.\]  Comp. [Dan. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#013)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p33.1"></span>. 
This designation was given to angels after the captivity, in which the
Jews had become familiar with the doctrine of tutelary deities.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p33.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3217"></span>[687:3218](0081466.htm#fr_3217) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p36"></span> Lit. “the Spirit of His Godhead.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p36.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3218"></span>[688:3219](0081466.htm#fr_3218) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p53"></span> This seems to be *Lusius* Quietus,
Trajan’s general in the East at this time.

<span id="fn_3219"></span>[688:3220](0081466.htm#fr_3219) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p54"></span> Or “kings.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p54.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3220"></span>[688:3221](0081466.htm#fr_3220) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p56"></span> We have here probably the most authentic
copy of the edict of Trajan commanding the stopping of the persecution
of the Christians, as it was taken down at the time by the reporters who
heard it read.

<span id="fn_3221"></span>[688:3222](0081466.htm#fr_3221) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p58"></span> Lit. “am far removed.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p58.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3222"></span>[688:3223](0081466.htm#fr_3222) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p59"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#012)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p59.1"></span>. 
Both the Peshito and the Greek (if <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p59.2"></span>τίς</span> be rejected) have “what it
*hath*:”  not “what it *is*.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p59.3"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3223"></span>[688:3224](0081466.htm#fr_3223) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p61"></span> See note on p. 678.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p61.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3224"></span>[688:3225](0081466.htm#fr_3224) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p63"></span> Perhaps “Eutropius.”

<span id="fn_3225"></span>[688:3226](0081466.htm#fr_3225) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p66"></span> What follows, down to the end, is a much
later addition, evidently made by the same ignorant person as that at p.
685, above:  see note 2 there.

<span id="fn_3226"></span>[689:3227](0081466.htm#fr_3226) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p67"></span> That is “Pius.”  The blunder arose from
taking the prefix D (?) as a part of the name.

<span id="fn_3227"></span>[689:3228](0081466.htm#fr_3227) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p68"></span> i.e., “Sixtus.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p68.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3228"></span>[689:3229](0081466.htm#fr_3228) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p69"></span> Or “Eortis.”  The person referred to is
“Evaristus.”  Cureton reads “Erastus:”  it does not appear why.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p69.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3229"></span>[689:3230](0081466.htm#fr_3229) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p70"></span> i.e., “Linus:”  see p. 675, note
3.—<span class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p70.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3230"></span>[689:3231](0081466.htm#fr_3230) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p71"></span> See note 3 on p. 667.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p71.1"></span>Tr.</span>  \[Also see p.
666, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3231"></span>[689:3232](0081466.htm#fr_3231) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p72"></span> Put by mistake for “sixteenth,” which
agrees with the statement of Julius Africanus as to the date of our
Lord’s death; also with the year of the consulate of Rubellius Geminus
and Fufius Geminus (the persons intended below), and with the year of
the Greeks 341, which was <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p72.1"></span>a.d.</span> 29 or 30.

<span id="fn_3232"></span>[689:3233](0081466.htm#fr_3232) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p73"></span> Prop. “rising,” as of the sun.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p73.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3233"></span>[689:3234](0081466.htm#fr_3233) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p74"></span> The Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p74.1"></span>ειλητάριον</span>:  see Du Fresne,
*Glossarium*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elucidation.](0081467)
