[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081117)  [Next](0081119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxi.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xxi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.—Simon Retires.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxi.xxiii-p2"></span>“But you will say, ‘He knows that
there is no other above him, and on this account he cannot be
abandoned.’  Thanks, then, to there being no other; but He knows that
the state of your mind is one inclined to ingratitude.  But if, knowing
you to be ungrateful, He welcomes you, and knowing me to be grateful, He
does not receive me, He is inconsiderate, according to your own
assertion, and does not act reasonably.  And thus, Simon, you are not
aware that you are the servant of wickedness.”  And Simon answered: 
“Whence, then, has evil arisen? tell us.”  And Peter said:  “Since
to-day you were the first to go out, and you declared that you would not
in future listen to me as being a blasphemer, come to-morrow, if indeed
you wish to learn, and I shall explain the matter to you, and I will
permit you to ask me any questions you like, without any dispute.”  And
Simon said:  “I shall do as shall seem good to me.”  And saying this, he
went away.  Now, none of those who entered along with him went out along
with him; but, falling at Peter’s feet, they begged that they might be
pardoned for having been carried away with Simon, and on repenting, to
be welcomed.  But Peter, admitting those persons who repented, and the
rest of the multitudes, laid his hands upon them, praying, and healing
those who were sick amongst them; and thus dismissing them, he urged
them to return early about dawn.  And saying this, and going in with his
intimate friends, he made the usual preparations for immediate repose,
for it was now evening.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIX](0081119)
