[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081219)  [Next](0081221) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v.xliii"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.v.xliii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 42.</span>

<span id="vii.v.xliii-p2"></span>And Joseph having come to a feast with
his sons, James, Joseph, and Judah, and Simeon and his two daughters,
Jesus met them, with Mary His mother, along with her sister Mary of
Cleophas, whom the Lord God had given to her father Cleophas and her
mother Anna, because they had offered Mary the mother of Jesus to the
Lord.  And she was called by the same name, Mary, for the consolation of
her parents. <span id="fr_1689"></span>[1690](#fn_1689)   And when they
had come together, Jesus sanctified and blessed them, and He was the
first to begin to eat and drink; for none of them dared to eat or drink,
or to sit at table, or to break bread, until He had sanctified them, and
first done so.  And if He hap<span id="page_383">p. 383</span> <span
id="vii.v.xliii-Page_383"></span>pened to be absent, they used to wait
until He should do this.  And when He did not wish to come for
refreshment, neither Joseph nor Mary, nor the sons of Joseph, His
brothers, came.  And, indeed, these brothers, keeping His life as a lamp
before their eyes, observed Him, and feared Him.  And when Jesus slept,
whether by day or by night, the brightness of God shone upon Him.  To
whom be all praise and glory for ever and ever.  Amen, amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[382:1690](0081220.htm#fr_1689) <span
id="vii.v.xliii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xliii-p3"></span> One of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.v.xliii-p3.1"></span>mss.</span> has:  And when Joseph, worn out
with old age, died and was buried with his parents, the blessed Mary
lived with her nephews, or with the children of her sisters; for Anna
and Emerina were sisters.  Of Emerina was born Elizabeth, the mother of
John the Baptist.  And as Anna, the mother of the blessed Mary, was very
beautiful, when Joachim was dead she was married to Cleophas, by whom
she had a second daughter.  She called her Mary, and gave her to Alphæus
to wife; and of her was born James the son of Alphæus, and Philip his
brother.  And her second husband having died, Anna was married to a
third husband named Salome, by whom she had a third daughter.  She
called her Mary likewise, and gave her to Zebedee to wife; and of her
were born James the son of Zebedee, and John the Evangelist.

<span id="vii.v.xliii-p4"></span>Another passage to the same effect is
prefixed to the Gospel.  It reads Emeria for Emerina, and Joseph for
Philip.  It ends with a quotation from Jerome’s sermon upon Easter:—We
read in the Gospels that there were four Mary’s—first, the mother of the
Lord the Saviour; second, His maternal aunt, who was called Mary of
Cleophas; third, Mary the mother of James and Joseph, fourth, Mary
Magdalene—though some maintain that the mother of James and Joseph was
His aunt.

<span id="vii.v.xliii-p5"></span>The same <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.v.xliii-p5.1"></span>ms.</span> thus concludes:  The holy
Apostle and Evangelist John with his own hand wrote this little book in
Hebrew, and the learned doctor Jerome rendered it from Hebrew into
Latin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Gospel of the Nativity of Mary.](0081221)
