[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081312)  [Next](0081314) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xv.xiii"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xv.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.</span>

<span id="vii.xv.xiii-p2"></span>And the Jews, hearing that Joseph had
begged the body of Jesus, sought for him; and those twelve men who had
said that He was not born of fornication, and Nicodemus, and many
others, who had stood before Pilate and declared His good works.  And
all of them being hid, Nicodemus alone appeared to them, because he was
a chief man of the Jews; and he says to them:  How have ye come into the
synagogue?  The Jews say to him:  And thou, how hast thou come into the
synagogue, seeing that thou consentest with him?  May his portion be
with thee in the world to come!  Nicodemus said:  Amen, amen, amen. 
Likewise also Joseph, coming forth, said to them:  Why are you enraged
against me because I begged the body of Jesus?  Lo, I have laid him in
my own new <span id="page_444">p. 444</span> <span
id="vii.xv.xiii-Page_444"></span>tomb, wrapping him in clean linen; and
I have rolled a stone to the door of the cave.  And ye have not acted
well against a just man, since you have not borne in mind how you
crucified him, and pierced him with a lance.  The Jews therefore, laying
hold of Joseph, ordered him to be imprisoned because of the Sabbath-day;
and they say to him:  Know that the hour compels us not to do anything
against thee, because the Sabbath is dawning.  But understand that thou
art worthy not even of burial, but we will give thy flesh to the birds
of the air and the beasts of the earth.  Joseph says to them:  That is
the speech of proud Goliath, who reviled the living God against holy
David.  And God hath said, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the
Lord.  And Pilate, intercepted <span
id="fr_1963"></span>[1964](#fn_1963) in his heart, took water, and
washed his hands before the sun, saying, I am innocent of the blood of
this just man; see ye to it.  And you answered and said to Pilate, His
blood be upon us, and upon our children.  And now I fear that some time
or other the wrath of God will come upon you and your children, as you
have said.  And the Jews, hearing this, were embittered in heart; and
taking Joseph, shut him up in a house where there was no window, and set
guards at the gates, and sealed the gate where Joseph had been shut up.

<span id="vii.xv.xiii-p4"></span>And on the Sabbath morning they took
counsel with the priests and the Levites, that they should all be
assembled after the Sabbath-day.  And awaking at dawn, all the multitude
in the synagogue took counsel by what death they should slay him.  And
when the assembly was sitting, they ordered him to be brought with much
indignity; and opening the gate, they found him not.  All the people
therefore were in terror, and wondered with exceeding astonishment,
because they found the seals sealed, and because Caiaphas had the keys. 
And no longer did they dare to lay hand upon those who spoke before
Pilate in Jesus’ defence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1963"></span>[444:1964](0081313.htm#fr_1963) <span
id="vii.xv.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.xiii-p3"></span> Another reading is *compunctus*,
pricked.  The reading in the text, *obstructus*, is a curious
mistranslation of the word in the Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv.xiii-p3.1"></span>περιτετμημένος</span>, cut away all round,
i.e., *circumcised*; or, by an obvious transition, *hemmed in*—the
meaning adopted in the version before us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](0081314)
