[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081271)  [Next](0081273) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.</span>

<span id="vii.xiii.ii-p2"></span>Our Lord Jesus Christ having wrought in
Judæa many and great and extraordinary miracles, and on account of this
being hated by the Hebrews, while Pilate was procurator in Jerusalem,
and Annas and Caiaphas high priests, there came of the Jews to the chief
priests, Judas, Levi, Nephthalim, Alexander, Syrus, and many others,
speaking against Christ.  And these chief priests sent them away to say
these things to Pilate also.  And they went away, and said to him:  A
man walks about in this city whose father is called Joseph, and his
mother Mary; and he calls himself king and Son of God; and being a Jew,
he overturns the Scriptures, and does away with the Sabbath.  Pilate
then asked, in order to learn from them in what manner he did away with
the Sabbath.  And they answered, saying:  He cures the sick on the
Sabbath.  Pilate says:  If he makes the sick whole, he does no evil. 
They say to him:  If he effected the cures properly, small would be the
evil; but by using magic he does these things, and by having the demons
on his side.  Pilate says:  To cure a person that is ill is not a
diabolic work, but a grace from God.

<span id="vii.xiii.ii-p3"></span>The Hebrews said:  We beseech your
highness to summon him, in order that thou mayst make accurate inquiry
into what we say.  Pilate therefore, throwing off his cloak, gave it to
one of his officers, <span id="fr_1872"></span>[1873](#fn_1872) saying: 
Go away, and show this to Jesus, and say to him, Pilate the procurator
calls thee to come before him.  The officer accordingly went away, and
finding Jesus, summoned Him, having unfolded on the ground also Pilate’s
mantle, and urged Him to walk upon it.  And the Hebrews, seeing this,
and being greatly enraged, came to Pilate, murmuring against him, how he
had deemed Jesus worthy of so great honour.

<span id="vii.xiii.ii-p5"></span>And he, having inquired of the officer
who had been sent how he had done so, the officer answered:  When thou
didst send me to the Jew Alexander, I came upon Jesus entering the gate
of the city, sitting upon an ass.  And I saw that the Hebrews spread
their garments in the way, and the ass walked upon the garments; and
others cut branches, and they went forth to meet him, and cried out,
Hosanna in the highest!  Thus, therefore, it was necessary for me also
to do.

<span id="vii.xiii.ii-p6"></span>The Jews, hearing these words, said to
him:  How didst thou, being a Roman, know what was said by the Hebrews? 
The officer answered:  I asked one of the Hebrews, and he told me these
things.  Pilate said:  What means Hosanna?  The Jews said:  Save us, O
Lord.  Pilate answered:  Since you confess that your children said so,
how now do you bring charges, and say against Jesus what you do say? 
The Jews were silent, and had nothing to answer. <span
id="fr_1873"></span>[1874](#fn_1873)

<span id="vii.xiii.ii-p8"></span>Now, as Jesus was coming to Pilate, the
soldiers of Pilate adored Him.  And others also were standing before
Pilate holding standards.  And as Jesus was coming, the standards also
bowed down, and adored Him.  As Pilate, therefore, was wondering at what
had happened, the Jews said to him:  My lord, it was not the standards
that adored Jesus, but the soldiers who were holding them carelessly.

<span id="vii.xiii.ii-p9"></span>Pilate says to the ruler of the
synagogue:  Choose twelve powerful men, and give them the <span
id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span
id="vii.xiii.ii-Page_427"></span>standards, so that they may hold them
firmly.  And this having taken place, Pilate ordered the officer to take
Jesus outside, and bring Him in again.  And as He was coming in, the
standards again bowed down, and adored Him.  Pilate therefore wondered
greatly.  But the Jews said:  He is a magician, and through that he does
these things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1872"></span>[426:1873](0081272.htm#fr_1872) <span
id="vii.xiii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii.ii-p4"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xiii.ii-p4.1"></span>ms.</span> inserts:  by name Rachaab, the
messenger.

<span id="fn_1873"></span>[426:1874](0081272.htm#fr_1873) <span
id="vii.xiii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii.ii-p7"></span> Instead of these four sections, <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xiii.ii-p7.1"></span>ms.</span> C has a minute
account of the suicide of Judas, of which the following specimen may be
given:—And he went home to make a halter to hang himself, and he found
his wife roasting a cock on the coals.  And he says to her:  Rise, wife,
and get a rope ready for me; for I mean to hang myself, as I deserve. 
And his wife said to him:  Why do you speak like that?  And Judas says: 
Know in truth that I unjustly betrayed my master, etc., and that he is
going to rise on the third day; and woe to us!  And his wife says:  Do
not speak or think in that way.  It is just as likely as that this cock
roasting on the coals will crow, that Jesus will rise, as you say.  No
sooner said than the cock flapped his wings, and crew thrice.  This
decided Judas, and he immediately made the halter, and hanged himself. 
\[The<span class="c9"><span id="vii.xiii.ii-p7.2"></span>mss.</span> of
the “Second Greek Form” are designated by Tischendorf (*Evang. Apocry*.,
pp. lxxii., lxxiii.) as follows:  A, a Venice <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xiii.ii-p7.3"></span>ms.</span>, comparatively recent; B., a
Paris <span class="c9"><span id="vii.xiii.ii-p7.4"></span>ms.</span> of
the fifteenth century; C. a Venice <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xiii.ii-p7.5"></span>ms.</span> of the same century.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](0081273)
