[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081212)  [Next](0081214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.v.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 35.</span>

<span id="vii.v.xxxvi-p2"></span>There is a road going out of Jericho
and leading to the river Jordan, to the place <span id="page_381">p.
381</span> <span id="vii.v.xxxvi-Page_381"></span>where the children of
Israel crossed:  and there the ark of the covenant is said to have
rested.  And Jesus was eight years old, and He went out of Jericho, and
went towards the Jordan.  And there was beside the road, near the bank
of the Jordan, a cave where a lioness was nursing her cubs; and no one
was safe to walk that way.  Jesus then, coming from Jericho, and knowing
that in that cave the lioness had brought forth her young, went into it
in the sight of all.  And when the lions saw Jesus, they ran to meet
Him, and adored Him.  And Jesus was sitting in the cavern, and the
lion’s cubs ran hither and thither round His feet, fawning upon Him, and
sporting.  And the older lions, with their heads bowed down, stood at a
distance, and adored Him, and fawned upon Him with their tails.  Then
the people who were standing afar off, not seeing Jesus, said:  Unless
he or his parents had committed grievous sins, he would not of his own
accord have offered himself up to the lions.  And when the people were
thus reflecting within themselves, and were lying under great sorrow,
behold, on a sudden, in the sight of the people, Jesus came out of the
cave, and the lions went before Him, and the lion’s cubs played with
each other before His feet.  And the parents of Jesus stood afar off,
with their heads bowed down, and watched; likewise also the people stood
at a distance, on account of the lions; for they did not dare to come
close to them.  Then Jesus began to say to the people:  How much better
are the beasts than you, seeing that they recognise their Lord, and
glorify Him; while you men, who have been made after the image and
likeness of God, do not know Him!  Beasts know me, and are tame; men see
me, and do not acknowledge me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 36](0081214)
