[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081353)  [Next](0081355) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxiii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xxiii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.</span>

<span id="vii.xxiii.v-p2"></span>After I had beheld these things, as I
was going into Galilee with Jesus and the robber, Jesus was
transfigured, and was not as formerly, before He was crucified, but was
altogether light; and angels always ministered to Him, and Jesus spoke
with them.  And I remained with Him three days.  And no one of His
disciples was with Him, except the robber alone.

<span id="vii.xxiii.v-p3"></span>And in the middle of the feast of
unleavened bread, His disciple John comes, and we no longer beheld the
robber as to what took place.  And John asked Jesus:  Who is this, that
Thou hast not made me to be seen by him?  But Jesus answered him
nothing.  And falling down before Him, he said:  Lord, I know that Thou
hast loved me from the beginning, and why dost Thou not reveal to me
that man?  Jesus says to him:  Why dost thou seek what is hidden?  Art
thou still without understanding?  Dost thou not perceive the fragrance
of paradise filling the place?  Dost thou not know who it is?  The
robber on the cross has become heir of paradise.  Amen, amen; I say to
thee, that it shall belong to him alone until that the great day shall
come.  And John said:  Make me worthy to behold him.

<span id="vii.xxiii.v-p4"></span>And while John was yet speaking, the
robber suddenly appeared; and John, struck with astonishment, fell to
the earth.  And the robber <span id="page_471">p. 471</span> <span
id="vii.xxiii.v-Page_471"></span>was not in his first form, as before
John came; but he was like a king in great power, having on him the
cross.  And the voice of a great multitude was sent forth:  Thou hast
come to the place prepared for thee in paradise.  We have been commanded
by Him that has sent thee, to serve thee until the great day.  And after
this voice, both the robber and I Joseph vanished, and I was found in my
own house; and I no longer saw Jesus.

<span id="vii.xxiii.v-p5"></span>And I, having seen these things, have
written them down, in order that all may believe in the crucified Jesus
Christ our Lord, and may no longer obey the law of Moses, but may
believe in the signs and wonders that have happened through Him, and in
order that we who have believed may inherit eternal life, and be found
in the kingdom of the heavens.  For to Him are due glory, strength,
praise, and majesty for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Avenging of the Saviour.](0081355)
