[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081371)  [Next](0081373) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Acts of the Holy Apostle Thomas,</span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p2.1"></span>When He Came into India, and Built the
Palace in the Heavens.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>And</span> when the apostle came into
the cities of India, with Abbanes the merchant, Abbanes went away to
salute Gundaphoros the king, and reported to him about the carpenter
whom he had brought with him; and the king was glad, and ordered him to
come in to himself.  And when he had come in, the king said to him: 
What trade knowest thou?  The apostle says to him:  The carpenter’s and
house builder’s.  The king says to him:  What work in wood knowest thou,
<span id="page_539">p. 539</span> <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-Page_539"></span>then, and what in stone?  The
apostle says:  In wood, ploughs, yokes, balances, pulleys, and boats,
and oars, and masts; and in stone, monuments, temples, royal palaces. 
And the king said:  Wilt thou build me a palace?  And he answered:  Yes,
I shall build it, and finish it; for because of this I came, to build
houses, and to do carpenter’s work.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p4"></span>And the king having taken him, went
forth out of the gates of the city, and began to talk with him on the
way about the building of the palace, and about the foundations, how
they should be laid, until they came to that place in which he wished
the building to be.  And he said:  Here I wish the building to be.  And
the apostle says:  Yes; for assuredly this place is convenient for the
building.  For the place was well wooded, and there was much water
there.  The king therefore says:  Begin to build.  And he said:  I
cannot begin to build at this time.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p5"></span>And the king says:  When wilt thou
be able?  And he says:  I shall begin in Dius and end in
Xanthicus. <span id="fr_2329"></span>[2330](#fn_2329)   And the king
wondering, said:  Every building is built in summer; but canst thou
build and make a palace in winter itself?  And the apostle said:  Thus
it must be, and otherwise it is impossible.  And the king said:  If,
therefore, this be thy opinion, mark out for me how the work is to be,
since I shall come here after some time.  And the apostle, having taken
a reed, measured the place, and marked it out; and he set the doors
towards the rising of the sun, to look to the light, and the windows
towards its setting, to the winds; and he made the bakehouse to be
towards the south, and the water-tank, for abundance, towards the
north.  And the king seeing this, said to the apostle:  Thou art a
craftsman indeed, and it is fitting that thou shouldst serve kings.  And
having left many things for him, he went away.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p8"></span>And from time to time he also sent
the money that was necessary, for the living both of him and the other
workmen.  And he taking it, dispenses it all, going about the cities and
the places round, distributing and doing kindnesses to the poor and the
afflicted, and gave them rest, <span
id="fr_2330"></span>[2331](#fn_2330) saying:  The king knows how to
obtain royal recompense, and it is necessary for the poor to have repose
for the present.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p10"></span>And after this, the king sent a
messenger to the apostle, having written to him as follows:  Show me
what thou hast done, or what I am to send thee, or what thou needest. 
The apostle sends to him, saying:  The palace is built, and only the
roof remains to be done.  And the king, having heard, sent him again
gold and silver uncoined, and wrote to him:  Let the palace, if it be
done, be roofed.  And the apostle said to the Lord:  I thank Thee, Lord,
as to all things, that Thou didst die for a short time, that I might
live in Thee for ever; and hast sold me, so that Thou mayst deliver many
through me.  And he did not cease to teach and refresh the afflicted,
saying:  These things the Lord hath dispensed to us, and He gives to
each his food; for He is the support of the orphans, and the provider of
the widows, and to all that are afflicted He is rest and repose.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p11"></span>And when the king came into the
city, he inquired of his friends about the palace which Judas, who also
is Thomas, had built; and they said to him:  He has neither built a
palace, nor done anything else of what he promised to do; but he goes
round the cities and the districts, and if he has anything he gives all
to the poor, and teaches one new God, <span
id="fr_2331"></span>[2332](#fn_2331) and heals the diseased, and drives
out demons, and does many other extraordinary things; and we think that
he is a magician.  But his acts of compassion, and the cures done by him
as a free gift, and still more, his single-mindedness, and gentleness,
and fidelity, show that he is a just man, or an apostle of the new God
whom he preaches; for he continually fasts and prays, and eats only
bread with salt, and his drink is water, and he carries one coat,
whether in warm weather or in cold, and he takes nothing from any one,
but gives to others even what he has.  The king having heard this,
stroked his face with his hands, shaking his head for a long time.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p13"></span>And he sent for the merchant that
had brought him, and for the apostle, and said to him:  Hast thou built
me the palace?  And he said:  Yes, I have built it.  And the king said: 
When, then, are we to go and see it?  And he answered and said:  Now
thou canst not see it; but when thou hast departed this life, thou shalt
see it.  And the king, quite enraged, ordered both the merchant, and
Judas who also is Thomas, to be put in chains, and to be cast into
prison, until he should examine, and learn to whom he had given the
king’s property.  And thus I shall destroy him along with the merchant. 
And the apostle went to prison rejoicing, and said to the merchant: 
Fear nothing at all, but only believe in the God proclaimed by me, and
thou shalt be freed from this world, and thou shalt obtain life in the
world to come.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p14"></span>And the king considered by what
death he should kill them; and when it seemed good to him to flay them,
and burn them with fire, on that very night Gad the king’s brother fell
ill, <span id="page_540">p. 540</span> <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-Page_540"></span>and through the grief and
imposition which the king suffered he was grievously depressed; and
having sent for the king, he said to him:  My brother the king, I
commend to thee my house and my children; for I, on account of the
insult that has befallen thee, have been grieved, and am dying; and if
thou do not come down with vengeance upon the head of that magician,
thou wilt give my soul no rest in Hades.  And the king said to his
brother:  During the whole night I have considered this, how I shall put
him to death; and this has seemed good to me—to flay him and burn him up
with fire, both him and with him the merchant that brought him.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p15"></span>And as they were talking together,
the soul of Gad his brother departed.  And the king mourned for Gad
exceedingly, for he altogether loved him.  And he ordered him to be
prepared for burial in a royal and costly robe.  And as this was being
done, angels received the soul of Gad the king’s brother, and took it up
into heaven, showing him the places and dwellings there, asking him:  In
what sort of a place dost thou wish to dwell?  And when they came near
the edifice of Thomas the apostle, which he had built for the king, Gad,
seeing it, said to the angels, I entreat you, my lords, permit me to
dwell in one of the underground chambers of this palace.  And they said
to him:  Thou canst not dwell in this building. <span
id="fr_2332"></span>[2333](#fn_2332)   And he said:  Wherefore?  They
say to him:  This palace is the one which that Christian built for thy
brother.  And he said:  I entreat you, my lords, permit me to go to my
brother, that I may buy this palace from him; for my brother does not
know what it is like, and he will sell it to me.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p17"></span>Then the angels let the soul of
Gad go.  And as they were putting on him the burial robe, his soul came
into him.  And he said to those standing round him:  Call my brother to
me, that I may beg of him one request.  Straightway, therefore, they
sent the good news to their king, saying:  Thy brother has come alive
again.  And the king started up, and along with a great multitude went
to his brother, and went in and stood beside his bed as if
thunderstruck, not being able to speak to him.  And his brother said:  I
know and am persuaded, brother, that if any one asked of thee the half
of thy kingdom, thou wouldst give it for my sake; wherefore I entreat
thee to grant me one favour, which I beg of thee to do me.  And the king
answered and said:  And what is it that thou askest me to do for thee? 
And he said:  Assure me by an oath that thou wilt grant it me.  And the
king swore to him:  Of what belongs to me, whatever thou shalt ask, I
will give thee.  And he says to him:  Sell me that palace which thou
hast in the heavens.  And the king said:  Whence does a palace in the
heavens belong to me?  And he said:  That which the Christian who is now
in the prison, whom the merchant bought from a certain Jesus, and
brought to thee, built for thee.  And as he was at a loss, he says to
him again:  I speak of that Hebrew slave whom thou didst wish to punish,
as having suffered some imposition from him, on account of whom I also
was grieved and died, and now have come alive again.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p18"></span>Then the king, having come to
know, understood about the eternal benefits that were conferred upon him
and destined for him, and said:  That palace I cannot sell thee, but I
pray thee to go into it, and dwell *there*, and become worthy to be of
its inhabitants; but if thou really wishest to buy such a palace,
behold, the man is alive, and will build thee a better than that. <span
id="fr_2333"></span>[2334](#fn_2333)   And having sent immediately, he
brought out of the prison the apostle, and the merchant who had been
shut up along with him, saying:  I entreat thee, as a man entreating the
servant of God, that thou wilt pray for me, and entreat him whose
servant thou art, to pardon me, and overlook what I have done to thee,
or even what I meant to do, and that I may be worthy to be an inhabitant
of that house for which indeed I have laboured nothing, but which thou
labouring alone hast built for me, the grace of thy God working with
thee; and that I may become a servant, I also, and slave of this God
whom thou proclaimest.  And his brother, falling down before the
apostle, said:  I entreat thee, and supplicate before thy God, that I
may become worthy of this ministry and service, and may be allotted to
become worthy of those things which were shown me by his angels.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p20"></span>And the apostle, seized with joy,
said:  I make full confession <span id="fr_2334"></span>[2335](#fn_2334)
to Thee, Lord Jesus, that Thou hast revealed Thy truth in these men: 
for Thou alone art a God of truth, and not another; and Thou art He who
knowest all things that are unknown to many:  Thou art He, Lord, who in
all things showest compassion and mercy to men; for men, through the
error that is in them, have overlooked Thee, but Thou hast not
overlooked them.  And now, when I am entreating and supplicating Thee,
accept the king and his brother, and unite them into Thy fold, having
<span id="page_541">p. 541</span> <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-Page_541"></span>cleansed them by Thy purification,
and anointed them with Thy oil, from the error which encompasseth them;
and protect them also from the wolves, bringing them into Thy meadows;
and give them to drink of Thy ambrosial fountain, that is never muddy
and never faileth:  for they entreat Thee, and supplicate, and wish to
become Thy ministers and servants; and on account of this they are well
pleased even to be persecuted by Thine enemies, and for Thy sake to be
hated by them, and insulted, and to die; as Thou also for our sakes
didst suffer all these things, that Thou mightst gain us to Thyself, as
being Lord, and truly a good shepherd.  And do Thou grant them that they
may have confidence in Thee alone, and aid from Thee, and hope of their
salvation, which they obtain from Thee alone, and that they may be
confirmed in Thy mysteries; and they shall receive the perfect benefits
of Thy graces and gifts, and flourish in Thy service, and bear fruit to
perfection in Thy Father.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p22"></span>King Gundaphoros, therefore, and
Gad, having been altogether set apart by the apostle, followed him, not
at all going back, they also providing for those that begged of them,
giving to all, and relieving all.  And they entreated him that they
might also then receive the seal of baptism; and they said to him:  As
our souls are at ease, and as we are earnest about God, give us the
seal; for we have heard thee saying that the God whom thou proclaimest
recognises through his seal his own sheep.  And the apostle said to
them:  And I am glad, and entreat you to receive this seal, and to
communicate with me in this thanksgiving <span
id="fr_2335"></span>[2336](#fn_2335) and blessing of God, and to be made
perfect in it; <span id="fr_2336"></span>[2337](#fn_2336) for this Jesus
Christ whom I proclaim is Lord and God of all, and He is the Father of
truth, in whom I have taught you to believe.  And he ordered to bring
them oil, in order that through the oil they might receive the seal. 
They brought the oil, therefore, and lighted many lamps, for it was
night. <span id="fr_2337"></span>[2338](#fn_2337)

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p27"></span>And the apostle arose, and sealed
them; and the Lord was revealed to them, through a voice saying, Peace
to you, brethren!  And they heard His voice only, but His form they saw
not; for they had not yet received the ratification <span
id="fr_2338"></span>[2339](#fn_2338) of the seal.  And the apostle,
having taken oil, and poured it over their head, and salved and anointed
them, began to say:  Come, holy name of Christ, which is above every
name; come, power of the Most High, and perfect compassion; come, grace
most high; come, compassionate mother; come, thou that hast charge <span
id="fr_2339"></span>[2340](#fn_2339) of the male child; come, thou who
revealest secret mysteries; come, mother of the seven houses, that there
may be rest for thee in the eighth house; come, thou presbyter of the
five members—intelligence, thought, purpose, reflection,
reasoning—communicate with these young persons; come, Holy Spirit, and
purify their reins and heart, and seal them in the name of Father, and
Son, and Holy Spirit.  And when they had been sealed, there appeared to
them a young man holding a burning torch, so that their lamps were even
darkened by the approach <span id="fr_2340"></span>[2341](#fn_2340) of
its light.  And he went out, and disappeared from their sight.  And the
apostle said to the Lord:  Thy light, Lord, is too great for us, and we
cannot bear it; for it is too much for our sight.  And when light came,
and it was dawn, having broken bread, he made them partakers of the
thanksgiving <span id="fr_2341"></span>[2342](#fn_2341) of Christ.  And
they rejoiced and exulted; and many others also believed, and were
added, and came to the refuge of the Saviour.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p32"></span>And the apostle ceased not
proclaiming, and saying to them:  Men and women, boys and girls, young
men and maidens, vigorous and aged, both bond and free, withhold
yourselves from fornication, and covetousness, and the service of the
belly; for under these three heads all wickedness comes.  For
fornication maims the mind, and darkens the eyes of the soul, and
becomes a hindrance of the due regulation of the body, changing the
whole man into feebleness, and throwing the whole body into disease. 
And insatiableness puts the soul into fear and shame, existing by what
pertains to the body, <span id="fr_2342"></span>[2343](#fn_2342) and
forcibly seizing what belongs to another;…and the service of the belly
throws the soul into cares and troubles and griefs.…Since, therefore,
you have been set free from these, you are without care, and without
grief, and without fear; and there remains to you that which was said by
the Saviour:  Take no care for the morrow, for the morrow will take care
of itself. <span id="fr_2343"></span>[2344](#fn_2343)   Keep in mind
also that saying before mentioned:  Look upon the ravens, and behold the
fowls of the heaven, that they neither sow nor reap, nor gather into
barns, and God takes care of them; how much more you, O ye of little
faith! <span id="fr_2344"></span>[2345](#fn_2344)   But look for His
appearing, and have your hopes in Him, and believe in His <span
id="page_542">p. 542</span> <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-Page_542"></span>name:  for He is the Judge of
living and dead, and He requites to each one according to his deeds; and
at His coming and appearance at last no one will have as a ground of
excuse, when he comes to be judged by Him, that he has not heard.  For
His heralds are proclaiming in the four quarters of the world.  Repent,
therefore, and believe the message, <span
id="fr_2345"></span>[2346](#fn_2345) and accept the yoke of gentleness
and the light burden, <span id="fr_2346"></span>[2347](#fn_2346) that
you may live and not die.  These things lay hold of, these things keep;
come forth from the darkness, that the light may receive you; come to
Him who is truly good, that from Him you may receive grace, and place
His sign upon your souls.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p38"></span>When he had thus said, some of the
bystanders said to him:  It is time for this debtor to receive his
debt.  And he said to them:  The creditor, <span
id="fr_2347"></span>[2348](#fn_2347) indeed, always wishes to receive
more; but let us give him what is proper.  And having blessed them, he
took bread and oil, and herbs and salt, and gave them to eat.  But he
continued in his fasting, for the Lord’s day was about to dawn.  And on
the night following, while he was asleep, the Lord came and stood by his
head, saying:  Thomas, rise up early and bless them all; and after the
prayer and service go along the eastern road two miles, and there I
shall show in thee my glory.  For because thou goest away, many shall
flee to me for refuge, and thou shalt reprove the nature and the power
of the enemy.  And having risen up from sleep, he said to the brethren
who were with him:  Children and brethren, the Lord wishes to do
something or other to-day through me; but let us pray and entreat Him
that nothing may be a hindrance to us towards Him, but as at all times
let it now also be done unto us according to His purpose and will.  And
having thus spoken, he laid his hands upon them and blessed them.  And
having broken the bread of the Eucharist, he gave it to them, saying: 
This Eucharist shall be <span id="fr_2348"></span>[2349](#fn_2348) to
you for compassion, and mercy, and recompense, and not for judgment. 
And they said:  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2329"></span>[539:2330](0081372.htm#fr_2329) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p6"></span> Dius was the first, and Xanthicus
the sixth, of the twelve lunar months of the Macedonian calendar, which
after the time of Alexander was adopted by the Greek cities of Asia
generally.  Dius fell partly in October and partly in November;
Xanthicus answered generally to April.—Smith’s *Dict. of Antiq*., s.v.
Mensis.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p7"></span>Another reading is:  I shall begin
in Hyperberetæus—the twelfth month.

<span id="fn_2330"></span>[539:2331](0081372.htm#fr_2330) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p9"></span> Or, remission.

<span id="fn_2331"></span>[539:2332](0081372.htm#fr_2331) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p12"></span> One of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p12.1"></span>mss.</span> has:  that there is one
God, namely Jesus.

<span id="fn_2332"></span>[540:2333](0081372.htm#fr_2332) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p16"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p16.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  But if thou buy it,
thou shalt live in it.  And he said to them:  Can I buy it?  And they
said to him:  See that thou obtain one like this which thou seest, or
better if thou wilt, that when thou comest hither again, thou mayst not
be driven into the darkness.

<span id="fn_2333"></span>[540:2334](0081372.htm#fr_2333) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p19"></span> One of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p19.1"></span>mss.</span> here ends the history in
these words:—And he sent, and brought out Thomas, and said to him: 
Pardon us if we have in ignorance been in any way harsh to thee; and
make us to be partakers of him whom thou preachest.  And the apostle
says:  I too rejoice with you, that you are made partakers of His
kingdom.  And he took and enlightened them, having given them the
washing of grace in the name of Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, to
whom is due all glory and kingdom without end.  And when they had gone
up straightway out of the water, the Saviour appeared to them, so that
the apostle wondered, and a great light shone brighter than the rays of
the sun.  And having confirmed their faith, he went out, going on his
way in the Lord.

<span id="fn_2334"></span>[540:2335](0081372.htm#fr_2334) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p21"></span> i.e., give thanks, as in [Matt.
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025), [Luke
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021)<span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p21.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_2335"></span>[541:2336](0081372.htm#fr_2335) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p23"></span> Or, Eucharist.

<span id="fn_2336"></span>[541:2337](0081372.htm#fr_2336) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p24"></span> i.e., by it.

<span id="fn_2337"></span>[541:2338](0081372.htm#fr_2337) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p25"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p25.1"></span>ms.</span> for this whole section
has:  The two brothers having been set apart by the apostle, said to
him, Give us the seal in Christ.  And he ordered them to bring him oil. 
And ends the history thus:  And he arose, and sealed them in the name of
Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, and baptized them.  And the Lord was
revealed to them, through a voice saying to them, peace unto you!  And
the apostle sealed also all that were with them.  And they all believed
in our Lord Jesus Christ:  and the whole of India became believing.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p26"></span>The last sentence in the text
seems to be an interpolation.  The oil was not for the lamps, but for
the ceremony of baptism.  The practice of baptizing with oil instead of
water—one of the “notable and execrable” heresies of the Manichæans—is
said to have been founded on this passage.

<span id="fn_2338"></span>[541:2339](0081372.htm#fr_2338) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p28"></span> Lit., the sealing up.

<span id="fn_2339"></span>[541:2340](0081372.htm#fr_2339) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p29"></span> Lit., the administration.

<span id="fn_2340"></span>[541:2341](0081372.htm#fr_2340) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p30"></span> Perhaps for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p30.1"></span>προσβολῇ</span> we
should read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p30.2"></span>προβολῇ</span>, projection or
emanation.

<span id="fn_2341"></span>[541:2342](0081372.htm#fr_2341) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p30.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p31"></span> Or, communicants of the
Eucharist.

<span id="fn_2342"></span>[541:2343](0081372.htm#fr_2342) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p33"></span> Or, arising from the things of
the body.

<span id="fn_2343"></span>[541:2344](0081372.htm#fr_2343) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p34"></span> Comp. [Matt. vi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034)<span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2344"></span>[541:2345](0081372.htm#fr_2344) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p35"></span> [Luke xii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#024)<span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2345"></span>[542:2346](0081372.htm#fr_2345) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p36"></span> Or, announcement.

<span id="fn_2346"></span>[542:2347](0081372.htm#fr_2346) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p37"></span> [Matt. xi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)<span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2347"></span>[542:2348](0081372.htm#fr_2347) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p39"></span> Lit., master of the debt.

<span id="fn_2348"></span>[542:2349](0081372.htm#fr_2348) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.i-p40"></span> i.e., be.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: About the Dragon and the Young Man.](0081373)
