[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081328)  [Next](0081330) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xvi.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xvi.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11 (27).</span>

<span id="vii.xvi.xi-p2"></span>These are the divine and sacred
mysteries which we saw and heard, I Karinus, and Leucius.  More we are
not allowed to tell of the other mysteries of God, as Michael the
archangel adjured us, and said:  You shall go into Jerusalem with your
brethren, and continue in prayers, and you shall cry out, and glorify
the resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, who has raised you up again
from the dead with Himself.  And with none of men shall you speak; and
you shall sit as if dumb, until the hour shall come when the Lord
Himself shall permit you to relate the mysteries of His divinity.  And
Michael the archangel ordered us to walk across Jordan into a place rich
and fertile, where there are many who rose again along with us for an
evidence of the resurrection of Christ the Lord; because only three days
were allowed to us who have risen from the dead to celebrate in
Jerusalem the passover of the Lord, with our living relations, for an
evidence of the resurrection of Christ the Lord:  and we have been
baptized in the holy river of Jordan, receiving each of us white robes. 
And after three days, when we had celebrated the passover of the Lord,
all who rose again along with us were snatched up into the clouds, and
taken across the Jordan, and were no longer seen by any one.  But we
were told to remain in the city of Arimathæa in prayers.

<span id="vii.xvi.xi-p3"></span><span id="page_453">p. 453</span> <span
id="vii.xvi.xi-Page_453"></span>These are the things which the Lord
commanded us to relate to you.  Give Him praise and confession, and be
penitent, that He may have mercy upon you.  Peace be to you from the
same Lord Jesus Christ, and the Saviour of all of us!  Amen.

<span id="vii.xvi.xi-p4"></span>And after they had finished all, writing
on separate sheets of paper, they arose.  And Karinus gave what he wrote
into the hands of Annas and Caiaphas and Gamaliel; in like manner also
Leucius gave what he wrote into the hands of Nicodemus and Joseph.  And
being suddenly transfigured, they became exceedingly white, and were
seen no more.  And their writings were found exactly the same, not one
letter more or less.

<span id="vii.xvi.xi-p5"></span>All the synagogue of the Jews, hearing
all these wonderful sayings of Karinus and Leucius, said to each other: 
Truly all these things have been done by the Lord, and blessed be the
Lord for ever and ever.  Amen.  And they all went out with great
anxiety, beating their breasts with fear and trembling; and they went
away, each to his own house.

<span id="vii.xvi.xi-p6"></span>All these things which were said by the
Jews in their synagogue Joseph and Nicodemus immediately reported to the
proconsul.  And Pilate himself wrote all which had been done and said
concerning Jesus by the Jews, and he placed all the words in the public
records of his prætorium.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](0081330)
