[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081421)  [Next](0081423) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c6"><span
id="viii.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>The Second Epistle.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="viii.vi.ii-p2.1"></span>To All Bishops.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p3"></span>On brotherly love, and on avoiding the
evil.

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p4"></span>Pontianus, bishop of the holy and
universal Church, to all who worship the Lord aright, and love the
divine worship, greeting.

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p5"></span>Glory to God in the highest, and on
earth peace to men of good will. <span
id="fr_2783"></span>[2784](#fn_2783)   These words, most beloved, are
not the words of men, but of angels; and they were not devised by human
sense, but were uttered by angels at the birth of the Saviour.  And from
these words it can be understood without doubt by all that peace is
given by the Lord, not to men of evil will, but to men of good will. 
Whence the Lord, speaking by the prophet, says:  “How good is God to
Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart!  But as for me, my feet
were almost gone; my steps had well-nigh slipped:  for I was envious at
the unrighteous, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.” <span
id="fr_2784"></span>[2785](#fn_2784)   Of the good, however, the Truth
says in His own person, “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall
see God.” <span id="fr_2785"></span>[2786](#fn_2785)   And they are not
the pure in heart who think evil things, or things hurtful to their
brethren; for he who is the faithful man devises nothing evil.  The
faithful man, accordingly, loves rather to hear things which are
becoming, than to speak things which are not becoming.  And if any one
is faithful, let him see to it that he speak no evil, and lay no snares
in the way of any one.  In this, then, are the children of God
distinguished from the children of the devil.  For the children of God
always think and strive to do things which are of God, and give help
unceasingly to their brethren, and wish to injure no one.  But, on the
other hand, the children of the devil are always meditating things evil
and hurtful, because their deeds are evil.  And of them the Lord,
speaking by the prophet Jeremiah, says:  “I will utter my judgments
against them touching all their wickedness.” <span
id="fr_2786"></span>[2787](#fn_2786)   “Wherefore I will yet plead with
you, saith the Lord; and with your children’s children will I
plead.” <span id="fr_2787"></span>[2788](#fn_2787)   “Behold, I frame
evil against you, and devise a device against you.” <span
id="fr_2788"></span>[2789](#fn_2788)   These things, brethren, are
greatly to be feared, and to be guarded against by all; for the man on
whom the judgment of God may fall will not depart unhurt.  And therefore
let every one see to it carefully that he neither contrive nor do
against a brother what he would not wish to have to endure himself.  And
let not the man of faith come under the suspicion even of saying or
doing what he would not wish to have to endure himself.  Wherefore
persons suspected, or hostile or litigious, and those who are not of
good conversation, or whose life is reprehensible, and those who do not
hold and teach the right faith, have been debarred from being either
accusers or witnesses by our predecessors with apostolic authority; and
we too remove them from that function, and exclude them from it in times
to come, lest those lapse wilfully whom we ought to keep in and save;
lest not only (which may God forbid!) the predicted judgment of God
should fall upon both, but we also should perish (which may God forbid!)
through their fault.  For it is written, “Have they made thee the master
*of a feast?*  Take care for them, that thou mayst be merry on their
account, and receive as thy crown the ornament of esteem, and find
approbation of <span id="page_624">p. 624</span> <span
id="viii.vi.ii-Page_624"></span>thine election.” <span
id="fr_2789"></span>[2790](#fn_2789)   For the evil word affects the
heart, out of which proceed these four objects, good and evil, life and
death; and the tongue in its assiduous action is what determines these. 
Wherefore the before-named parties are altogether to be avoided; and
until the before-noted matters are investigated, and the parties are
found to be clear of such, they are not to be received:  for the right
sacrifice is to give heed to the commandments, and to depart from all
iniquity.  “To depart from wickedness is a thing pleasing to the Lord,
and to forsake unrighteousness is *a sacrifice of* praise.” <span
id="fr_2790"></span>[2791](#fn_2790)   For it is written, “Love thy
friend, and be faithful unto him.  But if thou bewrayest his secrets,
follow no more after him.  For as a man who destroyeth his friend, so is
he who destroys (loseth) the friendship of his neighbour.  And as one
that letteth a bird go out of his hand, so art thou that has let thy
neighbour go and shalt not get him again.  Follow after him no more, for
he is far off.  For he has escaped like a roe out of the snare, because
his soul is wounded.  Thou wilt not be able to bind him any more, and
there is reconciliation for the reviled.  But to betray the secrets of a
friend is the desperation of a wretched soul.  He that winketh with the
eye worketh evil, and no one will cast him off.  When thou art present,
he will despise his own mouth, and express his wonder at thy discourse;
but at the last he will writhe his mouth, and slander thy sayings.  I
have hated many things, but nothing like him; and the Lord will hate
him.  Whoso casteth a stone on high, it will fall upon his own head, and
a deceitful stroke of the deceitful will make wounds.  Whoso diggeth a
pit shall fall therein; and he that setteth a stone in his neighbour’s
way will fall thereon; and he that placeth a snare for another will
perish therein.  He that worketh mischief, it shall fall upon him, and
he shall not know whence it cometh on him.  Mockery and reproach are
from the proud; and vengeance, as a lion, shall be in wait for them. 
They that rejoice at the fall of the righteous shall perish in the
snare, and anguish shall consume them before they die.  Anger and wrath
are both abominations, and the sinful man shall have them both.” <span
id="fr_2791"></span>[2792](#fn_2791)   “He that will be avenged shall
find vengeance from the Lord, and he will surely keep his sins.  Forgive
thy neighbour the hurt that he hath done unto thee, and then shall thy
sins be forgiven thee when thou prayest.  One man beareth hatred against
another; and doth he ask redress of God?  He showeth no mercy to a man
which is like himself; and doth he ask forgiveness of the Most High for
his own sins?  He, though he is flesh, nourisheth hatred; and doth he
ask pardon of God?  Who will entreat for his sins?  Remember thy end,
and let enmity cease; for corruption and death impend on commandments. 
Remember the fear of God, and bear no malice to thy neighbour.  Remember
the covenant of the Highest, and look down upon (*despice*) the
ignorance of thy neighbour.  Abstain from strife, and thou shalt
diminish thy sins.

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p15"></span>For a furious man kindleth strife; and
a sinful man will disquiet friends, and make enmity among them that be
at peace.  For even as the trees of the wood are, so will the fire burn;
and as a man’s strength is, so will his anger be; and as his riches are,
so will he make his anger rise.  An hastened contention will kindle a
fire, and an hastening quarrel will shed blood, and a testifying
(*testificans*) tongue will bring death.  If thou blow upon the spark,
it will burn like a fire; and if thou spit upon it, it will be
extinguished:  and both these come out of the mouth.  Cursed be the
whisperer and doubled-tongued, for such have troubled many that were at
peace.  A third (*tertia*) tongue hath disquieted many, and driven them
from nation to nation:  the fortified cities of the rich it hath pulled
down, and overthrown the houses of great men.  It has subverted the
virtues of peoples, and has destroyed strong nations.  A third tongue
hath cast out truthful <span id="fr_2792"></span>[2793](#fn_2792) women,
and deprived them of their labours.  Whoso hearkeneth unto it shall
never find rest, and never dwell quietly.  The stroke of the whip maketh
marks in the flesh, but the stroke of the tongue will break bones.  Many
have fallen by the edge of the sword, but not in such manner as those
who have perished by their tongue.  Well is he that is defended from the
evil tongue, who hath not passed into the anger thereof, and who hath
not drawn the yoke thereof, nor hath been bound with the bands of it;
for the yoke thereof is a yoke of iron, and the band thereof is a band
of brass.  The death thereof is the vilest death, and the grave were
better than it.  The perseverance thereof shall not abide; but it shall
hold the ways of the unrighteous, and its flame shall not burn the
righteous.  Such as forsake the Lord shall fall into it, and it shall
burn in them, and not be quenched; and it shall be sent upon them as a
lion, and hurt them as a leopard.  Hedge thine ears about with thorns,
and listen not to the evil tongue; and make a door for thy mouth, and
bars for thine ears.  Smelt (*confla*) thy gold and silver, and make a
balance for thy words, and right curbs for thy mouth.  And beware that
thou slide not perchance in thy tongue, and fall before thine enemies
that lie in wait for thee, and thy fall be irremediable even to
death.” <span id="fr_2793"></span>[2794](#fn_2793)   “Make no tarrying
to turn to the <span id="page_625">p. 625</span> <span
id="viii.vi.ii-Page_625"></span>Lord, and put not off from day to day. 
For suddenly shall His wrath come, and in the time of vengeance He will
destroy thee.  Set not thine heart upon goods unjustly gotten, for they
shall not profit thee in the day of veiling (for execution,
*obductionis*) and vengeance.  Move not with every wind, and go not into
every way; for so is the sinner proved with the double-tongue.  Be
stedfast in the way of the Lord, and in the truth of thine
understanding, and in knowledge; and let the word of peace and
righteousness attend thee.  Be courteous in hearing the word, that thou
mayest understand it, and with wisdom give a true answer.  If thou hast
understanding, answer thy neighbour; if not, lay thy hand upon thy
mouth, lest thou be caught in a word of folly, and be confounded. 
Honour and glory are in the talk of the intelligent man; the tongue of
the unwise is his fall.  Be not called a whisperer, and be not caught in
thy tongue, and confounded.  For confusion and penitence are upon the
thief, and the worst condemnation upon the double-tongued.  Moreover,
for the whisperer there is hatred, and enmity, and shame.  Justify the
small and the great alike.” <span id="fr_2794"></span>[2795](#fn_2794)  
Instead of a friend, become not an enemy to thy neighbour.  For the evil
man shall inherit reproach and shame, and every sinner in like manner
that is envious and double-tongued.  Extol not thyself in the counsel of
thine own heart as a bull, lest perchance thy virtue be shattered in
folly, and it consume thy leaves, and destroy thy fruits, and thou be
left as a dry tree in the desert.  For a wicked soul shall destroy him
that hath it, and makes him to be laughed to scorn by his enemies, and
shall bring him down to the lot of the impious.” <span
id="fr_2795"></span>[2796](#fn_2795)   Most dearly beloved, study to
lift up the oppressed, and always help the necessitous; for if a man
relieves an afflicted brother, delivers a captive, or consoles a
mourner, let him have no doubt that that will be recompensed to him by
Him on whom he bestows it all, and who says:  “Inasmuch as ye have done
it unto one of the least of my brethren, ye have done it unto me.” <span
id="fr_2796"></span>[2797](#fn_2796)   Strive, then, unceasingly to do
what is good in such wise that ye may both obtain the fruit of good
works here, and enjoy the favour of God in the future, to the intent
that hereafter ye may be worthy to enter the court of the heavenly
kingdom.—Given on the fourth day before the kalends of May (the 28th of
April), in the consulship of the most illustrious Severus and
Quintianus.

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p21"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2783"></span>[623:2784](0081422.htm#fr_2783) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p6"></span> [Luke i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#014)<span id="viii.vi.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2784"></span>[623:2785](0081422.htm#fr_2784) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p7"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)<span id="viii.vi.ii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2785"></span>[623:2786](0081422.htm#fr_2785) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p8"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="viii.vi.ii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2786"></span>[623:2787](0081422.htm#fr_2786) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p9"></span> [Jer. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#016)<span id="viii.vi.ii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2787"></span>[623:2788](0081422.htm#fr_2787) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p10"></span> [Jer. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#009)<span id="viii.vi.ii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2788"></span>[623:2789](0081422.htm#fr_2788) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p11"></span> [Jer. xviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#011)<span id="viii.vi.ii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2789"></span>[624:2790](0081422.htm#fr_2789) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p12"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
32.1-3](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#001)<span
id="viii.vi.ii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2790"></span>[624:2791](0081422.htm#fr_2790) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p13"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
35.1-3](../../../bib/apo/sir035.htm#001)<span
id="viii.vi.ii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2791"></span>[624:2792](0081422.htm#fr_2791) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p14"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
27.17-30](../../../bib/apo/sir027.htm#017)<span
id="viii.vi.ii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2792"></span>[624:2793](0081422.htm#fr_2792) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p16"></span> Veridicas.  The text reads “Viratas.”

<span id="fn_2793"></span>[624:2794](0081422.htm#fr_2793) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p17"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
28](../../../bib/apo/sir028.htm#000)<span id="viii.vi.ii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2794"></span>[625:2795](0081422.htm#fr_2794) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p18"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
5.7-18](../../../bib/apo/sir005.htm#007)<span
id="viii.vi.ii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2795"></span>[625:2796](0081422.htm#fr_2795) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p19"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
6.1-4](../../../bib/apo/sir006.htm#001)<span
id="viii.vi.ii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2796"></span>[625:2797](0081422.htm#fr_2796) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p20"></span> [Matt. xxv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span id="viii.vi.ii-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note by the American Editor.](0081423)
