[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081105)  [Next](0081107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxi.xi"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxi.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xxi.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.—Simon Professes to Utter His
Real Sentiments.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxi.xi-p2"></span>And Simon said:  It contributes much
to victory, if the man who wars uses his own weapons; for what one loves
he can in real earnest defend, and that which is defended with genuine
earnestness has no ordinary power in it.  Wherefore in future I shall
lay before you my real opinions.  I maintain that there is some
unrevealed power, unknown to all, even to the Creator himself, as Jesus
himself has also declared, though he did not know what he said.  For
when one talks a great deal he sometimes hits the truth, not knowing
what he is saying.  I am referring to the statement which he uttered,
‘No one knows the Father.’”  And Peter said:  “Do not any longer profess
that you know His doctrines.”  And Simon said:  “I do not profess to
believe his doctrines; but I am discussing points in which he was by
accident right.”  And Peter said:  “Not to give you any pretext for
escape, I shall carry on the discussion with you in the way you wish. 
At the same time, I call all to witness that you do not yet believe the
statement which you just now made.  For I know your opinions.  And in
order that you may not imagine that I am not speaking the truth, I shall
expound your opinions, that you may know that you are discussing with
one who is well acquainted with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](0081107)
