[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081232)  [Next](0081234) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.viii"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p1"></span> <span id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span
id="vii.viii-Page_395"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.viii-p1.1"></span>The Gospel of Thomas.</span>

<span id="vii.viii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.viii-p3"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="vii.viii-p3.1"></span>First Greek Form.</span>

<span id="vii.viii-p4"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="vii.viii-p4.1"></span>Thomas the Israelite Philosopher’s Account of
the Infancy of the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.viii-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.viii-p5.1"></span>I Thomas</span>, an Israelite, write you this
account, that all the brethren from among the heathen may know the
miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ in His infancy, which He did after His
birth in our country.  The beginning of it is as follows:—

<span id="vii.viii-p6"></span>2.  This child Jesus, when five years old,
was playing in the ford of a mountain stream; and He collected the
flowing waters into pools, and made them clear immediately, and by a
word alone He made them obey Him.  And having made some soft clay, He
fashioned out of it twelve sparrows.  And it was the Sabbath when He did
these things.  And there were also many other children playing with
Him.  And a certain Jew, seeing what Jesus was doing, playing on the
Sabbath, went off immediately, and said to his father Joseph:  Behold,
thy son is at the stream, and has taken clay, and made of it twelve
birds, and has profaned the Sabbath.  And Joseph, coming to the place
and seeing, cried out to Him, saying:  Wherefore doest thou on the
Sabbath what it is not lawful to do?  And Jesus clapped His hands, and
cried out to the sparrows, and said to them:  Off you go!  And the
sparrows flew, and went off crying.  And the Jews seeing this were
amazed, and went away and reported to their chief men what they had seen
Jesus doing. <span id="fr_1738"></span>[1739](#fn_1738)

<span id="vii.viii-p8"></span>3.  And the son of Annas the scribe was
standing there with Joseph; and he took a willow branch, and let out the
waters which Jesus had collected.  And Jesus, seeing what was done, was
angry, and said to him:  O wicked, impious, and foolish! what harm did
the pools and the waters do to thee?  Behold, even now thou shalt be
dried up like a tree, and thou shalt not bring forth either leaves, or
root, <span id="fr_1739"></span>[1740](#fn_1739) or fruit.  And
straightway that boy was quite dried up.  And Jesus departed, and went
to Joseph’s house.  But the parents of the boy that had been dried up
took him up, bewailing his youth, and brought him to Joseph, and
reproached him because, *said they*, thou hast such a child doing such
things. <span id="fr_1740"></span>[1741](#fn_1740)

<span id="vii.viii-p11"></span>4.  After that He was again passing
through the village; and a boy ran up against Him, and struck His
shoulder.  And Jesus was angry, and said to him:  Thou shalt not go back
the way thou camest.  And immediately he fell down dead.  And some who
saw what had taken place, said:  Whence was this child begotten, that
every word of his is certainly accomplished?  And the parents of the
dead boy went away to Joseph, and blamed him, saying:  Since thou hast
such a child, it is impossible for thee to live with us in the village;
or else teach him to bless, and not to curse: <span
id="fr_1741"></span>[1742](#fn_1741)   for he is killing our children.

<span id="vii.viii-p13"></span>5.  And Joseph called the child apart,
and admonished Him, saying:  Why doest thou such things, and these
people suffer, and hate us, and persecute us?  And Jesus said:  I know
that these words of thine are not thine own; <span
id="fr_1742"></span>[1743](#fn_1742) nevertheless for thy sake I will be
silent; but they shall bear their punishment.  And straightway those
that accused Him were struck blind.  And those who saw it were much
afraid and in great perplexity, and said about Him:  Every word which he
spoke, whether good or bad, was an act, and became a wonder.  And when
they saw that Jesus had done such a thing, Joseph rose and took hold of
His ear, and pulled it hard.  And the child was very angry, and said to
him:  It is enough for thee to seek, and not to find; and most certainly
thou hast not done wisely.  Knowest thou not that I am thine?  Do not
trouble me. <span id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743)

<span id="vii.viii-p16"></span><span id="page_396">p. 396</span> <span
id="vii.viii-Page_396"></span>6.  And a certain teacher, Zacchæus by
name, was standing in a certain place, and heard Jesus thus speaking to
his father; and he wondered exceedingly, that, being a child, he should
speak in such a way.  And a few days thereafter he came to Joseph, and
said to him:  Thou hast a sensible child, and he has some mind.  Give
him to me, then, that he may learn letters; and I shall teach him along
with the letters all knowledge, both how to address all the elders, and
to honour them as forefathers and fathers, and how to love those of his
own age.  And He said to him all the letters from the Alpha even to the
Omega, clearly and with great exactness.  And He looked upon the teacher
Zacchæus, and said to him:  Thou who art ignorant of the nature of the
Alpha, how canst thou teach others the Beta?  Thou hypocrite! first, if
thou knowest, teach the A, and then we shall believe thee about the B. 
Then He began to question the teacher about the first letter, and he was
not able to answer Him.  And in the hearing of many, the child says to
Zacchæus:  Hear, O teacher, the order of the first letter, and notice
here how it has lines, and a middle stroke crossing those which thou
seest common; (lines) brought together; the highest part supporting
them, and again bringing them under one head; with three points *of
intersection*; of the same kind; principal and subordinate; of equal
length.  Thou hast the lines of the A. <span
id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744)

<span id="vii.viii-p19"></span>7.  And when the teacher Zacchæus heard
the child speaking such and so great allegories of the first letter, he
was at a great loss about such a narrative, and about His teaching.  And
He said to those that were present:  Alas!  I, wretch that I am, am at a
loss, bringing shame upon myself by having dragged this child hither. 
Take him away, then, I beseech thee, brother Joseph.  I cannot endure
the sternness of his look; I cannot make out his meaning at all.  That
child does not belong to this earth; he can tame even fire.  Assuredly
he was born before the creation of the world.  What sort of a belly bore
him, what sort of a womb nourished him, I do not know.  Alas! my friend,
he has carried me away; I cannot get at his meaning:  thrice wretched
that I am, I have deceived myself.  I made a struggle to have a scholar,
and I was found to have a teacher.  My mind is filled with shame, my
friends, because I, an old man, have been conquered by a child.  There
is nothing for me but despondency and death on account of this boy, for
I am not able at this hour to look him in the face; and when everybody
says that I have been beaten by a little child, what can I say?  And how
can I give an account of the lines of the first letter that he spoke
about?  I know not, O my friends; for I can make neither beginning nor
end of him.  Therefore, I beseech thee, brother Joseph, take him home. 
What great thing he is, either god or angel, or what I am to say, I know
not. <span id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745)

<span id="vii.viii-p22"></span>8.  And when the Jews were encouraging
Zacchæus, the child laughed aloud, and said:  Now let thy learning bring
forth fruit, and let the blind in heart see.  I am here from above, that
I may curse them, and call them to the things that are above, as He that
sent me on your account has commanded me.  And when the child ceased
speaking, immediately all were made whole who had fallen under His
curse.  And no one after that dared to make Him angry, lest He should
curse him, and he should be maimed.

<span id="vii.viii-p23"></span>9.  And some days after, Jesus was
playing in an upper room of a certain house, and one of the children
that were playing with Him fell down from the house, and was killed. 
And, when the other children saw this, they ran away, and Jesus alone
stood still.  And the parents of the dead child coming, reproached <span
id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746) …and they threatened Him.  And
Jesus leaped down from the roof, and stood beside the body of the child,
and cried with a loud voice, and said:  Zeno—for that was his name—stand
up, and tell me; did I throw thee down?  And he stood up immediately,
and said:  Certainly not, my lord; thou didst not throw me down, but
hast raised me up.  And those that saw this were struck with
astonishment.  And the child’s parents glorified God on account of the
miracle that had happened, and adored Jesus. <span
id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747)

<span id="vii.viii-p26"></span>10.  A few days after, a young man was
splitting wood in the corner, <span id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748)
and the axe came down and cut the sole of his foot in two, and he died
from loss of blood.  And there was a great commotion, and people ran
together, and the child Jesus ran there too.  And He pressed through the
crowd, and laid hold of the young man’s wounded foot, and he was cured
immediately.  And He said to the young man:  Rise up now, split the
wood, and remember me.  And the crowd seeing what had happened, adored
the child, saying:  Truly the Spirit of God dwells in this child.

<span id="vii.viii-p28"></span><span id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span
id="vii.viii-Page_397"></span>11.  And when He was six years old, His
mother gave Him a pitcher, and sent Him to draw water, and bring it into
the house.  But He struck against some one in the crowd, and the pitcher
was broken.  And Jesus unfolded the cloak which He had on, and filled it
with water, and carried it to His mother.  And His mother, seeing the
miracle that had happened, kissed Him, and kept within herself the
mysteries which she had seen Him doing. <span
id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749)

<span id="vii.viii-p30"></span>12.  And again in seed-time the child
went out with His father to sow corn in their land.  And while His
father was sowing, the child Jesus also sowed one grain of corn.  And
when He had reaped it, and threshed it, He made a hundred kors; <span
id="fr_1750"></span>[1751](#fn_1750) and calling all the poor of the
village to the threshing-floor, He gave them the corn, and Joseph took
away what was left of the corn.  And He was eight years old when He did
this miracle. <span id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751)

<span id="vii.viii-p33"></span>13.  And His father was a carpenter, and
at that time made ploughs and yokes.  And a certain rich man ordered him
to make him a couch.  And one of what is called the cross pieces being
too short, they did not know what to do.  The child Jesus said to His
father Joseph:  Put down the two pieces of wood, and make them even in
the middle.  And Joseph did as the child said to him.  And Jesus stood
at the other end, and took hold of the shorter piece of wood, and
stretched it, and made it equal to the other.  And His father Joseph saw
it, and wondered, and embraced the child, and blessed Him, saying: 
Blessed am I, because God has given me this child. <span
id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752)

<span id="vii.viii-p35"></span>14.  And Joseph, seeing that the child
was vigorous in mind and body, again resolved that He should not remain
ignorant of the letters, and took Him away, and handed Him over to
another teacher.  And the teacher said to Joseph:  I shall first teach
him the Greek letters, and then the Hebrew.  For the teacher was aware
of the trial that had been made of the child, and was afraid of Him. 
Nevertheless he wrote out the alphabet, and gave Him all his attention
for a long time, and He made him no answer.  And Jesus said to him:  If
thou art really a teacher, and art well acquainted with the letters,
tell me the power of the Alpha, and I will tell thee the power of the
Beta.  And the teacher was enraged at this, and struck Him on the head. 
And the child, being in pain, cursed him; and immediately he swooned
away, and fell to the ground on his face.  And the child returned to
Joseph’s house; and Joseph was grieved, and gave orders to His mother,
saying:  Do not let him go outside of the door, because those that make
him angry die. <span id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753)

<span id="vii.viii-p37"></span>15.  And after some time, another master
again, a genuine friend of Joseph, said to him:  Bring the child to my
school; perhaps I shall be able to flatter him into learning his
letters.  And Joseph said:  If thou hast the courage, brother, take him
with thee.  And he took Him with him in fear and great agony; but the
child went along pleasantly.  And going boldly into the school, He found
a book lying on the reading-desk; and taking it, He read not the letters
that were in it, but opening His mouth, He spoke by the Holy Spirit, and
taught the law to those that were standing round.  And a great crowd
having come together, stood by and heard Him, and wondered at the
ripeness of His teaching, and the readiness of His words, and that He,
child as He was, spoke in such a way.  And Joseph hearing of it, was
afraid, and ran to the school, in doubt lest his master too should be
without experience. <span id="fr_1754"></span>[1755](#fn_1754)   And the
master said to Joseph:  Know, brother, that I have taken the child as a
scholar, and he is full of much grace and wisdom; but I beseech thee,
brother, take him home.  And when the child heard this, He laughed at
him directly, and said:  Since thou hast spoken aright, and witnessed
aright, for thy sake he also that was struck down shall be cured.  And
immediately the other master was cured.  And Joseph took the child, and
went away home. <span id="fr_1755"></span>[1756](#fn_1755)

<span id="vii.viii-p40"></span>16.  And Joseph sent his son James to tie
up wood and bring it home, and the child Jesus also followed him.  And
when James was gathering the fagots, a viper bit James’ hand.  And when
he was racked *with pain*, and at the point of death, Jesus came near
and blew upon the bite; and the pain ceased directly, and the beast
burst, and instantly James remained safe and sound. <span
id="fr_1756"></span>[1757](#fn_1756)

<span id="vii.viii-p42"></span>17.  And after this the infant of one of
Joseph’s neighbours fell sick and died, and its mother wept sore.  And
Jesus heard that there was great lamentation and commotion, and ran in
haste, and found the child dead, and touched his breast, and said:  I
say to thee, child, be not dead, but live, and be with thy mother.  And
directly it looked up and laughed.  And He said to the woman:  Take it,
and give it milk, and remember me.  And seeing this, the crowd that was
standing by wondered, and said:  Truly this child was either God or an
angel of God, for every word of his is a certain fact.  And Jesus went
out thence, playing with the other children. <span
id="fr_1757"></span>[1758](#fn_1757)

<span id="vii.viii-p44"></span><span id="page_398">p. 398</span> <span
id="vii.viii-Page_398"></span>18.  And some time after there occurred a
great commotion while a house was building, and Jesus stood up and went
away to the place.  And seeing a man lying dead, He took him by the
hand, and said:  Man, I say to thee, arise, and go on with thy work. 
And directly he rose up, and adored Him.  And seeing this, the crowd
wondered, and said:  This child is from heaven, for he has saved many
souls from death, and he continues to save during all his life.

<span id="vii.viii-p45"></span>19.  And when He was twelve years old His
parents went as usual to Jerusalem to the feast of the passover with
their fellow-travellers.  And after the passover they were coming home
again.  And while they were coming home, the child Jesus went back to
Jerusalem.  And His parents thought that He was in the company.  And
having gone one day’s journey, they sought for Him among their
relations; and not finding Him, they were in great grief, and turned
back to the city seeking for Him.  And after the third day they found
Him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, both hearing
the law and asking them questions.  And they were all attending to Him,
and wondering that He, being a child, was shutting the mouths of the
elders and teachers of the people, explaining the main points of the law
and the parables of the prophets.  And His mother Mary coming up, said
to Him:  Why hast thou done this to us, child?  Behold, we have been
seeking for thee in great trouble.  And Jesus said to them:  Why do you
seek me?  Do you not know that I must be about my Father’s
business? <span id="fr_1758"></span>[1759](#fn_1758)   And the scribes
and the Pharisees said:  Art thou the mother of this child?  And she
said:  I am.  And they said to her:  Blessed art thou among women, for
God hath blessed the fruit of thy womb; for such glory, and such virtue
and wisdom, we have neither seen nor heard ever.  And Jesus rose up, and
followed His mother, and was subject to His parents.  And His mother
observed all these things that had happened.  And Jesus advanced in
wisdom, and stature, and grace. <span
id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759)   To whom be glory for ever and
ever.  Amen.

<span id="vii.viii-p48"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1738"></span>[395:1739](0081233.htm#fr_1738) <span
id="vii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p7"></span> Pseudo-Matt. 26, etc.

<span id="fn_1739"></span>[395:1740](0081233.htm#fr_1739) <span
id="vii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p9"></span> Another reading is, *branches*.

<span id="fn_1740"></span>[395:1741](0081233.htm#fr_1740) <span
id="vii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p10"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.viii-p10.1"></span>ms</span>. has:  And Jesus, at the entreaty
of all of them, healed him.

<span id="fn_1741"></span>[395:1742](0081233.htm#fr_1741) <span
id="vii.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p12"></span> Or, either teach him to bless, and not
to curse, or depart with him from this place; for, etc.

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[395:1743](0081233.htm#fr_1742) <span
id="vii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p14"></span> Or, are not mine, but thine.

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[395:1744](0081233.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="vii.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p15"></span> Pseudo-Matt. 29.  \[The numerous
references to the latter part of Pseudo-Matthæi, see pp. 378–383, shows
the close relationship.  But it is generally agreed that this narrative
is the older, and one of the sources of Pseudo-Matthæi.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[396:1745](0081233.htm#fr_1744) <span
id="vii.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p17"></span> Pseud.-Matt. 30, 31.  Various
explanations have been given of this difficult passage by annotators,
who refer it to the A of the Hebrew, or of the Greek, or of the Armenian
alphabet.  It seems, however, to answer very closely to the old
Phenician A, which was written \*\*\* or \*\*\*.

<span id="vii.viii-p18"></span>The Paris <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.viii-p18.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  And he sat down to teach
Jesus the letters, and began the first letter Aleph; and Jesus says the
second, Beth, Gimel, and told him all the letters to the end.  And
shutting the book, He taught the master the prophets.

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[396:1746](0081233.htm#fr_1745) <span
id="vii.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p20"></span> Instead of this chapter, the Paris <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.viii-p20.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  And he was
ashamed and perplexed, because he knew not whence he knew the letters. 
And he arose, and went home, in great astonishment at this strange
thing.

<span id="vii.viii-p21"></span>It then goes on with a fragment of the
history of the dyer’s shop, as given in the Arabic Gospel of the
Infancy, ch. 37.

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[396:1747](0081233.htm#fr_1746) <span
id="vii.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p24"></span> One of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.viii-p24.1"></span>mss.</span> of the Latin Gospel inserts
here—Jesus, saying:  Indeed, you made him fall down.  And Jesus said:  I
never made him fall.

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[396:1748](0081233.htm#fr_1747) <span
id="vii.viii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p25"></span> Pseudo-Matt. 32.

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[396:1749](0081233.htm#fr_1748) <span
id="vii.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p27"></span> A better reading would be <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p27.1"></span>ἐν τῇ γειτονίᾳ</span>, in
the neighbourhood, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p27.2"></span>ἐν τῇ γωνίᾳ</span>, in the corner.

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[397:1750](0081233.htm#fr_1749) <span
id="vii.viii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p29"></span> Pseudo-Matt. 33.

<span id="fn_1750"></span>[397:1751](0081233.htm#fr_1750) <span
id="vii.viii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p31"></span> The kor or chomer was, according to
Jahn, 32 pecks 1 pint.

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[397:1752](0081233.htm#fr_1751) <span
id="vii.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p32"></span> Pseudo-Matt. 34.

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[397:1753](0081233.htm#fr_1752) <span
id="vii.viii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p34"></span> Pseudo-Matt. 37.

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[397:1754](0081233.htm#fr_1753) <span
id="vii.viii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p36"></span> Pseudo-Matt. 38.

<span id="fn_1754"></span>[397:1755](0081233.htm#fr_1754) <span
id="vii.viii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p38"></span> Tischendorf suggests <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p38.1"></span>ἀνάπηρος</span>, maimed,
for <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p38.2"></span>ἄπειρος</span>.

<span id="fn_1755"></span>[397:1756](0081233.htm#fr_1755) <span
id="vii.viii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p39"></span> Pseudo-Matt. 39.

<span id="fn_1756"></span>[397:1757](0081233.htm#fr_1756) <span
id="vii.viii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p41"></span> Pseudo-Matt. 41.

<span id="fn_1757"></span>[397:1758](0081233.htm#fr_1757) <span
id="vii.viii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p43"></span> Pseudo-Matt. 40.

<span id="fn_1758"></span>[398:1759](0081233.htm#fr_1758) <span
id="vii.viii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p46"></span> \[This may be rendered, as in R.V.,
[Luke ii. 49](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#049)<span
id="vii.viii-p46.1"></span>, “ in my Father’s house.”  The words are the
same as in that passage.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[398:1760](0081233.htm#fr_1759) <span
id="vii.viii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p47"></span> [Luke ii.
41-52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#041)<span
id="vii.viii-p47.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Gospel of Thomas:  Second Greek Form.](0081234)
