[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081239)  [Next](0081241) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.x.v"></span>

<span id="vii.x.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.x.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—How the Citizens Were Enraged
Against Joseph on Account of the Doings of Jesus.</span>

<span id="vii.x.v-p2"></span>And a few days after, as Jesus was walking
through the town with Joseph, one of the children ran up and struck
Jesus on the arm.  And Jesus said to him:  So shalt thou not finish thy
journey.  And immediately he fell to the ground, and died.  And those
who saw these wonderful things cried out, saying:  Whence is that boy? 
And they said to Joseph:  It is not right for such a boy to be among
us.  And Joseph went and brought Him.  And they said to him:  Go away
from this place; but if thou must live with us, teach him to pray, and
not to blaspheme:  but our children have been killed.  Joseph called
Jesus, and reproved Him, saying:  Why dost thou blaspheme?  For these
people who live here hate us.  And Jesus said:  I know that these words
are not mine, but thine; but I will hold my tongue for thy sake:  and
let them see to it in their wisdom.  And immediately those who were
speaking against Jesus became blind.  And they walked up and down, and
said:  All the words which proceed from his mouth are accomplished.  And
Joseph seeing what Jesus had done, in a fury seized Him by the ear; and
Jesus said to Joseph in anger:  It is enough for thee to see me, not to
touch me.  For thou knowest not who I am; but if thou didst know, thou
wouldst not make me angry.  And although just now I am with thee, I was
made before thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](0081241)
