[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081189)  [Next](0081191) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v.xiii"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.v.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.</span>

<span id="vii.v.xiii-p2"></span>After these things there arose a great
report that Mary was with child.  And Joseph was seized by the officers
of the temple, and brought along with Mary to the high priest.  And he
with the priests began to reproach him, and to say:  Why hast thou
beguiled so great and so glorious a virgin, who was fed like a dove in
the temple by the angels of God, who never wished either to see or to
have a man, who had the most excellent knowledge of the law of God?  If
thou hadst not done violence to her, she would still have remained in
her virginity.  And Joseph vowed, and swore that he had never touched
her at all.  And Abiathar the high priest answered him:  As the Lord
liveth, I will give thee to drink of the water of drinking of the Lord,
and immediately thy sin will appear.

<span id="vii.v.xiii-p3"></span>Then was assembled a multitude of people
which could not be numbered, and Mary was brought to the temple.  And
the priests, and her relatives, and her parents wept, and said to Mary: 
Confess to the priests thy sin, thou that wast like a dove in the temple
of God, and didst receive food from the hands of an angel.  And again
Joseph was summoned to the altar, and the water of drinking of the Lord
was given him to drink.  And when any one that had lied drank this
water, and walked seven times round the altar, God used to show some
sign in his face.  When, therefore, Joseph had drunk in safety, and had
walked round the altar seven times, no sign of sin appeared in him. 
Then all the priests, and the officers, and the people justified him,
saying:  Blessed art thou, seeing that no charge has been found good
against thee.  And they summoned Mary, and said:  And what excuse canst
thou have? or what greater sign can appear in thee than the conception
of thy womb, which betrays thee?  This only we require of thee, that
since Joseph is pure <span id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span
id="vii.v.xiii-Page_374"></span>regarding thee, thou confess who it is
that has beguiled thee.  For it is better that thy confession should
betray thee, than that the wrath of God should set a mark on thy face,
and expose thee in the midst of the people.  Then Mary said, stedfastly
and without trembling:  O Lord God, King over all, who knowest all
secrets, if there be any pollution in me, or any sin, or any evil
desires, or unchastity, expose me in the sight of all the people, and
make me an example of punishment to all.  Thus saying, she went up to
the altar of the Lord boldly, and drank the water of drinking, and
walked round the altar seven times, and no spot was found in her.

<span id="vii.v.xiii-p4"></span>And when all the people were in the
utmost astonishment, seeing that she was with child, and that no sign
had appeared in her face, they began to be disturbed among themselves by
conflicting statements:  some said that she was holy and unspotted,
others that she was wicked and defiled.  Then Mary, seeing that she was
still suspected by the people, and that on that account she did not seem
to them to be wholly cleared, said in the hearing of all, with a loud
voice, As the Lord Adonai liveth, the Lord of Hosts before whom I stand,
I have not known man; but I am known by Him to whom from my earliest
years I have devoted myself.  And this vow I made to my God from my
infancy, that I should remain unspotted in Him who created me, and I
trust that I shall so live to Him alone, and serve Him alone; and in
Him, as long as I shall live, will I remain unpolluted.  Then they all
began to kiss her feet and to embrace her knees, asking her to pardon
them for their wicked suspicions.  And she was led down to her house
with exultation and joy by the people, and the priests, and all the
virgins.  And they cried out, and said:  Blessed be the name of the Lord
for ever, because He hath manifested thy holiness to all His people
Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](0081191)
