[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081208)  [Next](0081210) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v.xxxii"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.v.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 31.</span>

<span id="vii.v.xxxii-p2"></span>A second time the master Zachyas,
doctor of the law, said to Joseph and Mary:  Give me the boy, and I
shall hand him over to master Levi, who shall teach him his letters and
instruct him.  Then Joseph and Mary, soothing Jesus, took Him to the
schools, that He might be taught His letters by old Levi.  And as soon
as He went in He held His tongue.  And the master Levi said one letter
to Jesus, and, beginning from the first letter Aleph, said to Him: 
Answer.  But Jesus was silent, and answered nothing.  Wherefore the
preceptor Levi was angry, and seized his storax-tree rod, and struck Him
on the head.  And Jesus said to the teacher Levi:  Why dost thou strike
me?  Thou shalt know in truth, that He who is struck can teach him who
strikes Him more than He can be taught by him.  For I can teach you
those very things that you are saying.  But all these are blind who
speak and hear, like sounding brass or tinkling cymbal, in which there
is no perception of those things which are meant by their sound. <span
id="fr_1673"></span>[1674](#fn_1673)   And Jesus in addition said to
Zachyas:  Every letter from Aleph even to Thet <span
id="fr_1674"></span>[1675](#fn_1674) is known by its arrangement.  Say
thou first, therefore, <span id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span
id="vii.v.xxxii-Page_380"></span>what Thet is, and I will tell thee what
Aleph is.  And again Jesus said to them:  Those who do not know Aleph,
how can they say Thet, the hypocrites?  Tell me what the first one,
Aleph, is; and I shall then believe you when you have said Beth.  And
Jesus began to ask the names of the letters one by one, and said:  Let
the master of the law tell us what the first letter is, or why it has
many triangles, gradate, subacute, mediate, obduced, produced, erect,
prostrate, curvistrate. <span id="fr_1675"></span>[1676](#fn_1675)   And
when Levi heard this, he was thunderstruck at such an arrangement of the
names of the letters.  Then he began in the hearing of all to cry out,
and say:  Ought such a one to live on the earth?  Yea, he ought to be
hung on the great cross.  For he can put out fire, and make sport of
other modes of punishment.  I think that he lived before the flood, and
was born before the deluge.  For what womb bore him? or what mother
brought him forth? or what breasts gave him suck?  I flee before him; I
am not able to withstand the words from his mouth, but my heart is
astounded to hear such words.  I do not think that any man can
understand what he says, except God were with him.  Now I, unfortunate
wretch, have given myself up to be a laughing-stock to him.  For when I
thought I had a scholar, I, not knowing him, have found my master.  What
shall I say?  I cannot withstand the words of this child:  I shall now
flee from this town, because I cannot understand them.  An old man like
me has been beaten by a boy, because I can find neither beginning nor
end of what he says.  For it is no easy matter to find a beginning of
himself. <span id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676)   I tell you of a
certainty, I am not lying, that to my eyes the proceedings of this boy,
the commencement of his conversation, and the upshot of his intention,
seem to have nothing in common with mortal man.  Here then I do not know
whether he be a wizard or a god; or at least an angel of God speaks in
him.  Whence he is, or where he comes from, or who he will turn out to
be, I know not.  Then Jesus, smiling at him with a joyful countenance,
said in a commanding voice to all the sons of Israel standing by and
hearing:  Let the unfruitful bring forth fruit, and the blind see, and
the lame walk right, and the poor enjoy the good things of this life,
and the dead live, that each may return to his original state, and abide
in Him who is the root of life and of perpetual sweetness.  And when the
child Jesus had said this, forthwith all who had fallen under malignant
diseases were restored.  And they did not dare to say anything more to
Him, or to hear anything from Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[379:1674](0081209.htm#fr_1673) <span
id="vii.v.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xxxii-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001), [1 Cor.
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#007)<span
id="vii.v.xxxii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[379:1675](0081209.htm#fr_1674) <span
id="vii.v.xxxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xxxii-p4"></span> Tau, and not Teth, is the last letter
of the Hebrew alphabet.

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[380:1676](0081209.htm#fr_1675) <span
id="vii.v.xxxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xxxii-p5"></span> The original—*triangulos gradatos,
subacutos, mediatos, obductos, productos, erectos, stratos,
curvistratos*—is hopelessly corrupt.  Compare the passages in the
following Apocrypha.  \[The Gospel of Thomas, first Greek form, chaps.
6, 7, and parallel passages.—R.\]  It obviously, however, refers to the
Pentalpha, Pentacle, or Solomon’s Seal, celebrated in the remains of the
magical books that have come down to us under the names of Hermas and
the Pythagoreans.  The Pentalpha was formed by joining by straight lines
the alternate angles of a regular pentagon, and thus contained numerous
triangles.  The Pythagoreans called it the *Hygiea* or symbol of health,
and it was frequently engraved on amulets and coins.  It is still, if
the books are to be trusted, a symbol of power in the higher grades of
freemasonry.

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[380:1677](0081209.htm#fr_1676) <span
id="vii.v.xxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xxxii-p6"></span> i.e., It is not wonderful that we do
not understand what he says, for we do not know what he is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](0081210)
