[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081185)  [Next](0081187) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v.ix"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.v.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.</span>

<span id="vii.v.ix-p2"></span>Now it came to pass, when she was
fourteen <span id="fr_1631"></span>[1632](#fn_1631) years old, and on
this account there was occasion for the Pharisees’ saying that it was
now a custom that no woman of that age <span id="page_372">p. 372</span>
<span id="vii.v.ix-Page_372"></span>should abide in the temple of God,
they fell upon the plan of sending a herald through all the tribes of
Israel, that on the third day all should come together into the temple
of the Lord.  And when all the people had come together, Abiathar the
high priest rose, and mounted on a higher step, that he might be seen
and heard by all the people; and when great silence had been obtained,
he said:  Hear me, O sons of Israel, and receive my words into your
ears.  Ever since this temple was built by Solomon, there have been in
it virgins, the daughters of kings and the daughters of prophets, and of
high priests and priests; and they were great, and worthy of
admiration.  But when they came to the proper age they were given in
marriage, and followed the course of their mothers before them, and were
pleasing to God.  But a new order of life has been found out by Mary
alone, who promises that she will remain a virgin to God.  Wherefore it
seems to me, that through our inquiry and the answer of God we should
try to ascertain to whose keeping she ought to be entrusted.  Then these
words found favour with all the synagogue.  And the lot was cast by the
priests upon the twelve tribes, and the lot fell upon the tribe of
Judah.  And the priest said:  To-morrow let every one who has no wife
come, and bring his rod in his hand.  Whence it happened that
Joseph <span id="fr_1632"></span>[1633](#fn_1632) brought his rod along
with the young men.  And the rods having been handed over to the high
priest, he offered a sacrifice to the Lord God, and inquired of the
Lord.  And the Lord said to him:  Put all their rods into the holy of
holies of God, and let them remain there, and order them to come to thee
on the morrow to get back their rods; and the man from the point of
whose rod a dove shall come forth, and fly towards heaven, and in whose
hand the rod, when given back, shall exhibit this sign, to him let Mary
be delivered to be kept.

<span id="vii.v.ix-p5"></span>On the following day, then, all having
assembled early, and an incense-offering having been made, the high
priest went into the holy of holies, and brought forth the rods.  And
when he had distributed the rods, <span
id="fr_1633"></span>[1634](#fn_1633) and the dove came forth out of none
of them, the high priest put on the twelve bells <span
id="fr_1634"></span>[1635](#fn_1634) and the sacerdotal robe; and
entering into the holy of holies, he there made a burnt-offering, and
poured forth a prayer.  And the angel of the Lord appeared to him,
saying:  There is here the shortest rod, of which thou hast made no
account:  thou didst bring it in with the rest, but didst not take it
out with them.  When thou hast taken it out, and hast given it him whose
it is, in it will appear the sign of which I spoke to thee.  Now that
was Joseph’s rod; and because he was an old man, he had been cast off,
as it were, that he might not receive her, but neither did he himself
wish to ask back his rod. <span id="fr_1635"></span>[1636](#fn_1635)  
And when he was humbly standing last of all, the high priest cried out
to him with a loud voice, saying:  Come, Joseph, and receive thy rod;
for we are waiting for thee.  And Joseph came up trembling, because the
high priest had called him with a very loud voice.  But as soon as he
stretched forth his hand, and laid hold of his rod, immediately from the
top of it came forth a dove whiter than snow, beautiful exceedingly,
which, after long flying about the roofs of the temple, at length flew
towards the heavens.  Then all the people congratulated the old man,
saying:  Thou hast been made blessed in thine old age, O father Joseph,
seeing that God hath shown thee to be fit to receive Mary.  And the
priests having said to him, Take her, because of all the tribe of Judah
thou alone hast been chosen by God; Joseph began bashfully to address
them, saying:  I am an old man, and have children; why do you hand over
to me this infant, who is younger than my grandsons?  Then Abiathar the
high priest said to him:  Remember, Joseph, how Dathan and Abiron and
Core perished, because they despised the will of God.  So will it happen
to thee, if thou despise this which is commanded thee by God.  Joseph
answered him:  I indeed do not despise the will of God; but I shall be
her guardian until I can ascertain concerning the will of God, as to
which of my sons can have her as his wife.  Let some virgins of her
companions, with whom she may meanwhile spend her time, be given for a
consolation to her.  Abiathar the high priest answered and said:  Five
virgins indeed shall be given her for consolation, until the appointed
day come in which thou mayst receive her; for to no other can she be
joined in marriage.

<span id="vii.v.ix-p9"></span>Then Joseph received Mary, with the other
five virgins who were to be with her in Joseph’s house.  These virgins
were Rebecca, Sephora, Susanna, Abigea, and Cael; to whom the high
priest gave the silk, and the blue, <span
id="fr_1636"></span>[1637](#fn_1636) and the fine linen, and the
scarlet, and the purple, and the fine flax.  For they cast lots among
themselves what each virgin should do, and the purple for the veil of
the temple of the Lord fell to the lot of Mary.  And when she had got
it, those virgins said to her:  Since thou art the last, and humble, and
younger than all, thou hast deserved to receive and obtain the purple. 
And thus saying, <span id="page_373">p. 373</span> <span
id="vii.v.ix-Page_373"></span>as it were in words of annoyance, they
began to call her queen of virgins.  While, however, they were so doing,
the angel of the Lord appeared in the midst of them, saying:  These
words shall not have been uttered by way of annoyance, but prophesied as
a prophecy most true.  They trembled, therefore, at the sight of the
angel, and at his words, and asked her to pardon them, and pray for
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1631"></span>[371:1632](0081186.htm#fr_1631) <span
id="vii.v.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ix-p3"></span> Or, twelve.

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[372:1633](0081186.htm#fr_1632) <span
id="vii.v.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ix-p4"></span> One of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.v.ix-p4.1"></span>mss.</span> adds:  Seeing that he had not a
wife, and not wishing to slight the order of the high priest.

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[372:1634](0081186.htm#fr_1633) <span
id="vii.v.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ix-p6"></span> One of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.v.ix-p6.1"></span>mss.</span> inserts:  To the number of three
thousand.

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[372:1635](0081186.htm#fr_1634) <span
id="vii.v.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ix-p7"></span> See Protev. James 8<span
id="vii.v.ix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[372:1636](0081186.htm#fr_1635) <span
id="vii.v.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ix-p8"></span> Another and more probable reading is: 
And this was Joseph’s rod; and he was of an abject appearance, seeing
that he was old, and he would not ask back his rod, lest perchance he
might be forced to receive her.

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[372:1637](0081186.htm#fr_1636) <span
id="vii.v.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.ix-p10"></span> Or, hyacinth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](0081187)
