[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081240)  [Next](0081242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.x.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.x.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.x.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—How Jesus Was Treated by the
Schoolmaster.</span>

<span id="vii.x.vi-p2"></span>Therefore a certain man named
Zacheus <span id="fr_1761"></span>[1762](#fn_1761) listened to all that
Jesus was saying to Joseph, and in great astonishment said to himself: 
Such a boy speaking in this way I have never seen.  And he went up to
Joseph, and said:  That is an intelligent boy of thine; hand him over to
me to learn his letters; and when he has thoroughly learned his letters,
I shall teach him honourably, so that he may be no fool.  But Joseph
answered and said to him:  No one can teach him but God alone.  You do
not believe that that little boy will be of little consequence?  And
when Jesus heard Joseph speaking in this way, He said to Zacheus: 
Indeed, master, whatever proceeds from my mouth is true.  And before all
I was Lord, but you are foreigners.  To me has been given the glory of
the ages, to you has been given nothing; because I am before the ages. 
And I know how many years of life thou wilt have, and that thou wilt be
carried into exile:  and my Father hath appointed this, that thou mayest
understand that whatever proceeds from my mouth is true.  And the Jews
who were standing by, and hearing the words which Jesus spoke, were
astonished, and said:  We have seen such wonderful things, and heard
such words from that boy, as we have never heard, nor are likely to hear
from any other human being,—either from the high priests, or the
masters, or the Pharisees.  Jesus answered and said to them:  Why do you
wonder?  Do you consider it incredible that I have spoken the truth?  I
know when both you and your fathers were born, and to tell you more,
when the world was made:  I know also who sent me to you. <span
id="fr_1762"></span>[1763](#fn_1762)   And when the Jews heard the words
which the child had spoken, they wondered, because that they were not
able to answer.  And, communing with Himself, the child exulted and
said:  I have told you a proverb; and I know that you are weak and
ignorant.

<span id="vii.x.vi-p5"></span>And that schoolmaster said to Joseph: 
Bring him to me, and I shall teach him letters.  And Joseph took hold of
the boy Jesus, and led Him to the house of a certain schoolmaster, where
other boys were being taught.  Now the master in soothing words began to
teach Him His letters, and wrote for Him the first line, which is from A
to T, <span id="fr_1763"></span>[1764](#fn_1763) and began to stroke Him
and teach Him.  And that teacher struck the child on the head:  and when
He had received the blow, the child said to him:  I should teach thee,
and not thou me; I know the letters which thou wishest to teach me, and
I know that you are to me like vessels from which there come forth only
sounds, and no wisdom.  And, beginning the line, He said the letters
from A to T in full, and very fast.  And He looked at the master, and
said to him:  Thou indeed canst not tell us what A and B are; how dost
thou wish to teach others?  O hypocrite, if thou knowest and will tell
me about the A, then will I tell thee about the B.  And when that
teacher began to tell <span id="fr_1764"></span>[1765](#fn_1764) about
the first letter, he was unable to give any answer.  And <span
id="page_402">p. 402</span> <span id="vii.x.vi-Page_402"></span>Jesus
said to Zacheus:  Listen to me, master; understand the first letter. 
See how it has two lines; advancing in the middle, standing still,
giving, scattering, varying, threatening; triple intermingled with
double; at the same time homogeneous, having all common. <span
id="fr_1765"></span>[1766](#fn_1765)

<span id="vii.x.vi-p9"></span>And Zacheus, seeing that He so divided the
first letter, was stupefied about the first letter, and about such a
human being and such learning; and he cried out, and said:  Woe’s me,
for I am quite stupefied; I have brought disgrace upon myself through
that child.  And he said to Joseph:  I earnestly entreat thee, brother,
take him away from me, because I cannot look upon his face, nor hear his
mighty words.  Because that child can tame fire and bridle the sea:  for
he was born before the ages.  What womb brought him forth, or what
mother <span id="fr_1766"></span>[1767](#fn_1766) nursed him, I know
not.  Oh, my friends, I am driven out of my senses; I have become a
wretched laughing-stock.  And I said that I had got a scholar; but he
has been found to be my master.  And my disgrace I cannot get over,
because I am an old man; and what to say to him I cannot find.  All I
have to do is to fall into some grievous illness, and depart from this
world; or to leave this town, because all have seen my disgrace.  An
infant has deceived me.  What answer can I give to others, or what words
can I say, because he has got the better of me in the first letter?  I
am struck dumb, O my friends and acquaintances; neither beginning nor
end can I find of an answer to him.  And now I beseech thee, brother
Joseph, take him away from me, and lead him home, because he is a
master, or the Lord, or an angel.  What to say I do not know.  And Jesus
turned to the Jews who were with Zacheus, and said to them:  Let all not
seeing see, and not understanding understand; let the deaf hear, and let
those who are dead through me rise again; and those who are exalted, let
me call to still higher things, as He who sent me to you hath commanded
me.  And when Jesus ceased speaking, all who had been affected with any
infirmity through His words were made whole.  And they did not dare to
speak to Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1761"></span>[401:1762](0081241.htm#fr_1761) <span
id="vii.x.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x.vi-p3"></span> \[In this book, the name Zacheus is given
in different form, following the Latin.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1762"></span>[401:1763](0081241.htm#fr_1762) <span
id="vii.x.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x.vi-p4"></span> A slight alteration is here made upon the
punctuation of the original.

<span id="fn_1763"></span>[401:1764](0081241.htm#fr_1763) <span
id="vii.x.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x.vi-p6"></span> This refers to the Hebrew alphabet.

<span id="fn_1764"></span>[401:1765](0081241.htm#fr_1764) <span
id="vii.x.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x.vi-p7"></span> Better, perhaps:  And when He began to
tell that teacher.

<span id="fn_1765"></span>[402:1766](0081241.htm#fr_1765) <span
id="vii.x.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x.vi-p8"></span> This passage is hopelessly corrupt.  The
writer of this Gospel knew very little Greek, and probably the text from
which he was translating was also here in a bad state.  \[Compare the
accounts in the versions from the Greek forms.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1766"></span>[402:1767](0081241.htm#fr_1766) <span
id="vii.x.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x.vi-p10"></span> The Greek original has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.x.vi-p10.1"></span>μήτρα</span>, which he
seems to have confounded with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.x.vi-p10.2"></span>μήτηρ</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](0081242)
