[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081367)  [Next](0081369) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p1"></span> <span id="page_528">p. 528</span> <span
id="vii.xxxii-Page_528"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Acts and Martyrdom of St. Matthew the
Apostle.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxxii-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxii-p3.1"></span>About</span> that time Matthew, the holy
apostle and evangelist of Christ, was abiding in the mountain resting,
and praying in his tunic and apostolic robes without sandals; and,
behold, Jesus came to Matthew in the likeness of the infants who sing in
paradise, and said to him:  Peace to thee, Matthew!  And Matthew having
gazed upon Him, and not known who He was, said:  Grace to thee, and
peace, O child highly favoured!  And why hast thou come hither to me,
having left those who sing in paradise, and the delights there?  Because
here the place is desert; and what sort of a table I shall lay for thee,
O child, I know not, because I have no bread nor oil in a jar. 
Moreover, even the winds are at rest, so as not to cast down from the
trees to the ground anything for food; because, for the accomplishing of
my fast of forty days, I, partaking only of the fruits falling by the
movement of the winds, am glorifying my Jesus.  Now, therefore, what
shall I bring thee, beautiful boy?  There is not even water near, that I
may wash thy feet.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p4"></span>And the child said:  Why sayest thou, O
Matthew?  Understand and know that good discourse is better than a calf,
and words of meekness better than every herb of the field, and a sweet
saying as the perfume of love, and cheerfulness of countenance better
than feeding, and a pleasant look is as the appearance of sweetness. 
Understand, Matthew, and know that I am paradise, that I am the
comforter, I am the power of the powers above, I the strength of those
that restrain themselves, I the crown of the virgins, I the self-control
of the once married, I the boast of the widowed, I the defence of the
infants, I the foundation of the Church, I the kingdom of the bishops, I
the glory of the presbyters, I the praise of the deacons.  Be a man, and
be strong, Matthew, in, these words.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p5"></span>And Matthew said:  The sight of thee hast
altogether delighted me, O child; moreover also, thy words are full of
life.  For assuredly thy face shines more than the lightning, and thy
words are altogether most sweet.  And that indeed I saw thee in paradise
when thou didst sing with the other infants who were killed in
Bethlehem, I know right well; but how thou hast suddenly come hither,
this altogether astonishes me.  But I shall ask thee one thing, O
child:  that impious Herod, where is he?  The child says to him:  Since
thou hast asked, hear his dwelling-place.  He dwells, indeed, in Hades;
and there has been prepared for him fire unquenchable, Gehenna without
end, bubbling mire, worm that sleeps not, <span
id="fr_2282"></span>[2283](#fn_2282) because he cut off three <span
id="fr_2283"></span>[2284](#fn_2283) thousand infants, wishing to slay
the child Jesus, the ancient of the ages; but of all these ages I am
father.  Now therefore, O Matthew, take this rod of mine, and go down
from the mountain, and go into Myrna, the city of the man-eaters, and
plant it by the gate of the church which thou <span
id="fr_2284"></span>[2285](#fn_2284) and Andrew founded; and as soon as
thou hast planted it, it shall be a tree, great and lofty and with many
branches, and its branches shall extend to thirty cubits, and of each
single branch the fruit shall be different both to the sight and the
eating, <span id="fr_2285"></span>[2286](#fn_2285) and from the top of
the tree shall flow down much honey; and from its root there shall come
forth a great fountain, giving drink to this country round about, and in
it creatures that swim and creep; and in it the man-eaters shall wash
themselves, and eat of the fruit of the trees of the vine and of the
honey; and their bodies shall be changed, and their forms shall be
altered so as to be like those of other men; and they shall be ashamed
of the nakedness of their body, and they shall put on clothing of the
rams of the sheep, and they shall no longer eat unclean things; and
there shall be to them fire in superabundance, preparing the sacrifices
for offerings, and they shall bake their bread with fire; and they shall
see each other in the likeness of the rest of men, and they shall
acknowledge me, and glorify my Father who is in the heavens.  Now
therefore make haste, Matthew, and go down hence, because the departure
from thy body through fire is at hand, and the crown of thy endurance.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p10"></span><span id="page_529">p. 529</span> <span
id="vii.xxxii-Page_529"></span>And the child having said this, and given
him the rod, was taken up into the heavens.  And Matthew went down from
the mountain, hastening to the city.  And as he was about to enter into
the city, there met him Fulvana the wife of the king, and his son
Fulvanus and his wife Erva, who were possessed by an unclean spirit, and
cried out shouting:  Who has brought thee here again, Matthew? or who
has given thee the rod for our destruction? for we see also the child
Jesus, the Son of God, who is with thee.  Do not go then, O Matthew, to
plant the rod for the food, and for the transformation of the
man-eaters:  for I have found what I shall do to thee.  For since thou
didst drive me out of this city, and prevent me from fulfilling my
wishes among the man-eaters, behold, I will raise up against thee the
king of this city, and he will burn thee alive.  And Matthew, having
laid his hands on each one of the demoniacs, put the demons to flight,
and made the people whole; and they followed him.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p11"></span>And thus the affair being made manifest,
Plato the bishop, having heard of the presence of the holy Apostle
Matthew, met him with all the clergy; and having fallen to the ground,
they kissed his feet.  And Matthew raised them, and went with them into
the church, and the child Jesus was also with him.  And Matthew, having
come to the gate of the church, stood upon a certain lofty and
immoveable stone; and when the whole city ran together, especially the
brethren who had believed, began to say:  Men and women who appear in
our sight, heretofore believing in the universe, <span
id="fr_2286"></span>[2287](#fn_2286) but now knowing Him who has upheld
and made the universe; until now worshipping the Satyr, and mocked by
ten thousand false gods, but now through Jesus Christ acknowledging the
one and only God, Lord, Judge; who have laid aside the immeasurable
greatness of evil, and put on love, which is of like nature with
affectionateness, towards men; once strangers to Christ, but now
confessing Him Lord and God; formerly without form, but now transformed
through Christ;—behold, the staff which you see in my hand, which Jesus,
in whom you have believed and will believe, gave me; perceive now what
comes to pass through me, and acknowledge the riches of the greatness
which He will this day make for you.  For, behold, I shall plant this
rod in this place, and it shall be a sign to your generations, and it
shall become a tree, great and lofty and flourishing, and its fruit
beautiful to the view and good to the sight; and the fragrance of
perfumes shall come forth from it, and there shall be a vine twining
round it, full of clusters; and from the top of it honey coming down,
and every flying creature shall find covert in its branches; and a
fountain of water shall come forth from the root of it, having swimming
and creeping things, giving drink to all the country round about.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p13"></span>And having said this, and called upon
the name of the Lord Jesus, he fixed his rod in the ground, and
straightway it sprung up to one cubit; and the sight was strange and
wonderful.  For the rod having straightway shot up, increased in size,
and grew into a great tree, as Matthew had said.  And the apostle said: 
Go into the fountain and wash your bodies in it, and then thus partake
both of the fruits of the tree, and of the vine and the honey, and drink
of the fountain, and you shall be transformed in your likeness to that
of men; and after that, having gone into the church, you will clearly
recognise that you have believed in the living and true God.  And having
done all these things, they saw themselves changed into the likeness of
Matthew; then, having thus gone into the church, they worshipped and
glorified God.  And when they had been changed, they knew that they were
naked; and they ran in haste each to his own house to cover their
nakedness, because they were ashamed.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p14"></span>And Matthew and Plato remained in the
church spending the night, and glorifying God.  And there remained also
the king’s wife, and his son and his wife, and they prayed the apostle
to give them the seal in Christ.  And Matthew gave orders to Plato; and
he, having gone forth, baptized them in the water of the fountain of the
tree, in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.  And
so thereafter, having gone into the church, they communicated in the
holy mysteries of Christ; <span id="fr_2287"></span>[2288](#fn_2287) and
they exulted and passed the night, they also along with the apostle,
many others having also come with them; and all in the church sang the
whole night, glorifying God.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p16"></span>And when the dawn had fully come, the
blessed Matthew, having gone along with the bishop Plato, stood in the
place in which the rod had been planted, and he sees the rod grown into
a great tree, and near it a vine twined round it, and honey coming down
from above even to its root; and that tree was at once beautiful and
flourishing, like the plants in paradise, and a river proceeded from its
root watering <span id="fr_2288"></span>[2289](#fn_2288) all the land of
the city of Myrna. <span id="fr_2289"></span>[2290](#fn_2289)   And all
ran together, and ate of the fruit of the tree and the vine, just as any
one wished.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p19"></span>And when what had come to pass was
reported in the palace, the king Fulvanus, having learned what had been
done by Matthew about his wife, <span id="page_530">p. 530</span> <span
id="vii.xxxii-Page_530"></span>and his son, and his daughter-in-law,
rejoiced for a time at their purification; but seeing that they were
inseparable from Matthew, he was seized with rage and anger, and
endeavoured to put him to death by fire.  And on that night <span
id="fr_2290"></span>[2291](#fn_2290) in which the king intended to lay
hands on Matthew, Matthew saw Jesus saying to him:  I am with thee
always to save thee, Matthew; be strong, and be a man.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p21"></span>And the blessed Matthew, having awoke,
and sealed himself over all the body, rose up at dawn, and proceeded
into the church; and having bent his knees, prayed earnestly.  Then the
bishop having come, and the clergy, they stood in common in prayer,
glorifying God.  And after they had ended the prayer, the bishop Plato
said:  Peace to thee, Matthew, apostle of Christ!  And the blessed
Matthew said to him:  Peace to you!  And when they had sat down, the
apostle said to the bishop Plato, and to all the clergy:  I wish you,
children, to know, Jesus having declared it to me, that the king of this
city is going to send soldiers against me, the devil having entered into
him, and manifestly armed him against us.  But let us give ourselves up
to Jesus, and He will deliver us from every trial, and all who have
believed in Him.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p22"></span>And the king, plotting against the
blessed Matthew how he should lay hands on him, and seeing also that the
believers were very many, was very much at fault, and was in great
difficulty.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p23"></span>Therefore the wicked and unclean devil
who had come forth from the king’s wife, and his son, and his
daughter-in-law, put to flight by Matthew, having transformed himself
into the likeness of a soldier, stood before the king, and said to him: 
O king, why art thou thus put to the worse by this stranger and
sorcerer?  Knowest thou not that he was a publican, but now he has been
called an apostle <span id="fr_2291"></span>[2292](#fn_2291) by Jesus,
who was crucified by the Jews?  For, behold, thy wife, and thy son, and
thy daughter-in-law, instructed by him, have believed in him, and along
with him sing in the church.  And now, behold, Matthew is going forth,
and Plato with him, and they are going to the gate called Heavy; but
make haste, and thou wilt find them, and thou shalt do to him all that
may be pleasing in thine eyes.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p25"></span>The king having heard this, and being
the more exasperated by the pretended soldier, sent against the blessed
Matthew four soldiers, having threatened them, and said:  Unless you
bring Matthew to me, I shall burn you alive with fire; and the
punishment which he is to undergo, you shall endure.  And the soldiers,
having been thus threatened by the king, go in arms to where the Apostle
Matthew and the bishop Plato are.  And when they came near them, they
heard their speaking indeed, but saw no one.  And having come, they said
to the king:  We pray thee, O king, we went and found no one, but only
heard the voices of persons talking.  And the king, being enraged, and
having blazed up like fire, gave orders to send other ten
soldiers—man-eaters—saying to them:  Go stealthily to the place, and
tear them in pieces alive, and eat up Matthew, and Plato, who is with
him.  And when they were about to come near the blessed Matthew, the
Lord Jesus Christ, having come in the likeness of a most beautiful boy,
holding a torch of fire, ran to meet them, burning out their eyes.  And
they, having cried out and thrown their arms from them, fled, and came
to the king, being speechless.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p26"></span>And the demon who had before appeared to
the king in the form of a soldier, being again transformed into the form
of a soldier, stood before the king, and said to him:  Thou seest, O
king, this stranger has bewitched them all.  Learn, then, how thou shalt
take him.  The king says to him:  Tell me first wherein his strength is,
that I may know, and then I will draw up against him with a great
force.  And the demon, compelled by an angel, says to the king:  Since
thou wishest to hear accurately about him, O king, I will tell thee all
the truth.  Really, unless he shall be willing to be taken by thee of
his own accord, thou labourest in vain, and thou wilt not be able to
hurt him; but if thou wishest to lay hands on him, thou wilt be struck
by him with blindness, and thou wilt be paralyzed.  And if thou send a
multitude of soldiers against him, they also will be struck with
blindness, and will be paralyzed.  And we shall go, even seven unclean
demons, and immediately make away with thee and thy whole camp, and
destroy all the city with lightning, except those naming that awful and
holy name of Christ; for wherever a footstep of theirs has come, thence,
pursued, we flee.  And even if thou shalt apply fire to him, to him the
fire will be dew; and if thou shalt shut him up in a furnace, to him the
furnace will be a church; and if thou shalt put him in chains in prison,
and seal up the floors, the doors will open to him of their own accord,
and all who believe in that name will go in, even they, and say, This
prison is a church of the living God, and a holy habitation of those
that live alone. <span id="fr_2292"></span>[2293](#fn_2292)   Behold, O
king, I have told thee all the truth.  The king therefore says to the
pretended soldier:  Since I do not know Matthew, come with me, and point
him out to me from a distance, and take from me gold, as much as thou
mayst wish, or go thyself, and with thy sword kill him, and Plato his
associate. <span id="fr_2293"></span>[2294](#fn_2293)   The demon says
to him:  I cannot kill him.  I dare <span id="page_531">p. 531</span>
<span id="vii.xxxii-Page_531"></span>not even look into his face, seeing
that he has destroyed all our generation through the name of Christ,
proclaimed through him.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p29"></span>The king says to him:  And who art
thou?  And he says:  I am the demon who dwelt in thy wife, and in thy
son, and in thy daughter-in-law; and my name is Asmodæus; and this
Matthew drove me out of them.  And now, behold, thy wife, and thy son,
and thy daughter-in-law sing along with him in the church.  And I know,
O king, that thou also after this wilt believe in him.  The king says to
him:  Whoever thou art, spirit of many shapes, I adjure thee by the God
whom he whom thou callest Matthew proclaims, depart hence without doing
hurt to any one.  And straightway the demon, no longer like a soldier,
but like smoke, became invisible; and as he fled he cried out:  O secret
name, armed against us, I pray thee, Matthew, servant of the holy God,
pardon me, and I will no longer remain in this city.  Keep thou thine
own; but I go away into the fire everlasting.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p30"></span>Then the king, affected with great fear
at the answer of the demon, remained quiet that day.  And the night
having come, and he not being able to sleep because he was hungry, <span
id="fr_2294"></span>[2295](#fn_2294) leaped up at dawn, and went into
the church, with only two soldiers without arms, to take Matthew by
craft, that he might kill him.  And having summoned two friends of
Matthew, he said to them:  Show to Matthew, says he, that I wish to be
his disciple.  And Matthew hearing, and knowing the craft of the tyrant,
and having been warned also by the vision of the Lord to him, went forth
out of the church, led by the hand by Plato, and stood in the gate of
the church.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p32"></span>And they say to the king:  Behold
Matthew in the gate!  And he says:  Who he is, or where he is, I see
not.  And they said to him:  Behold, he is in sight of thee.  And he
says:  All the while I see nobody.  For he had been blinded by the power
of God.  And he began to cry out:  Woe to me, miserable! what evil has
come upon me, for my eyes have been blinded, and all my limbs
paralyzed?  O Asmodæus Beelzebul Satan! all that thou hast said to me
has come upon me.  But I pray thee, Matthew, servant of God, forgive me
as the herald of the good God; for assuredly the Jesus proclaimed by
thee three days ago through the night appeared to me altogether
resplendent as with lightning, like a beautiful young man, and said to
me, Since thou art entertaining evil counsels in the wickedness of thine
heart in regard to my servant Matthew, know I have disclosed to him that
through thee will be the release of his body.  And straightway I saw him
going up into heaven.  If therefore he is thy God, and if he wishes thy
body to be buried in our city for a testimony of the salvation of the
generations after this, and for the banishing <span
id="fr_2295"></span>[2296](#fn_2295) of the demons, I shall know the
truth for myself by this, by thee laying on hands upon me, and I shall
receive my sight.  And the apostle having laid his hands upon his eyes,
and saying <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxii-p33.1"></span>Ephphatha</span>, Jesus, <span
id="fr_2296"></span>[2297](#fn_2296) he made him receive his sight
instantly.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p35"></span>And straightway the king, laying hold of
the apostle, and leading him by the right hand, brought him by craft
into the palace; and Plato was on Matthew’s left hand, going along with
him, and keeping hold of him. <span id="fr_2297"></span>[2298](#fn_2297)
  Then Matthew says:  O crafty tyrant, how long dost thou not fulfil the
works of thy father the devil?  And he was enraged at what had been
said; for he perceived that he would inflict upon him a more bitter
death.  For he resolved to put him to death by fire.  And he commanded
several executioners to come, and to lead him away to the place by the
seashore, where the execution of malefactors was wont to take place,
saying to the executioners:  I hear, says he, that the God whom he
proclaims delivers from fire those who believe in him.  Having laid him,
therefore, on the ground on his back, and stretched him out, pierce his
hands and feet with iron nails, and cover him over with paper, having
smeared it with dolphins’ oil, and cover him up with brimstone and
asphalt and pitch, and *put* tow and brushwood above.  Thus apply the
fire to him; and if any of the same tribe with him rise up against you,
he shall get the same punishment.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p37"></span>And the apostle exhorted the brethren to
remain undismayed, and that they should rejoice, and accompany him with
great meekness, singing and praising God, because they were deemed
worthy to have the relics of the apostle.  Having therefore come to the
place, the executioners, like most evil wild beasts, pinned down to the
ground Matthew’s hands and feet with long nails; and having done
everything as they had been bid, applied the fire.  And they indeed
laboured <span id="fr_2298"></span>[2299](#fn_2298) closely, kindling it
all round; but all the fire was changed into dew, so that the brethren,
rejoicing, cried out:  The only God is the Christians’, who assists
Matthew, in whom also we have believed:  the only God is the
Christians’, who preserves His own apostle in the fire.  And by the
voice the city was shaken.  And some of the executioners, having gone
forth, said to the king:  We indeed, O king, by every contrivance of
vengeance, have kindled the fire; but the sorcerer by a certain name
puts it out, calling upon Christ, and invoking his cross; and the <span
id="page_532">p. 532</span> <span
id="vii.xxxii-Page_532"></span>Christians surrounding him play with the
fire, and walking *in it* with naked feet, laugh at us, <span
id="fr_2299"></span>[2300](#fn_2299) and we have fled ashamed.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p40"></span>Then he ordered a multitude to carry
coals of fire from the furnace of the bath in the palace, and the twelve
gods of gold and silver; and place them, says he, in a circle round the
sorcerer, lest he may even somehow bewitch the fire from the furnace of
the palace.  And there being many executioners and soldiers, some
carried the coals; and others, bearing the gods, brought them.  And the
king accompanied them, watching lest any of the Christians should steal
one of his gods, or bewitch the fire.  And when they came near the place
where the apostle was nailed down, his face was looking towards heaven,
and all his body was covered over with the paper, and much brushwood
over his body to the height of ten cubits.  And having ordered the
soldiers to set the gods in a circle round Matthew, five cubits off,
securely fastened that they might not fall, again he ordered the coal to
be thrown on, and to kindle the fire at all points.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p41"></span>And Matthew, having looked up to heaven,
cried out, <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxii-p41.1"></span>Adonai</span> *eloi sabaoth marmari
marmunth*; that is, O God the Father, O Lord Jesus Christ, deliver me,
and burn down their gods which they worship; and let the fire also
pursue the king even to his palace, but not to his destruction:  for
perhaps he will repent and be converted.  And when he saw the fire to be
monstrous in height, the king, thinking that Matthew was burnt up,
laughed aloud, and said:  Has thy magic been of any avail to thee,
Matthew?  Can thy Jesus now give thee any help?

<span id="vii.xxxii-p42"></span>And as he said this a dreadful wonder
appeared; for all the fire along with the wood went away from Matthew,
and was poured round about their gods, so that nothing of the gold or
the silver was any more seen; and the king fled, and said:  Woe’s me,
that my gods are destroyed by the rebuke of Matthew, of which the weight
was a thousand talents of gold and a thousand talents of silver.  Better
are the gods of stone and of earthenware, in that they are neither
melted nor stolen. <span id="fr_2300"></span>[2301](#fn_2300)

<span id="vii.xxxii-p44"></span>And when the fire had thus utterly
destroyed their gods, and burnt up many soldiers, there came to pass
again another stranger wonder.  For the fire, in the likeness of a great
and dreadful dragon, chased the tyrant as far as the palace, and ran
hither and thither round the king, not letting him go into the palace. 
And the king, chased by the fire, and not allowed to go into his palace,
turned back to where Matthew was, and cried out, saying:  I beseech
thee, whoever thou art, O man, whether magician or sorcerer or god, or
angel of God, whom so great a pyre has not touched, remove from me this
dreadful and fiery dragon; forget the evil I have done, as also when
thou madest me receive my sight.  And Matthew, having rebuked the fire,
and the flames having been extinguished, and the dragon having become
invisible, stretching his eyes to heaven, and praying in Hebrew, and
commending his spirit to the Lord, said:  Peace to you!  And having
glorified the Lord, he went to his rest about the sixth hour.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p45"></span>Then the king, having ordered more
soldiers to come, and the bed to be brought from the palace, which had a
great show of gold, he ordered the apostle to be laid on it, and carried
to the palace.  And the body of the apostle was lying as if in sleep,
and his robe and his tunic unstained by the fire; and sometimes they saw
him on the bed, and sometimes following, and sometimes going before the
bed, and with his right hand put upon Plato’s head, and singing along
with the multitude, so that both the king and the soldiers, with the
crowd, were struck with astonishment.  And many diseased persons and
demoniacs, having only touched the bed, were made sound; and as many as
were savage in appearance, in that same hour were changed into the
likeness of other men.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p46"></span>And as the bed was going into the
palace, we <span id="fr_2301"></span>[2302](#fn_2301) all saw Matthew
rising up, as it were, from the bed, and going into heaven, led by the
hand by a beautiful boy; and twelve men in shining garments came to meet
him, having never-fading and golden crowns on their head; and we saw how
that child crowned Matthew, so as to be like them, and in a flash of
lightning they went away to heaven.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p48"></span>And the king stood at the gate of the
palace, and ordered that no one should come in but the soldiers carrying
the bed.  And having shut the doors, <span
id="fr_2302"></span>[2303](#fn_2302) he ordered an iron coffin to be
made, put the body of Matthew into it, and sealed it up with lead;
through the eastern gate of the palace at midnight put it into a boat,
no one knowing of it, and threw it into the deep part of the sea.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p50"></span>And through the whole night the brethren
remained before the gate of the palace, spending the night, and singing;
and when the dawn rose there was a voice:  O bishop Plato, carry the
Gospel and the Psalter of David; go along with the multitude of the
brethren to the east of the palace, and sing the Alleluia, and read the
Gospel, and bring as an offering the holy bread; and having pressed
three clusters from <span id="page_533">p. 533</span> <span
id="vii.xxxii-Page_533"></span>the vine into a cup, communicate with me,
as the Lord Jesus showed us how to offer up when He rose from the dead
on the third day.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p51"></span>And the bishop having run into the
church, and taken the Gospel and the Psalter of David, and having
assembled the presbyters and the multitude of the brethren, came to the
east of the palace at the hour of sunrise; and having ordered the one
who was singing to go upon a certain lofty stone, he began to praise in
singing of a song to God:  Precious in the sight of God is the death of
His saints. <span id="fr_2303"></span>[2304](#fn_2303)   And again:  I
laid me down and slept; I arose:  because the Lord will sustain
me. <span id="fr_2304"></span>[2305](#fn_2304)   And they listened to
the singing of a song of David:  Shall he that is dead not rise again? 
Now I shall raise him up for myself, saith the Lord.  And all shouted
out the Alleluia.  And the bishop read the Gospel, and all cried out: 
Glory to Thee, Thou who hast been glorified in heaven and on earth.  And
so then they offered the gift of the holy offering for Matthew; and
having partaken for thanksgiving <span
id="fr_2305"></span>[2306](#fn_2305) of the undefiled and life-giving
mysteries of Christ, they all glorified God.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p55"></span>And it was about the sixth hour, and
Plato sees the sea opposite about seven furlongs off; and, behold,
Matthew was standing on the sea, and two men, one on each side, in
shining garments, and the beautiful boy in front of them.  And all the
brethren saw these things, and they heard them saying Amen, Alleluia. 
And one could see the sea fixed like a stone of crystal, and the
beautiful boy in front of them, when out of the depth of the sea a cross
came up, and at the end of the cross the coffin going up in which was
the body of Matthew; and in the hour of the piercing on the cross, <span
id="fr_2306"></span>[2307](#fn_2306) the boy placed the coffin on the
ground, behind the palace towards the east, where the bishop had offered
the offering for Matthew.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p57"></span>And the king having seen these things
from the upper part of the house, and being terror-struck, went forth
from the palace, and ran and worshipped towards the east at the coffin,
and fell down before the bishop, and the presbyters, and the deacons, in
repentance and confession, saying: <span
id="fr_2307"></span>[2308](#fn_2307)   Truly I believe in the true God,
Christ Jesus.  I entreat, give me the seal in Christ, and I will give
you my palace, in testimony of Matthew, and you shall put the coffin
upon my golden bed, in the great dining-room; only, having baptized me
in it, communicate to me the Eucharist of Christ.  And the bishop having
prayed, and ordered him to take off his clothes, and having examined him
for a long time, and he having confessed and wept over what he had done,
having sealed him, and anointed him with oil, put him down into the sea,
in the name of Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost.  And when he came up
from the water he ordered him to put on himself splendid garments, and
so then having given praise and thanks, communicating the holy bread and
mixed cup, the bishop first gave them to the king, saying:  Let this
body of Christ, and this cup, His blood shed for us, be to thee for the
remission of sins unto life.  And a voice was heard from on high:  Amen,
amen, amen.  And when he had thus communicated in fear and joy, the
apostle appeared and said:  King Fulvanus, thy name shall no longer be
Fulvanus; but thou shalt be called Matthew.  And thou, the son of the
king, shall no longer be called Fulvanus, but Matthew also; and thou
Ziphagia, the wife of the king, shall be called Sophia; <span
id="fr_2308"></span>[2309](#fn_2308) and Erva, the wife of your son,
shall be called Synesis. <span id="fr_2309"></span>[2310](#fn_2309)  
And these names of yours shall be written in the heavens, and there
shall not fail of your loins from generation to generation.  And in that
same hour Matthew appointed the king a presbyter, and he was
thirty-seven years old; and the king’s son he appointed deacon, being
seventeen years old; and the king’s wife he appointed a presbyteress;
and his son’s wife he appointed a deaconess, <span
id="fr_2310"></span>[2311](#fn_2310) and she also was seventeen years
old.  And then he thus blessed them, saying:  The blessing and the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ shall be with you to time everlasting.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p62"></span>Then the king, having awakened out of
sleep, and rejoiced with all his house at the vision of the holy Apostle
Matthew, praised God.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p63"></span>And the king, having gone into his
palace, broke all the idols to pieces, and gave a decree to those in his
kingdom, writing thus:  King Matthew, to all those under my kingdom,
greeting.  Christ having appeared upon earth, and having saved the human
race, the so-called gods have been found to be deceivers, and
soul-destroyers, and plotters against the human race.  Whence, divine
grace having shone abroad, and come even to us, and we having come to
the knowledge of the deception of the idols, that it is vain and false,
it has seemed good to our divinity that there should not be many gods,
but <span id="page_534">p. 534</span> <span
id="vii.xxxii-Page_534"></span>one, and one only, the God in the
heavens.  And you, having received this our decree, keep to the purport
of it, and break to pieces and destroy every idol; and if any one shall
be detected from this time forth serving idols, or concealing them, let
such an one be subjected to punishment by the sword.  Farewell all,
because we also are well.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p64"></span>And when this order was given out, all,
rejoicing and exulting, broke their idols to pieces, crying out and
saying:  There is one only God, He who is in the heavens, who does good
to men.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p65"></span>And after all these things had come to
pass, Matthew the apostle of Christ appeared to the bishop Plato, and
said to him:  Plato, servant of God, and our brother, be it known unto
thee, that after three years shall be thy rest in the Lord, and
exultation to ages of ages.  And the king himself, whom after my own
name I have called Matthew, shall receive the throne of thy bishopric,
and after him his son.  And he, having said Peace to thee and all the
saints, went to heaven.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p66"></span>And after three years the bishop Plato
rested in the Lord.  And King Matthew succeeded him, having given up his
kingdom willingly to another, whence there was given him grace against
unclean demons, and he cured every affliction.  And he advanced his son
to be a presbyter, and made him second to himself.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p67"></span>And Saint Matthew finished his course in
the country of the man-eaters, in the city of Myrna, on the sixteenth of
the month of November, our Lord Jesus Christ reigning, to whom be glory
and strength, now and ever, and to ages of ages.  Amen. <span
id="fr_2311"></span>[2312](#fn_2311)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2282"></span>[528:2283](0081368.htm#fr_2282) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p6"></span> Or, that dies not.

<span id="fn_2283"></span>[528:2284](0081368.htm#fr_2283) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p7"></span> The other \[Vienna\] <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxii-p7.1"></span>ms.</span> has, eleven.

<span id="fn_2284"></span>[528:2285](0081368.htm#fr_2284) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p8"></span> In some of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxii-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> of the previous book the name of
Matthew appears in place of that of Matthias—Matthaios for Mattheias.

<span id="fn_2285"></span>[528:2286](0081368.htm#fr_2285) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p9"></span> Comp. [Rev. xxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002)<span id="vii.xxxii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2286"></span>[529:2287](0081368.htm#fr_2286) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p12"></span> The other \[Vienna\] <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxii-p12.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  heretofore
worshipping every evil thing.

<span id="fn_2287"></span>[529:2288](0081368.htm#fr_2287) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p15"></span> The other \[Paris\]<span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxii-p15.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  having
communicated in the Eucharist.

<span id="fn_2288"></span>[529:2289](0081368.htm#fr_2288) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p17"></span> Or, giving drink to.

<span id="fn_2289"></span>[529:2290](0081368.htm#fr_2289) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p18"></span> The other \[Paris\]<span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxii-p18.1"></span>ms.</span> has Smyrna. 
Nicephorus calls it Myrmene.

<span id="fn_2290"></span>[530:2291](0081368.htm#fr_2290) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p20"></span> Comp. [Acts
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#009), [Acts
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xxxii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2291"></span>[530:2292](0081368.htm#fr_2291) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p24"></span> Or, as an apostle.

<span id="fn_2292"></span>[530:2293](0081368.htm#fr_2292) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p27"></span> i.e., monks.

<span id="fn_2293"></span>[530:2294](0081368.htm#fr_2293) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p28"></span> Lit., of the same form with him.

<span id="fn_2294"></span>[531:2295](0081368.htm#fr_2294) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p31"></span> The other \[Vienna\] <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxii-p31.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  for he
neither ate nor drank, in his concern about these things.

<span id="fn_2295"></span>[531:2296](0081368.htm#fr_2295) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p33"></span> The word thus translated is used by the
LXX. in the sense of an asylum, or place of refuge.

<span id="fn_2296"></span>[531:2297](0081368.htm#fr_2296) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p34"></span> Comp. [Mark vii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#034)<span id="vii.xxxii-p34.1"></span>. 
The addition of Jesus here shows that the writer did not know the
meaning of the Aramaic word.

<span id="fn_2297"></span>[531:2298](0081368.htm#fr_2297) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p36"></span> Or, holding him back.

<span id="fn_2298"></span>[531:2299](0081368.htm#fr_2298) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p38"></span> I should be disposed to read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxii-p38.1"></span>ἔκαιον</span>, set fire
to, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxii-p38.2"></span>ἔκαμνον</span>, laboured.

<span id="fn_2299"></span>[532:2300](0081368.htm#fr_2299) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p39"></span> The other \[Vienna\] <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxii-p39.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  at our
gods.

<span id="fn_2300"></span>[532:2301](0081368.htm#fr_2300) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p43"></span> The other \[Vienna\] <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxii-p43.1"></span>ms.</span> adds:  How my
forefathers toiled, and with great trouble made the gods; and now,
behold, they have been destroyed by one magician.

<span id="fn_2301"></span>[532:2302](0081368.htm#fr_2301) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p47"></span> The change of person is noticable.

<span id="fn_2302"></span>[532:2303](0081368.htm#fr_2302) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p49"></span> In the other<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxii-p49.1"></span>ms.</span> the king prays:  And now, since
there is still in me a little unbelief, I beseech thee that thou wilt
bring the body of Matthew from the sea.  For, behold, I will order the
body to be thrown into the depths of the sea; and if thou deliver it as
thou didst deliver it, in the funeral pile, I will forsake all my gods
at once, and believe in thee alone.  \[The Vienna<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxii-p49.2"></span>ms.</span>, here cited, interpolates still
more.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2303"></span>[533:2304](0081368.htm#fr_2303) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p52"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#015)<span id="vii.xxxii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2304"></span>[533:2305](0081368.htm#fr_2304) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p53"></span> [Ps. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005)<span id="vii.xxxii-p53.1"></span>
according to the LXX.

<span id="fn_2305"></span>[533:2306](0081368.htm#fr_2305) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p54"></span> Or, of the Eucharist.

<span id="fn_2306"></span>[533:2307](0081368.htm#fr_2306) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p56"></span> The meaning is not clear.  The
other<span class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxii-p56.1"></span>ms.</span> has: 
After one hour he sees in that place an image of a cross coming up from
the depth of the sea.  \[The Vienna<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxii-p56.2"></span>ms.</span> varies more than this extract
indicates.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2307"></span>[533:2308](0081368.htm#fr_2307) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p58"></span> The other \[Vienna\] <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxii-p58.1"></span>ms.</span> is much fuller
here:  And the cry of the multitude came to the king.  And he asked: 
What is the uproar and shouting among the people?  And he learned that
Matthew’s coffin had come of itself.  Then, filled with great joy, the
king straightway goes to the coffin, crying out, and saying with a loud
voice:  The God of Matthew is the only God, and there is none other but
Him.  And he fell on his face near the coffin, saying:  Pardon me, Lord
Jesus Christ, for what I have done against this holy man, for I was in
ignorance.  And the bishop, seeing the repentance and tears of the king,
gave him a hand, and raised him from the ground, and said to him:  Rise
up, and be of good courage; for the Lord God hath accepted thy
repentance and conversion through the good offices of His servant and
apostle Thomas.  And the king rose up from the ground, and fell at the
bishop’s feet, etc.—as in the text.

<span id="fn_2308"></span>[533:2309](0081368.htm#fr_2308) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p59"></span> Wisdom.

<span id="fn_2309"></span>[533:2310](0081368.htm#fr_2309) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p60"></span> Understanding.

<span id="fn_2310"></span>[533:2311](0081368.htm#fr_2310) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p61"></span> The other \[Vienna\] <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxii-p61.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  And
likewise his wife and his daughter-in-law deaconesses.

<span id="fn_2311"></span>[534:2312](0081368.htm#fr_2311) <span
id="vii.xxxii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxii-p68"></span> The other \[Paris\]<span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxii-p68.1"></span>ms.</span> ends
differently:  And there came a voice, Peace to you, and joy, for there
shall not be war nor stroke of sword in this city, because of Matthew,
mine elect, whom I have loved for ever.  Blessed are they who observe
his memory, for they shall be glorified to ages of ages.

<span id="vii.xxxii-p69"></span>And the day of his commemoration shall
be the fourteenth of the month of Gorpiæus.\*  Glory, honour, and
worship to God, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever,
and to the ages.  \[The Paris <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxii-p69.1"></span>ms.</span> is usually followed by
Tischendorf.  But in the three concluding paragraphs, as given in the
text above, he follows the Vienna <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxii-p69.2"></span>ms.</span>—R.\]

<span id="vii.xxxii-p70"></span>\*Gorpiæus was the eleventh month of the
Macedonian year, and fell partly in August and partly in September.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts of the Holy Apostle Thomas.](0081369)
