[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081309)  [Next](0081311) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xv.x"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xv.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.</span>

<span id="vii.xv.x-p2"></span>And Pilate, calling Nicodemus and the
twelve men who said that He was not born of fornication, says to them: 
What am I to do, seeing that there is a sedition among the people?  They
say to him:  We do not know; let them see to it.  Again Pilate, calling
all the multitude of the Jews, said:  You know that you have a custom
during the day of unleavened bread, that I should release to you one
that is bound.  I have a notable one bound in the prison, a murderer who
is called Barabbas, and Jesus who is called Christ, in whom I find no
cause of death.  Whom do you wish that I should release unto you?  And
they all cried out, saying:  Release unto us Barabbas.  Pilate says to
them:  What, then, am I to do with Jesus who is called Christ?  They all
say:  Let him be crucified.  Again the Jews said:  Thou art no friend of
Cæsar’s if thou release this man, for he called himself the Son of God,
and a king; unless, perhaps, thou wishest this man to be king, and not
Cæsar.

<span id="vii.xv.x-p3"></span>Then, filled with fury, Pilate said to
them:  Always has your nation been seditious, and always have you been
opposed to those who were for you.  The Jews answered:  Who are for us? 
Pilate says to them:  Your God,—who rescued you from the hard slavery of
the Egyptians, and led you forth out of Egypt through the sea as if
through dry land, and fed you in the desert with manna and quail, and
brought water to you out <span id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span
id="vii.xv.x-Page_443"></span>of the rock, and gave you to drink, and
gave you a law; and in all these things you provoked your God, and
sought for yourselves a god, a molten calf.  And you exasperated your
God, and He wished to slay you; and Moses made supplication for you,
that ye should not die.  And now you say that I hate the king.

<span id="vii.xv.x-p4"></span>And rising up from the tribunal, he wished
to go outside.  And the Jews cried out, and said to him:  We know that
Cæsar is king, and not Jesus.  For the Magi also presented gifts to him
as to a king; and Herod, hearing from the Magi that a king was born,
wished to slay him.  But when this was known, his father Joseph took him
and his mother, and fled into Egypt; and Herod hearing, destroyed the
infants of the Jews which were born in Bethlehem.

<span id="vii.xv.x-p5"></span>Pilate, hearing those words, was afraid. 
And silence being made among the people, who were crying out, Pilate
said:  This, then, is he whom Herod sought?  They say to him:  It is
he.  And taking water, Pilate washed his hands in presence of the
people, saying:  I am innocent of the blood of this just man; see ye to
it.  Again the Jews cried out, saying:  His blood be upon us, and upon
our children.

<span id="vii.xv.x-p6"></span>Then Pilate ordered the veil to be
loosened, <span id="fr_1960"></span>[1961](#fn_1960) and said to Jesus: 
Thine own nation have brought charges against thee as a king; and
therefore I have sentenced thee first to be scourged on account of the
statutes of the emperors, and then to be crucified on a cross.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1960"></span>[443:1961](0081310.htm#fr_1960) <span
id="vii.xv.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.x-p7"></span> See note 5, p. 420.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](0081311)
