[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081485)  [Next](0081487) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p1"></span> <span id="page_723">p. 723</span> <span
id="ix.xvi-Page_723"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>Ancient Syriac Documents.</span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.xvi-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="ix.xvi-p3.1"></span>Bardesan. <span
id="fr_3354"></span>[3355](#fn_3354) </span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p5"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="ix.xvi-p5.1"></span>The Book of the Laws of Divers Countries. <span
id="fr_3355"></span>[3356](#fn_3355) </span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p7"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xvi-p7.1"></span>Some</span> days since we were calling <span
id="fr_3356"></span>[3357](#fn_3356) to pay a visit to our brother
Shemashgram, and Bardesan came and found us there.  And when he had made
inquiries after his health, <span id="fr_3357"></span>[3358](#fn_3357)
and ascertained that he was well, he asked us, “What were you talking
about? for I heard your voice outside as I was coming in.”  For it was
his habit, whenever he found us talking about anything before he
came, <span id="fr_3358"></span>[3359](#fn_3358) to ask us, “What were
you saying?” that he might talk with us about it.

<span id="ix.xvi-p11"></span>“Avida here,” said we to him, “was saying
to us, ‘If God is one, as ye say, and if He is the creator of men, and
if it is His will that you should do that which you are commanded, why
did He not so create men that they should not be able to do wrong, but
should constantly be doing that which is right? for in this way His will
would have been accomplished.’”

<span id="ix.xvi-p12"></span>“Tell me, my son Avida,” said Bardesan to
him, “why it has come into thy mind that the God of all is not One; or
that He is One, but doth not will that men should behave themselves
justly and uprightly?”

<span id="ix.xvi-p13"></span>“I, sir,” said Avida, “have asked these
*brethren*, persons of my own age, in order that ‘they’ may return me an
answer.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p14"></span>“If,” said Bardesan to him, “thou wishest
to learn, it were for thy advantage to learn from some one who is older
than they; but if to teach, it is not requisite for ‘thee’ to ask
‘them,’ but *rather* that thou shouldst induce ‘them’ to ask ‘thee’ what
they wish.  For teachers are ‘asked’ questions, and do not themselves
ask them; or, if they ever do ask a question, it is to direct the mind
of the questioner, so that he may ask properly, and they may know what
his desire is.  For it is a good thing that a man should know how to ask
questions.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p15"></span>“For my part,” said Avida, “I wish to
learn; but I began first of all to question my brethren here, because I
was too bashful to ask thee.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p16"></span>“Thou speakest becomingly,” <span
id="fr_3359"></span>[3360](#fn_3359) said Bardesan.  “But know,
nevertheless, that he who asks questions properly, and wishes to be
convinced, and approaches the way of truth without contentiousness, has
no need to be bashful; because he is sure by means of the things I have
mentioned to please him to whom his questions are addressed.  If so be,
therefore, my son, thou hast any opinion of thy own <span
id="fr_3360"></span>[3361](#fn_3360) respecting this matter about which
thou hast asked, tell it to us all; and, if we too approve of it, we
shall express our agreement with thee; and, if we do not approve of it,
we shall be under obligation to show thee why we do not approve of it. 
But if thou wast simply desirous of becoming acquainted with this
subject, and hast no opinion of thy own about it, as a man who has but
lately joined the disciples and is a recent inquirer, I will tell thee
*respecting it*; so that thou mayest not go from us empty away.  If,
moreover, thou art pleased with those things which I shall say to thee,
we have other things besides to tell thee <span
id="fr_3361"></span>[3362](#fn_3361) concerning this matter; but, if
thou art not pleased, we on our part shall have stated our views without
any personal feeling.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p20"></span>“I too,” said Avida, “shall be much
gratified <span id="fr_3362"></span>[3363](#fn_3362) to hear and to be
convinced:  because it is not from another that I have heard of this
subject, but I have spoken of it to my brethren here out of my own mind;
and they have not cared to convince me; but they say, ‘Only believe,
<span id="page_724">p. 724</span> <span id="ix.xvi-Page_724"></span>and
thou wilt *then* be able to know everything.’  But for my part, I cannot
believe unless I be convinced.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p22"></span>“Not only,” said Bardesan, “is Avida
unwilling to believe, but there are many *others* also who, because
there is no faith in them, are not even capable of being convinced; but
they are always pulling down and building up, and *so* are found
destitute of all knowledge of the truth.  But notwithstanding, since
Avida is not willing to believe, lo! I will speak to you who do believe,
concerning this matter about which he asks; and *thus* he too will hear
something further *about it*.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p23"></span>He began accordingly to address us *as
follows:*  “Many men are there who have not faith, and have not received
knowledge from the True Wisdom. <span
id="fr_3363"></span>[3364](#fn_3363)   In consequence of this, they are
not competent to speak and give instruction *to others*, nor are they
readily inclined themselves to hear.  For they have not the foundation
of faith to build upon, nor have they any confidence on which to rest
their hope.  Moreover, because they are accustomed to doubt even
concerning God, they likewise have not in them the fear of Him, which
would of itself deliver them from all *other* fears:  for he in whom
there is no fear of God is the slave of all *sorts of* fears.  For even
with regard to those things of various kinds which they disbelieve, they
are not certain that they disbelieve them rightly, but they are
unsettled in their opinions, and have no fixed belief, <span
id="fr_3364"></span>[3365](#fn_3364) and the taste of their thoughts is
insipid in their *own* mouth; and they are always haunted with fear, and
flushed with excitement, and reckless.

<span id="ix.xvi-p26"></span>“But with regard to what Avida has said: 
‘How is it that God did not so make us that we should not sin and incur
condemnation?’—if man had been made so, he would not have belonged to
himself, but would have been the instrument of him that moved him; and
it is evident also, that he who moves *an instrument* as he pleases,
moves it either for good or for evil.  And how, in that case, would a
man differ from a harp, on which another plays; or from a ship, which
another guides:  where the praise and the blame reside in the hand of
the performer or the steersman, <span
id="fr_3365"></span>[3366](#fn_3365) and the harp itself knows not what
is played on it, nor the ship itself whether it be well steered and
guided *or ill*, they being only instruments made for the use of him in
whom is the *requisite* skill?  But God in His benignity chose not so to
make man; but by freedom He exalted him above many *of His* creatures,
and *even* made him equal with the angels.  For look at the sun, and the
moon, and the signs of the zodiac, <span
id="fr_3366"></span>[3367](#fn_3366) and all the other creatures which
are greater than we in some points, *and see* how individual freedom has
been denied them, and how they are all fixed *in their course* by
decree, so that they may do that only which is decreed for them, and
nothing else.  For the sun never says, I will not rise at my appointed
time; nor the moon, I will not change, nor wane, nor wax; nor does any
one of the stars say, I will not rise nor set; nor the sea, I will not
bear up the ships, nor stay within my boundaries; nor the mountains, We
will not continue in the places in which we are set; nor do the winds
say, We will not blow; nor the earth, I will not bear up and sustain
whatsoever is upon me.  But all these things are servants, and are
subject to one decree:  for they are the instruments of the wisdom of
God, which erreth not.

<span id="ix.xvi-p29"></span>“*Not so, however, with man:*  for, if
everything ministered, who would be he that is ministered to?  And, if
everything were ministered to, who would be he that ministered?  *In
that case*, too, there would not be one thing diverse from another:  yet
that which is one, and in which there is no diversity *of parts*, is a
being <span id="fr_3367"></span>[3368](#fn_3367) which up to this time
has not been fashioned.  But those things which are destined <span
id="fr_3368"></span>[3369](#fn_3368) for ministering have been fixed in
the power of man:  because in the image of Elohim <span
id="fr_3369"></span>[3370](#fn_3369) was he made.  Therefore have these
things, in the benignity *of God*, been given to him, that they may
minister to him for a season.  It has also been given to him to be
guided by his own will; so that whatever he is able to do, if he will he
may do it, and if he do not will he may not do it, and *that so* he may
justify himself or condemn.  For, had he been made so as not to be able
to do evil and thereby incur condemnation, in like manner also the good
which he did would not have been his own, and he could not have been
justified by it.  For, if any one should not of his own will do that
which is good or that which is evil, his justification and his
condemnation would rest simply with that Fortune to which he is
subjected. <span id="fr_3370"></span>[3371](#fn_3370)

<span id="ix.xvi-p34"></span>“It will therefore be manifest to you, that
the goodness of God is great toward man, and that <span id="page_725">p.
725</span> <span id="ix.xvi-Page_725"></span>freedom has been given to
him in greater measure than to any of those elemental bodies <span
id="fr_3371"></span>[3372](#fn_3371) of which we have spoken, in order
that by this freedom he may justify himself, and order his conduct in a
godlike manner, and be copartner with angels, who are likewise possessed
of personal freedom.  For we are sure that, if the angels likewise had
not been possessed of personal freedom, they would not have consorted
with the daughters of men, and sinned, and fallen from their places.  In
like manner, too, those other *angels*, who did the will of their Lord,
were, by reason of their self-control, raised to higher rank, and
sanctified, and received noble gifts.  For every being in existence is
in need of the Lord of all; of His gifts also there is no end.

<span id="ix.xvi-p36"></span>Know ye, however, notwithstanding *what I
have said*, that even those things of which I have spoken as subsisting
by decree are not absolutely destitute of all freedom; and on this
account, at the last day, they will all be made subject to judgment.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p37"></span>“But how,” said I to him, “should those
things which are fixed *and regulated by decree* be judged?”

<span id="ix.xvi-p38"></span>“Not inasmuch as they are fixed, O Philip,”
said he, “will the elements be judged, but inasmuch as they are endowed
with power.  For beings <span id="fr_3372"></span>[3373](#fn_3372) are
not deprived of their natural properties <span
id="fr_3373"></span>[3374](#fn_3373) when they come to be fashioned, but
*only* of the full exercise of their strength, <span
id="fr_3374"></span>[3375](#fn_3374) suffering a decrease <span
id="fr_3375"></span>[3376](#fn_3375) *of power* through their
intermingling one with another, and being kept in subjection by the
power of their Maker; and in so far as they are in subjection they will
not be judged, but in respect of that *only* which is *under* their own
*control*.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p43"></span>“Those things,” said Avida to him, “which
thou hast said, are very good; but, lo! the commands which have been
given to men are severe, and they cannot perform them.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p44"></span>“This,” said Bardesan, “is the saying of
one who has not the will to do that which is right; nay, more, of him
who has *already* yielded obedience and submission to his foe.  For men
have not been commanded to do anything but that which they are able to
do.  For the commandments set before us are *only two, and they are*
such as are compatible with freedom and consistent with equity:  one,
that we refrain from everything which is wrong, and which we should not
like to have done to ourselves; and the other, that we should do that
which is right, and which we love and are pleased to have done to us
likewise.  Who, then, is the man that is too weak to avoid stealing, or
to avoid lying, or to avoid acts of profligacy, or to avoid hatred and
deception?  For, lo! all these things are under *the control of* the
mind of man; and are not dependent on <span
id="fr_3376"></span>[3377](#fn_3376) the strength of the body, but on
the will of the soul.  For even if a man be poor, and sick, and old, and
disabled in his limbs, he is able to avoid doing all these things.  And,
as he is able to avoid doing these things, so is he able to love, and to
bless, and to speak the truth, and to pray for what is good for every
one with whom he is acquainted; and if he be in health, and capable *of
working*, <span id="fr_3377"></span>[3378](#fn_3377) he is able also to
give of that which he has; moreover, to support with strength of body
him that is sick and enfeebled—this also he can do.

<span id="ix.xvi-p47"></span>“Who, then, it is that is not capable of
doing that which men destitute of faith complain of, I know not.  For my
part, I think that it is precisely in respect to these commandments that
man has more power than in anything *else*.  For they are easy, and
there are no circumstances that can hinder their performance.  For we
are not commanded to carry heavy loads of stones, or of timber, or of
anything else, which those only who have *great* bodily strength can do;
nor to build fortresses <span id="fr_3378"></span>[3379](#fn_3378) and
found cities, which kings only can do; nor to steer a ship, which
mariners only have the skill to steer; nor to measure and divide land,
which *land*-measurers only know how to do; nor *to practise* any one of
those arts which are possessed by some, while the rest are destitute of
them.  But there have been given to us, in accordance with the benignity
of God, commandments having no harshness in them <span
id="fr_3379"></span>[3380](#fn_3379) —such as any living man
whatsoever <span id="fr_3380"></span>[3381](#fn_3380) may rejoice to
do. <span id="fr_3381"></span>[3382](#fn_3381)   For there is no man
that does not rejoice when he does that which is right, nor any one that
is not gladdened within himself if he abstains from things that are
bad—except those who were not created for this good thing, and are
called tares. <span id="fr_3382"></span>[3383](#fn_3382)   For would not
the judge be unjust who should censure a man with regard to any such
thing as he has not the ability to do?”

<span id="ix.xvi-p53"></span>“Sayest thou of these deeds, O Bardesan,”
said Avida to him, “that they are easy to do?”

<span id="ix.xvi-p54"></span>“To him that hath the will,” said Bardesan,
“I have said, and do *still* say, that they are easy.  For this
*obedience I contend for* is the proper behaviour of a free mind, <span
id="fr_3383"></span>[3384](#fn_3383) and of the soul which has <span
id="page_726">p. 726</span> <span id="ix.xvi-Page_726"></span>not
revolted against its governors.  As for the action of the body, there
are many things which hinder it:  especially old age, and sickness, and
poverty.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p56"></span>“Possibly,” said Avida, “a man may be able
to abstain from the things that are bad; but as for doing the things
that are good, what man is capable *of this?*”

<span id="ix.xvi-p57"></span>“It is easier,” said Bardesan, “to do good
than to abstain from evil.  For the good comes from the man
himself, <span id="fr_3384"></span>[3385](#fn_3384) and therefore he
rejoices whenever he does good; but the evil is the work of the Enemy,
and therefore *it is that, only* when a man is excited *by some evil
passion*, and is not in his sound natural condition, <span
id="fr_3385"></span>[3386](#fn_3385) he does the things that are bad. 
For know, my son, that for a man to praise and bless his friend is an
easy thing; but for a man to refrain from taunting and reviling one whom
he hates is not easy:  nevertheless, it is possible.  When, too, a man
does that which is right, his mind is gladdened, and his conscience at
ease, and he is pleased for every one to see what he does.  But, when a
man behaves amiss and commits wrong, he is troubled and excited, and
full of anger and rage, and distressed in his soul and in his body; and,
when he is in this *state of* mind, he does not like to be seen by any
one; and even those things in which he rejoices, and which are
accompanied with praise and blessing *from others*, are spurned from his
thoughts, while those things by which he is agitated and disturbed are
*rendered more distressing to him because* accompanied by the curse of
*conscious* guilt.

<span id="ix.xvi-p60"></span>“Perhaps, however, some one will say that
fools also are pleased when they do abominable things.  *Undoubtedly:* 
but not because they do them *as such*, nor because they receive any
conmendation *for them*, nor because *they do them* with a good
hope; <span id="fr_3386"></span>[3387](#fn_3386) nor does the pleasure
itself stay long with them.  For the pleasure which is *experienced* in
a healthy state *of the soul*, with a good hope, is one thing; and the
pleasure of a diseased state *of the soul*, with a bad hope, is
another.  For lust is one thing, and love is another; and friendship is
one thing, and good-fellowship another; and we ought without any
difficulty to understand that the false counterfeit of affection which
is called lust, even though there be in it the enjoyment of the moment,
is nevertheless widely different from true affection, whose enjoyment is
for ever, incorruptible and indestructible.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p62"></span>“Avida here,” said I to him, “has also been
speaking thus:  ‘It is from his nature that man does wrong; for, were he
not naturally formed to do wrong, he would not do it.’”

<span id="ix.xvi-p63"></span>“If all men,” said Bardesan, “acted
alike, <span id="fr_3387"></span>[3388](#fn_3387) and followed one
bias, <span id="fr_3388"></span>[3389](#fn_3388) it would *then* be
manifest that it was their nature that guided them, and that they had
not that freedom of which I have been speaking to you.  That you may
understand, however, what is nature and what is freedom, I will proceed
to inform you.

<span id="ix.xvi-p66"></span>“The nature of man is, that he should be
born, and grow up, and rise to his full stature, and produce children,
and grow old, eating and drinking, and sleeping and waking, and that
*then* he should die.  These things, because they are of nature, belong
to all men; and not to all men only, but also to all animals
whatsoever, <span id="fr_3389"></span>[3390](#fn_3389) and some of them
also to trees.  For this is the work of physical nature, <span
id="fr_3390"></span>[3391](#fn_3390) which makes and produces and
regulates everything just as it has been commanded.  Nature, I say, is
found to be maintained among animals also in their actions.  For the
lion eats flesh, in accordance with his nature; and therefore all lions
are eaters of flesh.  The sheep eats grass; and therefore all sheep are
eaters of grass.  The bee makes honey, by which it is sustained;
therefore all bees are makers of honey.  The ant collects for herself a
store in summer, from which to sustain herself in winter; and therefore
do all ants act likewise.  The scorpion strikes with its sting him who
has not hurt it; and thus do all scorpions strike.  Thus all animals
preserve their nature:  the eaters of flesh do not eat herbage; nor do
the eaters of herbage eat flesh.

<span id="ix.xvi-p69"></span>“Men, on the contrary, are not governed
thus; but, whilst in the matters pertaining to their bodies they
preserve their nature like animals, in the matters pertaining to their
minds they do that which they choose, as those who are free, <span
id="fr_3391"></span>[3392](#fn_3391) and endowed with power, and as
*made in* the likeness of God.  For there are some of them that eat
flesh, and do not touch bread; and there are some of them that make a
distinction between the *several* kinds of flesh-food; and there are
some of them that do not eat the flesh of any animal whatever. <span
id="fr_3392"></span>[3393](#fn_3392)   There are some of them that
become the husbands of their mothers, and of their sisters, and of their
daughters; and there are some who do not consort with women at all. 
There are those who take it upon *themselves* to inflict vengeance, like
lions and leopards; and there are those who strike him that has not done
them any wrong, like scorpions; and there are those that are led like
sheep, and do not harm their conductors.  There are some that behave
themselves with kindness, <span id="page_727">p. 727</span> <span
id="ix.xvi-Page_727"></span>and some with justice, and some with
wickedness.

<span id="ix.xvi-p72"></span>“If any one should say that each one of
them has a nature so to do, let him be assured <span
id="fr_3393"></span>[3394](#fn_3393) that it is not so.  For there are
those who *once* were profligates and drunkards; and, when the
admonition of good counsels reached them, they became pure and
sober, <span id="fr_3394"></span>[3395](#fn_3394) and spurned their
bodily appetites.  And there are those who *once* behaved with purity
and sobriety; and when they turned away from right admonition, and dared
to set themselves against the commands of Deity and of their teachers,
they fell from the way of truth, and became profligates and revellers. 
And there are those who after their fall repented again, and fear *came
and* abode upon them, and they turned themselves *afresh* towards the
truth which they had *before* held. <span
id="fr_3395"></span>[3396](#fn_3395)

<span id="ix.xvi-p76"></span>“What, therefore, is the nature of man? 
For, lo! all men differ one from another in their conduct and in their
aims, <span id="fr_3396"></span>[3397](#fn_3396) and such *only* as are
of <span id="fr_3397"></span>[3398](#fn_3397) one mind and of one
purpose resemble one another.  But those men who, up to the present
moment, have been enticed by their appetites and governed by their
anger, are resolved to ascribe any wrong they do to their Maker, that
they themselves may be found faultless, and that He who made them may,
in the idle talk *of men*, <span id="fr_3398"></span>[3399](#fn_3398)
bear the blame.  They do not consider that nature is amenable to no
law.  For a man is not found fault with for being tall or short in his
stature, or white or black, or because his eyes are large or small, or
for any bodily defect whatsoever; but he is found fault with if he
steal, or lie, or practise deceit, or poison *another*, or be abusive,
or do *any other* such-like things.

<span id="ix.xvi-p80"></span>“From hence, lo! it will be evident, that
for those things which are not in our own hands, but which we have from
nature, we are in no wise condemned, nor are we in any wise justified;
but by those things which we do in *the exercise of* our personal
freedom, if they be right we are justified and entitled to praise, and
if they be wrong we are condemned and subjected to blame.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p81"></span>Again we questioned him, and said to him: 
“There are others who say that men are governed by the decree of Fate,
*so as to act* at one time wickedly, and at another time well.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p82"></span>“I too am aware, O Philip and Baryama,”
said he to us, “that there are *such* men:  those who are called
Chaldæans, and also others who are fond of this subtle knowledge, <span
id="fr_3399"></span>[3400](#fn_3399) as I myself also once was.  For it
has been said by me in another place, <span
id="fr_3400"></span>[3401](#fn_3400) that the soul of man longs <span
id="fr_3401"></span>[3402](#fn_3401) to know that which the many are
ignorant of, and those men make it their aim to do *this;* <span
id="fr_3402"></span>[3403](#fn_3402) and *that* all the wrong which
*men* commit, and all that they do aright, and all those things which
happen to them, as regards riches and poverty, and sickness and health,
and blemishes of the body, come to them through the governance of those
stars which are called the Seven; <span
id="fr_3403"></span>[3404](#fn_3403) and that they are, *in fact*,
governed by them.  But there are others who affirm the opposite of these
things,—how that this art is a lying invention of the astrologers; <span
id="fr_3404"></span>[3405](#fn_3404) or that Fate has no existence
whatever, but is an empty name; that, *on the contrary*, all things,
great and small, are placed in the hands of man; and that bodily
blemishes and faults simply befall and happen to him by chance.  But
others, *again*, say that whatsoever a man does he does of his own will,
in *the exercise of* the freedom which has been given to him, and that
the faults and blemishes and *other* untoward things which befall him he
receives as punishment from God.

<span id="ix.xvi-p89"></span>“For myself, however according to my weak
judgment, <span id="fr_3405"></span>[3406](#fn_3405) the matter appears
to stand *thus:*  that these three opinions <span
id="fr_3406"></span>[3407](#fn_3406) are partly to be accepted as true,
and partly to be rejected as false;—accepted as true, because men speak
after the appearances which they see, and also because these men see how
things come upon them *as if* accidentally; to be set aside as
fallacious, because the wisdom of God is too profound <span
id="fr_3407"></span>[3408](#fn_3407) for them—that *wisdom* which
founded the world, and created man, and ordained Governors, and gave to
all things the *degree of* pre-eminence which is suited to every one of
them.  What I mean is, that this power is possessed by God, and the
Angels, and the Potentates, <span id="fr_3408"></span>[3409](#fn_3408)
and the Governors, <span id="fr_3409"></span>[3410](#fn_3409) and the
Elements, and men, and animals; but that *this* power has not been given
to all these orders *of beings* of which I have spoken in respect to
everything (for He that has power over everything is One); but over some
things they have power, and over some things they have not power, as I
have been saying:  in order that in those things over which they have
power the <span id="page_728">p. 728</span> <span
id="ix.xvi-Page_728"></span>goodness of God may be seen, and in those
over which they have no power they may know that they have a Superior.

<span id="ix.xvi-p95"></span>“There is, then, *such a thing as* Fate, as
the astrologers say.  That everything, moreover, is not under the
control of our will, is apparent from this—that the majority of men have
had the will to be rich, and to exercise dominion over their fellows,
and to be healthy in their bodies, and to have things in subjection to
them as they please; but that wealth is not found except with a few, nor
dominion except with one here and another there, nor health of body with
all men; and that *even* those who are rich do not have complete
possession of their riches, nor do those who are in power have things in
subjection to them as they wish, but that sometimes things are
disobedient *to them* as they do not wish; and that at one time the rich
are rich as they desire, and at another time they become poor as they do
not desire; and that those who are thoroughly poor have dwellings such
as they do not wish, and pass their lives in the world as they do not
like, and covet *many* things which *only* flee from them.  Many have
children, and do not rear them; others rear them, and do not retain
possession of them; others retain possession of them, and they become a
disgrace and a sorrow *to their parents*.  Some are rich, as they wish,
and are afflicted with ill-health, as they do not wish; others are
blessed with good health, as they wish, and afflicted with poverty, as
they do not wish.  There are those who have in abundance the things they
wish for, and but few of those things for which they do not wish; and
there are others who have in abundance the things they do not wish for,
and but few of those for which they do wish. <span
id="fr_3410"></span>[3411](#fn_3410)

<span id="ix.xvi-p97"></span>“And so the matter is found *to stand*
thus:  that wealth, and honours, and health, and sickness, and children,
and *all the other* various objects of desire, are placed under *the
control of* Fate, and are not in our own power; but *that, on the
contrary*, while we are pleased and delighted with such things as are in
accordance with our wishes, towards such as we do not wish for we are
drawn by force; and, from those things which happen to us when we are
not pleased, it is evident that those things also with which we are
pleased do not happen to us because we desire them; but that things
happen as they do happen, and with some of them we are pleased, and with
others not.

<span id="ix.xvi-p98"></span>“And *thus* we men are found to be governed
by Nature all alike, and by Fate variously, and by our freedom each as
he chooses.

<span id="ix.xvi-p99"></span>“But let us now proceed to show with
respect to Fate that it has not power over everything.  *Clearly not:* 
because that which is called Fate is itself *nothing more than a
certain* order of procession, <span id="fr_3411"></span>[3412](#fn_3411)
which has been given to the Potentates and Elements by God; and, in
conformity with this said procession and order, intelligences <span
id="fr_3412"></span>[3413](#fn_3412) undergo change when they
descend <span id="fr_3413"></span>[3414](#fn_3413) to *be with* the
soul, and souls undergo change when they descend <span
id="fr_3414"></span>[3415](#fn_3414) to *be with* bodies; and this
*order*, under the name of Fate and <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p103.1"></span>γένεσις</span>, <span
id="fr_3415"></span>[3416](#fn_3415) is the agent of the changes <span
id="fr_3416"></span>[3417](#fn_3416) that take place in this assemblage
*of parts of which man consists*, <span
id="fr_3417"></span>[3418](#fn_3417) which is being sifted and purified
for the benefit of whatsoever by the grace of God and by goodness has
been benefited, and is being *and will continue to be* benefited until
the close of all *things*.

<span id="ix.xvi-p107"></span>“The body, then, is governed by Nature,
the soul also sharing in its experiences and sensations; and the body is
neither hindered nor helped by Fate in the several acts it performs. 
For a man does not become a father before the age of fifteen, nor does a
woman become a mother before the age of thirteen.  In like manner, too,
there is a law for old age:  for women *then* become incapable of
bearing, and men cease to possess the natural power of begetting
children; while other animals, which are likewise governed by their
nature, do, *even* before those ages I have mentioned, not only produce
offspring, but also become too old to do so, just as the bodies of men
also, when they are grown old, cease to propagate:  nor is Fate able to
give them offspring at a time when the body has not the natural power to
give them.  Neither, again, is Fate able to preserve the body of man in
life without meat and drink; nor yet, even when it has meat and drink,
to grant it exemption from death:  for these and many other things
belong exclusively to Nature. <span id="fr_3418"></span>[3419](#fn_3418)

<span id="ix.xvi-p109"></span>“But, when the times and methods of Nature
<span id="page_729">p. 729</span> <span id="ix.xvi-Page_729"></span>have
had their full scope, then does Fate come and make its appearance among
them, and produce effects of various kinds:  at one time helping Nature
and augmenting *its power*, and at another crippling and baffling it. 
Thus, from Nature comes the growth and perfecting of the body; but apart
from Nature, that is by Fate, come diseases and blemishes in the body. 
From Nature comes the union of male and female, and the unalloyed
happiness of them both; but from Fate comes hatred and the dissolution
of the union, and, *moreover*, all that impurity and lasciviousness
which by reason of *the natural propensity to* intercourse men practise
in their lust.  From Nature comes birth and children; and from Fate,
that sometimes the children are deformed, and sometimes are cast away,
and sometimes die before their time.  From Nature comes a supply *of
nourishment* sufficient for the bodies of all *creatures;* <span
id="fr_3419"></span>[3420](#fn_3419) and from Fate comes the want of
sustenance, and *consequent* suffering in those bodies; and so, again,
from the same Fate comes gluttony and unnecessary luxury.  Nature
ordains that the aged shall be judges for the young, and the wise for
the foolish, and that the strong shall be set over <span
id="fr_3420"></span>[3421](#fn_3420) the weak, and the brave over the
timid; but Fate brings it to pass that striplings are set over the aged,
and the foolish over the wise, and that in time of war the weak command
the strong, and the timid the brave.

<span id="ix.xvi-p112"></span>“You must distinctly understand <span
id="fr_3421"></span>[3422](#fn_3421) that, in all cases in which Nature
is disturbed from its direct course, its disturbance comes by reason of
Fate; *and this happens* because the Chiefs <span
id="fr_3422"></span>[3423](#fn_3422) and Governors, with whom rests that
agency of change <span id="fr_3423"></span>[3424](#fn_3423) which is
called Nativity, are opposed to one another.  Some of them, which are
called Dexter, are those which help Nature, and add to its
predominance, <span id="fr_3424"></span>[3425](#fn_3424) whenever the
procession is favourable to them, and they stand in those regions of the
zodiac which are in the ascendant, in their own portions. <span
id="fr_3425"></span>[3426](#fn_3425)   Those, on the contrary, which are
called Sinister are evil, and whenever they in their turn are in
possession of the ascendant they act in opposition to Nature; and not on
men only do they inflict harm, but at times on animals also, and trees,
and fruits, and the produce of the year, and fountains of water, and,
*in short*, on everything that is comprised within Nature, which is
under their government.

<span id="ix.xvi-p118"></span>“And in consequence of this,—*namely*, the
divisions and parties which exist among the Potentates,—some men have
thought that the world is governed *by these contending powers* without
any superintendence *from above*.  *But that* is because they do not
understand that this very thing—*I mean* the parties and divisions
*subsisting among them*,—and the justification and condemnation
*consequent on their behaviour*, belong to that constitution of things
founded in freedom which has been given by God, to the end that these
agents likewise, by reason of their self-determining power, <span
id="fr_3426"></span>[3427](#fn_3426) may be either justified or
condemned.  Just as we see that Fate crushes Nature, so can we also see
the freedom of man defeating and crushing Fate itself,—not, however, in
everything,—just as also Fate itself does not in everything defeat
Nature.  For it is proper that the three things, Nature, and Fate, and
Freedom, should be continued in existence until the procession *of which
I before spoke* be completed, and the *appointed* measure and number *of
its evolutions* be accomplished, even as it seemed good to Him who
ordains of what kind shall be the mode of life and the end of all
creatures, and the condition of all beings and natures.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p120"></span>“I am convinced,” said Avida, “by the
arguments thou hast brought forward, that it is not from his nature that
a man does wrong, and also that all men are not governed alike.  If thou
canst further prove also that it is not from Fate and Destiny that those
who do wrong so act, then will it be incumbent on us to believe that man
possesses personal freedom, and by his nature has the power *both* to
follow that which is right and to avoid that which is wrong, and will
therefore also justly be judged at the last day.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p121"></span>“Art thou,” said Bardesan, “by the fact
that all men are not governed alike, convinced that it is not from their
nature that they do wrong?  Why, then, thou canst not possibly escape
the conviction <span id="fr_3427"></span>[3428](#fn_3427) that neither
also from Fate exclusively do they do wrong, if we are able to show thee
that the sentence of the Fates and Potentates does not influence all men
alike, but that we have freedom in our own selves, so that we can avoid
serving physical nature and being influenced by the control of the
Potentates.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p123"></span>“Prove me this,” said Avida, “and I will
be convinced by thee, and whatsoever thou shalt enjoin upon me I will
do.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p124"></span>“Hast thou,” said Bardesan, “read the
books of the astrologers <span id="fr_3428"></span>[3429](#fn_3428) who
are in Babylon, in which is described what effects the stars have in
their *various* combinations at the Nativities of men; and the books of
the Egyptians, in which are described all the *various* characters which
men happen to have?”

<span id="ix.xvi-p126"></span><span id="page_730">p. 730</span> <span
id="ix.xvi-Page_730"></span>“I have read books of astrology,” <span
id="fr_3429"></span>[3430](#fn_3429) said Avida, “but I do not know
which are those of the Babylonians and which those of the Egyptians.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p128"></span>“The teaching of both countries,” said
Bardesan, “is the same.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p129"></span>“It is well known to be so,” said Avida.

<span id="ix.xvi-p130"></span>“Listen, then,” said Bardesan, “and
observe, that that which the stars decree by their Fate and their
portions is not practised by all men alike who are in all *parts of* the
earth.  For men have made laws *for themselves* in various countries, in
*the exercise of* that freedom which was given them by God:  forasmuch
as this gift is in its very nature opposed to that Fate emanating from
the Potentates, who assume to themselves that which was not given them. 
I will begin my enumeration *of these laws*, so far as I can remember
*them*, from the East, the beginning of the whole world:—

<span id="ix.xvi-p131"></span>“*Laws of the Seres*.—The Seres have laws
forbidding to kill, or to commit impurity, or to worship idols; and in
the whole of Serica there are no idols, and no harlots, nor any one that
kills a man, nor any that is killed:  although they, like other men, are
born at all hours and on all days.  Thus the fierce Mars, whensoever he
is ‘posited’ in the zenith, does not overpower the freedom of the Seres,
and compel a man to shed the blood of his fellow with an iron weapon;
nor does Venus, when posited with Mars, compel any man whatever among
the Seres to consort with his neighbour’s wife, or with any *other*
woman.  Rich and poor, however, and sick people and healthy, and rulers
and subjects, are there:  because such matters are given into the power
of the Governors.

<span id="ix.xvi-p132"></span>“*Laws of the Brahmans who are in
India*.—Again, among the Hindoos, the Brahmans, of whom there are many
thousands and tens of thousands, have a law forbidding to kill at all,
or to pay reverence to idols, or to commit impurity, or to eat flesh, or
to drink wine; and among these people not one of these things *ever*
takes place.  Thousands of years, too, have elapsed, during which these
men, lo! have been governed by this law which they made for themselves.

<span id="ix.xvi-p133"></span>“*Another Law which is in India*.—There is
also another law in India, and in the same zone, <span
id="fr_3430"></span>[3431](#fn_3430) prevailing among those who are not
of the caste <span id="fr_3431"></span>[3432](#fn_3431) of the Brahmans,
and do not embrace their teaching, bidding them serve idols, and commit
impurity, and kill, and do other bad things, which by the Brahmans are
disapproved.  In the same zone of India, too, there are men who are in
the habit of eating the flesh of men, just as all other nations eat the
flesh of animals.  Thus the evil stars have not compelled the Brahmans
to do evil and impure things; nor have the good stars prevailed on the
rest of the Hindoos to abstain from doing evil things; nor have those
stars which are well ‘located’ in the regions which properly belong to
them, <span id="fr_3432"></span>[3433](#fn_3432) and in the signs of the
zodiac favourable to a humane disposition, <span
id="fr_3433"></span>[3434](#fn_3433) prevailed on those who eat the
flesh of men to abstain from using this foul and abominable food.

<span id="ix.xvi-p138"></span>“*Laws of the Persians*.—The Persians,
again, have made themselves laws permitting them to take as wives their
sisters, and their daughters, and their daughters’ daughters; and there
are some who go yet further, and take even their mothers.  Some of these
said Persians are scattered abroad, *away from their country*, and are
*found* in Media, and in the country of the Parthians, <span
id="fr_3434"></span>[3435](#fn_3434) and in Egypt, and in Phrygia (they
are called Magi); and in all the countries and zones in which they are
*found*, they are governed by this law which was made for their
fathers.  Yet we cannot say that for all the Magi, and for the rest of
the Persians, Venus was posited with the Moon and with Saturn in the
house of Saturn in her portions, while the aspect of Mars was toward
them. <span id="fr_3435"></span>[3436](#fn_3435)   There are many
places, too, in the kingdom of the Parthians, where men kill their
wives, and their brothers, and their children, and incur no penalty;
while among the Romans and the Greeks, he that kills one of these incurs
capital punishment, the severest of penalties.

<span id="ix.xvi-p141"></span>“*Laws of the Geli*.—Among the Geli the
women sow and reap, and build, and perform all the tasks of labourers,
and wear no raiment of colours, and put on no shoes, and use no pleasant
ointments; nor does any one find fault with them when they consort with
strangers, or cultivate intimacies with their household slaves.  But the
husbands of these Gelæ are dressed in garments of colours, and
ornamented with gold and jewels, and anoint themselves with pleasant
ointments.  Nor is it on account of any effeminacy on their part that
they act in this manner, but on account of the law which has been made
for them:  in fact, all the men are fond of hunting and addicted to
war.  But we cannot say that for all the women of the Geli Venus was
posited in Capricorn or in Aquarius, in a position of ill luck; nor can
we possibly say that for all the Geli Mars and Venus were posited in
<span id="page_731">p. 731</span> <span
id="ix.xvi-Page_731"></span>Aries, where it is written that brave and
wanton <span id="fr_3436"></span>[3437](#fn_3436) men are born.

<span id="ix.xvi-p143"></span>“*Laws of the Bactrians*.—Among the
Bactrians, who are called Cashani, the women adorn themselves with the
goodly raiment of men, and with much gold, and with costly jewels; and
the slaves and handmaids minister to them more than to their husbands;
and they ride on horses decked out with trapping of gold and with
precious stones. <span id="fr_3437"></span>[3438](#fn_3437)   These
women, moreover, do not practise continency, but have intimacies with
their slaves, and with strangers who go to that country; and their
husbands do not find fault with them, nor have the women themselves any
fear *of punishment*, because the Cashani look upon <span
id="fr_3438"></span>[3439](#fn_3438) their wives *only* as mistresses. 
Yet we cannot say that for all the Bactrian women Venus and Mars and
Jupiter are posited in the house of Mars in the middle of the
heavens, <span id="fr_3439"></span>[3440](#fn_3439) the place where
women are born that are rich and adulterous, and that make their
husbands subservient to them in everything.

<span id="ix.xvi-p147"></span>“*Laws of the Racami, and of the
Edessæans, and of the Arabians*.—Among the Racami, and the Edessæans,
and the Arabians, not only is she that commits adultery put to death,
but she also upon whom rests the suspicion <span
id="fr_3440"></span>[3441](#fn_3440) of adultery suffers capital
punishment.

<span id="ix.xvi-p149"></span>“*Laws in Hatra*.—There is a law in
force <span id="fr_3441"></span>[3442](#fn_3441) in Hatra, that
whosoever steals any little thing, even though it were worthless as
water, shall be stoned.  Among the Cashani, *on the contrary*, if any
one commits such a theft as this, they *merely* spit in his face.  Among
the Romans, *too*, he that commits a small theft is scourged and sent
about his business.  On the other side of the Euphrates, and *as you go*
eastward, he that is stigmatized as either a thief or a murderer does
not much resent it; <span id="fr_3442"></span>[3443](#fn_3442) but, if a
man be stigmatized as an arsenocœte, he will avenge himself even to the
extent of killing *his accuser*.

<span id="ix.xvi-p152"></span>“*Laws*.…—Among <span
id="fr_3443"></span>[3444](#fn_3443) …boys…to us, and are not…Again, in
all the region of the East, if any persons are *thus* stigmatized, and
are known *to be guilty*, their *own* fathers and brothers put them to
death; and very often <span id="fr_3444"></span>[3445](#fn_3444) they do
not even make known the graves *where they are buried*.

<span id="ix.xvi-p155"></span>“*Such are* the laws of the people of the
East.  But *in the North, and in the country of the Gauls* <span
id="fr_3445"></span>[3446](#fn_3445) and their neighbours, such youths
among them as are handsome the men take as wives, and they even have
feasts *on the occasion*; and it is not considered by them as a
disgrace, nor as a reproach, because of the law which prevails among
them.  But it is a thing impossible that all those in Gaul who are
branded with this disgrace should at their Nativities have had Mercury
posited with Venus in the house of Saturn, and within the limits of
Mars, and in the signs of the zodiac to the west.  For, concerning such
men as are born under these conditions, it is written that they are
branded with infamy, *as being* like women.

<span id="ix.xvi-p157"></span>“*Laws of the Britons*.—Among the Britons
many men take one *and the same* wife.

<span id="ix.xvi-p158"></span>“*Laws of the Parthians*.—Among the
Parthians, *on the other hand*, one man takes many wives, and all of
them keep to him only, because of the law which has been made there in
that country.

<span id="ix.xvi-p159"></span>“*Laws of the Amazons*.—As regards the
Amazons, they, all of them, the entire nation, have no husbands; but
like animals, once a year, in the spring-time, they issue forth from
their territories and cross the river; and, having crossed it, they hold
a great festival on a mountain, and the men from those parts come and
stay with them fourteen days, and associate with them, and they become
pregnant by them, and pass over again to their own country; and, when
they are delivered, such *of the children* as are males they cast away,
and the females they bring up.  Now it is evident that, according to the
ordinance of Nature, since they all became pregnant in one month, they
also in one month are *all* delivered, a little sooner or a little
later; and, as we have heard, all of them are robust and warlike; but
not one of the stars is able to help any of those males who are born so
as to prevent their being cast away.

<span id="ix.xvi-p160"></span>“*The Book of the Astrologers*.—It is
written in the book of the astrologers, that, when Mercury is posited
with Venus in the house of Mercury, he produces painters, sculptors, and
bankers; but that, when they are in the house of Venus, they produce
perfumers, and dancers, <span id="page_732">p. 732</span> <span
id="ix.xvi-Page_732"></span>and singers, and poets.  And *yet*, in all
the country of the Tayites and of the Saracens, and in Upper Libya and
among the Mauritanians, and in the country of the Nomades, which is at
the mouth of the Ocean, and in outer Germany, and in Upper Sarmatia, and
in Spain, and in all the countries to the north of Pontus, and in all
the country of the Alanians, and among the Albanians, and among the
Zazi, and in Brusa, which is beyond the Douro, one sees neither
sculptors, nor painters, nor perfumers, nor bankers, nor poets; but, *on
the contrary*, this decree of Mercury and Venus is prevented from
*influencing* the entire circumference of the world.  In the whole of
Media, all men when they die, *and even* while life is still remaining
in them, are cast to the dogs, and the dogs eat the dead of the whole of
Media.  Yet we cannot say that all the Medians are born having the Moon
posited with Mars in Cancer in the day-time beneath the earth:  for it
is written that those whom dogs eat are so born.  The Hindoos, when they
die, are all of them burnt with fire, and many of their wives are burnt
along with them alive.  But we cannot say that all those women of the
Hindoos who are burnt had at their Nativity Mars and the Sun posited in
Leo in the night-time beneath the earth, as those persons are born who
are burnt with fire.  All the Germans die by strangulation, <span
id="fr_3446"></span>[3447](#fn_3446) except those who are killed in
battle.  But it is a thing impossible, that, at the Nativity of all the
Germans the Moon and Hora should have been posited between Mars and
Saturn.  The truth is, that in all countries, every day, and at all
hours, men are born under Nativities diverse from one another, and the
laws of men prevail over the decree *of the stars*, and they are
governed by their customs.  Fate does not compel the Seres to commit
murder against their wish, nor the Brahmans to eat flesh; nor does it
hinder the Persians from taking *as wives* their daughters and their
sisters, nor the Hindoos from being burnt, nor the Medes from being
devoured by dogs, nor the Parthians from taking many wives, nor among
the Britons many men from taking one *and the same* wife, nor the
Edessæans from cultivating chastity, nor the Greeks from practising
gymnastics,…, nor the Romans from perpetually seizing upon *other*
countries, nor the *men of the* Gauls from marrying one another; nor
*does it compel* the Amazons to rear the males; nor does his Nativity
compel any man within the circumference of the *whole* world to
cultivate the art of the Muses; but, as I have *already* said, in every
country and in every nation all men avail themselves of the freedom of
their nature in any way they choose, and, by reason of the body with
which they are clothed, do service to Fate and to Nature, sometimes as
they wish, and at other times as they do not wish.  For in every country
and in every nation there are rich and poor, and rulers and subjects,
and people in health and those who are sick—each one according as Fate
and *his* Nativity have affected him.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p162"></span>“Of these things, Father Bardesan,” said I
to him, “thou hast convinced us, and we know that they are true.  But
knowest thou that the astrologers say that the earth is divided into
seven portions, which are called Zones; and that over the said portions
those seven *stars* have authority, each of them *over one;* and that in
each one of the said portions the will of its own Potentate prevails;
and that this is called *its* law?”

<span id="ix.xvi-p163"></span>“First of all, know thou, my son Philip,”
said he to me, “that the astrologers have invented this statement as a
device *for the promotion* of error.  For, although the earth be divided
into seven portions, yet in every one of the seven portions many laws
are to be found differing from one another.  For there are not seven
*kinds of* laws *only* found in the world, according to the number of
the seven stars; nor yet twelve, according to the number of the signs of
the zodiac; nor yet thirty-six, according to the number of the
Decani. <span id="fr_3447"></span>[3448](#fn_3447)   But there are many
*kinds of* laws *to be seen as you go* from kingdom to kingdom, from
country to country, from district to district, and in every abode *of
man*, differing one from another.  For ye remember what I said to
you—that in one zone, *that* of the Hindoos, there are many men that do
not eat the flesh of animals, and there are others that *even* eat the
flesh of men.  And again, I told you, *in speaking* of the Persians and
the Magi, that it is not in the zone of Persia only that they have taken
*for wives* their daughters and their sisters, but that in every country
to which they have gone they have followed the law of their fathers, and
have preserved the mystic arts contained in that *teaching* which they
delivered to them.  And again, remember that I told you of many nations
spread abroad over the entire circuit of the world, <span
id="fr_3448"></span>[3449](#fn_3448) who have not been confined to any
one zone, but have dwelt in every quarter from which the wind
blows, <span id="fr_3449"></span>[3450](#fn_3449) and in all the zones,
and who have not the arts which Mercury and Venus *are said to* have
given when in conjunction with each other.  Yet, if laws were regulated
by zones, this could not be; but they clearly are not:  because those
men *I have spoken of* are at a wide remove from having anything in
common with many *other* men in their habits of life.

<span id="ix.xvi-p167"></span><span id="page_733">p. 733</span> <span
id="ix.xvi-Page_733"></span>“*Then, again*, how many wise men, think ye,
have abolished from their countries laws which appeared to them not well
made?  How many laws, also, are there which have been set aside through
necessity?  And how many kings are there who, when they have got
possession of countries which did not belong to them, have abolished
their established laws, and made such *other* laws as they chose?  And,
whenever these things occurred, no one of the stars was able to preserve
the law.  Here is an instance at hand for you to see *for yourselves:* 
it is but as yesterday since the Romans took possession of Arabia, and
they abolished all the laws previously existing *there*, and especially
the circumcision which they practised.  The truth is, <span
id="fr_3450"></span>[3451](#fn_3450) that he who is his own master is
*sometimes* compelled to obey the law imposed on him by another, who
himself *in turn* becomes possessed of the power to do as he pleases.

<span id="ix.xvi-p169"></span>“But let me mention to you a fact which
more than anything *else* is likely <span
id="fr_3451"></span>[3452](#fn_3451) to convince the foolish, and such
as are wanting in faith.  All the Jews, who received the law through
Moses, circumcise their male children on the eighth day, without waiting
for the coming of the *proper* stars, or standing in fear of the law of
the country *where they are living*.  Nor does the star which has
authority over the zone govern them by force; but, whether they be in
Edom, or in Arabia, or in Greece, or in Persia, or in the north, or in
the south, they carry out this law which was made for them by their
fathers.  It is evident that what they do is not from Nativity: for it
is impossible that for all the Jews, on the eighth day, on which they
are circumcised, Mars should ‘be in the ascendant,’ so that steel should
pass upon them, and their blood be shed.  Moreover, all of them,
wherever they are, abstain from paying reverence to idols.  One day in
seven, also, they and their children cease from all work, from all
building, and from all travelling, and from all buying and selling; nor
do they kill an animal on the Sabbath-day, nor kindle a fire, nor
administer justice; and there is not found among them any one whom Fate
compels, <span id="fr_3452"></span>[3453](#fn_3452) either to go to law
on the Sabbath-day and gain his cause, or to go to law and lose it, or
to pull down, or to build up, or to do any one of those things which are
done by all those men who have not received this law.  They have also
other things in respect to which they do not *on the Sabbath* conduct
themselves like the rest of mankind, though on this same day they both
bring forth and are born, and fall sick and die:  for these things do
not pertain to the power of man.

<span id="ix.xvi-p172"></span>“In Syria and in Edessa men used to part
with their manhood in honour of Tharatha; but, when King Abgar <span
id="fr_3453"></span>[3454](#fn_3453) became a believer he commanded that
every one that did so should have his hand cut off, and from that day
until now no one does so in the country of Edessa.

<span id="ix.xvi-p174"></span>“And what shall we say of the new race of
us Christians, whom Christ at His advent planted in every country and in
every region? for, lo! wherever we are, we are all called after the one
name of Christ—Christians.  On one day, the first of the week, we
assemble ourselves together, and on the days of the readings <span
id="fr_3454"></span>[3455](#fn_3454) we abstain from *taking*
sustenance.  The brethren who are in Gaul do not take males *for wives*,
nor those who are in Parthia two wives; nor do those who are in Judæa
circumcise themselves; nor do our sisters who are among the Geli consort
with strangers; nor do those *brethren* who are in Persia take their
daughters *for wives;* nor do those who are in Media abandon their dead,
or bury them alive, or give them as food to the dogs; nor do those who
are in Edessa kill their wives or their sisters when they commit
impurity, but they withdraw from them, and give them over to the
judgment of God; nor do those who are in Hatra <span
id="fr_3455"></span>[3456](#fn_3455) stone thieves *to death;* but,
wherever they are, and in whatever place they are *found*, the laws of
the *several* countries do not hinder them from obeying the law of their
*Sovereign*, Christ; nor does the Fate of the *celestial* Governors
compel them to make use of things which they regard as impure.

<span id="ix.xvi-p177"></span>“On the other hand, sickness and health,
and riches and poverty, things which are not within the scope of their
freedom, befall them wherever they are.  For although the freedom of man
is not influenced by the compulsion of the Seven, or, if at any time it
is influenced, it is able to withstand the influences exerted upon it,
yet, *on the other hand*, this *same* man, externally regarded, <span
id="fr_3456"></span>[3457](#fn_3456) cannot on the instant liberate
himself from the command of his Governors:  for he is a slave and in
subjection.  For, if we were able to do everything, we should ourselves
be everything; and, if we had not the power to do anything, we should be
the tools of others.

<span id="ix.xvi-p179"></span>“But, when God wills *them*, all things
are possible, *and they may take place* without hindrance:  for there is
nothing that can stay that Great and Holy Will.  For even those who
think that they *successfully* withstand it, do not with<span
id="page_734">p. 734</span> <span id="ix.xvi-Page_734"></span>stand it
by strength, but by wickedness and error.  And this may go on for a
little while, because He is kind and forbearing towards all beings that
exist, <span id="fr_3457"></span>[3458](#fn_3457) so as to let them
remain as they are, and be governed by their own will, whilst
notwithstanding they are held in check by the works which have been done
and by the arrangements which have been made for their help.  For this
well-ordered constitution of things <span
id="fr_3458"></span>[3459](#fn_3458) and *this* government which have
been instituted, and the intermingling of one with another, serve to
repress the violence of *these* beings, <span
id="fr_3459"></span>[3460](#fn_3459) so that they should not inflict
harm *on one another* to the full, nor yet to the full suffer harm, as
was the case with them before the creation of the world.  A time is also
coming when this *propensity to inflict* harm which still remains in
them shall be brought to an end, through the teaching which shall be
*given them* amidst intercourse of another kind.  And at the
establishment of that new world all evil commotions shall cease, and all
rebellions terminate, and the foolish shall be convinced, and all
deficiencies shall be filled up, and there shall be quietness and peace,
through the gift of the Lord of all existing beings.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p183"></span>*Here* endeth the Book of the Laws of
Countries.

<span id="ix.xvi-p184"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.xvi-p185"></span>Bardesan, therefore, an aged man, and one
celebrated for *his* knowledge of events, wrote, in a certain work which
was composed by him, concerning the synchronisms <span
id="fr_3460"></span>[3461](#fn_3460) with one another of the luminaries
of heaven, speaking as follows:—

<span id="ix.xvi-p187"></span>Two revolutions of Saturn, <span
id="fr_3461"></span>[3462](#fn_3461) 60 years;

<span id="ix.xvi-p189"></span>5 revolutions of Jupiter, 60 years;

<span id="ix.xvi-p190"></span>40 revolutions of Mars, 60 years;

<span id="ix.xvi-p191"></span>60 revolutions of the Sun, 60 years;

<span id="ix.xvi-p192"></span>72 revolutions of Venus, 60 years;

<span id="ix.xvi-p193"></span>150 revolutions of Mercury, 60 years;

<span id="ix.xvi-p194"></span>720 revolutions of the Moon, 60 years.

<span id="ix.xvi-p195"></span>And this,” says he, “is one synchronism of
them all; that is, the time of one *such* synchronism of them.  So that
from hence *it appears that* to *complete* 100 such synchronisms there
will be *required* six thousands of years.  Thus:—

<span id="ix.xvi-p196"></span>200 revolutions of Saturn, six thousands
of years;

<span id="ix.xvi-p197"></span>500 revolutions of Jupiter, 6 thousands of
years;

<span id="ix.xvi-p198"></span>4 thousand revolutions of Mars, 6
thousands of years;

<span id="ix.xvi-p199"></span>Six thousand revolutions of the Sun, 6
thousands of years;

<span id="ix.xvi-p200"></span>7 thousand and 200 revolutions of Venus, 6
thousands of years;

<span id="ix.xvi-p201"></span>12 thousand revolutions of Mercury, 6
thousands of years;

<span id="ix.xvi-p202"></span>72 thousand revolutions of the Moon, 6
thousands of years.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p203"></span>These things did Bardesan thus compute
when desiring to show that this world would stand only six thousands of
years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3354"></span>[723:3355](0081486.htm#fr_3354) <span
id="ix.xvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p4"></span> Lit. “Son of Daisan,” from a river so
called near Edessa.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xvi-p4.1"></span>Hahn</span>.  \[Elucidation I. “The Laws of
Countries” is the title.  For “Various Countries” I have used
“*Divers*.”\]

<span id="fn_3355"></span>[723:3356](0081486.htm#fr_3355) <span
id="ix.xvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p6"></span> Called by Eusebius, *Hist. Eccl*., iv. 30,
*The Discourse on Fate* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p6.1"></span>῾Ο περὶ εἱμαρμένης διάλογος</span>).  This is
more correct than the title above given:  the “Laws” are adduced only as
illustrations of the argument of the piece.  The subject would, however,
be more properly given as “The Freedom of the Will.”

<span id="fn_3356"></span>[723:3357](0081486.htm#fr_3356) <span
id="ix.xvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p8"></span> Lit. “going in.”  Cureton renders, “we went
up.”

<span id="fn_3357"></span>[723:3358](0081486.htm#fr_3357) <span
id="ix.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p9"></span> Lit. “felt him.”

<span id="fn_3358"></span>[723:3359](0081486.htm#fr_3358) <span
id="ix.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p10"></span> Lit. “before him.”  Merx:  “ehe er kam.”

<span id="fn_3359"></span>[723:3360](0081486.htm#fr_3359) <span
id="ix.xvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p17"></span> The word used is formed from the Greek
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.xvi-p17.1"></span>εὐσχημόνως</span>. 
\[Here observe what is said (in Elucidation I.) by Nöldke on the
Hellenization theory of Mommsen, with reference to this very work; p.
742, *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_3360"></span>[723:3361](0081486.htm#fr_3360) <span
id="ix.xvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p18"></span> Lit. “hast anything in thy mind.”

<span id="fn_3361"></span>[723:3362](0081486.htm#fr_3361) <span
id="ix.xvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p19"></span> Lit. “there are for thee other things
also.”

<span id="fn_3362"></span>[723:3363](0081486.htm#fr_3362) <span
id="ix.xvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p21"></span> \*\*\* is here substituted for the \*\*\*
of the text, which yields no sense.

<span id="fn_3363"></span>[724:3364](0081486.htm#fr_3363) <span
id="ix.xvi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p24"></span> Lit. “the wisdom of the truth.”

<span id="fn_3364"></span>[724:3365](0081486.htm#fr_3364) <span
id="ix.xvi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p25"></span> Lit. “are not able to stand.”

<span id="fn_3365"></span>[724:3366](0081486.htm#fr_3365) <span
id="ix.xvi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p27"></span> Or, “in the hand of the operator;” but it
is better to employ two words.

<span id="fn_3366"></span>[724:3367](0081486.htm#fr_3366) <span
id="ix.xvi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p28"></span> Or, “and the sphere.”

<span id="fn_3367"></span>[724:3368](0081486.htm#fr_3367) <span
id="ix.xvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p30"></span> The word \*\*\*, here used, occurs
subsequently as a designation of the Gnostic Æons.  Here, as Merx
observes, it can hardly go beyond its original meaning of *ens*,
*entia*, *Wesen*, *that which is*.  It evidently refers, however, in
this passage to a *system* of things, a world.

<span id="fn_3368"></span>[724:3369](0081486.htm#fr_3368) <span
id="ix.xvi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p31"></span> Lit. “required.”  \[It is a *phenomenon*
to find this early specimen of “anthropology” emanating from the far
East, and anticipating the Augustinian controversies on “fixed fate,
free-will, foreknowledge absolute.”  Yet the West did not originate the
discussion.  See vol. iv. p. 320.  See the ethical or metaphysical side
of free-will discussed in Eaton’s *Bampton Lectures* for 1872, p. 79,
ed. Pott, Young, & Co., New York, 1873.  On St. Augustine, see
Wordsworth’s valuable remarks in his *Bampton Lectures* for 1881.\]

<span id="fn_3369"></span>[724:3370](0081486.htm#fr_3369) <span
id="ix.xvi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p32"></span> [Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span id="ix.xvi-p32.1"></span>. 
The Hebrew itself, <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.xvi-p32.2"></span>סיהלא סלעב</span><span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.xvi-p32.3"></span>ֶ</span> <span id="ix.xvi-p32.4"></span>is
given in Syriac characters, without translation.

<span id="fn_3370"></span>[724:3371](0081486.htm#fr_3370) <span
id="ix.xvi-p32.5"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p33"></span> Cureton renders, “for which he is
created.”  Merx has, “das ihn gemacht hat.”

<span id="fn_3371"></span>[725:3372](0081486.htm#fr_3371) <span
id="ix.xvi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p35"></span> The Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p35.1"></span>στοιχεῖα</span>.

<span id="fn_3372"></span>[725:3373](0081486.htm#fr_3372) <span
id="ix.xvi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p39"></span> \*\*\*, that which exists, especially that
which has an independent existence, is used here of the Gnostic Æons. 
They were so called in respect of their pre-existence, their existence
independent of time or creation.  When they came to be “created,” or
more properly “fashioned,” they were called “emanations.”

<span id="fn_3373"></span>[725:3374](0081486.htm#fr_3373) <span
id="ix.xvi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p40"></span> Lit. “of their nature.”

<span id="fn_3374"></span>[725:3375](0081486.htm#fr_3374) <span
id="ix.xvi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p41"></span> Lit. “the strength of their exactness,”
i.e., their exact (or complete) strength.  Cureton has, “their force of
*energy*.”

<span id="fn_3375"></span>[725:3376](0081486.htm#fr_3375) <span
id="ix.xvi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p42"></span> “being lessened,” or “lowered.”

<span id="fn_3376"></span>[725:3377](0081486.htm#fr_3376) <span
id="ix.xvi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p45"></span> Lit. “do not take place by.”

<span id="fn_3377"></span>[725:3378](0081486.htm#fr_3377) <span
id="ix.xvi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p46"></span> Cureton renders, “have the use of his
hands:”  Merx gives “etwas erwirbt.”

<span id="fn_3378"></span>[725:3379](0081486.htm#fr_3378) <span
id="ix.xvi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p48"></span> Or “towns.”

<span id="fn_3379"></span>[725:3380](0081486.htm#fr_3379) <span
id="ix.xvi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p49"></span> Lit. “without ill-will.”

<span id="fn_3380"></span>[725:3381](0081486.htm#fr_3380) <span
id="ix.xvi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p50"></span> Lit. “every man in whom there is a soul.”

<span id="fn_3381"></span>[725:3382](0081486.htm#fr_3381) <span
id="ix.xvi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p51"></span> Lit. “can do rejoicing.”

<span id="fn_3382"></span>[725:3383](0081486.htm#fr_3382) <span
id="ix.xvi-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p52"></span> The Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p52.1"></span>ζιζάνια</span>.

<span id="fn_3383"></span>[725:3384](0081486.htm#fr_3383) <span
id="ix.xvi-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p55"></span> Lit. “a mind the son of the free.”

<span id="fn_3384"></span>[726:3385](0081486.htm#fr_3384) <span
id="ix.xvi-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p58"></span> Lit. “is the man’s own.”

<span id="fn_3385"></span>[726:3386](0081486.htm#fr_3385) <span
id="ix.xvi-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p59"></span> Lit. “is not sound in his nature.”

<span id="fn_3386"></span>[726:3387](0081486.htm#fr_3386) <span
id="ix.xvi-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p61"></span> Cureton, “for good hope.”  But \*\*\* is a
common expression for “in hope,” as in [Rom. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020)<span id="ix.xvi-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3387"></span>[726:3388](0081486.htm#fr_3387) <span
id="ix.xvi-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p64"></span> Lit. “did one deed.”

<span id="fn_3388"></span>[726:3389](0081486.htm#fr_3388) <span
id="ix.xvi-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p65"></span> Lit. “used one mind.”

<span id="fn_3389"></span>[726:3390](0081486.htm#fr_3389) <span
id="ix.xvi-p66.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p67"></span> Lit. “in whom there is a soul.”

<span id="fn_3390"></span>[726:3391](0081486.htm#fr_3390) <span
id="ix.xvi-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p68.1"></span>Φύσις</span>.

<span id="fn_3391"></span>[726:3392](0081486.htm#fr_3391) <span
id="ix.xvi-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p70"></span> Lit. “as children of the free.”

<span id="fn_3392"></span>[726:3393](0081486.htm#fr_3392) <span
id="ix.xvi-p70.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p71"></span> Lit. “in which there is a soul.”

<span id="fn_3393"></span>[727:3394](0081486.htm#fr_3393) <span
id="ix.xvi-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p73"></span> Lit. “let him see.”

<span id="fn_3394"></span>[727:3395](0081486.htm#fr_3394) <span
id="ix.xvi-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p74"></span> Lit. “patient,” i.e., tolerant of the
craving which seeks gratification.

<span id="fn_3395"></span>[727:3396](0081486.htm#fr_3395) <span
id="ix.xvi-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p75"></span> Lit. “in which they had stood.”

<span id="fn_3396"></span>[727:3397](0081486.htm#fr_3396) <span
id="ix.xvi-p76.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p77"></span> Or “volitions.”

<span id="fn_3397"></span>[727:3398](0081486.htm#fr_3397) <span
id="ix.xvi-p77.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p78"></span> Lit. “have stood in.”

<span id="fn_3398"></span>[727:3399](0081486.htm#fr_3398) <span
id="ix.xvi-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p79"></span> So Merx, “in either Rede.”  Cureton, “by a
vain plea.”

<span id="fn_3399"></span>[727:3400](0081486.htm#fr_3399) <span
id="ix.xvi-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p83"></span> Lit. “this knowledge of art (or skill).”

<span id="fn_3400"></span>[727:3401](0081486.htm#fr_3400) <span
id="ix.xvi-p83.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p84"></span> To what other work of his he refers is not
known.

<span id="fn_3401"></span>[727:3402](0081486.htm#fr_3401) <span
id="ix.xvi-p84.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p85"></span> Cureton, “is capable.”  Dr. Payne Smith
(*Thes. Syr*., s.v.) says, referring to \*\*\* as used in this passage: 
“*eget*, *cupit*, significare videtur.”

<span id="fn_3402"></span>[727:3403](0081486.htm#fr_3402) <span
id="ix.xvi-p85.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p86"></span> So Dr. Payne Smith.  Merx renders, “Even
that *which* men desire to do.”  Cureton has, “and the same men meditate
to do.”

<span id="fn_3403"></span>[727:3404](0081486.htm#fr_3403) <span
id="ix.xvi-p86.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p87"></span> Lit. “the sevenths.”

<span id="fn_3404"></span>[727:3405](0081486.htm#fr_3404) <span
id="ix.xvi-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p88"></span> Lit. “Chaldæans.”

<span id="fn_3405"></span>[727:3406](0081486.htm#fr_3405) <span
id="ix.xvi-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p90"></span> Lit. “my weakness.”

<span id="fn_3406"></span>[727:3407](0081486.htm#fr_3406) <span
id="ix.xvi-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p91"></span> Or “sects” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p91.1"></span>αἱρέσεις</span>).

<span id="fn_3407"></span>[727:3408](0081486.htm#fr_3407) <span
id="ix.xvi-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p92"></span> Lit. “rich.”

<span id="fn_3408"></span>[727:3409](0081486.htm#fr_3408) <span
id="ix.xvi-p92.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p93"></span> \*\*\*, Shlitâne.  \[Of Angels, see vol.
i. p. 269.\]

<span id="fn_3409"></span>[727:3410](0081486.htm#fr_3409) <span
id="ix.xvi-p93.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p94"></span> \*\*\*, Medabhrâne.  Merx, p. 74,
referring to the Peshito of [Gen. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016)<span id="ix.xvi-p94.1"></span>,
thinks that by the Potentates are meant the sun and moon, and by the
Governors the five planets.

<span id="fn_3410"></span>[728:3411](0081486.htm#fr_3410) <span
id="ix.xvi-p95.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p96"></span> \[The book of Job and the Book of
Ecclesiastes, with the eloquent and pathetic remonstrance (chap. iii.
18–22) “concerning the estate of the sons of men,” are proofs that God
foresaw the struggles of faith against the *apparently* unequal ways and
rulings of Providence.  For popular answers see Parnell’s *Hermit*, and
Addison, *Spectator*, No. 237.  But a valuable comment may be found in
Wordsworth’s *Bampton Lectures* (for 1881) *on the one Religion*, p. 5,
Oxford, Parker, 1881.\]

<span id="fn_3411"></span>[728:3412](0081486.htm#fr_3411) <span
id="ix.xvi-p99.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p100"></span> Merx renders \*\*\* by “emanation,”
quoting two passages from Eph. Syr. where the root \*\*\* is used of the
issuing of water from a fountain.  Dr. Payne Smith says:  “The word
seems to mean no more than *cursus*:  cf. Eusb., *Theoph*., i. 31. 5,
55. 1, 83, 22, where it is used of the stars; and i. 74. 13, where it
means the course of nature.”

<span id="fn_3412"></span>[728:3413](0081486.htm#fr_3412) <span
id="ix.xvi-p100.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p101"></span> Read \*\*\* for \*\*\*.

<span id="fn_3413"></span>[728:3414](0081486.htm#fr_3413) <span
id="ix.xvi-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p102"></span> Lit. “in their descents.”

<span id="fn_3414"></span>[728:3415](0081486.htm#fr_3414) <span
id="ix.xvi-p102.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p103"></span> Lit. “in their descents.”

<span id="fn_3415"></span>[728:3416](0081486.htm#fr_3415) <span
id="ix.xvi-p103.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p104"></span> Or “nativity,” “natal hour” (\*\*\* =
place of birth, “Geburtshaus:”  Merx).

<span id="fn_3416"></span>[728:3417](0081486.htm#fr_3416) <span
id="ix.xvi-p104.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p105"></span> Lit. “this agent of change.”  Cureton,
“this alternation.”  “Das diese Veränderung bewirkende Agens” is the
rendering of Merx.

<span id="fn_3417"></span>[728:3418](0081486.htm#fr_3417) <span
id="ix.xvi-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p106"></span> Dr. Payne Smith thinks the reference to
be to the Gnostic <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p106.1"></span>νοῦς</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p106.2"></span>ψυχή</span>, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p106.3"></span>σῶμα</span>, which seem to be spoken of just
before.  This difficult passage is rendered by Cureton:  “And this
alternation itself is called the Fortune, and the Nativity of this
assemblage, which is being sifted and purified for the assistance of
that which,” etc.  Merx has, “…<span id="ix.xvi-p106.4"></span>zur
Unterstützung des Dinges, welches…unterstützt worden ist und unterstützt
bleibt bis zur Vernichtung des Weltalls.”

<span id="fn_3418"></span>[728:3419](0081486.htm#fr_3418) <span
id="ix.xvi-p107.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p108"></span> Lit. “are Nature’s own.”

<span id="fn_3419"></span>[729:3420](0081486.htm#fr_3419) <span
id="ix.xvi-p109.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p110"></span> Lit. “a sufficiency in measure for all
bodies.”

<span id="fn_3420"></span>[729:3421](0081486.htm#fr_3420) <span
id="ix.xvi-p110.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p111"></span> Lit. “be heads to.”

<span id="fn_3421"></span>[729:3422](0081486.htm#fr_3421) <span
id="ix.xvi-p112.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p113"></span> Lit. “know ye distinctly.”

<span id="fn_3422"></span>[729:3423](0081486.htm#fr_3422) <span
id="ix.xvi-p113.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p114"></span> Or “heads.”

<span id="fn_3423"></span>[729:3424](0081486.htm#fr_3423) <span
id="ix.xvi-p114.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p115"></span> Lit. “agent of change,” as above.  Merx: 
“das Veränderungs-princip.”

<span id="fn_3424"></span>[729:3425](0081486.htm#fr_3424) <span
id="ix.xvi-p115.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p116"></span> Lit. “excellence.”

<span id="fn_3425"></span>[729:3426](0081486.htm#fr_3425) <span
id="ix.xvi-p116.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p117"></span> i.e., zones of the earth.  See p. 732,
note 2, *infra*.

<span id="fn_3426"></span>[729:3427](0081486.htm#fr_3426) <span
id="ix.xvi-p118.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p119"></span> Or, “power as to themselves.”

<span id="fn_3427"></span>[729:3428](0081486.htm#fr_3427) <span
id="ix.xvi-p121.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p122"></span> Lit. “the matter compels thee to be
convinced.”

<span id="fn_3428"></span>[729:3429](0081486.htm#fr_3428) <span
id="ix.xvi-p124.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p125"></span> Lit. “Chaldæans.”

<span id="fn_3429"></span>[730:3430](0081486.htm#fr_3429) <span
id="ix.xvi-p126.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p127"></span> Lit. “Chaldaism.”

<span id="fn_3430"></span>[730:3431](0081486.htm#fr_3430) <span
id="ix.xvi-p133.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p134"></span> The Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p134.1"></span>κλίμα</span>, denoting one of the seven belts
(see p. 732, below) into which the earth’s latitude was said to be
divided.  The Arabs also borrowed the word.

<span id="fn_3431"></span>[730:3432](0081486.htm#fr_3431) <span
id="ix.xvi-p134.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p135"></span> Or “family.”

<span id="fn_3432"></span>[730:3433](0081486.htm#fr_3432) <span
id="ix.xvi-p135.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p136"></span> That is, their own “houses,” as below. 
Each house had one of the heavenly bodies as its “lord,” who was
stronger, or better “located” in his own house than in any other.  Also,
of two planets equally strong in other respects, that which was in the
strongest house was the stronger.  The strength of the houses was
determined by the order in which they rose, the strongest being that
about to rise, which was called the ascendant.

<span id="fn_3433"></span>[730:3434](0081486.htm#fr_3433) <span
id="ix.xvi-p136.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p137"></span> Lit. “the signs of humanity.”

<span id="fn_3434"></span>[730:3435](0081486.htm#fr_3434) <span
id="ix.xvi-p138.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p139"></span> The text adds \*\*\*.

<span id="fn_3435"></span>[730:3436](0081486.htm#fr_3435) <span
id="ix.xvi-p139.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p140"></span> Lit. “while Mars was witness to them.”

<span id="fn_3436"></span>[731:3437](0081486.htm#fr_3436) <span
id="ix.xvi-p141.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p142"></span> The difficult word \*\*\* is not found in
the lexicons.  Dr. Payne Smith remarks that it could only come from
\*\*\*, which verb, however, throws away its \*\*\*, so that the form
would be \*\*\*.  He suggests, doubtfully, that the right reading is
\*\*\*, from \*\*\*, which is used occasionally for *appetite*, and
forms such an adjective in the sense of *animosus*, *animâ præditus*;
and that if so, it may, like \*\*\* in [Jude
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#019), [1 Cor.
15:44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#046)<span id="ix.xvi-p142.1"></span>,
be = <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.xvi-p142.2"></span>ψυχικοί</span>,
*having an animal nature*, *sensual*.  Eusebius and Cæsarius have <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.xvi-p142.3"></span>σπατάλους</span>, a word
of similar force.

<span id="fn_3437"></span>[731:3438](0081486.htm#fr_3437) <span
id="ix.xvi-p143.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p144"></span> Cureton’s rendering, “and some adorn
themselves,” etc., is not so good, as being a repetition of what has
already been said.  It is also doubtful whether the words can be so
construed.  The Greek of Eusebius gives the sense as in the text:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.xvi-p144.1"></span>κοσμοῦσαι πολλῷ χρυσῷ καὶ
λίθοις βαρυτίμοις τοὺς ἵππους</span>.  If \*\*\*, *horses*, be masc., or
masc. only, as Bernstein gives it, the participle should be altered to
the same gender.  But Dr. Payne Smith remarks that Amira in his Grammar
makes it fem.  Possibly the word takes both genders; possibly, too, the
women of Bactria rode on mares.

<span id="fn_3438"></span>[731:3439](0081486.htm#fr_3438) <span
id="ix.xvi-p144.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p145"></span> Lit. “possess.”

<span id="fn_3439"></span>[731:3440](0081486.htm#fr_3439) <span
id="ix.xvi-p145.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p146"></span> The zenith.

<span id="fn_3440"></span>[731:3441](0081486.htm#fr_3440) <span
id="ix.xvi-p147.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p148"></span> Lit. “name,” or “report.”

<span id="fn_3441"></span>[731:3442](0081486.htm#fr_3441) <span
id="ix.xvi-p149.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p150"></span> Lit. “made.”

<span id="fn_3442"></span>[731:3443](0081486.htm#fr_3442) <span
id="ix.xvi-p150.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p151"></span> Lit. “is not very angry.”

<span id="fn_3443"></span>[731:3444](0081486.htm#fr_3443) <span
id="ix.xvi-p152.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p153"></span> Eusebius has, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p153.1"></span>Παρ᾽ ῞Ελλησι δὲ καὶ οἱ σοφοὶ ἐρωμένους ἔχοντες
οὐ ψέγονται</span>.

<span id="fn_3444"></span>[731:3445](0081486.htm#fr_3444) <span
id="ix.xvi-p153.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p154"></span> Lit. “how many times.”

<span id="fn_3445"></span>[731:3446](0081486.htm#fr_3445) <span
id="ix.xvi-p155.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p156"></span> The text of Eusebius and the
*Recognitions* is followed, which agrees better with the context.  The
Syriac reads “Germans.”

<span id="fn_3446"></span>[732:3447](0081486.htm#fr_3446) <span
id="ix.xvi-p160.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p161"></span> So Eusebius:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p161.1"></span>ἀγχονιμαίῳ μόρῳ</span>.  Otherwise
“suffocation.”

<span id="fn_3447"></span>[732:3448](0081486.htm#fr_3447) <span
id="ix.xvi-p163.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p164"></span> So called from containing each ten of the
parts or degrees into which the zodiacal circle is divided.  Cf. Hahn,
*Bardesanes Gnosticus*, p. 72.

<span id="fn_3448"></span>[732:3449](0081486.htm#fr_3448) <span
id="ix.xvi-p164.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p165"></span> Lit. “who surround the whole world.”

<span id="fn_3449"></span>[732:3450](0081486.htm#fr_3449) <span
id="ix.xvi-p165.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p166"></span> Lit. “have been in all the winds.”

<span id="fn_3450"></span>[733:3451](0081486.htm#fr_3450) <span
id="ix.xvi-p167.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p168"></span> Lit. “for.”

<span id="fn_3451"></span>[733:3452](0081486.htm#fr_3451) <span
id="ix.xvi-p169.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p170"></span> Lit. “able.”

<span id="fn_3452"></span>[733:3453](0081486.htm#fr_3452) <span
id="ix.xvi-p170.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p171"></span> Lit. “commands.”

<span id="fn_3453"></span>[733:3454](0081486.htm#fr_3453) <span
id="ix.xvi-p172.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p173"></span> According to Neander, *General Church
History*, i. 109, this was the Abgar Bar Manu with whom Bardesan is said
to have stood very high.  His conversion is placed between 160 and 170
<span class="c9"><span id="ix.xvi-p173.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_3454"></span>[733:3455](0081486.htm#fr_3454) <span
id="ix.xvi-p174.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p175"></span> For \*\*\*, Merx, by omitting one \*\*\*,
gives \*\*\*, “readings.”  But what is meant is not clear.  Ephraem
Syrus ascribes certain compositions of this name to Bardesanes.  Cf.
Hahn, *Bard. Gnost*., p. 28.

<span id="fn_3455"></span>[733:3456](0081486.htm#fr_3455) <span
id="ix.xvi-p175.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p176"></span> Or “Hutra.”

<span id="fn_3456"></span>[733:3457](0081486.htm#fr_3456) <span
id="ix.xvi-p177.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p178"></span> Lit. “this man who is seen.”

<span id="fn_3457"></span>[734:3458](0081486.htm#fr_3457) <span
id="ix.xvi-p179.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p180"></span> Lit. “all natures.”

<span id="fn_3458"></span>[734:3459](0081486.htm#fr_3458) <span
id="ix.xvi-p180.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p181"></span> Lit. “this order.”

<span id="fn_3459"></span>[734:3460](0081486.htm#fr_3459) <span
id="ix.xvi-p181.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p182"></span> Lit. “natures.”

<span id="fn_3460"></span>[734:3461](0081486.htm#fr_3460) <span
id="ix.xvi-p185.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p186"></span> The Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xvi-p186.1"></span>σύνοδοι</span>.

<span id="fn_3461"></span>[734:3462](0081486.htm#fr_3461) <span
id="ix.xvi-p187.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p188"></span> The five planets are called by their
Greek names, <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.xvi-p188.1"></span>Κρόνος,
κ.τ.λ</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Letter of Mara, Son of Serapion.](0081487)
