[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081344)  [Next](0081346) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xix"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p1"></span> <span id="page_460">p. 460</span> <span
id="vii.xix-Page_460"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xix-p1.1"></span>The Report of Pilate the Procurator Concerning
Our Lord Jesus Christ.</span>

<span id="vii.xix-p2"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xix-p2.1"></span>Sent to the August <span
id="fr_2013"></span>[2014](#fn_2013) Cæsar in Rome.</span>

<span id="vii.xix-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xix-p5"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="vii.xix-p5.1"></span>First Greek Form.</span>

<span id="vii.xix-p6"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xix-p6.1"></span>In</span> those days, our Lord Jesus Christ
having been crucified under Pontius Pilate, procurator of Palestine and
Phœnicia, these records were made in Jerusalem as to what was done by
the Jews against the Lord.  Pilate therefore, along with his private
report, sent them to the Cæsar in Rome, writing thus:—

<span id="vii.xix-p7"></span>To the most mighty, venerable, most divine,
and most terrible, the august <span id="fr_2014"></span>[2015](#fn_2014)
Cæsar, Pilate the governor of the East *sends greeting*.  I have, O most
mighty, a narrative to give thee, on account of which I am seized with
fear and trembling.  For in this government of mine, of which one of the
cities is called Jerusalem, all the people of the Jews have delivered to
me a man named Jesus, bringing many charges against him, which they were
not able to convict him of by the consistency of their evidence.  And
one of the heresies they had against him was, that Jesus said that their
Sabbath should not be a day of leisure, and should not be observed.  For
he performed many cures on that day:  he made the blind receive their
sight, the lame walk; he raised up the dead, he cleansed the lepers; he
healed paralytics that were not at all able to make any movement of
their body, or to keep their nerves steady, but who had only speech and
the modulation of their voice, and he gave them the power of walking and
running, removing their illness by a single word.  Another thing again,
more powerful still, which is strange even with our gods: he raised up
one that had been dead four days, summoning him by a single word, when
the dead man had his blood corrupted, and when his body was destroyed by
the worms produced in it, and when it had the stink of a dog.  And
seeing him lying in the tomb, he ordered him to run.  Nor had he
anything of a dead body about him at all; but as a bridegroom from the
bridal chamber, so he came forth from the tomb filled with very great
fragrance.  And strangers that were manifestly demoniac, and that had
their dwelling in deserts, and ate their own flesh, living like beasts
and creeping things, even these he made to be dwellers in cities, and by
his word restored them to soundness of mind, and rendered them wise and
able and reputable, eating with all the enemies of the unclean spirits
that dwelt in them for their destruction, which he cast down into the
depths of the sea.  And again there was another having a withered hand;
and not the hand only, but rather the half of the body of the man, was
petrified, so that he had not the form of a man, or the power of moving
his body.  And him by a word he healed, and made sound.  And a woman
that had an issue of blood for many years, and whose joints <span
id="fr_2015"></span>[2016](#fn_2015) and veins were drained by the
flowing of the blood, so that she did not present the appearance of a
human being, but was like a corpse, and was speechless every day, so
that all the physicians of the district could not cure her.  For there
was not any hope of life left to her.  And when Jesus passed by, she
mysteriously received strength through his overshadowing her; and she
took hold of his fringe behind, and immediately in the same hour power
filled up what in her was empty, so that, no longer suffering any pain,
she began to run swiftly to her own city Kepharnaum, so as to accomplish
the journey in six days.

<span id="vii.xix-p10"></span>And these are the things which I lately
had in my mind to report, which Jesus accomplished on the Sabbath.  And
other signs greater than these he did, so that I have perceived that the
wonderful works done by him are greater than can be done by the gods
whom we worship.

<span id="vii.xix-p11"></span>And him Herod and Archelaus and Philip,
Annas and Caiaphas, with all the people, deliv<span id="page_461">p.
461</span> <span id="vii.xix-Page_461"></span>ered to me, making a great
uproar against me that I should try him.  I therefore ordered him to be
crucified, having first scourged him, and having found against him no
cause of evil accusations or deeds.

<span id="vii.xix-p12"></span>And at the time he was crucified there was
darkness over all the world, the sun being darkened at mid-day, and the
stars appearing, but in them there appeared no lustre; and the moon, as
if turned into blood, failed in her light.  And the world was swallowed
up by the lower regions, so that the very sanctuary of the temple, as
they call it, could not be seen by the Jews in their fall; and they saw
below them a chasm of the earth, with the roar of the thunders that fell
upon it. <span id="fr_2016"></span>[2017](#fn_2016)   And in that terror
dead men were seen that had risen, as the Jews themselves testified; and
they said that it was Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the twelve
patriarchs, and Moses and Job, that had died, as they say, three
thousand five hundred years before.  And there were very many whom I
also saw appearing in the body; and they were making a lamentation about
the Jews, on account of the wickedness that had come to pass through
them, and the destruction of the Jews and of their law.

<span id="vii.xix-p14"></span>And the fear of the earthquake remained
from the sixth hour of the preparation until the ninth hour.  And on the
evening of the first day of the week there was a sound out of the
heaven, so that the heaven became enlightened sevenfold more than all
the days.  And at the third hour of the night also the sun was seen
brighter than it had ever shone before, lighting up all the heaven.  And
as lightnings come suddenly in winter, so majestic men appeared <span
id="fr_2017"></span>[2018](#fn_2017) in glorious robes, an innumerable
multitude, whose voice was heard as that of a very great thunder, crying
out:  Jesus that was crucified is risen:  come up out of Hades, ye that
have been enslaved in the underground regions of Hades.  And the chasm
of the earth was as if it had no bottom; but it was as if the very
foundations of the earth appeared along with those that cried out in the
heavens, and walked about in the body in the midst of the dead that had
risen.  And he that raised up all the dead, and bound Hades, said:  Say
to my disciples, He goes before you into Galilee; there shall you see
him.

<span id="vii.xix-p16"></span>And all that night the light did not cease
shining.  And many of the Jews died, swallowed up in the chasm of the
earth, so that on the following day most of those who had been against
Jesus could not be found.  Others saw the appearing of those that had
risen, whom no one of us had ever seen. <span
id="fr_2018"></span>[2019](#fn_2018)   And only one <span
id="fr_2019"></span>[2020](#fn_2019) synagogue of the Jews was left in
this Jerusalem, since all disappeared in that fall.

<span id="vii.xix-p19"></span>With that terror, being in perplexity, and
seized with a most frightful trembling, I have written what I saw at
that time, and have reported to thy majesty.  Having set in order also
what was done by the Jews against Jesus, I have sent it, my lord, to thy
divinity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2013"></span>[460:2014](0081345.htm#fr_2013) <span
id="vii.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p3"></span> Or, Augustus.

<span id="fn_2014"></span>[460:2015](0081345.htm#fr_2014) <span
id="vii.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p8"></span> Or, Augustus.

<span id="fn_2015"></span>[460:2016](0081345.htm#fr_2015) <span
id="vii.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p9"></span> Codex A has a better reading—arteries. 
\[The<span class="c9"><span id="vii.xix-p9.1"></span>ms.</span> here
referred to is in Paris, of the fourteenth century (<span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xix-p9.2"></span>a.d.</span> 1315).—R.\]

<span id="fn_2016"></span>[461:2017](0081345.htm#fr_2016) <span
id="vii.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p13"></span> The text here is very corrupt.

<span id="fn_2017"></span>[461:2018](0081345.htm#fr_2017) <span
id="vii.xix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p15"></span> Or, so men appeared on high.

<span id="fn_2018"></span>[461:2019](0081345.htm#fr_2018) <span
id="vii.xix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p17"></span> This sentence also is very corrupt.

<span id="fn_2019"></span>[461:2020](0081345.htm#fr_2019) <span
id="vii.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p18"></span> Another and more probably reading is,
*not one*.  \[So B, a Paris<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xix-p18.1"></span>ms.</span> of the fourteenth century.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Report of Pilate the Procurator Concerning Our Lord Jesus
Christ:  Second Greek Form.](0081346)
