[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081302)  [Next](0081304) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xv.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xv.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.</span>

<span id="vii.xv.iii-p2"></span>And Pilate seeing, fear seized him, and
immediately he wished to rise from the tribunal.  And while he was
thinking of this, *viz*., to rise and go away, his wife sent to him,
saying:  Have nothing to do with that just man, <span
id="fr_1956"></span>[1957](#fn_1956) for I have suffered much on account
of him this night.  And Pilate, calling the Jews, said to them:  Ye know
that my wife is a worshipper of God, and in Judaism thinks rather with
you.  The Jews say to him:  So it is, and we know.  Pilate says to
them:  Lo, my wife has sent to me, saying:  Have nothing to do with that
just man, <span id="fr_1957"></span>[1958](#fn_1957) for I have suffered
much on account of him this night.  And the Jews answering, said to
Pilate:  Did we not say to thee that he is a magician?  Lo, he has sent
a vision of dreams to thy wife.

<span id="vii.xv.iii-p5"></span>Pilate called Jesus, and said to him: 
What is it that these witness against thee, and sayest thou nothing to
them?  And Jesus answered:  If they had not the power, they would not
speak.  Every one has power over his own mouth to say good and evil; let
them see <span id="fr_1958"></span>[1959](#fn_1958) *to it*.

<span id="vii.xv.iii-p7"></span>And the elders of the Jews answering,
say to Jesus:  What shall we see?  First, that thou wast born of
fornication; second, that at thy birth in Bethlehem there took place a
massacre of infants; third, that thy father Joseph and thy mother Mary
fled into Egypt, because they had no confidence in the people.

<span id="vii.xv.iii-p8"></span>Some of the bystanders, kind *men* of
the Jews, say:  We say that he was not born of fornication; but we know
that Mary was espoused to Joseph, and that he was not born of
fornication.  Pilate says to the Jews who said that he was of
fornication:  This speech of yours is not true, seeing that the
betrothal took place, as these of your nation say.  Annas and Caiaphas
say to Pilate:  We with all the multitude say that he was born of
fornication, and that he is a magician; but these are proselytes, and
his disciples.  And Pilate, calling Annas and Caiaphas, says to them: 
What are proselytes?  They say to him:  They have been born sons of the
Gen<span id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span
id="vii.xv.iii-Page_441"></span>tiles, and then have become Jews.  Then
answered those who testified that Jesus was not born of fornication,
Lazarus and Asterius, Antonius and James, Annes and Azaras, Samuel and
Isaac, Finees and Crispus, Agrippa and Judas:  We were not born
proselytes, but are sons of the Jews, and we speak the truth; for we
were present at the betrothal of Mary.

<span id="vii.xv.iii-p9"></span>And Pilate, calling to him those twelve
men who proved that Jesus had not been born of fornication, said to
them:  I adjure you by the health of Cæsar, tell me if it be true that
Jesus was not born of fornication.  They say to Pilate:  We have a law
not to swear, because it is a sin; but let them swear by the health of
Cæsar that it is not as we say, and we are worthy of death.  Then said
Pilate to Annas and Caiaphas:  Answer you nothing to those things which
these testify?  Annas and Caiaphas say to Pilate:  Those twelve are
believed that he is not born of fornication; we—all the people—cry out
that he was born of fornication, and is a magician, and says that he
himself is the Son of God and a king, and we are not believed.

<span id="vii.xv.iii-p10"></span>And Pilate ordered all the multitude to
go outside, except the twelve men who said that He was not born of
fornication, and ordered to separate Jesus from them.  And Pilate says
to them:  For what reason do the Jews wish to put Jesus to death?  And
they say to him:  They are angry because he heals on the Sabbath. 
Pilate said:  For a good work do they wish to put him to death?  They
say to him:  Yes, my lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1956"></span>[440:1957](0081303.htm#fr_1956) <span
id="vii.xv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.iii-p3"></span> Lit., nothing to thee and that just
man.

<span id="fn_1957"></span>[440:1958](0081303.htm#fr_1957) <span
id="vii.xv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.iii-p4"></span> Lit., nothing to thee and that just
man.

<span id="fn_1958"></span>[440:1959](0081303.htm#fr_1958) <span
id="vii.xv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.iii-p6"></span> Lit., they will see.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](0081304)
