[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb00700)  [Next](gb00901) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 8. Departmental Kings of Nature.

THE PRECEDING investigation has proved that the same union of sacred
functions with a royal title which meets us in the King of the Wood at
Nemi, the Sacrificial King at Rome, and the magistrate called the King
at Athens, occurs frequently outside the limits of classical antiquity
and is a common feature of societies at all stages from barbarism to
civilisation. Further, it appears that the royal priest is often a king,
not only in name but in fact, swaying the sceptre as well as the
crosier. All this confirms the traditional view of the origin of the
titular and priestly kings in the republics of ancient Greece and Italy.
At least by showing that the combination of spiritual and temporal
power, of which Graeco-Italian tradition preserved the memory, has
actually existed in many places, we have obviated any suspicion of
improbability that might have attached to the tradition. Therefore we
may now fairly ask, May not the King of the Wood have had an origin like
that which a probable tradition assigns to the Sacrificial King of Rome
and the titular King of Athens? In other words, may not his predecessors
in office have been a line of kings whom a republican revolution
stripped of their political power, leaving them only their religious
functions and the shadow of a crown? There are at least two reasons for
answering this question in the negative. One reason is drawn from the
abode of the priest of Nemi; the other from his title, the King of the
Wood. If his predecessors had been kings in the ordinary sense, he would
surely have been found residing, like the fallen kings of Rome and
Athens, in the city of which the sceptre had passed from him. This city
must have been Aricia, for there was none nearer. But Aricia was three
miles off from his forest sanctuary by the lake shore. If he reigned, it
was not in the city, but in the greenwood. Again his title, King of the
Wood, hardly allows us to suppose that he had ever been a king in the
common sense of the word. More likely he was a king of nature, and of a
special side of nature, namely, the woods from which he took his title.
If we could find instances of what we may call departmental kings of
nature, that is of persons supposed to rule over particular elements or
aspects of nature, they would probably present a closer analogy to the
King of the Wood than the divine kings we have been hitherto
considering, whose control of nature is general rather than special.
Instances of such departmental kings are not wanting.   1

  On a hill at Bomma near the mouth of the Congo dwells Namvulu Vumu,
King of the Rain and Storm. Of some of the tribes on the Upper Nile we
are told that they have no kings in the common sense; the only persons
whom they acknowledge as such are the Kings of the Rain, Mata Kodou, who
are credited with the power of giving rain at the proper time, that is,
the rainy season. Before the rains begin to fall at the end of March the
country is a parched and arid desert; and the cattle, which form the
people’s chief wealth, perish for lack of grass. So, when the end of
March draws on, each householder betakes himself to the King of the Rain
and offers him a cow that he may make the blessed waters of heaven to
drip on the brown and withered pastures. If no shower falls, the people
assemble and demand that the king shall give them rain; and if the sky
still continues cloudless, they rip up his belly, in which he is
believed to keep the storms. Amongst the Bari tribe one of these Rain
Kings made rain by sprinkling water on the ground out of a handbell.   2

  Among tribes on the outskirts of Abyssinia a similar office exists and
has been thus described by an observer: “The priesthood of the Alfai, as
he is called by the Barea and Kunama, is a remarkable one; he is
believed to be able to make rain. This office formerly existed among the
Algeds and appears to be still common to the Nuba negroes. The Alfai of
the Barea, who is also consulted by the northern Kunama, lives near
Tembadere on a mountain alone with his family. The people bring him
tribute in the form of clothes and fruits, and cultivate for him a large
field of his own. He is a kind of king, and his office passes by
inheritance to his brother or sister’s son. He is supposed to conjure
down rain and to drive away the locusts. But if he disappoints the
people’s expectation and a great drought arises in the land, the Alfai
is stoned to death, and his nearest relations are obliged to cast the
first stone at him. When we passed through the country, the office of
Alfai was still held by an old man; but I heard that rain-making had
proved too dangerous for him and that he had renounced his office.”   3

  In the backwoods of Cambodia live two mysterious sovereigns known as
the King of the Fire and the King of the Water. Their fame is spread all
over the south of the great Indo-Chinese peninsula; but only a faint
echo of it has reached the West. Down to a few years ago no European, so
far as is known, had ever seen either of them; and their very existence
might have passed for a fable, were it not that till lately
communications were regularly maintained between them and the King of
Cambodia, who year by year exchanged presents with them. Their royal
functions are of a purely mystic or spiritual order; they have no
political authority; they are simple peasants, living by the sweat of
their brow and the offerings of the faithful. According to one account
they live in absolute solitude, never meeting each other and never
seeing a human face. They inhabit successively seven towers perched upon
seven mountains, and every year they pass from one tower to another.
People come furtively and cast within their reach what is needful for
their subsistence. The kingship lasts seven years, the time necessary to
inhabit all the towers successively; but many die before their time is
out. The offices are hereditary in one or (according to others) two
royal families, who enjoy high consideration, have revenues assigned to
them, and are exempt from the necessity of tilling the ground. But
naturally the dignity is not coveted, and when a vacancy occurs, all
eligible men (they must be strong and have children) flee and hide
themselves. Another account, admitting the reluctance of the hereditary
candidates to accept the crown, does not countenance the report of their
hermit-like seclusion in the seven towers. For it represents the people
as prostrating themselves before the mystic kings whenever they appear
in public, it being thought that a terrible hurricane would burst over
the country if this mark of homage were omitted. Like many other sacred
kings, of whom we shall read in the sequel, the Kings of Fire and Water
are not allowed to die a natural death, for that would lower their
reputation. Accordingly when one of them is seriously ill, the elders
hold a consultation and if they think he cannot recover they stab him to
death. His body is burned and the ashes are piously collected and
publicly honoured for five years. Part of them is given to the widow,
and she keeps them in an urn, which she must carry on her back when she
goes to weep on her husband’s grave.   4

  We are told that the Fire King, the more important of the two, whose
supernatural powers have never been questioned, officiates at marriages,
festivals, and sacrifices in honour of the Yan or spirit. On these
occasions a special place is set apart for him; and the path by which he
approaches is spread with white cotton cloths. A reason for confining
the royal dignity to the same family is that this family is in
possession of certain famous talismans which would lose their virtue or
disappear if they passed out of the family. These talismans are three:
the fruit of a creeper called Cui, gathered ages ago at the time of the
last deluge, but still fresh and green; a rattan, also very old but
bearing flowers that never fade; and lastly, a sword containing a Yan or
spirit, who guards it constantly and works miracles with it. The spirit
is said to be that of a slave, whose blood chanced to fall upon the
blade while it was being forged, and who died a voluntary death to
expiate his involuntary offence. By means of the two former talismans
the Water King can raise a flood that would drown the whole earth. If
the Fire King draws the magic sword a few inches from its sheath, the
sun is hidden and men and beasts fall into a profound sleep; were he to
draw it quite out of the scabbard, the world would come to an end. To
this wondrous brand sacrifices of buffaloes, pigs, fowls, and ducks are
offered for rain. It is kept swathed in cotton and silk; and amongst the
annual presents sent by the King of Cambodia were rich stuffs to wrap
the sacred sword.   5

  Contrary to the common usage of the country, which is to bury the
dead, the bodies of both these mystic monarchs are burnt, but their
nails and some of their teeth and bones are religiously preserved as
amulets. It is while the corpse is being consumed on the pyre that the
kinsmen of the deceased magician flee to the forest and hide themselves,
for fear of being elevated to the invidious dignity which he has just
vacated. The people go and search for them, and the first whose lurking
place they discover is made King of Fire or Water.   6

  These, then, are examples of what I have called departmental kings of
nature. But it is a far cry to Italy from the forests of Cambodia and
the sources of the Nile. And though Kings of Rain, Water, and Fire have
been found, we have still to discover a King of the Wood to match the
Arician priest who bore that title. Perhaps we shall find him nearer
home.   7
