[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb00800)  [Next](gb00902.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 9. The Worship of Trees.

## Section 1. Tree-spirits.

IN THE RELIGIOUS history of the Aryan race in Europe the worship of
trees has played an important part. Nothing could be more natural. For
at the dawn of history Europe was covered with immense primaeval
forests, in which the scattered clearings must have appeared like islets
in an ocean of green. Down to the first century before our era the
Hercynian forest stretched eastward from the Rhine for a distance at
once vast and unknown; Germans whom Caesar questioned had travelled for
two months through it without reaching the end. Four centuries later it
was visited by the Emperor Julian, and the solitude, the gloom, the
silence of the forest appear to have made a deep impression on his
sensitive nature. He declared that he knew nothing like it in the Roman
empire. In our own country the wealds of Kent, Surrey, and Sussex are
remnants of the great forest of Anderida, which once clothed the whole
of the south-eastern portion of the island. Westward it seems to have
stretched till it joined another forest that extended from Hampshire to
Devon. In the reign of Henry II. the citizens of London still hunted the
wild bull and the boar in the woods of Hampstead. Even under the later
Plantagenets the royal forests were sixty-eight in number. In the forest
of Arden it was said that down to modern times a squirrel might leap
from tree to tree for nearly the whole length of Warwickshire. The
excavation of ancient pile-villages in the valley of the Po has shown
that long before the rise and probably the foundation of Rome the north
of Italy was covered with dense woods of elms, chestnuts, and especially
of oaks. Archaeology is here confirmed by history; for classical writers
contain many references to Italian forests which have now disappeared.
As late as the fourth century before our era Rome was divided from
central Etruria by the dreaded Ciminian forest, which Livy compares to
the woods of Germany. No merchant, if we may trust the Roman historian,
had ever penetrated its pathless solitudes; and it was deemed a most
daring feat when a Roman general, after sending two scouts to explore
its intricacies, led his army into the forest and, making his way to a
ridge of the wooded mountains, looked down on the rich Etrurian fields
spread out below. In Greece beautiful woods of pine, oak, and other
trees still linger on the slopes of the high Arcadian mountains, still
adorn with their verdure the deep gorge through which the Ladon hurries
to join the sacred Alpheus, and were still, down to a few years ago,
mirrored in the dark blue waters of the lonely lake of Pheneus; but they
are mere fragments of the forests which clothed great tracts in
antiquity, and which at a more remote epoch may have spanned the Greek
peninsula from sea to sea.   1

  From an examination of the Teutonic words for “temple” Grimm has made
it probable that amongst the Germans the oldest sanctuaries were natural
woods. However that may be, tree-worship is well attested for all the
great European families of the Aryan stock. Amongst the Celts the
oak-worship of the Druids is familiar to every one, and their old word
for sanctuary seems to be identical in origin and meaning with the Latin
nemus, a grove or woodland glade, which still survives in the name of
Nemi. Sacred groves were common among the ancient Germans, and
tree-worship is hardly extinct amongst their descendants at the present
day. How serious that worship was in former times may be gathered from
the ferocious penalty appointed by the old German laws for such as dared
to peel the bark of a standing tree. The culprit’s navel was to be cut
out and nailed to the part of the tree which he had peeled, and he was
to be driven round and round the tree till all his guts were wound about
its trunk. The intention of the punishment clearly was to replace the
dead bark by a living substitute taken from the culprit; it was a life
for a life, the life of a man for the life of a tree. At Upsala, the old
religious capital of Sweden, there was a sacred grove in which every
tree was regarded as divine. The heathen Slavs worshipped trees and
groves. The Lithuanians were not converted to Christianity till towards
the close of the fourteenth century, and amongst them at the date of
their conversion the worship of trees was prominent. Some of them
revered remarkable oaks and other great shady trees, from which they
received oracular responses. Some maintained holy groves about their
villages or houses, where even to break a twig would have been a sin.
They thought that he who cut a bough in such a grove either died
suddenly or was crippled in one of his limbs. Proofs of the prevalence
of tree-worship in ancient Greece and Italy are abundant. In the
sanctuary of Aesculapius at Cos, for example, it was forbidden to cut
down the cypress-trees under a penalty of a thousand drachms. But
nowhere, perhaps, in the ancient world was this antique form of religion
better preserved than in the heart of the great metropolis itself. In
the Forum, the busy centre of Roman life, the sacred fig-tree of Romulus
was worshipped down to the days of the empire, and the withering of its
trunk was enough to spread consternation through the city. Again, on the
slope of the Palatine Hill grew a cornel-tree which was esteemed one of
the most sacred objects in Rome. Whenever the tree appeared to a
passer-by to be drooping, he set up a hue and cry which was echoed by
the people in the street, and soon a crowd might be seen running
helter-skelter from all sides with buckets of water, as if (says
Plutarch) they were hastening to put out a fire.   2

  Among the tribes of the Finnish-Ugrian stock in Europe the heathen
worship was performed for the most part in sacred groves, which were
always enclosed with a fence. Such a grove often consisted merely of a
glade or clearing with a few trees dotted about, upon which in former
times the skins of the sacrificial victims were hung. The central point
of the grove, at least among the tribes of the Volga, was the sacred
tree, beside which everything else sank into insignificance. Before it
the worshippers assembled and the priest offered his prayers, at its
roots the victim was sacrificed, and its boughs sometimes served as a
pulpit. No wood might be hewn and no branch broken in the grove, and
women were generally forbidden to enter it.   3

  But it is necessary to examine in some detail the notions on which the
worship of trees and plants is based. To the savage the world in general
is animate, and trees and plants are no exception to the rule. He thinks
that they have souls like his own, and he treats them accordingly. “They
say,” writes the ancient vegetarian Porphyry, “that primitive men led an
unhappy life, for their superstition did not stop at animals but
extended even to plants. For why should the slaughter of an ox or a
sheep be a greater wrong than the felling of a fir or an oak, seeing
that a soul is implanted in these trees also?” Similarly, the Hidatsa
Indians of North America believe that every natural object has its
spirit, or to speak more properly, its shade. To these shades some
consideration or respect is due, but not equally to all. For example,
the shade of the cottonwood, the greatest tree in the valley of the
Upper Missouri, is supposed to possess an intelligence which, if
properly approached, may help the Indians in certain undertakings; but
the shades of shrubs and grasses are of little account. When the
Missouri, swollen by a freshet in spring, carries away part of its banks
and sweeps some tall tree into its current, it is said that the spirit
of the tree cries, while the roots still cling to the land and until the
trunk falls with a splash into the stream. Formerly the Indians
considered it wrong to fell one of these giants, and when large logs
were needed they made use only of trees which had fallen of themselves.
Till lately some of the more credulous old men declared that many of the
misfortunes of their people were caused by this modern disregard for the
rights of the living cottonwood. The Iroquois believed that each species
of tree, shrub, plant, and herb had its own spirit, and to these spirits
it was their custom to return thanks. The Wanika of Eastern Africa fancy
that every tree, and especially every coco-nut tree, has its spirit;
“the destruction of a cocoa-nut tree is regarded as equivalent to
matricide, because that tree gives them life and nourishment, as a
mother does her child.” Siamese monks, believing that there are souls
everywhere, and that to destroy anything whatever is forcibly to
dispossess a soul, will not break a branch of a tree, “as they will not
break the arm of an innocent person.” These monks, of course, are
Buddhists. But Buddhist animism is not a philosophical theory. It is
simply a common savage dogma incorporated in the system of an historical
religion. To suppose, with Benfey and others, that the theories of
animism and transmigration current among rude peoples of Asia are
derived from Buddhism, is to reverse the facts.   4

  Sometimes it is only particular sorts of trees that are supposed to be
tenanted by spirits. At Grbalj in Dalmatia it is said that among great
beeches, oaks, and other trees there are some that are endowed with
shades or souls, and whoever fells one of them must die on the spot, or
at least live an invalid for the rest of his days. If a woodman fears
that a tree which he has felled is one of this sort, he must cut off the
head of a live hen on the stump of the tree with the very same axe with
which he cut down the tree. This will protect him from all harm, even if
the tree be one of the animated kind. The silk-cotton trees, which rear
their enormous trunks to a stupendous height, far out-topping all the
other trees of the forest, are regarded with reverence throughout West
Africa, from the Senegal to the Niger, and are believed to be the abode
of a god or spirit. Among the Ewespeaking peoples of the Slave Coast the
indwelling god of this giant of the forest goes by the name of Huntin.
Trees in which he specially dwells—for it is not every silk-cotton tree
that he thus honours—are surrounded by a girdle of palm-leaves; and
sacrifices of fowls, and occasionally of human beings, are fastened to
the trunk or laid against the foot of the tree. A tree distinguished by
a girdle of palm-leaves may not be cut down or injured in any way; and
even silk-cotton trees which are not supposed to be animated by Huntin
may not be felled unless the woodman first offers a sacrifice of fowls
and palm-oil to purge himself of the proposed sacrilege. To omit the
sacrifice is an offence which may be punished with death. Among the
Kangra mountains of the Punjaub a girl used to be annually sacrificed to
an old cedar-tree, the families of the village taking it in turn to
supply the victim. The tree was cut down not very many years ago.   5

  If trees are animate, they are necessarily sensitive and the cutting
of them down becomes a delicate surgical operation, which must be
performed with as tender a regard as possible for the feelings of the
sufferers, who otherwise may turn and rend the careless or bungling
operator. When an oak is being felled “it gives a kind of shriekes or
groanes, that may be heard a mile off, as if it were the genius of the
oake lamenting. E. Wyld, Esq., hath heard it severall times.” The
Ojebways “very seldom cut down green or living trees, from the idea that
it puts them to pain, and some of their medicine-men profess to have
heard the wailing of the trees under the axe.” Trees that bleed and
utter cries of pain or indignation when they are hacked or burned occur
very often in Chinese books, even in Standard Histories. Old peasants in
some parts of Austria still believe that forest-trees are animate, and
will not allow an incision to be made in the bark without special cause;
they have heard from their fathers that the tree feels the cut not less
than a wounded man his hurt. In felling a tree they beg its pardon. It
is said that in the Upper Palatinate also old woodmen still secretly ask
a fine, sound tree to forgive them before they cut it down. So in
Jarkino the woodman craves pardon of the tree he fells. Before the
Ilocanes of Luzon cut down trees in the virgin forest or on the
mountains, they recite some verses to the following effect: “Be not
uneasy, my friend, though we fell what we have been ordered to fell.”
This they do in order not to draw down on themselves the hatred of the
spirits who live in the trees, and who are apt to avenge themselves by
visiting with grievous sickness such as injure them wantonly. The Basoga
of Central Africa think that, when a tree is cut down, the angry spirit
which inhabits it may cause the death of the chief and his family. To
prevent this disaster they consult a medicine-man before they fell a
tree. If the man of skill gives leave to proceed, the woodman first
offers a fowl and a goat to the tree; then as soon as he has given the
first blow with the axe, he applies his mouth to the cut and sucks some
of the sap. In this way he forms a brotherhood with the tree, just as
two men become blood-brothers by sucking each other’s blood. After that
he can cut down his tree-brother with impunity.   6

  But the spirits of vegetation are not always treated with deference
and respect. If fair words and kind treatment do not move them, stronger
measures are sometimes resorted to. The durian-tree of the East Indies,
whose smooth stem often shoots up to a height of eighty or ninety feet
without sending out a branch, bears a fruit of the most delicious
flavour and the most disgusting stench. The Malays cultivate the tree
for the sake of its fruit, and have been known to resort to a peculiar
ceremony for the purpose of stimulating its fertility. Near Jugra in
Selangor there is a small grove of durian-trees, and on a specially
chosen day the villagers used to assemble in it. Thereupon one of the
local sorcerers would take a hatchet and deliver several shrewd blows on
the trunk of the most barren of the trees, saying, “Will you now bear
fruit or not? If you do not, I shall fell you.” To this the tree replied
through the mouth of another man who had climbed a mangostin-tree hard
by (the durian-tree being unclimbable), “Yes, I will now bear fruit; I
beg of you not to fell me.” So in Japan to make trees bear fruit two men
go into an orchard. One of them climbs up a tree and the other stands at
the foot with an axe. The man with the axe asks the tree whether it will
yield a good crop next year and threatens to cut it down if it does not.
To this the man among the branches replies on behalf of the tree that it
will bear abundantly. Odd as this mode of horticulture may seem to us,
it has its exact parallels in Europe. On Christmas Eve many a South
Slavonian and Bulgarian peasant swings an axe threateningly against a
barren fruit-tree, while another man standing by intercedes for the
menaced tree, saying, “Do not cut it down; it will soon bear fruit.”
Thrice the axe is swung, and thrice the impending blow is arrested at
the entreaty of the intercessor. After that the frightened tree will
certainly bear fruit next year.   7

  The conception of trees and plants as animated beings naturally
results in treating them as male and female, who can be married to each
other in a real, and not merely a figurative or poetical, sense of the
word. The notion is not purely fanciful, for plants like animals have
their sexes and reproduce their kind by the union of the male and female
elements. But whereas in all the higher animals the organs of the two
sexes are regularly separated between different individuals, in most
plants they exist together in every individual of the species. This
rule, however, is by no means universal, and in many species the male
plant is distinct from the female. The distinction appears to have been
observed by some savages, for we are told that the Maoris “are
acquainted with the sex of trees, etc., and have distinct names for the
male and female of some trees.” The ancients knew the difference between
the male and the female date-palm, and fertilised them artificially by
shaking the pollen of the male tree over the flowers of the female. The
fertilisation took place in spring. Among the heathen of Harran the
month during which the palms were fertilised bore the name of the Date
Month, and at this time they celebrated the marriage festival of all the
gods and goddesses. Different from this true and fruitful marriage of
the palm are the false and barren marriages of plants which play a part
in Hindoo superstition. For example, if a Hindoo has planted a grove of
mangos, neither he nor his wife may taste of the fruit until he has
formally married one of the trees, as a bridegroom, to a tree of a
different sort, commonly a tamarind-tree, which grows near it in the
grove. If there is no tamarind to act as bride, a jasmine will serve the
turn. The expenses of such a marriage are often considerable, for the
more Brahmans are feasted at it, the greater the glory of the owner of
the grove. A family has been known to sell its golden and silver
trinkets, and to borrow all the money they could in order to marry a
mango-tree to a jasmine with due pomp and ceremony. On Christmas Eve
German peasants used to tie fruit-trees together with straw ropes to
make them bear fruit, saying that the trees were thus married.   8

  In the Moluccas, when the clove-trees are in blossom, they are treated
like pregnant women. No noise may be made near them; no light or fire
may be carried past them at night; no one may approach them with his hat
on, all must uncover in their presence. These precautions are observed
lest the tree should be alarmed and bear no fruit, or should drop its
fruit too soon, like the untimely delivery of a woman who has been
frightened in her pregnancy. So in the East the growing rice-crop is
often treated with the same considerate regard as a breeding woman. Thus
in Amboyna, when the rice is in bloom, the people say that it is
pregnant and fire no guns and make no other noises near the field, for
fear lest, if the rice were thus disturbed, it would miscarry, and the
crop would be all straw and no grain.   9

  Sometimes it is the souls of the dead which are believed to animate
trees. The Dieri tribe of Central Australia regard as very sacred
certain trees which are supposed to be their fathers transformed; hence
they speak with reverence of these trees, and are careful that they
shall not be cut down or burned. If the settlers require them to hew
down the trees, they earnestly protest against it, asserting that were
they to do so they would have no luck, and might be punished for not
protecting their ancestors. Some of the Philippine Islanders believe
that the souls of their ancestors are in certain trees, which they
therefore spare. If they are obliged to fell one of these trees, they
excuse themselves to it by saying that it was the priest who made them
do it. The spirits take up their abode, by preference, in tall and
stately trees with great spreading branches. When the wind rustles the
leaves, the natives fancy it is the voice of the spirit; and they never
pass near one of these trees without bowing respectfully, and asking
pardon of the spirit for disturbing his repose. Among the Ignorrotes,
every village has its sacred tree, in which the souls of the dead
forefathers of the hamlet reside. Offerings are made to the tree, and
any injury done to it is believed to entail some misfortune on the
village. Were the tree cut down, the village and all its inhabitants
would inevitably perish.   10

  In Corea the souls of people who die of the plague or by the roadside,
and of women who expire in childbirth, invariably take up their abode in
trees. To such spirits offerings of cake, wine, and pork are made on
heaps of stones piled under the trees. In China it has been customary
from time immemorial to plant trees on graves in order thereby to
strengthen the soul of the deceased and thus to save his body from
corruption; and as the evergreen cypress and pine are deemed to be
fuller of vitality than other trees, they have been chosen by preference
for this purpose. Hence the trees that grow on graves are sometimes
identified with the souls of the departed. Among the Miao-Kia, an
aboriginal race of Southern and Western China, a sacred tree stands at
the entrance of every village, and the inhabitants believe that it is
tenanted by the soul of their first ancestor and that it rules their
destiny. Sometimes there is a sacred grove near a village, where the
trees are suffered to rot and die on the spot. Their fallen branches
cumber the ground, and no one may remove them unless he has first asked
leave of the spirit of the tree and offered him a sacrifice. Among the
Maraves of Southern Africa the burial-ground is always regarded as a
holy place where neither a tree may be felled nor a beast killed,
because everything there is supposed to be tenanted by the souls of the
dead.   11

  In most, if not all, of these cases the spirit is viewed as
incorporate in the tree; it animates the tree and must suffer and die
with it. But, according to another and probably later opinion, the tree
is not the body, but merely the abode of the tree-spirit, which can quit
it and return to it at pleasure. The inhabitants of Siaoo, an East
Indian island, believe in certain sylvan spirits who dwell in forests or
in great solitary trees. At full moon the spirit comes forth from his
lurking-place and roams about. He has a big head, very long arms and
legs, and a ponderous body. In order to propitiate the wood-spirits
people bring offerings of food, fowls, goats, and so forth to the places
which they are supposed to haunt. The people of Nias think that, when a
tree dies, its liberated spirit becomes a demon, which can kill a
coco-nut palm by merely lighting on its branches, and can cause the
death of all the children in a house by perching on one of the posts
that support it. Further, they are of opinion that certain trees are at
all times inhabited by roving demons who, if the trees were damaged,
would be set free to go about on errands of mischief. Hence the people
respect these trees, and are careful not to cut them down.   12

  Not a few ceremonies observed at cutting down haunted trees are based
on the belief that the spirits have it in their power to quit the trees
at pleasure or in case of need. Thus when the Pelew Islanders are
felling a tree, they conjure the spirit of the tree to leave it and
settle on another. The wily negro of the Slave Coast, who wishes to fell
an ashorin tree, but knows that he cannot do it so long as the spirit
remains in the tree, places a little palm-oil on the ground as a bait,
and then, when the unsuspecting spirit has quitted the tree to partake
of this dainty, hastens to cut down its late abode. When the Toboongkoos
of Celebes are about to clear a piece of forest in order to plant rice,
they build a tiny house and furnish it with tiny clothes and some food
and gold. Then they call together all the spirits of the wood, offer
them the little house with its contents, and beseech them to quit the
spot. After that they may safely cut down the wood without fearing to
wound themselves in so doing. Before the Tomori, another tribe of
Celebes, fell a tall tree they lay a quid of betel at its foot, and
invite the spirit who dwells in the tree to change his lodging;
moreover, they set a little ladder against the trunk to enable him to
descend with safety and comfort. The Mandelings of Sumatra endeavour to
lay the blame of all such misdeeds at the door of the Dutch authorities.
Thus when a man is cutting a road through a forest and has to fell a
tall tree which blocks the way, he will not begin to ply his axe until
he has said: “Spirit who lodgest in this tree, take it not ill that I
cut down thy dwelling, for it is done at no wish of mine but by order of
the Controller.” And when he wishes to clear a piece of forest-land for
cultivation, it is necessary that he should come to a satisfactory
understanding with the woodland spirits who live there before he lays
low their leafy dwellings. For this purpose he goes to the middle of the
plot of ground, stoops down, and pretends to pick up a letter. Then
unfolding a bit of paper he reads aloud an imaginary letter from the
Dutch Government, in which he is strictly enjoined to set about clearing
the land without delay. Having done so, he says: “You hear that,
spirits. I must begin clearing at once, or I shall be hanged.”   13

  Even when a tree has been felled, sawn into planks, and used to build
a house, it is possible that the woodland spirit may still be lurking in
the timber, and accordingly some people seek to propitiate him before or
after they occupy the new house. Hence, when a new dwelling is ready the
Toradjas of Celebes kill a goat, a pig, or a buffalo, and smear all the
woodwork with its blood. If the building is a lobo or spirit-house, a
fowl or a dog is killed on the ridge of the roof, and its blood allowed
to flow down on both sides. The ruder Tonapoo in such a case sacrifice a
human being on the roof. This sacrifice on the roof of a lobo or temple
serves the same purpose as the smearing of blood on the woodwork of an
ordinary house. The intention is to propitiate the forest-spirits who
may still be in the timber; they are thus put in good humour and will do
the inmates of the house no harm. For a like reason people in Celebes
and the Moluccas are much afraid of planting a post upside down at the
building of a house; for the forest-spirit, who might still be in the
timber, would very naturally resent the indignity and visit the inmates
with sickness. The Kayans of Borneo are of opinion that tree-spirits
stand very stiffly on the point of honour and visit men with their
displeasure for any injury done to them. Hence after building a house,
whereby they have been forced to ill-treat many trees, these people
observe a period of penance for a year during which they must abstain
from many things, such as the killing of bears, tiger-cats, and
serpents.   14
