[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb00302)  [Next](gb00304) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 3. Sympathetic Magic.

## Section 3. Contagious Magic.

THUS far we have been considering chiefly that branch of sympathetic
magic which may be called homoeopathic or imitative. Its leading
principle, as we have seen, is that like produces like, or, in other
words, that an effect resembles its cause. The other great branch of
sympathetic magic, which I have called Contagious Magic, proceeds upon
the notion that things which have once been conjoined must remain ever
afterwards, even when quite dissevered from each other, in such a
sympathetic relation that whatever is done to the one must similarly
affect the other. Thus the logical basis of Contagious Magic, like that
of Homoeopathic Magic, is a mistaken association of ideas; its physical
basis, if we may speak of such a thing, like the physical basis of
Homoeopathic Magic, is a material medium of some sort which, like the
ether of modern physics, is assumed to unite distant objects and to
convey impressions from one to the other. The most familiar example of
Contagious Magic is the magical sympathy which is supposed to exist
between a man and any severed portion of his person, as his hair or
nails; so that whoever gets possession of human hair or nails may work
his will, at any distance, upon the person from whom they were cut. This
superstition is world-wide; instances of it in regard to hair and nails
will be noticed later on in this work.   1

  Among the Australian tribes it was a common practice to knock out one
or more of a boy’s front teeth at those ceremonies of initiation to
which every male member had to submit before he could enjoy the rights
and privileges of a full-grown man. The reason of the practice is
obscure; all that concerns us here is the belief that a sympathetic
relation continued to exist between the lad and his teeth after the
latter had been extracted from his gums. Thus among some of the tribes
about the river Darling, in New South Wales, the extracted tooth was
placed under the bark of a tree near a river or water-hole; if the bark
grew over the tooth, or if the tooth fell into the water, all was well;
but if it were exposed and the ants ran over it, the natives believed
that the boy would suffer from a disease of the mouth. Among the Murring
and other tribes of New South Wales the extracted tooth was at first
taken care of by an old man, and then passed from one headman to
another, until it had gone all round the community, when it came back to
the lad’s father, and finally to the lad himself. But however it was
thus conveyed from hand to hand, it might on no account be placed in a
bag containing magical substances, for to do so would, they believed,
put the owner of the tooth in great danger. The late Dr. Howitt once
acted as custodian of the teeth which had been extracted from some
novices at a ceremony of initiation, and the old men earnestly besought
him not to carry them in a bag in which they knew that he had some
quartz crystals. They declared that if he did so the magic of the
crystals would pass into the teeth, and so injure the boys. Nearly a
year after Dr. Howitt’s return from the ceremony he was visited by one
of the principal men of the Murring tribe, who had travelled some two
hundred and fifty miles from his home to fetch back the teeth. This man
explained that he had been sent for them because one of the boys had
fallen into ill health, and it was believed that the teeth had received
some injury which had affected him. He was assured that the teeth had
been kept in a box apart from any substances, like quartz crystals,
which could influence them; and he returned home bearing the teeth with
him carefully wrapt up and concealed.   2

  The Basutos are careful to conceal their extracted teeth, lest these
should fall into the hands of certain mythical beings who haunt graves,
and who could harm the owner of the tooth by working magic on it. In
Sussex some fifty years ago a maid-servant remonstrated strongly against
the throwing away of children’s cast teeth, affirming that should they
be found and gnawed by any animal, the child’s new tooth would be, for
all the world, like the teeth of the animal that had bitten the old one.
In proof of this she named old Master Simmons, who had a very large
pig’s tooth in his upper jaw, a personal defect that he always averred
was caused by his mother, who threw away one of his cast teeth by
accident into the hog’s trough. A similar belief has led to practices
intended, on the principles of homoeopathic magic, to replace old teeth
by new and better ones. Thus in many parts of the world it is customary
to put extracted teeth in some place where they will be found by a mouse
or a rat, in the hope that, through the sympathy which continues to
subsist between them and their former owner, his other teeth may acquire
the same firmness and excellence as the teeth of these rodents. For
example, in Germany it is said to be an almost universal maxim among the
people that when you have had a tooth taken out you should insert it in
a mouse’s hole. To do so with a child’s milk-tooth which has fallen out
will prevent the child from having toothache. Or you should go behind
the stove and throw your tooth backwards over your head, saying “Mouse,
give me your iron tooth; I will give you my bone tooth.” After that your
other teeth will remain good. Far away from Europe, at Raratonga, in the
Pacific, when a child’s tooth was extracted, the following prayer used
to be recited:

“Big rat! little rat!

Here is my old tooth.

Pray give me a new one.”

Then the tooth was thrown on the thatch of the house, because rats make
their nests in the decayed thatch. The reason assigned for invoking the
rats on these occasions was that rats’ teeth were the strongest known to
the natives.   3

  Other parts which are commonly believed to remain in a sympathetic
union with the body, after the physical connexion has been severed, are
the navel-string and the afterbirth, including the placenta. So
intimate, indeed, is the union conceived to be, that the fortunes of the
individual for good or evil throughout life are often supposed to be
bound up with one or other of these portions of his person, so that if
his navel-string or afterbirth is preserved and properly treated, he
will be prosperous; whereas if it be injured or lost, he will suffer
accordingly. Thus certain tribes of Western Australia believe that a man
swims well or ill, according as his mother at his birth threw the
navel-string into water or not. Among the natives on the Pennefather
River in Queensland it is believed that a part of the child’s spirit
(cho-i) stays in the afterbirth. Hence the grandmother takes the
afterbirth away and buries it in the sand. She marks the spot by a
number of twigs which she sticks in the ground in a circle, tying their
tops together so that the structure resembles a cone. When Anjea, the
being who causes conception in women by putting mud babies into their
wombs, comes along and sees the place, he takes out the spirit and
carries it away to one of his haunts, such as a tree, a hole in a rock,
or a lagoon where it may remain for years. But sometime or other he will
put the spirit again into a baby, and it will be born once more into the
world. In Ponape, one of the Caroline Islands, the navel-string is
placed in a shell and then disposed of in such a way as shall best adapt
the child for the career which the parents have chosen for him; for
example, if they wish to make him a good climber, they will hang the
navel-string on a tree. The Kei islanders regard the navel-string as the
brother or sister of the child, according to the sex of the infant. They
put it in a pot with ashes, and set it in the branches of a tree, that
it may keep a watchful eye on the fortunes of its comrade. Among the
Bataks of Sumatra, as among many other peoples of the Indian
Archipelago, the placenta passes for the child’s younger brother or
sister, the sex being determined by the sex of the child, and it is
buried under the house. According to the Bataks it is bound up with the
child’s welfare, and seems, in fact, to be the seat of the transferable
soul, of which we shall hear something later on. The Karo Bataks even
affirm that of a man’s two souls it is the true soul that lives with the
placenta under the house; that is the soul, they say, which begets
children.   4

  The Baganda believe that every person is born with a double, and this
double they identify with the afterbirth, which they regard as a second
child. The mother buries the afterbirth at the root of a plantain tree,
which then becomes sacred until the fruit has ripened, when it is
plucked to furnish a sacred feast for the family. Among the Cherokees
the navel-string of a girl is buried under a corn-mortar, in order that
the girl may grow up to be a good baker; but the navel-string of a boy
is hung up on a tree in the woods, in order that he may be a hunter. The
Incas of Peru preserved the navel-string with the greatest care, and
gave it to the child to suck whenever it fell ill. In ancient Mexico
they used to give a boy’s navel-string to soldiers, to be buried by them
on a field of battle, in order that the boy might thus acquire a passion
for war. But the navel-string of a girl was buried beside the domestic
hearth, because this was believed to inspire her with a love of home and
taste for cooking and baking.   5

  Even in Europe many people still believe that a person’s destiny is
more or less bound up with that of his navel-string or afterbirth. Thus
in Rhenish Bavaria the navel-string is kept for a while wrapt up in a
piece of old linen, and then cut or pricked to pieces according as the
child is a boy or a girl, in order that he or she may grow up to be a
skilful workman or a good sempstress. In Berlin the midwife commonly
delivers the dried navel-string to the father with a strict injunction
to preserve it carefully, for so long as it is kept the child will live
and thrive and be free from sickness. In Beauce and Perche the people
are careful to throw the navel-string neither into water nor into fire,
believing that if that were done the child would be drowned or
burned.   6

  Thus in many parts of the world the navel-string, or more commonly the
afterbirth, is regarded as a living being, the brother or sister of the
infant, or as the material object in which the guardian spirit of the
child or part of its soul resides. Further, the sympathetic connexion
supposed to exist between a person and his afterbirth or navel-string
comes out very clearly in the widespread custom of treating the
afterbirth or navel-string in ways which are supposed to influence for
life the character and career of the person, making him, if it is a man,
a nimble climber, a strong swimmer, a skilful hunter, or a brave
soldier, and making her, if it is a woman, a cunning sempstress, a good
baker, and so forth. Thus the beliefs and usages concerned with the
afterbirth or placenta, and to a less extent with the navel-string,
present a remarkable parallel to the widespread doctrine of the
transferable or external soul and the customs founded on it. Hence it is
hardly rash to conjecture that the resemblance is no mere chance
coincidence, but that in the afterbirth or placenta we have a physical
basis (not necessarily the only one) for the theory and practice of the
external soul. The consideration of that subject is reserved for a later
part of this work.   7

  A curious application of the doctrine of contagious magic is the
relation commonly believed to exist between a wounded man and the agent
of the wound, so that whatever is subsequently done by or to the agent
must correspondingly affect the patient either for good or evil. Thus
Pliny tells us that if you have wounded a man and are sorry for it, you
have only to spit on the hand that gave the wound, and the pain of the
sufferer will be instantly alleviated. In Melanesia, if a man’s friends
get possession of the arrow which wounded him, they keep it in a damp
place or in cool leaves, for then the inflammation will be trifling and
will soon subside. Meantime the enemy who shot the arrow is hard at work
to aggravate the wound by all the means in his power. For this purpose
he and his friends drink hot and burning juices and chew irritating
leaves, for this will clearly inflame and irritate the wound. Further,
they keep the bow near the fire to make the wound which it has inflicted
hot; and for the same reason they put the arrow-head, if it has been
recovered, into the fire. Moreover, they are careful to keep the
bow-string taut and to twang it occasionally, for this will cause the
wounded man to suffer from tension of the nerves and spasms of tetanus.
“It is constantly received and avouched,” says Bacon, “that the
anointing of the weapon that maketh the wound will heal the wound
itself. In this experiment, upon the relation of men of credit (though
myself, as yet, am not fully inclined to believe it), you shall note the
points following: first, the ointment wherewith this is done is made of
divers ingredients, whereof the strangest and hardest to come by are the
moss upon the skull of a dead man unburied, and the fats of a boar and a
bear killed in the act of generation.” The precious ointment compounded
out of these and other ingredients was applied, as the philosopher
explains, not to the wound but to the weapon, and that even though the
injured man was at a great distance and knew nothing about it. The
experiment, he tells us, had been tried of wiping the ointment off the
weapon without the knowledge of the person hurt, with the result that he
was presently in a great rage of pain until the weapon was anointed
again. Moreover, “it is affirmed that if you cannot get the weapon, yet
if you put an instrument of iron or wood resembling the weapon into the
wound, whereby it bleedeth, the anointing of that instrument will serve
and work the effect.” Remedies of the sort which Bacon deemed worthy of
his attention are still in vogue in the eastern counties of England.
Thus in Suffolk if a man cuts himself with a bill-hook or a scythe he
always takes care to keep the weapon bright, and oils it to prevent the
wound from festering. If he runs a thorn or, as he calls it, a bush into
his hand, he oils or greases the extracted thorn. A man came to a doctor
with an inflamed hand, having run a thorn into it while he was hedging.
On being told that the hand was festering, he remarked, “That didn’t
ought to, for I greased the bush well after I pulled it out.” If a horse
wounds its foot by treading on a nail, a Suffolk groom will invariably
preserve the nail, clean it, and grease it every day, to prevent the
foot from festering. Similarly Cambridgeshire labourers think that if a
horse has run a nail into its foot, it is necessary to grease the nail
with lard or oil and put it away in some safe place, or the horse will
not recover. A few years ago a veterinary surgeon was sent for to attend
a horse which had ripped its side open on the hinge of a farm gatepost.
On arriving at the farm he found that nothing had been done for the
wounded horse, but that a man was busy trying to pry the hinge out of
the gatepost in order that it might be greased and put away, which, in
the opinion of the Cambridge wiseacres, would conduce to the recovery of
the animal. Similarly Essex rustics opine that, if a man has been
stabbed with a knife, it is essential to his recovery that the knife
should be greased and laid across the bed on which the sufferer is
lying. So in Bavaria you are directed to anoint a linen rag with grease
and tie it on the edge of the axe that cut you, taking care to keep the
sharp edge upwards. As the grease on the axe dries, your wound heals.
Similarly in the Harz Mountains they say that if you cut yourself, you
ought to smear the knife or the scissors with fat and put the instrument
away in a dry place in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. As the knife dries, the wound heals. Other people, however,
in Germany say that you should stick the knife in some damp place in the
ground, and that your hurt will heal as the knife rusts. Others again,
in Bavaria, recommend you to smear the axe or whatever it is with blood
and put it under the eaves.   8

  The train of reasoning which thus commends itself to English and
German rustics, in common with the savages of Melanesia and America, is
carried a step further by the aborigines of Central Australia, who
conceive that under certain circumstances the near relations of a
wounded man must grease themselves, restrict their diet, and regulate
their behaviour in other ways in order to ensure his recovery. Thus when
a lad has been circumcised and the wound is not yet healed, his mother
may not eat opossum, or a certain kind of lizard, or carpet snake, or
any kind of fat, for otherwise she would retard the healing of the boy’s
wound. Every day she greases her digging-sticks and never lets them out
of her sight; at night she sleeps with them close to her head. No one is
allowed to touch them. Every day also she rubs her body all over with
grease, as in some way this is believed to help her son’s recovery.
Another refinement of the same principle is due to the ingenuity of the
German peasant. It is said that when one of his pigs or sheep breaks its
leg, a farmer of Rhenish Bavaria or Hesse will bind up the leg of a
chair with bandages and splints in due form. For some days thereafter no
one may sit on that chair, move it, or knock up against it; for to do so
would pain the injured pig or sheep and hinder the cure. In this last
case it is clear that we have passed wholly out of the region of
contagious magic and into the region of homoeopathic or imitative magic;
the chair-leg, which is treated instead of the beast’s leg, in no sense
belongs to the animal, and the application of bandages to it is a mere
simulation of the treatment which a more rational surgery would bestow
on the real patient.   9

  The sympathetic connexion supposed to exist between a man and the
weapon which has wounded him is probably founded on the notion that the
blood on the weapon continues to feel with the blood in his body. For a
like reason the Papuans of Tumleo, an island off New Guinea, are careful
to throw into the sea the bloody bandages with which their wounds have
been dressed, for they fear that if these rags fell into the hands of an
enemy he might injure them magically thereby. Once when a man with a
wound in his mouth, which bled constantly, came to the missionaries to
be treated, his faithful wife took great pains to collect all the blood
and cast it into the sea. Strained and unnatural as this idea may seem
to us, it is perhaps less so than the belief that magic sympathy is
maintained between a person and his clothes, so that whatever is done to
the clothes will be felt by the man himself, even though he may be far
away at the time. In the Wotjobaluk tribe of Victoria a wizard would
sometimes get hold of a man’s opossum rug and roast it slowly in the
fire, and as he did so the owner of the rug would fall sick. If the
wizard consented to undo the charm, he would give the rug back to the
sick man’s friends, bidding them put it in water, “so as to wash the
fire out.” When that happened, the sufferer would feel a refreshing
coolness and probably recover. In Tanna, one of the New Hebrides, a man
who had a grudge at another and desired his death would try to get
possession of a cloth which had touched the sweat of his enemy’s body.
If he succeeded, he rubbed the cloth carefully over with the leaves and
twigs of a certain tree, rolled and bound cloth, twigs, and leaves into
a long sausage-shaped bundle, and burned it slowly in the fire. As the
bundle was consumed, the victim fell ill, and when it was reduced to
ashes, he died. In this last form of enchantment, however, the magical
sympathy may be supposed to exist not so much between the man and the
cloth as between the man and the sweat which issued from his body. But
in other cases of the same sort it seems that the garment by itself is
enough to give the sorcerer a hold upon his victim. The witch in
Theocritus, while she melted an image or lump of wax in order that her
faithless lover might melt with love of her, did not forget to throw
into the fire a shred of his cloak which he had dropped in her house. In
Prussia they say that if you cannot catch a thief, the next best thing
you can do is to get hold of a garment which he may have shed in his
flight; for if you beat it soundly, the thief will fall sick. This
belief is firmly rooted in the popular mind. Some eighty or ninety years
ago, in the neighbourhood of Berend, a man was detected trying to steal
honey, and fled, leaving his coat behind him. When he heard that the
enraged owner of the honey was mauling his lost coat, he was so alarmed
that he took to his bed and died.   10

  Again, magic may be wrought on a man sympathetically, not only through
his clothes and severed parts of himself, but also through the
impressions left by his body in sand or earth. In particular, it is a
world-wide superstition that by injuring footprints you injure the feet
that made them. Thus the natives of South-eastern Australia think that
they can lame a man by placing sharp pieces of quartz, glass, bone, or
charcoal in his footprints. Rheumatic pains are often attributed by them
to this cause. Seeing a Tatungolung man very lame, Mr. Howitt asked him
what was the matter. He said, “some fellow has put bottle in my foot.”
He was suffering from rheumatism, but believed that an enemy had found
his foot-track and had buried it in a piece of broken bottle, the
magical influence of which had entered his foot.   11

  Similar practices prevail in various parts of Europe. Thus in
Mecklenburg it is thought that if you drive a nail into a man’s
footprint he will fall lame; sometimes it is required that the nail
should be taken from a coffin. A like mode of injuring an enemy is
resorted to in some parts of France. It is said that there was an old
woman who used to frequent Stow in Suffolk, and she was a witch. If,
while she walked, any one went after her and stuck a nail or a knife
into her footprint in the dust, the dame could not stir a step till it
was withdrawn. Among the South Slavs a girl will dig up the earth from
the footprints of the man she loves and put it in a flower-pot. Then she
plants in the pot a marigold, a flower that is thought to be fadeless.
And as its golden blossom grows and blooms and never fades, so shall her
sweetheart’s love grow and bloom, and never, never fade. Thus the
love-spell acts on the man through the earth he trod on. An old Danish
mode of concluding a treaty was based on the same idea of the
sympathetic connexion between a man and his footprints: the covenanting
parties sprinkled each other’s footprints with their own blood, thus
giving a pledge of fidelity. In ancient Greece superstitions of the same
sort seem to have been current, for it was thought that if a horse
stepped on the track of a wolf he was seized with numbness; and a maxim
ascribed to Pythagoras forbade people to pierce a man’s footprints with
a nail or a knife.   12

  The same superstition is turned to account by hunters in many parts of
the world for the purpose of running down the game. Thus a German
huntsman will stick a nail taken from a coffin into the fresh spoor of
the quarry, believing that this will hinder the animal from escaping.
The aborigines of Victoria put hot embers in the tracks of the animals
they were pursuing. Hottentot hunters throw into the air a handful of
sand taken from the footprints of the game, believing that this will
bring the animal down. Thompson Indians used to lay charms on the tracks
of wounded deer; after that they deemed it superfluous to pursue the
animal any further that day, for being thus charmed it could not travel
far and would soon die. Similarly, Ojebway Indians placed “medicine” on
the track of the first deer or bear they met with, supposing that this
would soon bring the animal into sight, even if it were two or three
days’ journey off; for this charm had power to compress a journey of
several days into a few hours. Ewe hunters of West Africa stab the
footprints of game with a sharp-pointed stick in order to maim the
quarry and allow them to come up with it.   13

  But though the footprint is the most obvious it is not the only
impression made by the body through which magic may be wrought on a man.
The aborigines of South-eastern Australia believe that a man may be
injured by burying sharp fragments of quartz, glass, and so forth in the
mark made by his reclining body; the magical virtue of these sharp
things enters his body and causes those acute pains which the ignorant
European puts down to rheumatism. We can now understand why it was a
maxim with the Pythagoreans that in rising from bed you should smooth
away the impression left by your body on the bed-clothes. The rule was
simply an old precaution against magic, forming part of a whole code of
superstitious maxims which antiquity fathered on Pythagoras, though
doubtless they were familiar to the barbarous forefathers of the Greeks
long before the time of that philosopher.   14
