[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb01803)  [Next](gb01902.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 19. Tabooed Acts.

## Section 1. Taboos on Intercourse with Strangers.

SO much for the primitive conceptions of the soul and the dangers to
which it is exposed. These conceptions are not limited to one people or
country; with variations of detail they are found all over the world,
and survive, as we have seen, in modern Europe. Beliefs so deep-seated
and so widespread must necessarily have contributed to shape the mould
in which the early kingship was cast. For if every person was at such
pains to save his own soul from the perils which threatened it on so
many sides, how much more carefully must he have been guarded upon whose
life hung the welfare and even the existence of the whole people, and
whom therefore it was the common interest of all to preserve? Therefore
we should expect to find the king’s life protected by a system of
precautions or safeguards still more numerous and minute than those
which in primitive society every man adopts for the safety of his own
soul. Now in point of fact the life of the early kings is regulated, as
we have seen and shall see more fully presently, by a very exact code of
rules. May we not then conjecture that these rules are in fact the very
safeguards which we should expect to find adopted for the protection of
the king’s life? An examination of the rules themselves confirms this
conjecture. For from this it appears that some of the rules observed by
the kings are identical with those observed by private persons out of
regard for the safety of their souls; and even of those which seem
peculiar to the king, many, if not all, are most readily explained on
the hypothesis that they are nothing but safeguards or lifeguards of the
king. I will now enumerate some of these royal rules or taboos, offering
on each of them such comments and explanations as may serve to set the
original intention of the rule in its proper light.   1

  As the object of the royal taboos is to isolate the king from all
sources of danger, their general effect is to compel him to live in a
state of seclusion, more or less complete, according to the number and
stringency of the rules he observes. Now of all sources of danger none
are more dreaded by the savage than magic and witchcraft, and he
suspects all strangers of practising these black arts. To guard against
the baneful influence exerted voluntarily or involuntarily by strangers
is therefore an elementary dictate of savage prudence. Hence before
strangers are allowed to enter a district, or at least before they are
permitted to mingle freely with the inhabitants, certain ceremonies are
often performed by the natives of the country for the purpose of
disarming the strangers of their magical powers, of counteracting the
baneful influence which is believed to emanate from them, or of
disinfecting, so to speak, the tainted atmosphere by which they are
supposed to be surrounded. Thus, when the ambassadors sent by Justin
II., Emperor of the East, to conclude a peace with the Turks had reached
their destination, they were received by shamans, who subjected them to
a ceremonial purification for the purpose of exorcising all harmful
influence. Having deposited the goods brought by the ambassadors in an
open place, these wizards carried burning branches of incense round
them, while they rang a bell and beat on a tambourine, snorting and
falling into a state of frenzy in their efforts to dispel the powers of
evil. Afterwards they purified the ambassadors themselves by leading
them through the flames. In the island of Nanumea (South Pacific)
strangers from ships or from other islands were not allowed to
communicate with the people until they all, or a few as representatives
of the rest, had been taken to each of the four temples in the island,
and prayers offered that the god would avert any disease or treachery
which these strangers might have brought with them. Meat offerings were
also laid upon the altars, accompanied by songs and dances in honour of
the god. While these ceremonies were going on, all the people except the
priests and their attendants kept out of sight. Amongst the Ot Danoms of
Borneo it is the custom that strangers entering the territory should pay
to the natives a certain sum, which is spent in the sacrifice of
buffaloes or pigs to the spirits of the land and water, in order to
reconcile them to the presence of the strangers, and to induce them not
to withdraw their favour from the people of the country, but to bless
the rice-harvest, and so forth. The men of a certain district in Borneo,
fearing to look upon a European traveller lest he should make them ill,
warned their wives and children not to go near him. Those who could not
restrain their curiosity killed fowls to appease the evil spirits and
smeared themselves with the blood. “More dreaded,” says a traveller in
Central Borneo, “than the evil spirits of the neighbourhood are the evil
spirits from a distance which accompany travellers. When a company from
the middle Mahakam River visited me among the Blu-u Kayans in the year
1897, no woman showed herself outside her house without a burning bundle
of plehiding bark, the stinking smoke of which drives away evil
spirits.”   2

  When Crevaux was travelling in South America he entered a village of
the Apalai Indians. A few moments after his arrival some of the Indians
brought him a number of large black ants, of a species whose bite is
painful, fastened on palm leaves. Then all the people of the village,
without distinction of age or sex, presented themselves to him, and he
had to sting them all with the ants on their faces, thighs, and other
parts of their bodies. Sometimes, when he applied the ants too tenderly,
they called out “More! more!” and were not satisfied till their skin was
thickly studded with tiny swellings like what might have been produced
by whipping them with nettles. The object of this ceremony is made plain
by the custom observed in Amboyna and Uliase of sprinkling sick people
with pungent spices, such as ginger and cloves, chewed fine, in order by
the prickling sensation to drive away the demon of disease which may be
clinging to their persons. In Java a popular cure for gout or rheumatism
is to rub Spanish pepper into the nails of the fingers and toes of the
sufferer; the pungency of the pepper is supposed to be too much for the
gout or rheumatism, who accordingly departs in haste. So on the Slave
Coast the mother of a sick child sometimes believes that an evil spirit
has taken possession of the child’s body, and in order to drive him out,
she makes small cuts in the body of the little sufferer and inserts
green peppers or spices in the wounds, believing that she will thereby
hurt the evil spirit and force him to be gone. The poor child naturally
screams with pain, but the mother hardens her heart in the belief that
the demon is suffering equally.   3

  It is probable that the same dread of strangers, rather than any
desire to do them honour, is the motive of certain ceremonies which are
sometimes observed at their reception, but of which the intention is not
directly stated. In the Ongtong Java Islands, which are inhabited by
Polynesians, the priests or sorcerers seem to wield great influence.
Their main business is to summon or exorcise spirits for the purpose of
averting or dispelling sickness, and of procuring favourable winds, a
good catch of fish, and so on. When strangers land on the islands, they
are first of all received by the sorcerers, sprinkled with water,
anointed with oil, and girt with dried pandanus leaves. At the same time
sand and water are freely thrown about in all directions, and the
newcomer and his boat are wiped with green leaves. After this ceremony
the strangers are introduced by the sorcerers to the chief. In
Afghanistan and in some parts of Persia the traveller, before he enters
a village, is frequently received with a sacrifice of animal life or
food, or of fire and incense. The Afghan Boundary Mission, in passing by
villages in Afghanistan, was often met with fire and incense. Sometimes
a tray of lighted embers is thrown under the hoofs of the traveller’s
horse, with the words, “You are welcome.” On entering a village in
Central Africa Emin Pasha was received with the sacrifice of two goats;
their blood was sprinkled on the path and the chief stepped over the
blood to greet Emin. Sometimes the dread of strangers and their magic is
too great to allow of their reception on any terms. Thus when Speke
arrived at a certain village, the natives shut their doors against him,
“because they had never before seen a white man nor the tin boxes that
the men were carrying: ‘Who knows,’ they said, ‘but that these very
boxes are the plundering Watuta transformed and come to kill us? You
cannot be admitted.’ No persuasion could avail with them, and the party
had to proceed to the next village.”   4

  The fear thus entertained of alien visitors is often mutual. Entering
a strange land the savage feels that he is treading enchanted ground,
and he takes steps to guard against the demons that haunt it and the
magical arts of its inhabitants. Thus on going to a strange land the
Maoris performed certain ceremonies to make it “common,” lest it might
have been previously “sacred.” When Baron Miklucho-Maclay was
approaching a village on the Maclay Coast of New Guinea, one of the
natives who accompanied him broke a branch from a tree and going aside
whispered to it for a while; then stepping up to each member of the
party, one after another, he spat something upon his back and gave him
some blows with the branch. Lastly, he went into the forest and buried
the branch under withered leaves in the thickest part of the jungle.
This ceremony was believed to protect the party against all treachery
and danger in the village they were approaching. The idea probably was
that the malignant influences were drawn off from the persons into the
branch and buried with it in the depths of the forest. In Australia,
when a strange tribe has been invited into a district and is approaching
the encampment of the tribe which owns the land, “the strangers carry
lighted bark or burning sticks in their hands, for the purpose, they
say, of clearing and purifying the air.” When the Toradjas are on a
head-hunting expedition and have entered the enemy’s country, they may
not eat any fruits which the foe has planted nor any animal which he has
reared until they have first committed an act of hostility, as by
burning a house or killing a man. They think that if they broke this
rule they would receive something of the soul or spiritual essence of
the enemy into themselves, which would destroy the mystic virtue of
their talismans.   5

  Again, it is believed that a man who has been on a journey may have
contracted some magic evil from the strangers with whom he has
associated. Hence, on returning home, before he is readmitted to the
society of his tribe and friends, he has to undergo certain purificatory
ceremonies. Thus the Bechuanas “cleanse or purify themselves after
journeys by shaving their heads, etc., lest they should have contracted
from strangers some evil by witchcraft or sorcery.” In some parts of
Western Africa, when a man returns home after a long absence, before he
is allowed to visit his wife, he must wash his person with a particular
fluid, and receive from the sorcerer a certain mark on his forehead, in
order to counteract any magic spell which a stranger woman may have cast
on him in his absence, and which might be communicated through him to
the women of his village. Two Hindoo ambassadors, who had been sent to
England by a native prince and had returned to India, were considered to
have so polluted themselves by contact with strangers that nothing but
being born again could restore them to purity. “For the purpose of
regeneration it is directed to make an image of pure gold of the female
power of nature, in the shape either of a woman or of a cow. In this
statue the person to be regenerated is enclosed, and dragged through the
usual channel. As a statue of pure gold and of proper dimensions would
be too expensive, it is sufficient to make an image of the sacred Yoni,
through which the person to be regenerated is to pass.” Such an image of
pure gold was made at the prince’s command, and his ambassadors were
born again by being dragged through it.   6

  When precautions like these are taken on behalf of the people in
general against the malignant influence supposed to be exercised by
strangers, it is no wonder that special measures are adopted to protect
the king from the same insidious danger. In the middle ages the envoys
who visited a Tartar Khan were obliged to pass between two fires before
they were admitted to his presence, and the gifts they brought were also
carried between the fires. The reason assigned for the custom was that
the fire purged away any magic influence which the strangers might mean
to exercise over the Khan. When subject chiefs come with their retinues
to visit Kalamba (the most powerful chief of the Bashilange in the Congo
Basin) for the first time or after being rebellious, they have to bathe,
men and women together, in two brooks on two successive days, passing
the nights under the open sky in the market-place. After the second bath
they proceed, entirely naked, to the house of Kalamba, who makes a long
white mark on the breast and forehead of each of them. Then they return
to the market-place and dress, after which they undergo the pepper
ordeal. Pepper is dropped into the eyes of each of them, and while this
is being done the sufferer has to make a confession of all his sins, to
answer all questions that may be put to him, and to take certain vows.
This ends the ceremony, and the strangers are now free to take up their
quarters in the town for as long as they choose to remain.   7
