[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb01100)  [Next](gb01202) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 12. The Sacred Marriage.

## Section 1. Diana as a Goddess of Fertility.

WE have seen that according to a widespread belief, which is not without
a foundation in fact, plants reproduce their kinds through the sexual
union of male and female elements, and that on the principle of
homoeopathic or imitative magic this reproduction is supposed to be
stimulated by the real or mock marriage of men and women, who masquerade
for the time being as spirits of vegetation. Such magical dramas have
played a great part in the popular festivals of Europe, and based as
they are on a very crude conception of natural law, it is clear that
they must have been handed down from a remote antiquity. We shall
hardly, therefore, err in assuming that they date from a time when the
forefathers of the civilised nations of Europe were still barbarians,
herding their cattle and cultivating patches of corn in the clearings of
the vast forests, which then covered the greater part of the continent,
from the Mediterranean to the Arctic Ocean. But if these old spells and
enchantments for the growth of leaves and blossoms, of grass and flowers
and fruit, have lingered down to our own time in the shape of pastoral
plays and popular merry-makings, is it not reasonable to suppose that
they survived in less attenuated forms some two thousand years ago among
the civilised peoples of antiquity? Or, to put it otherwise, is it not
likely that in certain festivals of the ancients we may be able to
detect the equivalents of our May Day, Whitsuntide, and Midsummer
celebrations, with this difference, that in those days the ceremonies
had not yet dwindled into mere shows and pageants, but were still
religious or magical rites, in which the actors consciously supported
the high parts of gods and goddesses? Now in the first chapter of this
book we found reason to believe that the priest who bore the title of
King of the Wood at Nemi had for his mate the goddess of the grove,
Diana herself. May not he and she, as King and Queen of the Wood, have
been serious counterparts of the merry mummers who play the King and
Queen of May, the Whitsuntide Bridegroom and Bride in modern Europe? and
may not their union have been yearly celebrated in a theogamy or divine
marriage? Such dramatic weddings of gods and goddesses, as we shall see
presently, were carried out as solemn religious rites in many parts of
the ancient world; hence there is no intrinsic improbability in the
supposition that the sacred grove at Nemi may have been the scene of an
annual ceremony of this sort. Direct evidence that it was so there is
none, but analogy pleads in favour of the view, as I shall now endeavour
to show.   1

  Diana was essentially a goddess of the woodlands, as Ceres was a
goddess of the corn and Bacchus a god of the vine. Her sanctuaries were
commonly in groves, indeed every grove was sacred to her, and she is
often associated with the forest god Silvanus in dedications. But
whatever her origin may have been, Diana was not always a mere goddess
of trees. Like her Greek sister Artemis, she appears to have developed
into a personification of the teeming life of nature, both animal and
vegetable. As mistress of the greenwood she would naturally be thought
to own the beasts, whether wild or tame, that ranged through it, lurking
for their prey in its gloomy depths, munching the fresh leaves and
shoots among the boughs, or cropping the herbage in the open glades and
dells. Thus she might come to be the patron goddess both of hunters and
herdsmen, just as Silvanus was the god not only of woods, but of cattle.
Similarly in Finland the wild beasts of the forest were regarded as the
herds of the woodland god Tapio and of his stately and beautiful wife.
No man might slay one of these animals without the gracious permission
of their divine owners. Hence the hunter prayed to the sylvan deities,
and vowed rich offerings to them if they would drive the game across his
path. And cattle also seem to have enjoyed the protection of those
spirits of the woods, both when they were in their stalls and while they
strayed in the forest. Before the Gayos of Sumatra hunt deer, wild
goats, or wild pigs with hounds in the woods, they deem it necessary to
obtain the leave of the unseen Lord of the forest. This is done
according to a prescribed form by a man who has special skill in
woodcraft. He lays down a quid of betel before a stake which is cut in a
particular way to represent the Lord of the Wood, and having done so he
prays to the spirit to signify his consent or refusal. In his treatise
on hunting, Arrian tells us that the Celts used to offer an annual
sacrifice to Artemis on her birthday, purchasing the sacrificial victim
with the fines which they had paid into her treasury for every fox,
hare, and roe that they had killed in the course of the year. The custom
clearly implied that the wild beasts belonged to the goddess, and that
she must be compensated for their slaughter.   2

  But Diana was not merely a patroness of wild beasts, a mistress of
woods and hills, of lonely glades and sounding rivers; conceived as the
moon, and especially, it would seem, as the yellow harvest moon, she
filled the farmer’s grange with goodly fruits, and heard the prayers of
women in travail. In her sacred grove at Nemi, as we have seen, she was
especially worshipped as a goddess of childbirth, who bestowed offspring
on men and women. Thus Diana, like the Greek Artemis, with whom she was
constantly identified, may be described as a goddess of nature in
general and of fertility in particular. We need not wonder, therefore,
that in her sanctuary on the Aventine she was represented by an image
copied from the many-breasted idol of the Ephesian Artemis, with all its
crowded emblems of exuberant fecundity. Hence too we can understand why
an ancient Roman law, attributed to King Tullus Hostilius, prescribed
that, when incest had been committed, an expiatory sacrifice should be
offered by the pontiffs in the grove of Diana. For we know that the
crime of incest is commonly supposed to cause a dearth; hence it would
be meet that atonement for the offence should be made to the goddess of
fertility.   3

  Now on the principle that the goddess of fertility must herself be
fertile, it behoved Diana to have a male partner. Her mate, if the
testimony of Servius may be trusted, was that Virbius who had his
representative, or perhaps rather his embodiment, in the King of the
Wood at Nemi. The aim of their union would be to promote the
fruitfulness of the earth, of animals, and of mankind; and it might
naturally be thought that this object would be more surely attained if
the sacred nuptials were celebrated every year, the parts of the divine
bride and bridegroom being played either by their images or by living
persons. No ancient writer mentions that this was done in the grove at
Nemi; but our knowledge of the Arician ritual is so scanty that the want
of information on this head can hardly count as a fatal objection to the
theory. That theory, in the absence of direct evidence, must necessarily
be based on the analogy of similar customs practised elsewhere. Some
modern examples of such customs, more or less degenerate, were described
in the last chapter. Here we shall consider their ancient
counterparts.   4
