[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb01901)  [Next](gb01903.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 19. Tabooed Acts.

## Section 2. Taboos on Eating and Drinking.

IN THE OPINION of savages the acts of eating and drinking are attended
with special danger; for at these times the soul may escape from the
mouth, or be extracted by the magic arts of an enemy present. Among the
Ewe-speaking peoples of the Slave Coast “the common belief seems to be
that the indwelling spirit leaves the body and returns to it through the
mouth; hence, should it have gone out, it behoves a man to be careful
about opening his mouth, lest a homeless spirit should take advantage of
the opportunity and enter his body. This, it appears, is considered most
likely to take place while the man is eating.” Precautions are therefore
adopted to guard against these dangers. Thus of the Bataks it is said
that “since the soul can leave the body, they always take care to
prevent their soul from straying on occasions when they have most need
of it. But it is only possible to prevent the soul from straying when
one is in the house. At feasts one may find the whole house shut up, in
order that the soul may stay and enjoy the good things set before it.”
The Zafimanelo in Madagascar lock their doors when they eat, and hardly
any one ever sees them eating. The Warua will not allow any one to see
them eating and drinking, being doubly particular that no person of the
opposite sex shall see them doing so. “I had to pay a man to let me see
him drink; I could not make a man let a woman see him drink.” When
offered a drink they often ask that a cloth may be held up to hide them
whilst drinking.   1

  If these are the ordinary precautions taken by common people, the
precautions taken by kings are extraordinary. The king of Loango may not
be seen eating or drinking by man or beast under pain of death. A
favourite dog having broken into the room where the king was dining, the
king ordered it to be killed on the spot. Once the king’s own son, a boy
of twelve years old, inadvertently saw the king drink. Immediately the
king ordered him to be finely apparelled and feasted, after which he
commanded him to be cut in quarters, and carried about the city with a
proclamation that he had seen the king drink. “When the king has a mind
to drink, he has a cup of wine brought; he that brings it has a bell in
his hand, and as soon as he has delivered the cup to the king, he turns
his face from him and rings the bell, on which all present fall down
with their faces to the ground, and continue so till the king has drank…
. His eating is much in the same style, for which he has a house on
purpose, where his victuals are set upon a bensa or table: which he goes
to, and shuts the door: when he has done, he knocks and comes out. So
that none ever see the king eat or drink. For it is believed that if any
one should, the king shall immediately die.” The remnants of his food
are buried, doubtless to prevent them from falling into the hands of
sorcerers, who by means of these fragments might cast a fatal spell over
the monarch. The rules observed by the neighbouring king of Cacongo were
similar; it was thought that the king would die if any of his subjects
were to see him drink. It is a capital offence to see the king of
Dahomey at his meals. When he drinks in public, as he does on
extraordinary occasions, he hides himself behind a curtain, or
handkerchiefs are held up round his head, and all the people throw
themselves with their faces to the earth. When the king of Bunyoro in
Central Africa went to drink milk in the dairy, every man must leave the
royal enclosure and all the women had to cover their heads till the king
returned. No one might see him drink. One wife accompanied him to the
dairy and handed him the milk-pot, but she turned away her face while he
drained it.   2
