[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb01903)  [Next](gb01905.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 19. Tabooed Acts.

## Section 4. Taboos on Quitting the House.

BY AN EXTENSION of the like precaution kings are sometimes forbidden
ever to leave their palaces; or, if they are allowed to do so, their
subjects are forbidden to see them abroad. The fetish king of Benin, who
was worshipped as a deity by his subjects, might not quit his palace.
After his coronation the king of Loango is confined to his palace, which
he may not leave. The king of Onitsha “does not step out of his house
into the town unless a human sacrifice is made to propitiate the gods:
on this account he never goes out beyond the precincts of his premises.”
Indeed we are told that he may not quit his palace under pain of death
or of giving up one or more slaves to be executed in his presence. As
the wealth of the country is measured in slaves, the king takes good
care not to infringe the law. Yet once a year at the Feast of Yams the
king is allowed, and even required by custom, to dance before his people
outside the high mud wall of the palace. In dancing he carries a great
weight, generally a sack of earth, on his back to prove that he is still
able to support the burden and cares of state. Were he unable to
discharge this duty, he would be immediately deposed and perhaps stoned.
The kings of Ethiopia were worshipped as gods, but were mostly kept shut
up in their palaces. On the mountainous coast of Pontus there dwelt in
antiquity a rude and warlike people named the Mosyni or Mosynoeci,
through whose rugged country the Ten Thousand marched on their famous
retreat from Asia to Europe. These barbarians kept their king in close
custody at the top of a high tower, from which after his election he was
never more allowed to descend. Here he dispensed justice to his people;
but if he offended them, they punished him by stopping his rations for a
whole day, or even starving him to death. The kings of Sabaea or Sheba,
the spice country of Arabia, were not allowed to go out of their
palaces; if they did so, the mob stoned them to death. But at the top of
the palace there was a window with a chain attached to it. If any man
deemed he had suffered wrong, he pulled the chain, and the king
perceived him and called him in and gave judgment.   1
