[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02106)  [Next](gb02108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 21. Tabooed Things.

## Section 7. Ceremonies at Hair-cutting.

BUT when it becomes necessary to crop the hair, measures are taken to
lessen the dangers which are supposed to attend the operation. The chief
of Namosi in Fiji always ate a man by way of precaution when he had had
his hair cut. “There was a certain clan that had to provide the victim,
and they used to sit in solemn council among themselves to choose him.
It was a sacrificial feast to avert evil from the chief.” Amongst the
Maoris many spells were uttered at hair-cutting; one, for example, was
spoken to consecrate the obsidian knife with which the hair was cut;
another was pronounced to avert the thunder and lightning which
hair-cutting was believed to cause. “He who has had his hair cut is in
immediate charge of the Atua (spirit); he is removed from the contact
and society of his family and his tribe; he dare not touch his food
himself; it is put into his mouth by another person; nor can he for some
days resume his accustomed occupations or associate with his
fellow-men.” The person who cuts the hair is also tabooed; his hands
having been in contact with a sacred head, he may not touch food with
them or engage in any other employment; he is fed by another person with
food cooked over a sacred fire. He cannot be released from the taboo
before the following day, when he rubs his hands with potato or fern
root which has been cooked on a sacred fire; and this food having been
taken to the head of the family in the female line and eaten by her, his
hands are freed from the taboo. In some parts of New Zealand the most
sacred day of the year was that appointed for hair-cutting; the people
assembled in large numbers on that day from all the neighbourhood.   1
