[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb01905)  [Next](gb02002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 20. Tabooed Persons.

## Section 1. Chiefs and Kings tabooed.

WE have seen that the Mikado’s food was cooked every day in new pots and
served up in new dishes; both pots and dishes were of common clay, in
order that they might be broken or laid aside after they had been once
used. They were generally broken, for it was believed that if any one
else ate his food out of these sacred dishes, his mouth and throat would
become swollen and inflamed. The same ill effect was thought to be
experienced by any one who should wear the Mikado’s clothes without his
leave; he would have swellings and pains all over his body. In Fiji
there is a special name (kana lama) for the disease supposed to be
caused by eating out of a chief’s dishes or wearing his clothes. “The
throat and body swell, and the impious person dies. I had a fine mat
given to me by a man who durst not use it because Thakombau’s eldest son
had sat upon it. There was always a family or clan of commoners who were
exempt from this danger. I was talking about this once to Thakombau. ‘Oh
yes,’ said he. ‘Here, So-and-so! come and scratch my back.’ The man
scratched; he was one of those who could do it with impunity.” The name
of the men thus highly privileged was Na nduka ni, or the dirt of the
chief.   1

  In the evil effects thus supposed to follow upon the use of the
vessels or clothes of the Mikado and a Fijian chief we see that other
side of the god-man’s character to which attention has been already
called. The divine person is a source of danger as well as of blessing;
he must not only be guarded, he must also be guarded against. His sacred
organism, so delicate that a touch may disorder it, is also, as it were,
electrically charged with a powerful magical or spiritual force which
may discharge itself with fatal effect on whatever comes in contact with
it. Accordingly the isolation of the man-god is quite as necessary for
the safety of others as for his own. His magical virtue is in the
strictest sense of the word contagious: his divinity is a fire, which,
under proper restraints, confers endless blessings, but, if rashly
touched or allowed to break bounds, burns and destroys what it touches.
Hence the disastrous effects supposed to attend a breach of taboo; the
offender has thrust his hand into the divine fire, which shrivels up and
consumes him on the spot.   2

  The Nubas, for example, who inhabit the wooded and fertile range of
Jebel Nuba in Eastern Africa, believe that they would die if they
entered the house of their priestly king; however, they can evade the
penalty of their intrusion by baring the left shoulder and getting the
king to lay his hand on it. And were any man to sit on a stone which the
king has consecrated to his own use, the transgressor would die within
the year. The Cazembes of Angola regard their king as so holy that no
one can touch him without being killed by the magical power which
pervades his sacred person. But since contact with him is sometimes
unavoidable, they have devised a means whereby the sinner can escape
with his life. Kneeling down before the king he touches the back of the
royal hand with the back of his own, then snaps his fingers; afterwards
he lays the palm of his hand on the palm of the king’s hand, then snaps
his fingers again. This ceremony is repeated four or five times, and
averts the imminent danger of death. In Tonga it was believed that if
any one fed himself with his own hands after touching the sacred person
of a superior chief or anything that belonged to him, he would swell up
and die; the sanctity of the chief, like a virulent poison, infected the
hands of his inferior, and, being communicated through them to the food,
proved fatal to the eater. A commoner who had incurred this danger could
disinfect himself by performing a certain ceremony, which consisted in
touching the sole of a chief’s foot with the palm and back of each of
his hands, and afterwards rinsing his hands in water. If there was no
water near, he rubbed his hands with the juicy stem of a plantain or
banana. After that he was free to feed himself with his own hands
without danger of being attacked by the malady which would otherwise
follow from eating with tabooed or sanctified hands. But until the
ceremony of expiation or disinfection had been performed, if he wished
to eat he had either to get some one to feed him, or else to go down on
his knees and pick up the food from the ground with his mouth like a
beast. He might not even use a toothpick himself, but might guide the
hand of another person holding the toothpick. The Tongans were subject
to induration of the liver and certain forms of scrofula, which they
often attributed to a failure to perform the requisite expiation after
having inadvertently touched a chief or his belongings. Hence they often
went through the ceremony as a precaution, without knowing that they had
done anything to call for it. The king of Tonga could not refuse to play
his part in the rite by presenting his foot to such as desired to touch
it, even when they applied to him at an inconvenient time. A fat
unwieldy king, who perceived his subjects approaching with this
intention, while he chanced to be taking his walks abroad, has been
sometimes seen to waddle as fast as his legs could carry him out of
their way, in order to escape the importunate and not wholly
disinterested expression of their homage. If any one fancied he might
have already unwittingly eaten with tabooed hands, he sat down before
the chief, and, taking the chief’s foot, pressed it against his own
stomach, that the food in his belly might not injure him, and that he
might not swell up and die. Since scrofula was regarded by the Tongans
as a result of eating with tabooed hands, we may conjecture that persons
who suffered from it among them often resorted to the touch or pressure
of the king’s foot as a cure for their malady. The analogy of the custom
with the old English practice of bringing scrofulous patients to the
king to be healed by his touch is sufficiently obvious, and suggests, as
I have already pointed out elsewhere, that among our own remote
ancestors scrofula may have obtained its name of the King’s Evil, from a
belief, like that of the Tongans, that it was caused as well as cured by
contact with the divine majesty of kings.   3

  In New Zealand the dread of the sanctity of chiefs was at least as
great as in Tonga. Their ghostly power, derived from an ancestral
spirit, diffused itself by contagion over everything they touched, and
could strike dead all who rashly or unwittingly meddled with it. For
instance, it once happened that a New Zealand chief of high rank and
great sanctity had left the remains of his dinner by the wayside. A
slave, a stout, hungry fellow, coming up after the chief had gone, saw
the unfinished dinner, and ate it up without asking questions. Hardly
had he finished when he was informed by a horror-stricken spectator that
the food of which he had eaten was the chief’s. “I knew the unfortunate
delinquent well. He was remarkable for courage, and had signalised
himself in the wars of the tribe,” but “no sooner did he hear the fatal
news than he was seized by the most extraordinary convulsions and cramp
in the stomach, which never ceased till he died, about sundown the same
day. He was a strong man, in the prime of life, and if any pakeha
\[European\] freethinker should have said he was not killed by the tapu
of the chief, which had been communicated to the food by contact, he
would have been listened to with feelings of contempt for his ignorance
and inability to understand plain and direct evidence.” This is not a
solitary case. A Maori woman having eaten of some fruit, and being
afterwards told that the fruit had been taken from a tabooed place,
exclaimed that the spirit of the chief, whose sanctity had been thus
profaned, would kill her. This was in the afternoon, and next day by
twelve o’clock she was dead. A Maori chief’s tinder-box was once the
means of killing several persons; for, having been lost by him, and
found by some men who used it to light their pipes, they died of fright
on learning to whom it had belonged. So, too, the garments of a high New
Zealand chief will kill any one else who wears them. A chief was
observed by a missionary to throw down a precipice a blanket which he
found too heavy to carry. Being asked by the missionary why he did not
leave it on a tree for the use of a future traveller, the chief replied
that “it was the fear of its being taken by another which caused him to
throw it where he did, for if it were worn, his tapu” (that is, his
spiritual power communicated by contact to the blanket and through the
blanket to the man) “would kill the person.” For a similar reason a
Maori chief would not blow a fire with his mouth; for his sacred breath
would communicate its sanctity to the fire, which would pass it on to
the pot on the fire, which would pass it on to the meat in the pot,
which would pass it on to the man who ate the meat, which was in the
pot, which stood on the fire, which was breathed on by the chief; so
that the eater, infected by the chief’s breath conveyed through these
intermediaries, would surely die.   4

  Thus in the Polynesian race, to which the Maoris belong, superstition
erected round the persons of sacred chiefs a real, though at the same
time purely imaginary barrier, to transgress which actually entailed the
death of the transgressor whenever he became aware of what he had done.
This fatal power of the imagination working through superstitious
terrors is by no means confined to one race; it appears to be common
among savages. For example, among the aborigines of Australia a native
will die after the infliction of even the most superficial wound, if
only he believes that the weapon which inflicted the wound had been sung
over and thus endowed with magical virtue. He simply lies down, refuses
food, and pines away. Similarly among some of the Indian tribes of
Brazil, if the medicine-man predicted the death of any one who had
offended him, “the wretch took to his hammock instantly in such full
expectation of dying, that he would neither eat nor drink, and the
prediction was a sentence which faith effectually executed.”   5
