[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02808)  [Next](gb02900) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 28. The Killing of the Tree-Spirit.

## Section 9. The Magic Spring.

THE GENERAL explanation which we have been led to adopt of these and
many similar ceremonies is that they are, or were in their origin,
magical rites intended to ensure the revival of nature in spring. The
means by which they were supposed to effect this end were imitation and
sympathy. Led astray by his ignorance of the true causes of things,
primitive man believed that in order to produce the great phenomena of
nature on which his life depended he had only to imitate them, and that
immediately by a secret sympathy or mystic influence the little drama
which he acted in forest glade or mountain dell, on desert plain or
wind-swept shore, would be taken up and repeated by mightier actors on a
vaster stage. He fancied that by masquerading in leaves and flowers he
helped the bare earth to clothe herself with verdure, and that by
playing the death and burial of winter he drove that gloomy season away,
and made smooth the path for the footsteps of returning spring. If we
find it hard to throw ourselves even in fancy into a mental condition in
which such things seem possible, we can more easily picture to ourselves
the anxiety which the savage, when he first began to lift his thoughts
above the satisfaction of his merely animal wants, and to meditate on
the causes of things, may have felt as to the continued operation of
what we now call the laws of nature. To us, familiar as we are with the
conception of the uniformity and regularity with which the great cosmic
phenomena succeed each other, there seems little ground for apprehension
that the causes which produce these effects will cease to operate, at
least within the near future. But this confidence in the stability of
nature is bred only by the experience which comes of wide observation
and long tradition; and the savage, with his narrow sphere of
observation and his short-lived tradition, lacks the very elements of
that experience which alone could set his mind at rest in face of the
ever-changing and often menacing aspects of nature. No wonder,
therefore, that he is thrown into a panic by an eclipse, and thinks that
the sun or the moon would surely perish, if he did not raise a clamour
and shoot his puny shafts into the air to defend the luminaries from the
monster who threatens to devour them. No wonder he is terrified when in
the darkness of night a streak of sky is suddenly illumined by the flash
of a meteor, or the whole expanse of the celestial arch glows with the
fitful light of the Northern Streamers. Even phenomena which recur at
fixed and uniform intervals may be viewed by him with apprehension,
before he has come to recognise the orderliness of their recurrence. The
speed or slowness of his recognition of such periodic or cyclic changes
in nature will depend largely on the length of the particular cycle. The
cycle, for example, of day and night is everywhere, except in the polar
regions, so short and hence so frequent that men probably soon ceased to
discompose themselves seriously as to the chance of its failing to
recur, though the ancient Egyptians, as we have seen, daily wrought
enchantments to bring back to the east in the morning the fiery orb
which had sunk at evening in the crimson west. But it was far otherwise
with the annual cycle of the seasons. To any man a year is a
considerable period, seeing that the number of our years is but few at
the best. To the primitive savage, with his short memory and imperfect
means of marking the flight of time, a year may well have been so long
that he failed to recognise it as a cycle at all, and watched the
changing aspects of earth and heaven with a perpetual wonder,
alternately delighted and alarmed, elated and cast down, according as
the vicissitudes of light and heat, of plant and animal life, ministered
to his comfort or threatened his existence. In autumn when the withered
leaves were whirled about the forest by the nipping blast, and he looked
up at the bare boughs, could he feel sure that they would ever be green
again? As day by day the sun sank lower and lower in the sky, could he
be certain that the luminary would ever retrace his heavenly road? Even
the waning moon, whose pale sickle rose thinner and thinner every night
over the rim of the eastern horizon, may have excited in his mind a fear
lest, when it had wholly vanished, there should be moons no more.   1

  These and a thousand such misgivings may have thronged the fancy and
troubled the peace of the man who first began to reflect on the
mysteries of the world he lived in, and to take thought for a more
distant future than the morrow. It was natural, therefore, that with
such thoughts and fears he should have done all that in him lay to bring
back the faded blossom to the bough, to swing the low sun of winter up
to his old place in the summer sky, and to restore its orbed fulness to
the silver lamp of the waning moon. We may smile at his vain endeavours
if we please, but it was only by making a long series of experiments, of
which some were almost inevitably doomed to failure, that man learned
from experience the futility of some of his attempted methods and the
fruitfulness of others. After all, magical ceremonies are nothing but
experiments which have failed and which continue to be repeated merely
because, for reasons which have already been indicated, the operator is
unaware of their failure. With the advance of knowledge these ceremonies
either cease to be performed altogether or are kept up from force of
habit long after the intention with which they were instituted has been
forgotten. Thus fallen from their high estate, no longer regarded as
solemn rites on the punctual performance of which the welfare and even
the life of the community depend, they sink gradually to the level of
simple pageants, mummeries, and pastimes, till in the final stage of
degeneration they are wholly abandoned by older people, and, from having
once been the most serious occupation of the sage, become at last the
idle sport of children. It is in this final stage of decay that most of
the old magical rites of our European forefathers linger on at the
present day, and even from this their last retreat they are fast being
swept away by the rising tide of those multitudinous forces, moral,
intellectual, and social, which are bearing mankind onward to a new and
unknown goal. We may feel some natural regret at the disappearance of
quaint customs and picturesque ceremonies, which have preserved to an
age often deemed dull and prosaic something of the flavour and freshness
of the olden time, some breath of the springtime of the world; yet our
regret will be lessened when we remember that these pretty pageants,
these now innocent diversions, had their origin in ignorance and
superstition; that if they are a record of human endeavour, they are
also a monument of fruitless ingenuity, of wasted labour, and of
blighted hopes; and that for all their gay trappings—their flowers,
their ribbons, and their music—they partake far more of tragedy than of
farce.   2

  The interpretation which, following in the footsteps of W. Mannhardt,
I have attempted to give of these ceremonies has been not a little
confirmed by the discovery, made since this book was first written, that
the natives of Central Australia regularly practise magical ceremonies
for the purpose of awakening the dormant energies of nature at the
approach of what may be called the Australian spring. Nowhere apparently
are the alternations of the seasons more sudden and the contrasts
between them more striking than in the deserts of Central Australia,
where at the end of a long period of drought the sandy and stony
wilderness, over which the silence and desolation of death appear to
brood, is suddenly, after a few days of torrential rain, transformed
into a landscape smiling with verdure and peopled with teeming
multitudes of insects and lizards, of frogs and birds. The marvellous
change which passes over the face of nature at such times has been
compared even by European observers to the effect of magic; no wonder,
then, that the savage should regard it as such in very deed. Now it is
just when there is promise of the approach of a good season that the
natives of Central Australia are wont especially to perform those
magical ceremonies of which the avowed intention is to multiply the
plants and animals they use as food. These ceremonies, therefore,
present a close analogy to the spring customs of our European peasantry
not only in the time of their celebration, but also in their aim; for we
can hardly doubt that in instituting rites designed to assist the
revival of plant life in spring our primitive forefathers were moved,
not by any sentimental wish to smell at early violets, or pluck the
rathe primrose, or watch yellow daffodils dancing in the breeze, but by
the very practical consideration, certainly not formulated in abstract
terms, that the life of man is inextricably bound up with that of
plants, and that if they were to perish he could not survive. And as the
faith of the Australian savage in the efficacy of his magic rites is
confirmed by observing that their performance is invariably followed,
sooner or later, by that increase of vegetable and animal life which it
is their object to produce, so, we may suppose, it was with European
savages in the olden time. The sight of the fresh green in brake and
thicket, of vernal flowers blowing on mossy banks, of swallows arriving
from the south, and of the sun mounting daily higher in the sky, would
be welcomed by them as so many visible signs that their enchantments
were indeed taking effect, and would inspire them with a cheerful
confidence that all was well with a world which they could thus mould to
suit their wishes. Only in autumn days, as summer slowly faded, would
their confidence again be dashed by doubts and misgivings at symptoms of
decay, which told how vain were all their efforts to stave off for ever
the approach of winter and of death.   3
