[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02102)  [Next](gb02104.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 21. Tabooed Things.

## Section 3. Sharp Weapons tabooed.

THERE is a priestly king to the north of Zengwih in Burma, revered by
the Sotih as the highest spiritual and temporal authority, into whose
house no weapon or cutting instrument may be brought. This rule may
perhaps be explained by a custom observed by various peoples after a
death; they refrain from the use of sharp instruments so long as the
ghost of the deceased is supposed to be near, lest they should wound it.
Thus among the Esquimaux of Bering Strait “during the day on which a
person dies in the village no one is permitted to work, and the
relatives must perform no labour during the three following days. It is
especially forbidden during this period to cut with any edged
instrument, such as a knife or an axe; and the use of pointed
instruments, like needles or bodkins, is also forbidden. This is said to
be done to avoid cutting or injuring the shade, which may be present at
any time during this period, and, if accidentally injured by any of
these things, it would become very angry and bring sickness or death to
the people. The relatives must also be very careful at this time not to
make any loud or harsh noises that may startle or anger the shade.” We
have seen that in like manner after killing a white whale these
Esquimaux abstain from the use of cutting or pointed instruments for
four days, lest they should unwittingly cut or stab the whale’s ghost.
The same taboo is sometimes observed by them when there is a sick person
in the village, probably from a fear of injuring his shade which may be
hovering outside of his body. After a death the Roumanians of
Transylvania are careful not to leave a knife lying with the sharp edge
uppermost so long as the corpse remains in the house, “or else the soul
will be forced to ride on the blade.” For seven days after a death, the
corpse being still in the house, the Chinese abstain from the use of
knives and needles, and even of chopsticks, eating their food with their
fingers. On the third, sixth, ninth, and fortieth days after the funeral
the old Prussians and Lithuanians used to prepare a meal, to which,
standing at the door, they invited the soul of the deceased. At these
meals they sat silent round the table and used no knives and the women
who served up the food were also without knives. If any morsels fell
from the table they were left lying there for the lonely souls that had
no living relations or friends to feed them. When the meal was over the
priest took a broom and swept the souls out of the house, saying, “Dear
souls, ye have eaten and drunk. Go forth, go forth.” We can now
understand why no cutting instrument may be taken into the house of the
Burmese pontiff. Like so many priestly kings, he is probably regarded as
divine, and it is therefore right that his sacred spirit should not be
exposed to the risk of being cut or wounded whenever it quits his body
to hover invisible in the air or to fly on some distant mission.   1
