[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02500)  [Next](gb02700) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 26. Sacrifice of the King's Son.

A POINT to notice about the temporary kings described in the foregoing
chapter is that in two places (Cambodia and Jambi) they come of a stock
which is believed to be akin to the royal family. If the view here taken
of the origin of these temporary kingships is correct, we can easily
understand why the king’s substitute should sometimes be of the same
race as the king. When the king first succeeded in getting the life of
another accepted as a sacrifice instead of his own, he would have to
show that the death of that other would serve the purpose quite as well
as his own would have done. Now it was as a god or demigod that the king
had to die; therefore the substitute who died for him had to be
invested, at least for the occasion, with the divine attributes of the
king. This, as we have just seen, was certainly the case with the
temporary kings of Siam and Cambodia; they were invested with the
supernatural functions, which in an earlier stage of society were the
special attributes of the king. But no one could so well represent the
king in his divine character as his son, who might be supposed to share
the divine afflatus of his father. No one, therefore, could so
appropriately die for the king and, through him, for the whole people,
as the king’s son.   1

  We have seen that according to tradition, Aun or On, King of Sweden,
sacrificed nine of his sons to Odin at Upsala in order that his own life
might be spared. After he had sacrificed his second son he received from
the god an answer that he should live so long as he gave him one of his
sons every ninth year. When he had sacrificed his seventh son, he still
lived, but was so feeble that he could not walk but had to be carried in
a chair. Then he offered up his eighth son, and lived nine years more,
lying in his bed. After that he sacrificed his ninth son, and lived
another nine years, but so that he drank out of a horn like a weaned
child. He now wished to sacrifice his only remaining son to Odin, but
the Swedes would not allow him. So he died and was buried in a mound at
Upsala.   2

  In ancient Greece there seems to have been at least one kingly house
of great antiquity of which the eldest sons were always liable to be
sacrificed in room of their royal sires. When Xerxes was marching
through Thessaly at the head of his mighty host to attack the Spartans
at Thermopylae, he came to the town of Alus. Here he was shown the
sanctuary of Laphystian Zeus, about which his guides told him a strange
tale. It ran somewhat as follows. Once upon a time the king of the
country, by name Athamas, married a wife Nephele, and had by her a son
called Phrixus and a daughter named Helle. Afterwards he took to himself
a second wife called Ino, by whom he had two sons, Learchus and
Melicertes. But his second wife was jealous of her stepchildren, Phrixus
and Helle, and plotted their death. She went about very cunningly to
compass her bad end. First of all she persuaded the women of the country
to roast the seed corn secretly before it was committed to the ground.
So next year no crops came up and the people died of famine. Then the
king sent messengers to the oracle at Delphi to enquire the cause of the
dearth. But the wicked stepmother bribed the messenger to give out as
the answer of the god that the dearth would never cease till the
children of Athamas by his first wife had been sacrificed to Zeus. When
Athamas heard that, he sent for the children, who were with the sheep.
But a ram with a fleece of gold opened his lips, and speaking with the
voice of a man warned the children of their danger. So they mounted the
ram and fled with him over land and sea. As they flew over the sea, the
girl slipped from the animal’s back, and falling into water was drowned.
But her brother Phrixus was brought safe to the land of Colchis, where
reigned a child of the sun. Phrixus married the king’s daughter, and she
bore him a son Cytisorus. And there he sacrificed the ram with the
golden fleece to Zeus the God of Flight; but some will have it that he
sacrificed the animal to Laphystian Zeus. The golden fleece itself he
gave to his wife’s father, who nailed it to an oak tree, guarded by a
sleepless dragon in a sacred grove of Ares. Meanwhile at home an oracle
had commanded that King Athamas himself should be sacrificed as an
expiatory offering for the whole country. So the people decked him with
garlands like a victim and led him to the altar, where they were just
about to sacrifice him when he was rescued either by his grandson
Cytisorus, who arrived in the nick of time from Colchis, or by Hercules,
who brought tidings that the king’s son Phrixus was yet alive. Thus
Athamas was saved, but afterward he went mad, and mistaking his son
Learchus for a wild beast, shot him dead. Next he attempted the life of
his remaining son Melicertes, but the child was rescued by his mother
Ino, who ran and threw herself and him from a high rock into the sea.
Mother and son were changed into marine divinities, and the son received
special homage in the isle of Tenedos, where babes were sacrificed to
him. Thus bereft of wife and children the unhappy Athamas quitted his
country, and on enquiring of the oracle where he should dwell was told
to take up his abode wherever he should be entertained by wild beasts.
He fell in with a pack of wolves devouring sheep, and when they saw him
they fled and left him the bleeding remnants of their prey. In this way
the oracle was fulfilled. But because King Athamas had not been
sacrificed as a sin-offering for the whole country, it was divinely
decreed that the eldest male scion of his family in each generation
should be sacrificed without fail, if ever he set foot in the town-hall,
where the offerings were made to Laphystian Zeus by one of the house of
Athamas. Many of the family, Xerxes was informed, had fled to foreign
lands to escape this doom; but some of them had returned long
afterwards, and being caught by the sentinels in the act of entering the
town-hall were wreathed as victims, led forth in procession, and
sacrificed. These instances appear to have been notorious, if not
frequent; for the writer of a dialogue attributed to Plato, after
speaking of the immolation of human victims by the Carthaginians, adds
that such practices were not unknown among the Greeks, and he refers
with horror to the sacrifices offered on Mount Lycaeus and by the
descendants of Athamas.   3

  The suspicion that this barbarous custom by no means fell into disuse
even in later days is strengthened by a case of human sacrifice which
occurred in Plutarch’s time at Orchomenus, a very ancient city of
Boeotia, distant only a few miles across the plain from the historian’s
birthplace. Here dwelt a family of which the men went by the name of
Psoloeis or “Sooty,” and the women by the name of Oleae or
“Destructive.” Every year at the festival of the Agrionia the priest of
Dionysus pursued these women with a drawn sword, and if he overtook one
of them he had the right to slay her. In Plutarch’s lifetime the right
was actually exercised by a priest Zoilus. The family thus liable to
furnish at least one human victim every year was of royal descent, for
they traced their lineage to Minyas, the famous old king of Orchomenus,
the monarch of fabulous wealth, whose stately treasury, as it is called,
still stands in ruins at the point where the long rocky hill of
Orchomenus melts into the vast level expanse of the Copaic plain.
Tradition ran that the king’s three daughters long despised the other
women of the country for yielding to the Bacchic frenzy, and sat at home
in the king’s house scornfully plying the distaff and the loom, while
the rest, wreathed with flowers, their dishevelled locks streaming to
the wind, roamed in ecstasy the barren mountains that rise above
Orchomenus, making the solitude of the hills to echo to the wild music
of cymbals and tambourines. But in time the divine fury infected even
the royal damsels in their quiet chamber; they were seized with a fierce
longing to partake of human flesh, and cast lots among themselves which
should give up her child to furnish a cannibal feast. The lot fell on
Leucippe, and she surrendered her son Hippasus, who was torn limb from
limb by the three. From these misguided women sprang the Oleae and the
Psoloeis, of whom the men were said to be so called because they wore
sad-coloured raiment in token of their mourning and grief.   4

  Now this practice of taking human victims from a family of royal
descent at Orchomenus is all the more significant because Athamas
himself is said to have reigned in the land of Orchomenus even before
the time of Minyas, and because over against the city there rises Mount
Laphystius, on which, as at Alus in Thessaly, there was a sanctuary of
Laphystian Zeus, where, according to tradition, Athamas purposed to
sacrifice his two children Phrixus and Helle. On the whole, comparing
the traditions about Athamas with the custom that obtained with regard
to his descendants in historical times, we may fairly infer that in
Thessaly and probably in Boeotia there reigned of old a dynasty of which
the kings were liable to be sacrificed for the good of the country to
the god called Laphystian Zeus, but that they contrived to shift the
fatal responsibility to their offspring, of whom the eldest son was
regularly destined to the altar. As time went on, the cruel custom was
so far mitigated that a ram was accepted as a vicarious sacrifice in
room of the royal victim, provided always that the prince abstained from
setting foot in the town-hall where the sacrifices were offered to
Laphystian Zeus by one of his kinsmen. But if he were rash enough to
enter the place of doom, to thrust himself wilfully, as it were, on the
notice of the god who had good-naturedly winked at the substitution of a
ram, the ancient obligation which had been suffered to lie in abeyance
recovered all its force, and there was no help for it but he must die.
The tradition which associated the sacrifice of the king or his children
with a great dearth points clearly to the belief, so common among
primitive folk, that the king is responsible for the weather and the
crops, and that he may justly pay with his life for the inclemency of
the one or the failure of the other. Athamas and his line, in short,
appear to have united divine or magical with royal functions; and this
view is strongly supported by the claims to divinity which Salmoneus,
the brother of Athamas, is said to have set up. We have seen that this
presumptuous mortal professed to be no other than Zeus himself, and to
wield the thunder and lightning, of which he made a trumpery imitation
by the help of tinkling kettles and blazing torches. If we may judge
from analogy, his mock thunder and lightning were no mere scenic
exhibition designed to deceive and impress the beholders; they were
enchantments practised by the royal magician for the purpose of bringing
about the celestial phenomena which they feebly mimicked.   5

  Among the Semites of Western Asia the king, in a time of national
danger, sometimes gave his own son to die as a sacrifice for the people.
Thus Philo of Byblus, in his work on the Jews, says: “It was an ancient
custom in a crisis of great danger that the ruler of a city or nation
should give his beloved son to die for the whole people, as a ransom
offered to the avenging demons; and the children thus offered were slain
with mystic rites. So Cronus, whom the Phoenicians call Israel, being
king of the land and having an only-begotten son called Jeoud (for in
the Phoenician tongue Jeoud signifies ‘only begotten’), dressed him in
royal robes and sacrificed him upon an altar in a time of war, when the
country was in great danger from the enemy.” When the king of Moab was
besieged by the Israelites and hard beset, he took his eldest son, who
should have reigned in his stead, and offered him for a burnt offering
on the wall.   6
