[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02107)  [Next](gb02109.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 21. Tabooed Things.

## Section 8. Disposal of Cut Hair and Nails.

BUT even when the hair and nails have been safely cut, there remains the
difficulty of disposing of them, for their owner believes himself liable
to suffer from any harm that may befall them. The notion that a man may
be bewitched by means of the clippings of his hair, the parings of his
nails, or any other severed portion of his person is almost world-wide,
and attested by evidence too ample, too familiar, and too tedious in its
uniformity to be here analysed at length. The general idea on which the
superstition rests is that of the sympathetic connexion supposed to
persist between a person and everything that has once been part of his
body or in any way closely related to him. A very few examples must
suffice. They belong to that branch of sympathetic magic which may be
called contagious. Dread of sorcery, we are told, formed one of the most
salient characteristics of the Marquesan islanders in the old days. The
sorcerer took some of the hair, spittle, or other bodily refuse of the
man he wished to injure, wrapped it up in a leaf, and placed the packet
in a bag woven of threads or fibres, which were knotted in an intricate
way. The whole was then buried with certain rites, and thereupon the
victim wasted away of a languishing sickness which lasted twenty days.
His life, however, might be saved by discovering and digging up the
buried hair, spittle, or what not; for as soon as this was done the
power of the charm ceased. A Maori sorcerer intent on bewitching
somebody sought to get a tress of his victim’s hair, the parings of his
nails, some of his spittle, or a shred of his garment. Having obtained
the object, whatever it was, he chanted certain spells and curses over
it in a falsetto voice and buried it in the ground. As the thing
decayed, the person to whom it had belonged was supposed to waste away.
When an Australian blackfellow wishes to get rid of his wife, he cuts
off a lock of her hair in her sleep, ties it to his spear-thrower, and
goes with it to a neighbouring tribe, where he gives it to a friend. His
friend sticks the spear-thrower up every night before the camp fire, and
when it falls down it is a sign that the wife is dead. The way in which
the charm operates was explained to Dr. Howitt by a Wirajuri man. “You
see,” he said, “when a blackfellow doctor gets hold of something
belonging to a man and roasts it with things, and sings over it, the
fire catches hold of the smell of the man, and that settles the poor
fellow.”   1

  The Huzuls of the Carpathians imagine that if mice get a person’s
shorn hair and make a nest of it, the person will suffer from headache
or even become idiotic. Similarly in Germany it is a common notion that
if birds find a person’s cut hair, and build their nests with it, the
person will suffer from headache; sometimes it is thought that he will
have an eruption on the head. The same superstition prevails, or used to
prevail, in West Sussex.   2

  Again it is thought that cut or combed-out hair may disturb the
weather by producing rain and hail, thunder and lightning. We have seen
that in New Zealand a spell was uttered at hair-cutting to avert thunder
and lightning. In the Tyrol, witches are supposed to use cut or
combed-out hair to make hailstones or thunderstorms with. Thlinkeet
Indians have been known to attribute stormy weather to the rash act of a
girl who had combed her hair outside of the house. The Romans seem to
have held similar views, for it was a maxim with them that no one on
shipboard should cut his hair or nails except in a storm, that is, when
the mischief was already done. In the Highlands of Scotland it is said
that no sister should comb her hair at night if she have a brother at
sea. In West Africa, when the Mani of Chitombe or Jumba died, the people
used to run in crowds to the corpse and tear out his hair, teeth, and
nails, which they kept as a rain-charm, believing that otherwise no rain
would fall. The Makoko of the Anzikos begged the missionaries to give
him half their beards as a rain-charm.   3

  If cut hair and nails remain in sympathetic connexion with the person
from whose body they have been severed, it is clear that they can be
used as hostages for his good behaviour by any one who may chance to
possess them; for on the principles of contagious magic he has only to
injure the hair or nails in order to hurt simultaneously their original
owner. Hence when the Nandi have taken a prisoner they shave his head
and keep the shorn hair as a surety that he will not attempt to escape;
but when the captive is ransomed, they return his shorn hair with him to
his own people.   4

  To preserve the cut hair and nails from injury and from the dangerous
uses to which they may be put by sorcerers, it is necessary to deposit
them in some safe place. The shorn locks of a Maori chief were gathered
with much care and placed in an adjoining cemetery. The Tahitians buried
the cuttings of their hair at the temples. In the streets of Soku a
modern traveller observed cairns of large stones piled against walls
with tufts of human hair inserted in the crevices. On asking the meaning
of this, he was told that when any native of the place polled his hair
he carefully gathered up the clippings and deposited them in one of
these cairns, all of which were sacred to the fetish and therefore
inviolable. These cairns of sacred stones, he further learned, were
simply a precaution against witchcraft, for if a man were not thus
careful in disposing of his hair, some of it might fall into the hands
of his enemies, who would, by means of it, be able to cast spells over
him and so compass his destruction. When the top-knot of a Siamese child
has been cut with great ceremony, the short hairs are put into a little
vessel made of plantain leaves and set adrift on the nearest river or
canal. As they float away, all that was wrong or harmful in the child’s
disposition is believed to depart with them. The long hairs are kept
till the child makes a pilgrimage to the holy Footprint of Buddha on the
sacred hill at Prabat. They are then presented to the priests, who are
supposed to make them into brushes with which they sweep the Footprint;
but in fact so much hair is thus offered every year that the priests
cannot use it all, so they quietly burn the superfluity as soon as the
pilgrims’ backs are turned. The cut hair and nails of the Flamen Dialis
were buried under a lucky tree. The shorn tresses of the Vestal Virgins
were hung on an ancient lotus-tree.   5

  Often the clipped hair and nails are stowed away in any secret place,
not necessarily in a temple or cemetery or at a tree, as in the cases
already mentioned. Thus in Swabia you are recommended to deposit your
clipped hair in some spot where neither sun nor moon can shine on it,
for example in the earth or under a stone. In Danzig it is buried in a
bag under the threshold. In Ugi, one of the Solomon Islands, men bury
their hair lest it should fall into the hands of an enemy, who would
make magic with it and so bring sickness or calamity on them. The same
fear seems to be general in Melanesia, and has led to a regular practice
of hiding cut hair and nails. The same practice prevails among many
tribes of South Africa, from a fear lest wizards should get hold of the
severed particles and work evil with them. The Caffres carry still
further this dread of allowing any portion of themselves to fall into
the hands of an enemy; for not only do they bury their cut hair and
nails in a secret spot, but when one of them cleans the head of another
he preserves the vermin which he catches, “carefully delivering them to
the person to whom they originally appertained, supposing, according to
their theory, that as they derived their support from the blood of the
man from whom they were taken, should they be killed by another, the
blood of his neighbour would be in his possession, thus placing in his
hands the power of some superhuman influence.”   6

  Sometimes the severed hair and nails are preserved, not to prevent
them from falling into the hands of a magician, but that the owner may
have them at the resurrection of the body, to which some races look
forward. Thus the Incas of Peru “took extreme care to preserve the
nail-parings and the hairs that were shorn off or torn out with a comb;
placing them in holes or niches in the walls; and if they fell out, any
other Indian that saw them picked them up and put them in their places
again. I very often asked different Indians, at various times, why they
did this, in order to see what they would say, and they all replied in
the same words saying, ‘Know that all persons who are born must return
to life’ (they have no word to express resurrection), ‘and the souls
must rise out of their tombs with all that belonged to their bodies. We,
therefore, in order that we may not have to search for our hair and
nails at a time when there will be much hurry and confusion, place them
in one place, that they may be brought together more conveniently, and,
whenever it is possible, we are also careful to spit in one place.’”
Similarly the Turks never throw away the parings of their nails, but
carefully stow them in cracks of the walls or of the boards, in the
belief that they will be needed at the resurrection. The Armenians do
not throw away their cut hair and nails and extracted teeth, but hide
them in places that are esteemed holy, such as a crack in the church
wall, a pillar of the house, or a hollow tree. They think that all these
severed portions of themselves will be wanted at the resurrection, and
that he who has not stowed them away in a safe place will have to hunt
about for them on the great day. In the village of Drumconrath in
Ireland there used to be some old women who, having ascertained from
Scripture that the hairs of their heads were all numbered by the
Almighty, expected to have to account for them at the day of judgment.
In order to be able to do so they stuffed the severed hair away in the
thatch of their cottages.   7

  Some people burn their loose hair to save it from falling into the
hands of sorcerers. This is done by the Patagonians and some of the
Victorian tribes. In the Upper Vosges they say that you should never
leave the clippings of your hair and nails lying about, but burn them to
hinder the sorcerers from using them against you. For the same reason
Italian women either burn their loose hairs or throw them into a place
where no one is likely to look for them. The almost universal dread of
witchcraft induces the West African negroes, the Makololo of South
Africa, and the Tahitians to burn or bury their shorn hair. In the Tyrol
many people burn their hair lest the witches should use it to raise
thunderstorms; others burn or bury it to prevent the birds from lining
their nests with it, which would cause the heads from which the hair
came to ache.   8

  This destruction of the hair and nails plainly involves an
inconsistency of thought. The object of the destruction is avowedly to
prevent these severed portions of the body from being used by sorcerers.
But the possibility of their being so used depends upon the supposed
sympathetic connexion between them and the man from whom they were
severed. And if this sympathetic connexion still exists, clearly these
severed portions cannot be destroyed without injury to the man.   9
