[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02108)  [Next](gb02110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 21. Tabooed Things.

## Section 9. Spittle tabooed.

THE SAME fear of witchcraft which has led so many people to hide or
destroy their loose hair and nails has induced other or the same people
to treat their spittle in a like fashion. For on the principles of
sympathetic magic the spittle is part of the man, and whatever is done
to it will have a corresponding effect on him. A Chilote Indian, who has
gathered up the spittle of an enemy, will put it in a potato, and hang
the potato in the smoke, uttering certain spells as he does so in the
belief that his foe will waste away as the potato dries in the smoke. Or
he will put the spittle in a frog and throw the animal into an
inaccessible, unnavigable river, which will make the victim quake and
shake with ague. The natives of Urewera, a district of New Zealand,
enjoyed a high reputation for their skill in magic. It was said that
they made use of people’s spittle to bewitch them. Hence visitors were
careful to conceal their spittle, lest they should furnish these wizards
with a handle for working them harm. Similarly among some tribes of
South Africa no man will spit when an enemy is near, lest his foe should
find the spittle and give it to a wizard, who would then mix it with
magical ingredients so as to injure the person from whom it fell. Even
in a man’s own house his saliva is carefully swept away and obliterated
for a similar reason.   1

  If common folk are thus cautious, it is natural that kings and chiefs
should be doubly so. In the Sandwich Islands chiefs were attended by a
confidential servant bearing a portable spittoon, and the deposit was
carefully buried every morning to put it out of the reach of sorcerers.
On the Slave Coast, for the same reason, whenever a king or chief
expectorates, the saliva is scrupulously gathered up and hidden or
buried. The same precautions are taken for the same reason with the
spittle of the chief of Tabali in Southern Nigeria.   2

  The magical use to which spittle may be put marks it out, like blood
or nail-parings, as a suitable material basis for a covenant, since by
exchanging their saliva the covenanting parties give each other a
guarantee of good faith. If either of them afterwards foreswears
himself, the other can punish his perfidy by a magical treatment of the
purjurer’s spittle which he has in his custody. Thus when the Wajagga of
East Africa desire to make a covenant, the two parties will sometimes
sit down with a bowl of milk or beer between them, and after uttering an
incantation over the beverage they each take a mouthful of the milk or
beer and spit it into the other’s mouth. In urgent cases, when there is
no time to spend on ceremony, the two will simply spit into each other’s
mouth, which seals the covenant just as well.   3
