[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02105)  [Next](gb02107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 21. Tabooed Things.

## Section 6. Hair tabooed.

WHEN the head was considered so sacred that it might not even be touched
without grave offence, it is obvious that the cutting of the hair must
have been a delicate and difficult operation. The difficulties and
dangers which, on the primitive view, beset the operation are of two
kinds. There is first the danger of disturbing the spirit of the head,
which may be injured in the process and may revenge itself upon the
person who molests him. Secondly, there is the difficulty of disposing
of the shorn locks. For the savage believes that the sympathetic
connexion which exists between himself and every part of his body
continues to exist even after the physical connexion has been broken,
and that therefore he will suffer from any harm that may befall the
several parts of his body, such as the clippings of his hair or the
parings of his nails. Accordingly he takes care that these severed
portions of himself shall not be left in places where they might either
be exposed to accidental injury or fall into the hands of malicious
persons who might work magic on them to his detriment or death. Such
dangers are common to all, but sacred persons have more to fear from
them than ordinary people, so the precautions taken by them are
proportionately stringent. The simplest way of evading the peril is not
to cut the hair at all; and this is the expedient adopted where the risk
is thought to be more than usually great. The Frankish kings were never
allowed to crop their hair; from their childhood upwards they had to
keep it unshorn. To poll the long locks that floated on their shoulders
would have been to renounce their right to the throne. When the wicked
brothers Clotaire and Childebert coveted the kingdom of their dead
brother Clodomir, they inveigled into their power their little nephews,
the two sons of Clodomir; and having done so, they sent a messenger
bearing scissors and a naked sword to the children’s grandmother, Queen
Clotilde, at Paris. The envoy showed the scissors and the sword to
Clotilde, and bade her choose whether the children should be shorn and
live or remain unshorn and die. The proud queen replied that if her
grandchildren were not to come to the throne she would rather see them
dead than shorn. And murdered they were by their ruthless uncle Clotaire
with his own hand. The king of Ponape, one of the Caroline Islands, must
wear his hair long, and so must his grandees. Among the Hos, a negro
tribe of West Africa, “there are priests on whose head no razor may come
during the whole of their lives. The god who dwells in the man forbids
the cutting of his hair on pain of death. If the hair is at last too
long, the owner must pray to his god to allow him at least to clip the
tips of it. The hair is in fact conceived as the seat and lodging-place
of his god, so that were it shorn the god would lose his abode in the
priest.” The members of a Masai clan, who are believed to possess the
art of making rain, may not pluck out their beards, because the loss of
their beards would, it is supposed, entail the loss of their rain-making
powers. The head chief and the sorcerers of the Masai observe the same
rule for a like reason: they think that were they to pull out their
beards, their supernatural gifts would desert them.   1

  Again, men who have taken a vow of vengeance sometimes keep their hair
unshorn till they have fulfilled their vow. Thus of the Marquesans we
are told that “occasionally they have their head entirely shaved, except
one lock on the crown, which is worn loose or put up in a knot. But the
latter mode of wearing the hair is only adopted by them when they have a
solemn vow, as to revenge the death of some near relation, etc. In such
case the lock is never cut off until they have fulfilled their promise.”
A similar custom was sometimes observed by the ancient Germans; among
the Chatti the young warriors never clipped their hair or their beard
till they had slain an enemy. Among the Toradjas, when a child’s hair is
cut to rid it of vermin, some locks are allowed to remain on the crown
of the head as a refuge for one of the child’s souls. Otherwise the soul
would have no place in which to settle, and the child would sicken. The
Karo-Bataks are much afraid of frightening away the soul of a child;
hence when they cut its hair, they always leave a patch unshorn, to
which the soul can retreat before the shears. Usually this lock remains
unshorn all through life, or at least up till manhood.   2
