[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02109)  [Next](gb02111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 21. Tabooed Things.

## Section 10. Foods tabooed.

AS MIGHT have been expected, the superstitions of the savage cluster
thick about the subject of food; and he abstains from eating many
animals and plants, wholesome enough in themselves, which for one reason
or another he fancies would prove dangerous or fatal to the eater.
Examples of such abstinence are too familiar and far too numerous to
quote. But if the ordinary man is thus deterred by superstitious fear
from partaking of various foods, the restraints of this kind which are
laid upon sacred or tabooed persons, such as kings and priests, are
still more numerous and stringent. We have already seen that the Flamen
Dialis was forbidden to eat or even name several plants and animals, and
that the flesh diet of Egyptian kings was restricted to veal and goose.
In antiquity many priests and many kings of barbarous peoples abstained
wholly from a flesh diet. The Gangas or fetish priests of the Loango
Coast are forbidden to eat or even see a variety of animals and fish, in
consequence of which their flesh diet is extremely limited; often they
live only on herbs and roots, though they may drink fresh blood. The
heir to the throne of Loango is forbidden from infancy to eat pork; from
early childhood he is interdicted the use of the cola fruit in company;
at puberty he is taught by a priest not to partake of fowls except such
as he has himself killed and cooked; and so the number of taboos goes on
increasing with his years. In Fernando Po the king after installation is
forbidden to eat cocco (arum acaule), deer, and porcupine, which are the
ordinary foods of the people. The head chief of the Masai may eat
nothing but milk, honey, and the roasted livers of goats; for if he
partook of any other food he would lose his power of soothsaying and of
compounding charms.   1
