[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02804)  [Next](gb02806.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 28. The Killing of the Tree-Spirit.

## Section 5. Battle of Summer and Winter.

SOMETIMES in the popular customs of the peasantry the contrast between
the dormant powers of vegetation in winter and their awakening vitality
in spring takes the form of a dramatic contest between actors who play
the parts respectively of Winter and Summer. Thus in the towns of Sweden
on May Day two troops of young men on horseback used to meet as if for
mortal combat. One of them was led by a representative of Winter clad in
furs, who threw snowballs and ice in order to prolong the cold weather.
The other troop was commanded by a representative of Summer covered with
fresh leaves and flowers. In the sham fight which followed the party of
Summer came off victorious, and the ceremony ended with a feast. Again,
in the region of the middle Rhine, a representative of Summer clad in
ivy combats a representative of Winter clad in straw or moss and finally
gains a victory over him. The vanquished foe is thrown to the ground and
stripped of his casing of straw, which is torn to pieces and scattered
about, while the youthful comrades of the two champions sing a song to
commemorate the defeat of Winter by Summer. Afterwards they carry about
a summer garland or branch and collect gifts of eggs and bacon from
house to house. Sometimes the champion who acts the part of Summer is
dressed in leaves and flowers and wears a chaplet of flowers on his
head. In the Palatinate this mimic conflict takes place on the fourth
Sunday in Lent. All over Bavaria the same drama used to be acted on the
same day, and it was still kept up in some places down to the middle of
the nineteenth century or later. While Summer appeared clad all in
green, decked with fluttering ribbons, and carrying a branch in blossom
or a little tree hung with apples and pears, Winter was muffled up in
cap and mantle of fur and bore in his hand a snow-shovel or a flail.
Accompanied by their respective retinues dressed in corresponding
attire, they went through all the streets of the village, halting before
the houses and singing staves of old songs, for which they received
presents of bread, eggs, and fruit. Finally, after a short struggle,
Winter was beaten by Summer and ducked in the village well or driven out
of the village with shouts and laughter into the forest.   1

  At Goepfritz in Lower Austria, two men personating Summer and Winter
used to go from house to house on Shrove Tuesday, and were everywhere
welcomed by the children with great delight. The representative of
Summer was clad in white and bore a sickle; his comrade, who played the
part of Winter, had a fur-cap on his head, his arms and legs were
swathed in straw, and he carried a flail. In every house they sang
verses alternately. At Drömling in Brunswick, down to the present time,
the contest between Summer and Winter is acted every year at Whitsuntide
by a troop of boys and a troop of girls. The boys rush singing,
shouting, and ringing bells from house to house to drive Winter away;
after them come the girls singing softly and led by a May Bride, all in
bright dresses and decked with flowers and garlands to represent the
genial advent of spring. Formerly the part of Winter was played by a
straw-man which the boys carried with them; now it is acted by a real
man in disguise.   2

  Among the Central Esquimaux of North America the contest between
representatives of summer and winter, which in Europe has long
degenerated into a mere dramatic performance, is still kept up as a
magical ceremony of which the avowed intention is to influence the
weather. In autumn, when storms announce the approach of the dismal
Arctic winter, the Esquimaux divide themselves into two parties called
respectively the ptarmigans and the ducks, the ptarmigans comprising all
persons born in winter, and the ducks all persons born in summer. A long
rope of sealskin is then stretched out, and each party laying hold of
one end of it seeks by tugging with might and main to drag the other
party over to its side. If the ptarmigans get the worst of it, then
summer has won the game and fine weather may be expected to prevail
through the winter.   3
