[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02006)  [Next](gb02102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 21. Tabooed Things.

## Section 1. The Meaning of Taboo.

THUS in primitive society the rules of ceremonial purity observed by
divine kings, chiefs, and priests agree in many respects with the rules
observed by homicides, mourners, women in childbed, girls at puberty,
hunters and fishermen, and so on. To us these various classes of persons
appear to differ totally in character and condition; some of them we
should call holy, others we might pronounce unclean and polluted. But
the savage makes no such moral distinction between them; the conceptions
of holiness and pollution are not yet differentiated in his mind. To him
the common feature of all these persons is that they are dangerous and
in danger, and the danger in which they stand and to which they expose
others is what we should call spiritual or ghostly, and therefore
imaginary. The danger, however, is not less real because it is
imaginary; imagination acts upon man as really as does gravitation, and
may kill him as certainly as a dose of prussic acid. To seclude these
persons from the rest of the world so that the dreaded spiritual danger
shall neither reach them nor spread from them, is the object of the
taboos which they have to observe. These taboos act, so to say, as
electrical insulators to preserve the spiritual force with which these
persons are charged from suffering or inflicting harm by contact with
the outer world.   1

  To the illustrations of these general principles which have been
already given I shall now add some more, drawing my examples, first,
from the class of tabooed things, and, second, from the class of tabooed
words; for in the opinion of the savage both things and words may, like
persons, be charged or electrified, either temporarily or permanently,
with the mysterious virtue of taboo, and may therefore require to be
banished for a longer or shorter time from the familiar usage of common
life. And the examples will be chosen with special reference to those
sacred chiefs, kings and priests, who, more than anybody else, live
fenced about by taboo as by a wall. Tabooed things will be illustrated
in the present chapter, and tabooed words in the next.   2
