[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02003)  [Next](gb02005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 20. Tabooed Persons.

## Section 4. Warriors tabooed.

ONCE more, warriors are conceived by the savage to move, so to say, in
an atmosphere of spiritual danger which constrains them to practise a
variety of superstitious observances quite different in their nature
from those rational precautions which, as a matter of course, they adopt
against foes of flesh and blood. The general effect of these observances
is to place the warrior, both before and after victory, in the same
state of seclusion or spiritual quarantine in which, for his own safety,
primitive man puts his human gods and other dangerous characters. Thus
when the Maoris went out on the war-path they were sacred or taboo in
the highest degree, and they and their friends at home had to observe
strictly many curious customs over and above the numerous taboos of
ordinary life. They became, in the irreverent language of Europeans who
knew them in the old fighting days, “tabooed an inch thick”; and as for
the leader of the expedition, he was quite unapproachable. Similarly,
when the Israelites marched forth to war they were bound by certain
rules of ceremonial purity identical with rules observed by Maoris and
Australian blackfellows on the war-path. The vessels they used were
sacred, and they had to practise continence and a custom of personal
cleanliness of which the original motive, if we may judge from the
avowed motive of savages who conform to the same custom, was a fear lest
the enemy should obtain the refuse of their persons, and thus be enabled
to work their destruction by magic. Among some Indian tribes of North
America a young warrior in his first campaign had to conform to certain
customs, of which two were identical with the observances imposed by the
same Indians on girls at their first menstruation: the vessels he ate
and drank out of might be touched by no other person, and he was
forbidden to scratch his head or any other part of his body with his
fingers; if he could not help scratching himself, he had to do it with a
stick. The latter rule, like the one which forbids a tabooed person to
feed himself with his own fingers, seems to rest on the supposed
sanctity or pollution, whichever we choose to call it, of the tabooed
hands. Moreover among these Indian tribes the men on the war-path had
always to sleep at night with their faces turned towards their own
country; however uneasy the posture, they might not change it. They
might not sit upon the bare ground, nor wet their feet, nor walk on a
beaten path if they could help it; when they had no choice but to walk
on a path, they sought to counteract the ill effect of doing so by
doctoring their legs with certain medicines or charms which they carried
with them for the purpose. No member of the party was permitted to step
over the legs, hands, or body of any other member who chanced to be
sitting or lying on the ground; and it was equally forbidden to step
over his blanket, gun, tomahawk, or anything that belonged to him. If
this rule was inadvertently broken, it became the duty of the member
whose person or property had been stepped over to knock the other member
down, and it was similarly the duty of that other to be knocked down
peaceably and without resistance. The vessels out of which the warriors
ate their food were commonly small bowls of wood or birch bark, with
marks to distinguish the two sides; in marching from home the Indians
invariably drank out of one side of the bowl, and in returning they
drank out of the other. When on their way home they came within a day’s
march of the village, they hung up all their bowls on trees, or threw
them away on the prairie, doubtless to prevent their sanctity or
defilement from being communicated with disastrous effects to their
friends, just as we have seen that the vessels and clothes of the sacred
Mikado, of women at childbirth and menstruation, and of persons defiled
by contact with the dead are destroyed or laid aside for a similar
reason. The first four times that an Apache Indian goes out on the
war-path, he is bound to refrain from scratching his head with his
fingers and from letting water touch his lips. Hence he scratches his
head with a stick, and drinks through a hollow reed or cane. Stick and
reed are attached to the warrior’s belt and to each other by a leathern
thong. The rule not to scratch their heads with their fingers, but to
use a stick for the purpose instead, was regularly observed by Ojebways
on the war-path.   1

  With regard to the Creek Indians and kindred tribes we are told they
“will not cohabit with women while they are out at war; they religiously
abstain from every kind of intercourse even with their own wives, for
the space of three days and nights before they go to war, and so after
they return home, because they are to sanctify themselves.” Among the
Ba-Pedi and Ba-Thonga tribes of South Africa not only have the warriors
to abstain from women, but the people left behind in the villages are
also bound to continence; they think that any incontinence on their part
would cause thorns to grow on the ground traversed by the warriors, and
that success would not attend the expedition.   2

  Why exactly many savages have made it a rule to refrain from women in
time of war, we cannot say for certain, but we may conjecture that their
motive was a superstitious fear lest, on the principles of sympathetic
magic, close contact with women should infect them with feminine
weakness and cowardice. Similarly some savages imagine that contact with
a woman in childbed enervates warriors and enfeebles their weapons.
Indeed the Kayans of Central Borneo go so far as to hold that to touch a
loom or women’s clothes would so weaken a man that he would have no
success in hunting, fishing, and war. Hence it is not merely sexual
intercourse with women that the savage warrior sometimes shuns; he is
careful to avoid the sex altogether. Thus among the hill tribes of
Assam, not only are men forbidden to cohabit with their wives during or
after a raid, but they may not eat food cooked by a woman; nay, they
should not address a word even to their own wives. Once a woman, who
unwittingly broke the rule by speaking to her husband while he was under
the war taboo, sickened and died when she learned the awful crime she
had committed.   3
