[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02110)  [Next](gb02201.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 21. Tabooed Things.

## Section 11. Knots and Rings tabooed.

WE have seen that among the many taboos which the Flamen Dialis at Rome
had to observe, there was one that forbade him to have a knot on any
part of his garments, and another that obliged him to wear no ring
unless it were broken. In like manner Moslem pilgrims to Mecca are in a
state of sanctity or taboo and may wear on their persons neither knots
nor rings. These rules are probably of kindred significance, and may
conveniently be considered together. To begin with knots, many people in
different parts of the world entertain a strong objection to having any
knot about their person at certain critical seasons, particularly
childbirth, marriage, and death. Thus among the Saxons of Transylvania,
when a woman is in travail all knots on her garments are untied, because
it is believed that this will facilitate her delivery, and with the same
intention all the locks in the house, whether on doors or boxes, are
unlocked. The Lapps think that a lying-in woman should have no knot on
her garments, because a knot would have the effect of making the
delivery difficult and painful. In the East Indies this superstition is
extended to the whole time of pregnancy; the people believe that if a
pregnant woman were to tie knots, or braid, or make anything fast, the
child would thereby be constricted or the woman would herself be “tied
up” when her time came. Nay, some of them enforce the observance of the
rule on the father as well as the mother of the unborn child. Among the
Sea Dyaks neither of the parents may bind up anything with a string or
make anything fast during the wife’s pregnancy. In the Toumbuluh tribe
of North Celebes a ceremony is performed in the fourth or fifth month of
a woman’s pregnancy, and after it her husband is forbidden, among many
other things, to tie any fast knots and to sit with his legs crossed
over each other.   1

  In all these cases the idea seems to be that the tying of a knot
would, as they say in the East Indies, “tie up” the woman, in other
words, impede and perhaps prevent her delivery, or delay her
convalescence after the birth. On the principles of homoeopathic or
imitative magic the physical obstacle or impediment of a knot on a cord
would create a corresponding obstacle or impediment in the body of the
woman. That this is really the explanation of the rule appears from a
custom observed by the Hos of West Africa at a difficult birth. When a
woman is in hard labour and cannot bring forth, they call in a magician
to her aid. He looks at her and says, “The child is bound in the womb,
that is why she cannot be delivered.” On the entreaties of her female
relations he then promises to loosen the bond so that she may bring
forth. For that purpose he orders them to fetch a tough creeper from the
forest, and with it he binds the hands and feet of the sufferer on her
back. Then he takes a knife and calls out the woman’s name, and when she
answers he cuts through the creeper with a knife, saying, “I cut through
to-day thy bonds and thy child’s bonds.” After that he chops up the
creeper small, puts the bits in a vessel of water, and bathes the woman
with the water. Here the cutting of the creeper with which the woman’s
hands and feet are bound is a simple piece of homoeopathic or imitative
magic: by releasing her limbs from their bonds the magician imagines
that he simultaneously releases the child in her womb from the trammels
which impede its birth. The same train of thought underlies a practice
observed by some peoples of opening all locks, doors, and so on, while a
birth is taking place in the house. We have seen that at such a time the
Germans of Transylvania open all the locks, and the same thing is done
also in Voigtland and Mecklenburg. In North-western Argyllshire
superstitious people used to open every lock in the house at childbirth.
In the island of Salsette near Bombay, when a woman is in hard labour,
all locks of doors or drawers are opened with a key to facilitate her
delivery. Among the Mandelings of Sumatra the lids of all chests, boxes,
pans, and so forth are opened; and if this does not produce the desired
effect, the anxious husband has to strike the projecting ends of some of
the house-beams in order to loosen them; for they think that “everything
must be open and loose to facilitate the delivery.” In Chittagong, when
a woman cannot bring her child to the birth, the midwife gives orders to
throw all doors and windows wide open, to uncork all bottles, to remove
the bungs from all casks, to unloose the cows in the stall, the horses
in the stable, the watchdog in his kennel, to set free sheep, fowls,
ducks, and so forth. This universal liberty accorded to the animals and
even to inanimate things is, according to the people, an infallible
means of ensuring the woman’s delivery and allowing the babe to be born.
In the island of Saghalien, when a woman is in labour, her husband
undoes everything that can be undone. He loosens the plaits of his hair
and the laces of his shoes. Then he unties whatever is tied in the house
or its vicinity. In the courtyard he takes the axe out of the log in
which it is stuck; he unfastens the boat, if it is moored to a tree, he
withdraws the cartridges from his gun, and the arrows from his
crossbow.   2

  Again, we have seen that a Toumbuluh man abstains not only from tying
knots, but also from sitting with crossed legs during his wife’s
pregnancy. The train of thought is the same in both cases. Whether you
cross threads in tying a knot, or only cross your legs in sitting at
your ease, you are equally, on the principles of homoeopathic magic,
crossing or thwarting the free course of things, and your action cannot
but check and impede whatever may be going forward in your
neighbourhood. Of this important truth the Romans were fully aware. To
sit beside a pregnant woman or a patient under medical treatment with
clasped hands, says the grave Pliny, is to cast a malignant spell over
the person, and it is worse still if you nurse your leg or legs with
your clasped hands, or lay one leg over the other. Such postures were
regarded by the old Romans as a let and hindrance to business of every
sort, and at a council of war or a meeting of magistrates, at prayers
and sacrifices, no man was suffered to cross his legs or clasp his
hands. The stock instance of the dreadful consequences that might flow
from doing one or the other was that of Alcmena, who travailed with
Hercules for seven days and seven nights, because the goddess Lucina sat
in front of the house with clasped hands and crossed legs, and the child
could not be born until the goddess had been beguiled into changing her
attitude. It is a Bulgarian superstition that if a pregnant woman is in
the habit of sitting with crossed legs, she will suffer much in
childbed. In some parts of Bavaria, when conversation comes to a
standstill and silence ensues, they say, “Surely somebody has crossed
his legs.”   3

  The magical effect of knots in trammelling and obstructing human
activity was believed to be manifested at marriage not less than at
birth. During the Middle Ages, and down to the eighteenth century, it
seems to have been commonly held in Europe that the consummation of
marriage could be prevented by any one who, while the wedding ceremony
was taking place, either locked a lock or tied a knot in a cord, and
then threw the lock or the cord away. The lock or the knotted cord had
to be flung into water; and until it had been found and unlocked, or
untied, no real union of the married pair was possible. Hence it was a
grave offence, not only to cast such a spell, but also to steal or make
away with the material instrument of it, whether lock or knotted cord.
In the year 1718 the parliament of Bordeaux sentenced some one to be
burned alive for having spread desolation through a whole family by
means of knotted cords; and in 1705 two persons were condemned to death
in Scotland for stealing certain charmed knots which a woman had made,
in order thereby to mar the wedded happiness of Spalding of Ashintilly.
The belief in the efficacy of these charms appears to have lingered in
the Highlands of Pertshire down to the end of the eighteenth century,
for at that time it was still customary in the beautiful parish of
Logierait, between the river Tummel and the river Tay, to unloose
carefully every knot in the clothes of the bride and bridegroom before
the celebration of the marriage ceremony. We meet with the same
superstition and the same custom at the present day in Syria. The
persons who help a Syrian bridegroom to don his wedding garments take
care that no knot is tied on them and no button buttoned, for they
believe that a button buttoned or a knot tied would put it within the
power of his enemies to deprive him of his nuptial rights by magical
means. The fear of such charms is diffused all over North Africa at the
present day. To render a bridegroom impotent the enchanter has only to
tie a knot in a handkerchief which he had previously placed quietly on
some part of the bridegroom’s body when he was mounted on horseback
ready to fetch his bride: so long as the knot in the handkerchief
remains tied, so long will the bridegroom remain powerless to consummate
the marriage.   4

  The maleficent power of knots may also be manifested in the infliction
of sickness, disease, and all kinds of misfortune. Thus among the Hos of
West Africa a sorcerer will sometimes curse his enemy and tie a knot in
a stalk of grass, saying, “I have tied up So-and-so in this knot. May
all evil light upon him! When he goes into the field, may a snake sting
him! When he goes to the chase, may a ravening beast attack him! And
when he steps into a river, may the water sweep him away! When it rains,
may the lightning strike him! May evil nights be his!” It is believed
that in the knot the sorcerer has bound up the life of his enemy. In the
Koran there is an allusion to the mischief of “those who puff into the
knots,” and an Arab commentator on the passage explains that the words
refer to women who practise magic by tying knots in cords, and then
blowing and spitting upon them. He goes on to relate how, once upon a
time, a wicked Jew bewitched the prophet Mohammed himself by tying nine
knots on a string, which he then hid in a well. So the prophet fell ill,
and nobody knows what might have happened if the archangel Gabriel had
not opportunely revealed to the holy man the place where the knotted
cord was concealed. The trusty Ali soon fetched the baleful thing from
the well; and the prophet recited over it certain charms, which were
specially revealed to him for the purpose. At every verse of the charms
a knot untied itself, and the prophet experienced a certain relief.   5

  If knots are supposed to kill, they are also supposed to cure. This
follows from the belief that to undo the knots which are causing
sickness will bring the sufferer relief. But apart from this negative
virtue of maleficent knots, there are certain beneficent knots to which
a positive power of healing is ascribed. Pliny tells us that some folk
cured diseases of the groin by taking a thread from a web, tying seven
or nine knots on it, and then fastening it to the patient’s groin; but
to make the cure effectual it was necessary to name some widow as each
knot was tied. O’Donovan describes a remedy for fever employed among the
Turcomans. The enchanter takes some camel hair and spins it into a stout
thread, droning a spell the while. Next he ties seven knots on the
thread, blowing on each knot before he pulls it tight. This knotted
thread is then worn as a bracelet on his wrist by the patient. Every day
one of the knots is untied and blown upon, and when the seventh knot is
undone the whole thread is rolled up into a ball and thrown into a
river, bearing away (as they imagine) the fever with it.   6

  Again knots may be used by an enchantress to win a lover and attach
him firmly to herself. Thus the love-sick maid in Virgil seeks to draw
Daphnis to her from the city by spells and by tying three knots on each
of three strings of different colours. So an Arab maiden, who had lost
her heart to a certain man, tried to gain his love and bind him to
herself by tying knots in his whip; but her jealous rival undid the
knots. On the same principle magic knots may be employed to stop a
runaway. In Swazieland you may often see grass tied in knots at the side
of the footpaths. Every one of these knots tells of a domestic tragedy.
A wife has run away from her husband, and he and his friends have gone
in pursuit, binding up the paths, as they call it, in this fashion to
prevent the fugitive from doubling back over them. A net, from its
affluence of knots, has always been considered in Russia very
efficacious against sorcerers; hence in some places, when a bride is
being dressed in her wedding attire, a fishing-net is flung over her to
keep her out of harm’s way. For a similar purpose the bridegroom and his
companions are often girt with pieces of net, or at least with
tight-drawn girdles, for before a wizard can begin to injure them he
must undo all the knots in the net, or take off the girdles. But often a
Russian amulet is merely a knotted thread. A skein of red wool wound
about the arms and legs is thought to ward off agues and fevers; and
nine skeins, fastened round a child’s neck, are deemed a preservative
against scarlatina. In the Tver Government a bag of a special kind is
tied to the neck of the cow which walks before the rest of a herd, in
order to keep off wolves; its force binds the maw of the ravening beast.
On the same principle, a padlock is carried thrice round a herd of
horses before they go afield in the spring, and the bearer locks and
unlocks it as he goes, saying, “I lock from my herd the mouths of the
grey wolves with this steel lock.”   7

  Knots and locks may serve to avert not only wizards and wolves but
death itself. When they brought a woman to the stake at St. Andrews in
1572 to burn her alive for a witch, they found on her a white cloth like
a collar, with strings and many knots on the strings. They took it from
her, sorely against her will, for she seemed to think that she could not
die in the fire, if only the cloth with the knotted strings was on her.
When it was taken away, she said, “Now I have no hope of myself.” In
many parts of England it is thought that a person cannot die so long as
any locks are locked or bolts shot in the house. It is therefore a very
common practice to undo all locks and bolts when the sufferer is plainly
near his end, in order that his agony may not be unduly prolonged. For
example, in the year 1863, at Taunton, a child lay sick of scarlatina
and death seemed inevitable. “A jury of matrons was, as it were,
empanelled, and to prevent the child ‘dying hard’ all the doors in the
house, all the drawers, all the boxes, all the cupboards were thrown
wide open, the keys taken out, and the body of the child placed under a
beam, whereby a sure, certain, and easy passage into eternity could be
secured.” Strange to say, the child declined to avail itself of the
facilities for dying so obligingly placed at its disposal by the
sagacity and experience of the British matrons of Taunton; it preferred
to live rather than give up the ghost just then.   8

  The rule which prescribes that at certain magical and religious
ceremonies the hair should hang loose and the feet should be bare is
probably based on the same fear of trammelling and impeding the action
in hand, whatever it may be, by the presence of any knot or
constriction, whether on the head or on the feet of the performer. A
similar power to bind and hamper spiritual as well as bodily activities
is ascribed by some people to rings. Thus in the island of Carpathus
people never button the clothes they put upon a dead body and they are
careful to remove all rings from it; “for the spirit, they say, can even
be detained in the little finger, and cannot rest.” Here it is plain
that even if the soul is not definitely supposed to issue at death from
the finger-tips, yet the ring is conceived to exercise a certain
constrictive influence which detains and imprisons the immortal spirit
in spite of its efforts to escape from the tabernacle of clay; in short
the ring, like the knot, acts as a spiritual fetter. This may have been
the reason of an ancient Greek maxim, attributed to Pythagoras, which
forbade people to wear rings. Nobody might enter the ancient Arcadian
sanctuary of the Mistress at Lycosura with a ring on his or her finger.
Persons who consulted the oracle of Faunus had to be chaste, to eat no
flesh, and to wear no rings.   9

  On the other hand, the same constriction which hinders the egress of
the soul may prevent the entrance of evil spirits; hence we find rings
used as amulets against demons, witches, and ghosts. In the Tyrol it is
said that a woman in childbed should never take off her wedding-ring, or
spirits and witches will have power over her. Among the Lapps, the
person who is about to place a corpse in the coffin receives from the
husband, wife, or children of the deceased a brass ring, which he must
wear fastened to his right arm until the corpse is safely deposited in
the grave. The ring is believed to serve the person as an amulet against
any harm which the ghost might do to him. How far the custom of wearing
finger-rings may have been influenced by, or even have sprung from, a
belief in their efficacy as amulets to keep the soul in the body, or
demons out of it, is a question which seems worth considering. Here we
are only concerned with the belief in so far as it seems to throw light
on the rule that the Flamen Dialis might not wear a ring unless it were
broken. Taken in conjunction with the rule which forbade him to have a
knot on his garments, it points to a fear that the powerful spirit
embodied in him might be trammelled and hampered in its goings-out and
comings-in by such corporeal and spiritual fetters as rings and
knots.   10
