[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02900)  [Next](gb03100.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 30. Adonis in Syria.

THE MYTH of Adonis was localised and his rites celebrated with much
solemnity at two places in Western Asia. One of these was Byblus on the
coast of Syria, the other was Paphos in Cyprus. Both were great seats of
the worship of Aphrodite, or rather of her Semitic counterpart, Astarte;
and of both, if we accept the legends, Cinyras, the father of Adonis,
was king. Of the two cities Byblus was the more ancient; indeed it
claimed to be the oldest city in Phoenicia, and to have been founded in
the early ages of the world by the great god El, whom Greeks and Romans
identified with Cronus and Saturn respectively. However that may have
been, in historical times it ranked as a holy place, the religious
capital of the country, the Mecca or Jerusalem of the Phoenicians. The
city stood on a height beside the sea, and contained a great sanctuary
of Astarte, where in the midst of a spacious open court, surrounded by
cloisters and approached from below by staircases, rose a tall cone or
obelisk, the holy image of the goddess. In this sanctuary the rites of
Adonis were celebrated. Indeed the whole city was sacred to him, and the
river Nahr Ibrahim, which falls into the sea a little to the south of
Byblus, bore in antiquity the name of Adonis. This was the kingdom of
Cinyras. From the earliest to the latest times the city appears to have
been ruled by kings, assisted perhaps by a senate or council of
elders.   1

  The last king of Byblus bore the ancient name of Cinyras, and was
beheaded by Pompey the Great for his tyrannous excesses. His legendary
namesake Cinyras is said to have founded a sanctuary of Aphrodite, that
is, of Astarte, at a place on Mount Lebanon, distant a day’s journey
from the capital. The spot was probably Aphaca, at the source of the
river Adonis, half-way between Byblus and Baalbec; for at Aphaca there
was a famous grove and sanctuary of Astarte which Constantine destroyed
on account of the flagitious character of the worship. The site of the
temple has been discovered by modern travellers near the miserable
village which still bears the name of Afka at the head of the wild,
romantic, wooded gorge of the Adonis. The hamlet stands among groves of
noble walnut-trees on the brink of the lyn. A little way off the river
rushes from a cavern at the foot of a mighty amphitheatre of towering
cliffs to plunge in a series of cascades into the awful depths of the
glen. The deeper it descends, the ranker and denser grows the
vegetation, which, sprouting from the crannies and fissures of the
rocks, spreads a green veil over the roaring or murmuring stream in the
tremendous chasm below. There is something delicious, almost
intoxicating, in the freshness of these tumbling waters, in the
sweetness and purity of the mountain air, in the vivid green of the
vegetation. The temple, of which some massive hewn blocks and a fine
column of Syenite granite still mark the site, occupied a terrace facing
the source of the river and commanding a magnificent prospect. Across
the foam and the roar of the waterfalls you look up to the cavern and
away to the top of the sublime precipices above. So lofty is the cliff
that the goats which creep along its ledges to browse on the bushes
appear like ants to the spectator hundreds of feet below. Seaward the
view is especially impressive when the sun floods the profound gorge
with golden light, revealing all the fantastic buttresses and rounded
towers of its mountain rampart, and falling softly on the varied green
of the woods which clothe its depths. It was here that, according to the
legend, Adonis met Aphrodite for the first or the last time, and here
his mangled body was buried. A fairer scene could hardly be imagined for
a story of tragic love and death. Yet, sequestered as the valley is and
must always have been, it is not wholly deserted. A convent or a village
may be observed here and there standing out against the sky on the top
of some beetling crag, or clinging to the face of a nearly perpendicular
cliff high above the foam and the din of the river; and at evening the
lights that twinkle through the gloom betray the presence of human
habitations on slopes which might seem inaccessible to man. In antiquity
the whole of the lovely vale appears to have been dedicated to Adonis,
and to this day it is haunted by his memory; for the heights which shut
it in are crested at various points by ruined monuments of his worship,
some of them overhanging dreadful abysses, down which it turns the head
dizzy to look and see the eagles wheeling about their nests far below.
One such monument exists at Ghineh. The face of a great rock, above a
roughly hewn recess, is here carved with figures of Adonis and
Aphrodite. He is portrayed with spear in rest, awaiting the attack of a
bear, while she is seated in an attitude of sorrow. Her grief-stricken
figure may well be the mourning Aphrodite of the Lebanon described by
Macrobius, and the recess in the rock is perhaps her lover’s tomb. Every
year, in the belief of his worshippers, Adonis was wounded to death on
the mountains, and every year the face of nature itself was dyed with
his sacred blood. So year by year the Syrian damsels lamented his
untimely fate, while the red anemone, his flower, bloomed among the
cedars of Lebanon, and the river ran red to the sea, fringing the
winding shores of the blue Mediterranean, whenever the wind set inshore,
with a sinuous band of crimson.   2
