[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb03800)  [Next](gb03902) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 39. The Ritual of Osiris.

## Section 1. The Popular Rites.

A USEFUL clue to the original nature of a god or goddess is often
furnished by the season at which his or her festival is celebrated.
Thus, if the festival falls at the new or the full moon, there is a
certain presumption that the deity thus honoured either is the moon or
at least has lunar affinities. If the festival is held at the winter or
summer solstice, we naturally surmise that the god is the sun, or at all
events that he stands in some close relation to that luminary. Again, if
the festival coincides with the time of sowing or harvest, we are
inclined to infer that the divinity is an embodiment of the earth or of
the corn. These presumptions or inferences, taken by themselves, are by
no means conclusive; but if they happen to be confirmed by other
indications, the evidence may be regarded as fairly strong.   1

  Unfortunately, in dealing with the Egyptian gods we are in a great
measure precluded from making use of this clue. The reason is not that
the dates of the festivals are always unknown, but that they shifted
from year to year, until after a long interval they had revolved through
the whole course of the seasons. This gradual revolution of the festal
Egyptian cycle resulted from the employment of a calendar year which
neither corresponded exactly to the solar year nor was periodically
corrected by intercalation.   2

  If the Egyptian farmer of the olden time could get no help, except at
the rarest intervals, from the official or sacerdotal calendar, he must
have been compelled to observe for himself those natural signals which
marked the times for the various operations of husbandry. In all ages of
which we possess any records the Egyptians have been an agricultural
people, dependent for their subsistence on the growth of the corn. The
cereals which they cultivated were wheat, barley, and apparently sorghum
(Holcus sorghum, Linnaeus), the doora of the modern fellaheen. Then as
now the whole country, with the exception of a fringe on the coast of
the Mediterranean, was almost rainless, and owed its immense fertility
entirely to the annual inundation of the Nile, which, regulated by an
elaborate system of dams and canals, was distributed over the fields,
renewing the soil year by year with a fresh deposit of mud washed down
from the great equatorial lakes and the mountains of Abyssinia. Hence
the rise of the river has always been watched by the inhabitants with
the utmost anxiety; for if it either falls short of or exceeds a certain
height, dearth and famine are the inevitable consequences. The water
begins to rise early in June, but it is not until the latter half of
July that it swells to a mighty tide. By the end of September the
inundation is at its greatest height. The country is now submerged, and
presents the appearance of a sea of turbid water, from which the towns
and villages, built on higher ground, rise like islands. For about a
month the flood remains nearly stationary, then sinks more and more
rapidly, till by December or January the river has returned to its
ordinary bed. With the approach of summer the level of the water
continues to fall. In the early days of June the Nile is reduced to half
its ordinary breadth; and Egypt, scorched by the sun, blasted by the
wind that has blown from the Sahara for many days, seems a mere
continuation of the desert. The trees are choked with a thick layer of
grey dust. A few meagre patches of vegetables, watered with difficulty,
struggle painfully for existence in the immediate neighbourhood of the
villages. Some appearance of verdure lingers beside the canals and in
the hollows from which the moisture has not wholly evaporated. The plain
appears to pant in the pitiless sunshine, bare, dusty, ash-coloured,
cracked and seamed as far as the eye can see with a network of fissures.
From the middle of April till the middle of June the land of Egypt is
but half alive, waiting for the new Nile.   3

  For countless ages this cycle of natural events has determined the
annual labours of the Egyptian husbandman. The first work of the
agricultural year is the cutting of the dams which have hitherto
prevented the swollen river from flooding the canals and the fields.
This is done, and the pent-up waters released on their beneficent
mission, in the first half of August. In November, when the inundation
has subsided, wheat, barley, and sorghum are sown. The time of harvest
varies with the district, falling about a month later in the north than
in the south. In Upper or Southern Egypt barley is reaped at the
beginning of March, wheat at the beginning of April, and sorghum about
the end of that month.   4

  It is natural to suppose that the various events of the agricultural
year were celebrated by the Egyptian farmer with some simple religious
rites designed to secure the blessing of the gods upon his labours.
These rustic ceremonies he would continue to perform year after year at
the same season, while the solemn festivals of the priests continued to
shift, with the shifting calendar, from summer through spring to winter,
and so backward through autumn to summer. The rites of the husbandman
were stable because they rested on direct observation of nature: the
rites of the priest were unstable because they were based on a false
calculation. Yet many of the priestly festivals may have been nothing
but the old rural festivals disguised in the course of ages by the pomp
of sacerdotalism and severed, by the error of the calendar, from their
roots in the natural cycle of the seasons.   5

  These conjectures are confirmed by the little we know both of the
popular and of the official Egyptian religion. Thus we are told that the
Egyptians held a festival of Isis at the time when the Nile began to
rise. They believed that the goddess was then mourning for the lost
Osiris, and that the tears which dropped from her eyes swelled the
impetuous tide of the river. Now if Osiris was in one of his aspects a
god of the corn, nothing could be more natural than that he should be
mourned at midsummer. For by that time the harvest was past, the fields
were bare, the river ran low, life seemed to be suspended, the corn-god
was dead. At such a moment people who saw the handiwork of divine beings
in all the operations of nature might well trace the swelling of the
sacred stream to the tears shed by the goddess at the death of the
beneficent corn-god her husband.   6

  And the sign of the rising waters on earth was accompanied by a sign
in heaven. For in the early days of Egyptian history, some three or four
thousand years before the beginning of our era, the splendid star of
Sirius, the brightest of all the fixed stars, appeared at dawn in the
east just before sunrise about the time of the summer solstice, when the
Nile begins to rise. The Egyptians called it Sothis, and regarded it as
the star of Isis, just as the Babylonians deemed the planet Venus the
star of Astarte. To both peoples apparently the brilliant luminary in
the morning sky seemed the goddess of life and love come to mourn her
departed lover or spouse and to wake him from the dead. Hence the rising
of Sirius marked the beginning of the sacred Egyptian year, and was
regularly celebrated by a festival which did not shift with the shifting
official year.   7

  The cutting of the dams and the admission of the water into the canals
and fields is a great event in the Egyptian year. At Cairo the operation
generally takes place between the sixth and the sixteenth of August, and
till lately was attended by ceremonies which deserve to be noticed,
because they were probably handed down from antiquity. An ancient canal,
known by the name of the Khalíj, formerly passed through the native town
of Cairo. Near its entrance the canal was crossed by a dam of earth,
very broad at the bottom and diminishing in breadth upwards, which used
to be constructed before or soon after the Nile began to rise. In front
of the dam, on the side of the river, was reared a truncated cone of
earth called the ’arooseh or “bride,” on the top of which a little maize
or millet was generally sown. This “bride” was commonly washed down by
the rising tide a week or a fortnight before the cutting of the dam.
Tradition runs that the old custom was to deck a young virgin in gay
apparel and throw her into the river as a sacrifice to obtain a
plentiful inundation. Whether that was so or not, the intention of the
practice appears to have been to marry the river, conceived as a male
power, to his bride the cornland, which was so soon to be fertilised by
his water. The ceremony was therefore a charm to ensure the growth of
the crops. In modern times money used to be thrown into the canal on
this occasion, and the populace dived into the water after it. This
practice also would seem to have been ancient, for Seneca tells us that
at a place called the Veins of the Nile, not far from Philae, the
priests used to cast money and offerings of gold into the river at a
festival which apparently took place at the rising of the water.   8

  The next great operation of the agricultural year in Egypt is the
sowing of the seed in November, when the water of the inundation has
retreated from the fields. With the Egyptians, as with many peoples of
antiquity, the committing of the seed to the earth assumed the character
of a solemn and mournful rite. On this subject I will let Plutarch speak
for himself. “What,” he asks, “are we to make of the gloomy, joyless,
and mournful sacrifices, if it is wrong either to omit the established
rites or to confuse and disturb our conceptions of the gods by absurd
suspicions? For the Greeks also perform many rites which resemble those
of the Egyptians and are observed about the same time. Thus at the
festival of the Thesmophoria in Athens women sit on the ground and fast.
And the Boeotians open the vaults of the Sorrowful One, naming that
festival sorrowful because Demeter is sorrowing for the descent of the
Maiden. The month is the month of sowing about the setting of the
Pleiades. The Egyptians call it Athyr, the Athenians Pyanepsion, the
Boeotians the month of Demeter… . For it was that time of year when they
saw some of the fruits vanishing and failing from the trees, while they
sowed others grudgingly and with difficulty, scraping the earth with
their hands and huddling it up again, on the uncertain chance that what
they deposited in the ground would ever ripen and come to maturity. Thus
they did in many respects like those who bury and mourn their dead.”   9

  The Egyptian harvest, as we have seen, falls not in autumn but in
spring, in the months of March, April, and May. To the husbandman the
time of harvest, at least in a good year, must necessarily be a season
of joy: in bringing home his sheaves he is requited for his long and
anxious labours. Yet if the old Egyptian farmer felt a secret joy at
reaping and garnering the grain, it was essential that he should conceal
the natural emotion under an air of profound dejection. For was he not
severing the body of the corn-god with his sickle and trampling it to
pieces under the hoofs of his cattle on the threshing-floor? Accordingly
we are told that it was an ancient custom of the Egyptian corn-reapers
to beat their breasts and lament over the first sheaf cut, while at the
same time they called upon Isis. The invocation seems to have taken the
form of a melancholy chant, to which the Greeks gave the name of
Maneros. Similar plaintive strains were chanted by corn-reapers in
Phoenicia and other parts of Western Asia. Probably all these doleful
ditties were lamentations for the corn-god killed by the sickles of the
reapers. In Egypt the slain deity was Osiris, and the name Maneros,
applied to the dirge, appears to be derived from certain words meaning
“Come to thy house,” which often occur in the lamentations for the dead
god.   10

  Ceremonies of the same sort have been observed by other peoples,
probably for the same purpose. Thus we are told that among all
vegetables corn, by which is apparently meant maize, holds the first
place in the household economy and the ceremonial observance of the
Cherokee Indians, who invoke it under the name of “the Old Woman” in
allusion to a myth that it sprang from the blood of an old woman killed
by her disobedient sons. After the last working of the crop a priest and
his assistant went into the field and sang songs of invocation to the
spirit of the corn. After that a loud rustling would be heard, which was
thought to be caused by the Old Woman bringing the corn into the field.
A clean trail was always kept from the field to the house, “so that the
corn might be encouraged to stay at home and not go wandering
elsewhere.” “Another curious ceremony, of which even the memory is now
almost forgotten, was enacted after the first working of the corn, when
the owner or priest stood in succession at each of the four corners of
the field and wept and wailed loudly. Even the priests are now unable to
give a reason for this performance, which may have been a lament for the
bloody death of Selu,” the Old Woman of the Corn. In these Cherokee
practices the lamentations and the invocations of the Old Woman of the
Corn resemble the ancient Egyptian customs of lamenting over the first
corn cut and calling upon Isis, herself probably in one of her aspects
an Old Woman of the Corn. Further, the Cherokee precaution of leaving a
clear path from the field to the house resembles the Egyptian invitation
to Osiris, “Come to thy house.” So in the East Indies to this day people
observe elaborate ceremonies for the purpose of bringing back the Soul
of the Rice from the fields to the barn. The Nandi of East Africa
perform a ceremony in September when the eleusine grain is ripening.
Every woman who owns a plantation goes out with her daughters into the
cornfields and makes a bonfire of the branches and leaves of certain
trees. After that they pluck some of the eleusine, and each of them puts
one grain in her necklace, chews another and rubs it on her forehead,
throat, and breast. “No joy is shown by the womenfolk on this occasion,
and they sorrowfully cut a basketful of the corn which they take home
with them and place in the loft to dry.”   11

  The conception of the corn-spirit as old and dead at harvest is very
clearly embodied in a custom observed by the Arabs of Moab. When the
harvesters have nearly finished their task and only a small corner of
the field remains to be reaped, the owner takes a handful of wheat tied
up in a sheaf. A hole is dug in the form of a grave, and two stones are
set upright, one at the head and the other at the foot, just as in an
ordinary burial. Then the sheaf of wheat is laid at the bottom of the
grave, and the sheikh pronounces these words, ’The old man is dead.”
Earth is afterwards thrown in to cover the sheaf, with a prayer, “May
Allah bring us back the wheat of the dead.”   12
