[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb04001)  [Next](gb04003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 40. The Nature of Osiris.

## Section 2. Osiris a Tree-spirit.

BUT Osiris was more than a spirit of the corn; he was also a
tree-spirit, and this may perhaps have been his primitive character,
since the worship of trees is naturally older in the history of religion
than the worship of the cereals. The character of Osiris as a
tree-spirit was represented very graphically in a ceremony described by
Firmicus Maternus. A pine-tree having been cut down, the centre was
hollowed out, and with the wood thus excavated an image of Osiris was
made, which was then buried like a corpse in the hollow of the tree. It
is hard to imagine how the conception of a tree as tenanted by a
personal being could be more plainly expressed. The image of Osiris thus
made was kept for a year and then burned, exactly as was done with the
image of Attis which was attached to the pine-tree. The ceremony of
cutting the tree, as described by Firmicus Maternus, appears to be
alluded to by Plutarch. It was probably the ritual counterpart of the
mythical discovery of the body of Osiris enclosed in the erica-tree. In
the hall of Osiris at Denderah the coffin containing the hawk-headed
mummy of the god is clearly depicted as enclosed within a tree,
apparently a conifer, the trunk and branches of which are seen above and
below the coffin. The scene thus corresponds closely both to the myth
and to the ceremony described by Firmicus Maternus.   1

  It accords with the character of Osiris as a tree-spirit that his
worshippers were forbidden to injure fruit-trees, and with his character
as a god of vegetation in general that they were not allowed to stop up
wells of water, which are so important for the irrigation of hot
southern lands. According to one legend, he taught men to train the vine
to poles, to prune its superfluous foliage, and to extract the juice of
the grape. In the papyrus of Nebseni, written about 1550 B.C., Osiris is
depicted sitting in a shrine, from the roof of which hang clusters of
grapes; and in the papyrus of the royal scribe Nekht we see the god
enthroned in front of a pool, from the banks of which a luxuriant vine,
with many bunches of grapes, grows towards the green face of the seated
deity. The ivy was sacred to him, and was called his plant because it is
always green.   2
