[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb04003)  [Next](gb04100.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 40. The Nature of Osiris.

## Section 4. Osiris a God of the Dead.

WE have seen that in one of his aspects Osiris was the ruler and judge
of the dead. To a people like the Egyptians, who not only believed in a
life beyond the grave but actually spent much of their time, labour, and
money in preparing for it, this office of the god must have appeared
hardly, if at all, less important than his function of making the earth
to bring forth its fruits in due season. We may assume that in the faith
of his worshippers the two provinces of the god were intimately
connected. In laying their dead in the grave they committed them to his
keeping who could raise them from the dust to life eternal, even as he
caused the seed to spring from the ground. Of that faith the
corn-stuffed effigies of Osiris found in Egyptian tombs furnish an
eloquent and un-equivocal testimony. They were at once an emblem and an
instrument of resurrection. Thus from the sprouting of the grain the
ancient Egyptians drew an augury of human immortality. They are not the
only people who have built the same lofty hopes on the same slender
foundation.   1

  A god who thus fed his people with his own broken body in this life,
and who held out to them a promise of a blissful eternity in a better
world hereafter, naturally reigned supreme in their affections. We need
not wonder, therefore, that in Egypt the worship of the other gods was
overshadowed by that of Osiris, and that while they were revered each in
his own district, he and his divine partner Isis were adored in all.   2
