[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb04200)  [Next](gb04400) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 43. Dionysus.

IN THE PRECEDING chapters we saw that in antiquity the civilised nations
of Western Asia and Egypt pictured to themselves the changes of the
seasons, and particularly the annual growth and decay of vegetation, as
episodes in the life of gods, whose mournful death and happy
resurrection they celebrated with dramatic rites of alternate
lamentation and rejoicing. But if the celebration was in form dramatic,
it was in substance magical; that is to say, it was intended, on the
principles of sympathetic magic, to ensure the vernal regeneration of
plants and the multiplication of animals, which had seemed to be menaced
by the inroads of winter. In the ancient world, however, such ideas and
such rites were by no means confined to the Oriental peoples of Babylon
and Syria, of Phrygia and Egypt; they were not a product peculiar to the
religious mysticism of the dreamy East, but were shared by the races of
livelier fancy and more mercurial temperament who inhabited the shores
and islands of the Aegean. We need not, with some enquirers in ancient
and modern times, suppose that these Western peoples borrowed from the
older civilisation of the Orient the conception of the Dying and
Reviving God, together with the solemn ritual, in which that conception
was dramatically set forth before the eyes of the worshippers. More
probably the resemblance which may be traced in this respect between the
religions of the East and West is no more than what we commonly, though
incorrectly, call a fortuitous coincidence, the effect of similar causes
acting alike on the similar constitution of the human mind in different
countries and under different skies. The Greek had no need to journey
into far countries to learn the vicissitudes of the seasons, to mark the
fleeting beauty of the damask rose, the transient glory of the golden
corn, the passing splendour of the purple grapes. Year by year in his
own beautiful land he beheld, with natural regret, the bright pomp of
summer fading into the gloom and stagnation of winter, and year by year
he hailed with natural delight the outburst of fresh life in spring.
Accustomed to personify the forces of nature, to tinge her cold
abstractions with the warm hues of imagination, to clothe her naked
realities with the gorgeous drapery of a mythic fancy, he fashioned for
himself a train of gods and goddesses, of spirits and elves, out of the
shifting panorama of the seasons, and followed the annual fluctuations
of their fortunes with alternate emotions of cheerfulness and dejection,
of gladness and sorrow, which found their natural expression in
alternate rites of rejoicing and lamentation, of revelry and mourning. A
consideration of some of the Greek divinities who thus died and rose
again from the dead may furnish us with a series of companion pictures
to set side by side with the sad figures of Adonis, Attis, and Osiris.
We begin with Dionysus.   1

  The god Dionysus or Bacchus is best known to us as a personification
of the vine and of the exhilaration produced by the juice of the grape.
His ecstatic worship, characterised by wild dances, thrilling music, and
tipsy excess, appears to have originated among the rude tribes of
Thrace, who were notoriously addicted to drunkenness. Its mystic
doctrines and extravagant rites were essentially foreign to the clear
intelligence and sober temperament of the Greek race. Yet appealing as
it did to that love of mystery and that proneness to revert to savagery
which seem to be innate in most men, the religion spread like wildfire
through Greece until the god whom Homer hardly deigned to notice had
become the most popular figure of the pantheon. The resemblance which
his story and his ceremonies present to those of Osiris have led some
enquirers both in ancient and modern times to hold that Dionysus was
merely a disguised Osiris, imported directly from Egypt into Greece. But
the great preponderance of evidence points to his Thracian origin, and
the similarity of the two worships is sufficiently explained by the
similarity of the ideas and customs on which they were founded.   2

  While the vine with its clusters was the most characteristic
manifestation of Dionysus, he was also a god of trees in general. Thus
we are told that almost all the Greeks sacrificed to “Dionysus of the
tree.” In Boeotia one of his titles was “Dionysus in the tree.” His
image was often merely an upright post, without arms, but draped in a
mantle, with a bearded mask to represent the head, and with leafy boughs
projecting from the head or body to show the nature of the deity. On a
vase his rude effigy is depicted appearing out of a low tree or bush. At
Magnesia on the Maeander an image of Dionysus is said to have been found
in a plane-tree, which had been broken by the wind. He was the patron of
cultivated trees: prayers were offered to him that he would make the
trees grow; and he was especially honoured by husbandmen, chiefly
fruit-growers, who set up an image of him, in the shape of a natural
tree-stump, in their orchards. He was said to have discovered all
tree-fruits, amongst which apples and figs are particularly mentioned;
and he was referred to as “well-fruited,” “he of the green fruit,” and
“making the fruit to grow.” One of his titles was “teeming” or
“bursting” (as of sap or blossoms); and there was a Flowery Dionysus in
Attica and at Patrae in Achaia. The Athenians sacrificed to him for the
prosperity of the fruits of the land. Amongst the trees particularly
sacred to him, in addition to the vine, was the pine-tree. The Delphic
oracle commanded the Corinthians to worship a particular pine-tree
“equally with the god,” so they made two images of Dionysus out of it,
with red faces and gilt bodies. In art a wand, tipped with a pine-cone,
is commonly carried by the god or his worshippers. Again, the ivy and
the fig-tree were especially associated with him. In the Attic township
of Acharnae there was a Dionysus Ivy; at Lacedaemon there was a Fig
Dionysus; and in Naxos, where figs were called meilicha, there was a
Dionysus Meilichios, the face of whose image was made of fig-wood.   3

  Further, there are indications, few but significant, that Dionysus was
conceived as a deity of agriculture and the corn. He is spoken of as
himself doing the work of a husbandman: he is reported to have been the
first to yoke oxen to the plough, which before had been dragged by hand
alone; and some people found in this tradition the clue to the bovine
shape in which, as we shall see, the god was often supposed to present
himself to his worshippers. Thus guiding the ploughshare and scattering
the seed as he went, Dionysus is said to have eased the labour of the
husbandman. Further, we are told that in the land of the Bisaltae, a
Thracian tribe, there was a great and fair sanctuary of Dionysus, where
at his festival a bright light shone forth at night as a token of an
abundant harvest vouchsafed by the diety; but if the crops were to fail
that year, the mystic light was not seen, darkness brooded over the
sanctuary as at other times. Moreover, among the emblems of Dionysus was
the winnowing-fan, that is the large open shovel-shaped basket, which
down to modern times has been used by farmers to separate the grain from
the chaff by tossing the corn in the air. This simple agricultural
instrument figured in the mystic rites of Dionysus; indeed the god is
traditionally said to have been placed at birth in a winnowing-fan as in
a cradle: in art he is represented as an infant so cradled; and from
these traditions and representations he derived the epithet of Liknites,
that is, “He of the Winnowing-fan.”   4

  Like other gods of vegetation Dionysus was believed to have died a
violent death, but to have been brought to life again; and his
sufferings, death, and resurrection were enacted in his sacred rites.
His tragic story is thus told by the poet Nonnus. Zeus in the form of a
serpent visited Persephone, and she bore him Zagreus, that is, Dionysus,
a horned infant. Scarcely was he born, when the babe mounted the throne
of his father Zeus and mimicked the great god by brandishing the
lightning in his tiny hand. But he did not occupy the throne long; for
the treacherous Titans, their faces whitened with chalk, attacked him
with knives while he was looking at himself in a mirror. For a time he
evaded their assaults by turning himself into various shapes, assuming
the likeness successively of Zeus and Cronus, of a young man, of a lion,
a horse, and a serpent. Finally, in the form of a bull, he was cut to
pieces by the murderous knives of his enemies. His Cretan myth, as
related by Firmicus Maternus, ran thus. He was said to have been the
bastard son of Jupiter, a Cretan king. Going abroad, Jupiter transferred
the throne and sceptre to the youthful Dionysus, but, knowing that his
wife Juno cherished a jealous dislike of the child, he entrusted
Dionysus to the care of guards upon whose fidelity he believed he could
rely. Juno, however, bribed the guards, and amusing the child with
rattles and a cunningly-wrought looking glass lured him into an ambush,
where her satellites, the Titans, rushed upon him, cut him limb from
limb, boiled his body with various herbs, and ate it. But his sister
Minerva, who had shared in the deed, kept his heart and gave it to
Jupiter on his return, revealing to him the whole history of the crime.
In his rage, Jupiter put the Titans to death by torture, and, to soothe
his grief for the loss of his son, made an image in which he enclosed
the child’s heart, and then built a temple in his honour. In this
version a Euhemeristic turn has been given to the myth by representing
Jupiter and Juno (Zeus and Hera) as a king and queen of Crete. The
guards referred to are the mythical Curetes who danced a war-dance round
the infant Dionysus, as they are said to have done round the infant
Zeus. Very noteworthy is the legend, recorded both by Nonnus and
Firmicus, that in his infancy Dionysus occupied for a short time the
throne of his father Zeus. So Proclus tells us that “Dionysus was the
last king of the gods appointed by Zeus. For his father set him on the
kingly throne, and placed in his hand the sceptre, and made him king of
all the gods of the world.” Such traditions point to a custom of
temporarily investing the king’s son with the royal dignity as a
preliminary to sacrificing him instead of his father. Pomegranates were
supposed to have sprung from the blood of Dionysus, as anemones from the
blood of Adonis and violets from the blood of Attis: hence women
refrained from eating seeds of pomegranates at the festival of the
Thesmophoria. According to some, the severed limbs of Dionysus were
pieced together, at the command of Zeus, by Apollo, who buried them on
Parnassus. The grave of Dionysus was shown in the Delphic temple beside
a golden statue of Apollo. However, according to another account, the
grave of Dionysus was at Thebes, where he is said to have been torn in
pieces. Thus far the resurrection of the slain god is not mentioned, but
in other versions of the myth it is variously related. According to one
version, which represented Dionysus as a son of Zeus and Demeter, his
mother pieced together his mangled limbs and made him young again. In
others it is simply said that shortly after his burial he rose from the
dead and ascended up to heaven; or that Zeus raised him up as he lay
mortally wounded; or that Zeus swallowed the heart of Dionysus and then
begat him afresh by Semele, who in the common legend figures as mother
of Dionysus. Or, again, the heart was pounded up and given in a potion
to Semele, who thereby conceived him.   5

  Turning from the myth to the ritual, we find that the Cretans
celebrated a biennial festival at which the passion of Dionysus was
represented in every detail. All that he had done or suffered in his
last moments was enacted before the eyes of his worshippers, who tore a
live bull to pieces with their teeth and roamed the woods with frantic
shouts. In front of them was carried a casket supposed to contain the
sacred heart of Dionysus, and to the wild music of flutes and cymbals
they mimicked the rattles by which the infant god had been lured to his
doom. Where the resurrection formed part of the myth, it also was acted
at the rites, and it even appears that a general doctrine of
resurrection, or at least of immortality, was inculcated on the
worshippers; for Plutarch, writing to console his wife on the death of
their infant daughter, comforts her with the thought of the immortality
of the soul as taught by tradition and revealed in the mysteries of
Dionysus. A different form of the myth of the death and resurrection of
Dionysus is that he descended into Hades to bring up his mother Semele
from the dead. The local Argive tradition was that he went down through
the Alcyonian lake; and his return from the lower world, in other words
his resurrection, was annually celebrated on the spot by the Argives,
who summoned him from the water by trumpet blasts, while they threw a
lamb into the lake as an offering to the warder of the dead. Whether
this was a spring festival does not appear, but the Lydians certainly
celebrated the advent of Dionysus in spring; the god was supposed to
bring the season with him. Deities of vegetation, who are believed to
pass a certain portion of each year underground, naturally come to be
regarded as gods of the lower world or of the dead. Both Dionysus and
Osiris were so conceived.   6

  A feature in the mythical character of Dionysus, which at first sight
appears inconsistent with his nature as a deity of vegetation, is that
he was often conceived and represented in animal shape, especially in
the form, or at least with the horns, of a bull. Thus he is spoken of as
“cow-born,” “bull,” “bull-shaped,” “bull-faced,” “bull-browed,”
“bull-horned,” “horn-bearing,” “two-horned,” “horned.” He was believed
to appear, at least occasionally, as a bull. His images were often, as
at Cyzicus, made in bull shape, or with bull horns; and he was painted
with horns. Types of the horned Dionysus are found amongst the surviving
monuments of antiquity. On one statuette he appears clad in a bull’s
hide, the head, horns, and hoofs hanging down behind. Again, he is
represented as a child with clusters of grapes round his brow, and a
calf’s head, with sprouting horns, attached to the back of his head. On
a red-figured vase the god is portrayed as a calf-headed child seated on
a woman’s lap. The people of Cynaetha held a festival of Dionysus in
winter, when men, who had greased their bodies with oil for the
occasion, used to pick out a bull from the herd and carry it to the
sanctuary of the god. Dionysus was supposed to inspire their choice of
the particular bull, which probably represented the deity himself; for
at his festivals he was believed to appear in bull form. The women of
Elis hailed him as a bull, and prayed him to come with his bull’s foot.
They sang, “Come hither, Dionysus, to thy holy temple by the sea; come
with the Graces to thy temple, rushing with thy bull’s foot, O goodly
bull, O goodly bull!” The Bacchanals of Thrace wore horns in imitation
of their god. According to the myth, it was in the shape of a bull that
he was torn to pieces by the Titans; and the Cretans, when they acted
the sufferings and death of Dionysus, tore a live bull to pieces with
their teeth. Indeed, the rending and devouring of live bulls and calves
appear to have been a regular feature of the Dionysiac rites. When we
consider the practice of portraying the god as a bull or with some of
the features of the animal, the belief that he appeared in bull form to
his worshippers at the sacred rites, and the legend that in bull form he
had been torn in pieces, we cannot doubt that in rending and devouring a
live bull at his festival the worshippers of Dionysus believed
themselves to be killing the god, eating his flesh, and drinking his
blood.   7

  Another animal whose form Dionysus assumed was the goat. One of his
names was “Kid.” At Athens and at Hermion he was worshipped under the
title of “the one of the Black Goatskin,” and a legend ran that on a
certain occasion he had appeared clad in the skin from which he took the
title. In the wine-growing district of Phlius, where in autumn the plain
is still thickly mantled with the red and golden foliage of the fading
vines, there stood of old a bronze image of a goat, which the husbandmen
plastered with gold-leaf as a means of protecting their vines against
blight. The image probably represented the vine-god himself. To save him
from the wrath of Hera, his father Zeus changed the youthful Dionysus
into a kid; and when the gods fled to Egypt to escape the fury of
Typhon, Dionysus was turned into a goat. Hence when his worshippers rent
in pieces a live goat and devoured it raw, they must have believed that
they were eating the body and blood of the god. The custom of tearing in
pieces the bodies of animals and of men and then devouring them raw has
been practised as a religious rite by savages in modern times. We need
not therefore dismiss as a fable the testimony of antiquity to the
observance of similar rites among the frenzied worshippers of
Bacchus.   8

  The custom of killing a god in animal form, which we shall examine
more in detail further on, belongs to a very early stage of human
culture, and is apt in later times to be misunderstood. The advance of
thought tends to strip the old animal and plant gods of their bestial
and vegetable husk, and to leave their human attributes (which are
always the kernel of the conception) as the final and sole residuum. In
other words, animal and plant gods tend to become purely
anthropomorphic. When they have become wholly or nearly so, the animals
and plants which were at first the deities themselves, still retain a
vague and ill-understood connexion with the anthropomorphic gods who
have developed out of them. The origin of the relationship between the
deity and the animal or plant having been forgotten, various stories are
invented to explain it. These explanations may follow one of two lines
according as they are based on the habitual or on the exceptional
treatment of the sacred animal or plant. The sacred animal was
habitually spared, and only exceptionally slain; and accordingly the
myth might be devised to explain either why it was spared or why it was
killed. Devised for the former purpose, the myth would tell of some
service rendered to the deity by the animal; devised for the latter
purpose, the myth would tell of some injury inflicted by the animal on
the god. The reason given for sacrificing goats to Dionysus exemplifies
a myth of the latter sort. They were sacrificed to him, it was said,
because they injured the vine. Now the goat, as we have seen, was
originally an embodiment of the god himself. But when the god had
divested himself of his animal character and had become essentially
anthropomorphic, the killing of the goat in his worship came to be
regarded no longer as a slaying of the deity himself, but as a sacrifice
offered to him; and since some reason had to be assigned why the goat in
particular should be sacrificed, it was alleged that this was a
punishment inflicted on the goat for injuring the vine, the object of
the god’s especial care. Thus we have the strange spectacle of a god
sacrificed to himself on the ground that he is his own enemy. And as the
deity is supposed to partake of the victim offered to him, it follows
that, when the victim is the god’s old self, the god eats of his own
flesh. Hence the goat-god Dionysus is represented as eating raw goat’s
blood; and the bull-god Dionysus is called “eater of bulls.” On the
analogy of these instances we may conjecture that wherever a deity is
described as the eater of a particular animal, the animal in question
was originally nothing but the deity himself. Later on we shall find
that some savages propitiate dead bears and whales by offering them
portions of their own bodies.   9

  All this, however, does not explain why a deity of vegetation should
appear in animal form. But the consideration of that point had better be
deferred till we have discussed the character and attributes of Demeter.
Meantime it remains to mention that in some places, instead of an
animal, a human being was torn in pieces at the rites of Dionysus. This
was the practice in Chios and Tenedos; and at Potniae in Boeotia the
tradition ran that it had been formerly the custom to sacrifice to the
goat-smiting Dionysus a child, for whom a goat was afterwards
substituted. At Orchomenus, as we have seen, the human victim was taken
from the women of an old royal family. As the slain bull or goat
represented the slain god, so, we may suppose, the human victim also
represented him.   10

  The legends of the deaths of Pentheus and Lycurgus, two kings who are
said to have been torn to pieces, the one by Bacchanals, the other by
horses, for their opposition to the rites of Dionysus, may be, as I have
already suggested, distorted reminiscences of a custom of sacrificing
divine kings in the character of Dionysus and of dispersing the
fragments of their broken bodies over the fields for the purpose of
fertilising them. It is probably no mere coincidence that Dionysus
himself is said to have been torn in pieces at Thebes, the very place
where according to legend the same fate befell king Pentheus at the
hands of the frenzied votaries of the vine-god.   11

  However, a tradition of human sacrifice may sometimes have been a mere
misinterpretation of a sacrificial ritual in which an animal victim was
treated as a human being. For example, at Tenedos the new-born calf
sacrificed to Dionysus was shod in buskins, and the mother cow was
tended like a woman in child-bed. At Rome a shegoat was sacrificed to
Vedijovis as if it were a human victim. Yet on the other hand it is
equally possible, and perhaps more probable, that these curious rites
were themselves mitigations of an older and ruder custom of sacrificing
human beings, and that the later pretence of treating the sacrificial
victims as if they were human beings was merely part of a pious and
merciful fraud, which palmed off on the deity less precious victims than
living men and women. This interpretation is supported by many undoubted
cases in which animals have been substituted for human victims.   12
