[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb04802)  [Next](gb04804) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 48. The Corn-Spirit as an Animal.

## Section 3. The Corn-spirit as a Cock.

ANOTHER form which the corn-spirit often assumes is that of a cock. In
Austria children are warned against straying in the corn-fields, because
the Corn-cock sits there, and will peck their eyes out. In North Germany
they say that “the Cock sits in the last sheaf”; and at cutting the last
corn the reapers cry, “Now we will chase out the Cock.” When it is cut
they say, “We have caught the Cock.” At Braller, in Transylvania, when
the reapers come to the last patch of corn, they cry, “Here we shall
catch the Cock.” At Fürstenwalde, when the last sheaf is about to be
bound, the master releases a cock, which he has brought in a basket, and
lets it run over the field. All the harvesters chase it till they catch
it. Elsewhere the harvesters all try to seize the last corn cut; he who
succeeds in grasping it must crow, and is called Cock. Among the Wends
it is or used to be customary for the farmer to hide a live cock under
the last sheaf as it lay on the field; and when the corn was being
gathered up, the harvester who lighted upon this sheaf had a right to
keep the cock, provided he could catch it. This formed the close of the
harvest-festival and was known as “the Cock-catching,” and the beer
which was served out to the reapers at this time went by the name of
“Cock-beer.” The last sheaf is called Cock, Cock-sheaf, Harvest-cock,
Harvest-hen, Autumn-hen. A distinction is made between a Wheat-cock,
Bean-cock, and so on, according to the crop. At Wünschensuhl, in
Thüringen, the last sheaf is made into the shape of a cock, and called
the Harvest-cock. A figure of a cock, made of wood, pasteboard, ears of
corn, or flowers, is borne in front of the harvest-waggon, especially in
Westphalia, where the cock carries in his beak fruits of the earth of
all kinds. Sometimes the image of the cock is fastened to the top of a
May-tree on the last harvest-waggon. Elsewhere a live cock, or a figure
of one, is attached to a harvest-crown and carried on a pole. In Galicia
and elsewhere this live cock is fastened to the garland of corn-ears or
flowers, which the leader of the women-reapers carries on her head as
she marches in front of the harvest procession. In Silesia a live cock
is presented to the master on a plate. The harvest-supper is called
Harvest-cock, Stubble-cock, etc., and a chief dish at it, at least in
some places, is a cock. If a waggoner upsets a harvest-waggon, it is
said that “he has spilt the Harvest-cock,” and he loses the cock, that
is, the harvest-supper. The harvest-waggon, with the figure of the cock
on it, is driven round the farmhouse before it is taken to the barn.
Then the cock is nailed over or at the side of the house-door, or on the
gable, and remains there till next harvest. In East Friesland the person
who gives the last stroke at threshing is called the Clucking-hen, and
grain is strewed before him as if he were a hen.   1

  Again, the corn-spirit is killed in the form of a cock. In parts of
Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Picardy the reapers place a live cock in
the corn which is to be cut last, and chase it over the field, or bury
it up to the neck in the ground; afterwards they strike off its head
with a sickle or scythe. In many parts of Westphalia, when the
harvesters bring the wooden cock to the farmer, he gives them a live
cock, which they kill with whips or sticks, or behead with an old sword,
or throw into the barn to the girls, or give to the mistress to cook. It
the Harvest-cock has not been spilt—that is, if no waggon has been
upset—the harvesters have the right to kill the farmyard cock by
throwing stones at it or beheading it. Where this custom has fallen into
disuse, it is still common for the farmer’s wife to make cockie-leekie
for the harvesters, and to show them the head of the cock which has been
killed for the soup. In the neighbourhood of Klausenburg, Transylvania,
a cock is buried on the harvest-field in the earth, so that only its
head appears. A young man then takes a scythe and cuts off the cock’s
head at a single sweep. If he fails to do this, he is called the Red
Cock for a whole year, and people fear that next year’s crop will be
bad. Near Udvarhely, in Transylvania, a live cock is bound up in the
last sheaf and killed with a spit. It is then skinned. The flesh is
thrown away, but the skin and feathers are kept till next year; and in
spring the grain from the last sheaf is mixed with the feathers of the
cock and scattered on the field which is to be tilled. Nothing could set
in a clearer light the identification of the cock with the spirit of the
corn. By being tied up in the last sheaf and killed, the cock is
identified with the corn, and its death with the cutting of the corn. By
keeping its feathers till spring, then mixing them with the seed-corn
taken from the very sheaf in which the bird had been bound, and
scattering the feathers together with the seed over the field, the
identity of the bird with the corn is again emphasised, and its
quickening and fertilising power, as an embodiment of the corn-spirit,
is intimated in the plainest manner. Thus the corn-spirit, in the form
of a cock, is killed at harvest, but rises to fresh life and activity in
spring. Again, the equivalence of the cock to the corn is expressed,
hardly less plainly, in the custom of burying the bird in the ground,
and cutting off its head (like the ears of corn) with the scythe.   2
