[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb04604)  [Next](gb04702) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 47. Lityerses.

## Section 1. Songs of the Corn Reapers.

IN THE PRECEDING pages an attempt has been made to show that in the
Corn-mother and Harvest-maiden of Northern Europe we have the prototypes
of Demeter and Persephone. But an essential feature is still wanting to
complete the resemblance. A leading incident in the Greek myth is the
death and resurrection of Persephone; it is this incident which, coupled
with the nature of the goddess as a deity of vegetation, links the myth
with the cults of Adonis, Attis, Osiris, and Dionysus; and it is in
virtue of this incident that the myth finds a place in our discussion of
the Dying God. It remains, therefore, to see whether the conception of
the annual death and resurrection of a god, which figures so prominently
in these great Greek and Oriental worships, has not also its origin or
its analogy in the rustic rites observed by reapers and vine-dressers
amongst the corn-shocks and the vines.   1

  Our general ignorance of the popular superstitions and customs of the
ancients has already been confessed. But the obscurity which thus hangs
over the first beginnings of ancient religion is fortunately dissipated
to some extent in the present case. The worships of Osiris, Adonis, and
Attis had their respective seats, as we have seen, in Egypt, Syria, and
Phrygia; and in each of these countries certain harvest and vintage
customs are known to have been observed, the resemblance of which to
each other and to the national rites struck the ancients themselves,
and, compared with the harvest customs of modern peasants and
barbarians, seems to throw some light on the origin of the rites in
question.   2

  It has been already mentioned, on the authority of Diodorus, that in
ancient Egypt the reapers were wont to lament over the first sheaf cut,
invoking Isis as the goddess to whom they owed the discovery of corn. To
the plaintive song or cry sung or uttered by Egyptian reapers the Greeks
gave the name of Maneros, and explained the name by a story that
Maneros, the only son of the first Egyptian king, invented agriculture,
and, dying an untimely death, was thus lamented by the people. It
appears, however, that the name Maneros is due to a misunderstanding of
the formula maa-ne-hra, “Come to the house,” which has been discovered
in various Egyptian writings, for example in the dirge of Isis in the
Book of the Dead. Hence we may suppose that the cry maa-ne-hra was
chanted by the reapers over the cut corn as a dirge for the death of the
corn-spirit (Isis or Osiris) and a prayer for its return. As the cry was
raised over the first ears reaped, it would seem that the corn-spirit
was believed by the Egyptians to be present in the first corn cut and to
die under the sickle. We have seen that in the Malay Peninsula and Java
the first ears of rice are taken to represent either the Soul of the
Rice or the Rice-bride and the Rice-bridegroom. In parts of Russia the
first sheaf is treated much in the same way that the last sheaf is
treated elsewhere. It is reaped by the mistress herself, taken home and
set in the place of honour near the holy pictures; afterwards it is
threshed separately, and some of its grain is mixed with the next year’s
seed-corn. In Aberdeenshire, while the last corn cut was generally used
to make the clyack sheaf, it was sometimes, though rarely, the first
corn cut that was dressed up as a woman and carried home with
ceremony.   3

  In Phoenicia and Western Asia a plaintive song, like that chanted by
the Egyptian corn-reapers, was sung at the vintage and probably (to
judge by analogy) also at harvest. This Phoenician song was called by
the Greeks Linus or Ailinus and explained, like Maneros, as a lament for
the death of a youth named Linus. According to one story Linus was
brought up by a shepherd, but torn to pieces by his dogs. But, like
Maneros, the name Linus or Ailinus appears to have originated in a
verbal misunderstanding, and to be nothing more than the cry ai lanu,
that is “Woe to us,” which the Phoenicians probably uttered in mourning
for Adonis; at least Sappho seems to have regarded Adonis and Linus as
equivalent.   4

  In Bithynia a like mournful ditty, called Bormus or Borimus, was
chanted by Mariandynian reapers. Bormus was said to have been a handsome
youth, the son of King Upias or of a wealthy and distinguished man. One
summer day, watching the reapers at work in his fields, he went to fetch
them a drink of water and was never heard of more. So the reapers sought
for him, calling him in plaintive strains, which they continued to chant
at harvest ever afterwards.   5
