[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb03902)  [Next](gb04002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 40. The Nature of Osiris.

## Section 1. Osiris a Corn-god.

THE FOREGOING survey of the myth and ritual of Osiris may suffice to
prove that in one of his aspects the god was a personification of the
corn, which may be said to die and come to life again every year.
Through all the pomp and glamour with which in later times the priests
had invested his worship, the conception of him as the corn-god comes
clearly out in the festival of his death and resurrection, which was
celebrated in the month of Khoiak and at a later period in the month of
Athyr. That festival appears to have been essentially a festival of
sowing, which properly fell at the time when the husbandman actually
committed the seed to the earth. On that occasion an effigy of the
corn-god, moulded of earth and corn, was buried with funeral rites in
the ground in order that, dying there, he might come to life again with
the new crops. The ceremony was, in fact, a charm to ensure the growth
of the corn by sympathetic magic, and we may conjecture that as such it
was practised in a simple form by every Egyptian farmer on his fields
long before it was adopted and transfigured by the priests in the
stately ritual of the temple. In the modern, but doubtless ancient, Arab
custom of burying “the Old Man,” namely, a sheaf of wheat, in the
harvest-field and praying that he may return from the dead, we see the
germ out of which the worship of the corn-god Osiris was probably
developed.   1

  The details of his myth fit in well with this interpretation of the
god. He was said to be the offspring of Sky and Earth. What more
appropriate parentage could be invented for the corn which springs from
the ground that has been fertilised by the water of heaven? It is true
that the land of Egypt owed its fertility directly to the Nile and not
to showers; but the inhabitants must have known or guessed that the
great river in its turn was fed by the rains which fell in the far
interior. Again, the legend that Osiris was the first to teach men the
use of corn would be most naturally told of the corn-god himself.
Further, the story that his mangled remains were scattered up and down
the land and buried in different places may be a mythical way of
expressing either the sowing or the winnowing of the grain. The latter
interpretation is supported by the tale that Isis placed the severed
limbs of Osiris on a corn-sieve. Or more probably the legend may be a
reminiscence of a custom of slaying a human victim, perhaps a
representative of the corn-spirit, and distributing his flesh or
scattering his ashes over the fields to fertilise them. In modern Europe
the figure of Death is sometimes torn in pieces, and the fragments are
then buried in the ground to make the crops grow well, and in other
parts of the world human victims are treated in the same way. With
regard to the ancient Egyptians we have it on the authority of Manetho
that they used to burn red-haired men and scatter their ashes with
winnowing fans, and it is highly significant that this barbarous
sacrifice was offered by the kings at the grave of Osiris. We may
conjecture that the victims represented Osiris himself, who was annually
slain, dismembered, and buried in their persons that he might quicken
the seed in the earth.   2

  Possibly in prehistoric times the kings themselves played the part of
the god and were slain and dismembered in that character. Set as well as
Osiris is said to have been torn in pieces after a reign of eighteen
days, which was commemorated by an annual festival of the same length.
According to one story Romulus, the first king of Rome, was cut in
pieces by the senators, who buried the fragments of him in the ground;
and the traditional day of his death, the seventh of July, was
celebrated with certain curious rites, which were apparently connected
with the artificial fertilisation of the fig. Again, Greek legend told
how Pentheus, king of Thebes, and Lycurgus, king of the Thracian
Edonians, opposed the vine-god Dionysus, and how the impious monarchs
were rent in pieces, the one by the frenzied Bacchanals, the other by
horses. The Greek traditions may well be distorted reminiscences of a
custom of sacrificing human beings, and especially divine kings, in the
character of Dionysus, a god who resembled Osiris in many points and was
said like him to have been torn limb from limb. We are told that in
Chios men were rent in pieces as a sacrifice to Dionysus; and since they
died the same death as their god, it is reasonable to suppose that they
personated him. The story that the Thracian Orpheus was similarly torn
limb from limb by the Bacchanals seems to indicate that he too perished
in the character of the god whose death he died. It is significant that
the Thracian Lycurgus, king of the Edonians, is said to have been put to
death in order that the ground, which had ceased to be fruitful, might
regain its fertility.   3

  Further, we read of a Norwegian king, Halfdan the Black, whose body
was cut up and buried in different parts of his kingdom for the sake of
ensuring the fruitfulness of the earth. He is said to have been drowned
at the age of forty through the breaking of the ice in spring. What
followed his death is thus related by the old Norse historian Snorri
Sturluson: “He had been the most prosperous (literally, blessed with
abundance) of all kings. So greatly did men value him that when the news
came that he was dead and his body removed to Hringariki and intended
for burial there, the chief men from Raumariki and Westfold and
Heithmörk came and all requested that they might take his body with them
and bury it in their various provinces; they thought that it would bring
abundance to those who obtained it. Eventually it was settled that the
body was distributed in four places. The head was laid in a barrow at
Steinn in Hringariki, and each party took away their own share and
buried it. All these barrows are called Halfdan’s barrows.” It should be
remembered that this Halfdan belonged to the family of the Ynglings, who
traced their descent from Frey, the great Scandinavian god of
fertility.   4

  The natives of Kiwai, an island lying off the mouth of the Fly River
in British New Guinea, tell of a certain magician named Segera, who had
sago for his totem. When Segera was old and ill, he told the people that
he would soon die, but that, nevertheless, he would cause their gardens
to thrive. Accordingly, he instructed them that when he was dead they
should cut him up and place pieces of his flesh in their gardens, but
his head was to be buried in his own garden. Of him it is said that he
outlived the ordinary age, and that no man knew his father, but that he
made the sago good and no one was hungry any more. Old men who were
alive some years ago affirmed that they had known Segera in their youth,
and the general opinion of the Kiwai people seems to be that Segera died
not more than two generations ago.   5

  Taken all together, these legends point to a widespread practice of
dismembering the body of a king or magician and burying the pieces in
different parts of the country in order to ensure the fertility of the
ground and probably also the fecundity of man and beast.   6

  To return to the human victims whose ashes the Egyptians scattered
with winnowing-fans, the red hair of these unfortunates was probably
significant. For in Egypt the oxen which were sacrificed had also to be
red; a single black or white hair found on the beast would have
disqualified it for the sacrifice. If, as I conjecture, these human
sacrifices were intended to promote the growth of the crops—and the
winnowing of their ashes seems to support this view—redhaired victims
were perhaps selected as best fitted to personate the spirit of the
ruddy grain. For when a god is represented by a living person, it is
natural that the human representative should be chosen on the ground of
his supposed resemblance to the divine original. Hence the ancient
Mexicans, conceiving the maize as a personal being who went through the
whole course of life between seed-time and harvest, sacrificed new-born
babes when the maize was sown, older children when it had sprouted, and
so on till it was fully ripe, when they sacrificed old men. A name for
Osiris was the “crop” or “harvest”; and the ancients sometimes explained
him as a personification of the corn.   7
