[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb05801)  [Next](gb05803.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 58. Human Scapegoats in Classical Antiquity.

## Section 2. The Human Scapegoat in Ancient Greece.

THE ANCIENT Greeks were also familiar with the use of a human scapegoat.
In Plutarch’s native town of Chaeronea a ceremony of this kind was
performed by the chief magistrate at the Town Hall, and by each
householder at his own home. It was called the “expulsion of hunger.” A
slave was beaten with rods of the agnus castus, and turned out of doors
with the words, “Out with hunger, and in with wealth and health.” When
Plutarch held the office of chief magistrate of his native town he
performed this ceremony at the Town Hall, and he has recorded the
discussion to which the custom afterwards gave rise.   1

  But in civilised Greece the custom of the scapegoat took darker forms
than the innocent rite over which the amiable and pious Plutarch
presided. Whenever Marseilles, one of the busiest and most brilliant of
Greek colonies, was ravaged by a plague, a man of the poorer classes
used to offer himself as a scapegoat. For a whole year he was maintained
at the public expense, being fed on choice and pure food. At the expiry
of the year he was dressed in sacred garments, decked with holy
branches, and led through the whole city, while prayers were uttered
that all the evils of the people might fall on his head. He was then
cast out of the city or stoned to death by the people outside of the
walls. The Athenians regularly maintained a number of degraded and
useless beings at the public expense; and when any calamity, such as
plague, drought, or famine, befell the city, they sacrificed two of
these outcast scapegoats. One of the victims was sacrificed for the men
and the other for the women. The former wore round his neck a string of
black, the latter a string of white figs. Sometimes, it seems, the
victim slain on behalf of the women was a woman. They were led about the
city and then sacrificed, apparently by being stoned to death outside
the city. But such sacrifices were not confined to extraordinary
occasions of public calamity; it appears that every year, at the
festival of the Thargelia in May, two victims, one for the men and one
for the women, were led out of Athens and stoned to death. The city of
Abdera in Thrace was publicly purified once a year, and one of the
burghers, set apart for the purpose, was stoned to death as a scapegoat
or vicarious sacrifice for the life of all the others; six days before
his execution he was excommunicated, “in order that he alone might bear
the sins of all the people.”   2

  From the Lover’s Leap, a white bluff at the southern end of their
island, the Leucadians used annually to hurl a criminal into the sea as
a scapegoat. But to lighten his fall they fastened live birds and
feathers to him, and a flotilla of small boats waited below to catch him
and convey him beyond the boundary. Probably these humane precautions
were a mitigation of an earlier custom of flinging the scapegoat into
the sea to drown. The Leucadian ceremony took place at the time of a
sacrifice to Apollo, who had a temple or sanctuary on the spot.
Elsewhere it was customary to cast a young man every year into the sea,
with the prayer, “Be thou our offscouring.” This ceremony was supposed
to rid the people of the evils by which they were beset, or according to
a somewhat different interpretation it redeemed them by paying the debt
they owed to the sea-god. As practised by the Greeks of Asia Minor in
the sixth century before our era, the custom of the scapegoat was as
follows. When a city suffered from plague, famine, or other public
calamity, an ugly or deformed person was chosen to take upon himself all
the evils which afflicted the community. He was brought to a suitable
place, where dried figs, a barley loaf, and cheese were put into his
hand. These he ate. Then he was beaten seven times upon his genital
organs with squills and branches of the wild fig and other wild trees,
while the flutes played a particular tune. Afterwards he was burned on a
pyre built of the wood of forest trees; and his ashes were cast into the
sea. A similar custom appears to have been annually celebrated by the
Asiatic Greeks at the harvest festival of the Thargelia.   3

  In the ritual just described the scourging of the victim with squills,
branches of the wild fig, and so forth, cannot have been intended to
aggravate his sufferings, otherwise any stick would have been good
enough to beat him with. The true meaning of this part of the ceremony
has been explained by W. Mannhardt. He points out that the ancients
attributed to squills a magical power of averting evil influences, and
that accordingly they hung them up at the doors of their houses and made
use of them in purificatory rites. Hence the Arcadian custom of whipping
the image of Pan with squills at a festival, or whenever the hunters
returned empty-handed, must have been meant, not to punish the god, but
to purify him from the harmful influences which were impeding him in the
exercise of his divine functions as a god who should supply the hunter
with game. Similarly the object of beating the human scapegoat on the
genital organs with squills and so on, must have been to release his
reproductive energies from any restraint or spell under which they might
be laid by demoniacal or other malignant agency; and as the Thargelia at
which he was annually sacrificed was an early harvest festival
celebrated in May, we must recognise in him a representative of the
creative and fertilising god of vegetation. The representative of the
god was annually slain for the purpose I have indicated, that of
maintaining the divine life in perpetual vigour, untainted by the
weakness of age; and before he was put to death it was not unnatural to
stimulate his reproductive powers in order that these might be
transmitted in full activity to his successor, the new god or new
embodiment of the old god, who was doubtless supposed immediately to
take the place of the one slain. Similar reasoning would lead to a
similar treatment of the scapegoat on special occasions, such as drought
or famine. If the crops did not answer to the expectation of the
husbandman, this would be attributed to some failure in the generative
powers of the god whose function it was to produce the fruits of the
earth. It might be thought that he was under a spell or was growing old
and feeble. Accordingly he was slain in the person of his
representative, with all the ceremonies already described, in order
that, born young again, he might infuse his own youthful vigour into the
stagnant energies of nature. On the same principle we can understand why
Mamurius Veturius was beaten with rods, why the slave at the Chaeronean
ceremony was beaten with the agnus castus (a tree to which magical
properties were ascribed), why the effigy of Death in some parts of
Europe is assailed with sticks and stones, and why at Babylon the
criminal who played the god scourged before he was crucified. The
purpose of the scourging was not to intensify the agony of the divine
sufferer, but on the contrary to dispel any malignant influences by
which at the supreme moment he might conceivably be beset.   4

  Thus far I have assumed that the human victims at the Thargelia
represented the spirits of vegetation in general, but it has been well
remarked by Mr. W. R. Paton that these poor wretches seem to have
masqueraded as the spirits of fig-trees in particular. He points out
that the process of caprification, as it is called, that is, the
artificial fertilisation of the cultivated fig-trees by hanging strings
of wild figs among the boughs, takes place in Greece and Asia Minor in
June about a month after the date of the Thargelia, and he suggests that
the hanging of the black and white figs round the necks of the two human
victims, one of whom represented the men and the other the women, may
have been a direct imitation of the process of caprification designed,
on the principle of imitative magic, to assist the fertilisation of the
fig-trees. And since caprification is in fact a marriage of the male
fig-tree with the female fig-tree, Mr. Paton further supposes that the
loves of the trees may, on the same principle of imitative magic, have
been simulated by a mock or even a real marriage between the two human
victims, one of whom appears sometimes to have been a woman. On this
view the practice of beating the human victims on their genitals with
branches of wild fig-trees and with squills was a charm intended to
stimulate the generative powers of the man and woman who for the time
being personated the male and the female fig-trees respectively, and who
by their union in marriage, whether real or pretended, were believed to
help the trees to bear fruit.   5

  The interpretation which I have adopted of the custom of beating the
human scapegoat with certain plants is supported by many analogies. Thus
among the Kai of German New Guinea, when a man wishes to make his banana
shoots bear fruit quickly, he beats them with a stick cut from a
banana-tree which has already borne fruit. Here it is obvious that
fruitfulness is believed to inhere in a stick cut from a fruitful tree
and to be imparted by contact to the young banana plants. Similarly in
New Caledonia a man will beat his taro plants lightly with a branch,
saying as he does so, “I beat this taro that it may grow,” after which
he plants the branch in the ground at the end of the field. Among the
Indians of Brazil at the mouth of the Amazon, when a man wishes to
increase the size of his generative organ, he strikes it with the fruit
of a white aquatic plant called aninga, which grows luxuriantly on the
banks of the river. The fruit, which is inedible, resembles a banana,
and is clearly chosen for this purpose on account of its shape. The
ceremony should be performed three days before or after the new moon. In
the county of Bekes, in Hungary, barren women are fertilised by being
struck with a stick which has first been used to separate pairing dogs.
Here a fertilising virtue is clearly supposed to be inherent in the
stick and to be conveyed by contact to the women. The Toradjas of
Central Celebes think that the plant Dracaena terminalis has a strong
soul, because when it is lopped, it soon grows up again. Hence when a
man is ill, his friends will sometimes beat him on the crown of the head
with Dracaena leaves in order to strengthen his weak soul with the
strong soul of the plant.   6

  These analogies, accordingly, support the interpretation which,
following my predecessors W. Mannhardt and Mr. W. R. Paton, I have given
of the beating inflicted on the human victims at the Greek harvest
festival of the Thargelia. That beating, being administered to the
generative organs of the victims by fresh green plants and branches, is
most naturally explained as a charm to increase the reproductive
energies of the men or women either by communicating to them the
fruitfulness of the plants and branches, or by ridding them of the
maleficent influences; and this interpretation is confirmed by the
observation that the two victims represented the two sexes, one of them
standing for the men in general and the other for the women. The season
of the year when the ceremony was performed, namely the time of the corn
harvest, tallies well with the theory that the rite had an agricultural
significance. Further, that it was above all intended to fertilise the
fig-trees is strongly suggested by the strings of black and white figs
which were hung round the necks of the victims, as well as by the blows
which were given their genital organs with the branches of a wild
fig-tree; since this procedure closely resembles the procedure which
ancient and modern husbandmen in Greek lands have regularly resorted to
for the purpose of actually fertilising their fig-trees. When we
remember what an important part the artificial fertilisation of the date
palm-tree appears to have played of old not only in the husbandry but in
the religion of Mesopotamia, there seems no reason to doubt that the
artificial fertilisation of the fig-tree may in like manner have
vindicated for itself a place in the solemn ritual of Greek
religion.   7

  If these considerations are just, we must apparently conclude that
while the human victims at the Thargelia certainly appear in later
classical times to have figured chiefly as public scapegoats, who
carried away with them the sins, misfortunes, and sorrows of the whole
people, at an earlier time they may have been looked on as embodiments
of vegetation, perhaps of the corn but particularly of the fig-trees;
and that the beating which they received and the death which they died
were intended primarily to brace and refresh the powers of vegetation
then beginning to droop and languish under the torrid heat of the Greek
summer.   8

  The view here taken of the Greek scapegoat, if it is correct, obviates
an objection which might otherwise be brought against the main argument
of this book. To the theory that the priest of Aricia was slain as a
representative of the spirit of the grove, it might have been objected
that such a custom has no analogy in classical antiquity. But reasons
have now been given for believing that the human being periodically and
occasionally slain by the Asiatic Greeks was regularly treated as an
embodiment of a divinity of vegetation. Probably the persons whom the
Athenians kept to be sacrificed were similarly treated as divine. That
they were social outcasts did not matter. On the primitive view a man is
not chosen to be the mouth-piece or embodiment of a god on account of
his high moral qualities or social rank. The divine afflatus descends
equally on the good and the bad, the lofty and the lowly. If then the
civilised Greeks of Asia and Athens habitually sacrificed men whom they
regarded as incarnate gods, there can be no inherent improbability in
the supposition that at the dawn of history a similar custom was
observed by the semibarbarous Latins in the Arician Grove.   9

  But to clinch the argument, it is clearly desirable to prove that the
custom of putting to death a human representative of a god was known and
practised in ancient Italy elsewhere than in the Arician Grove. This
proof I now propose to adduce.   10
