[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb05001)  [Next](gb05003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 50. Eating the God.

## Section 2. Eating the God among the Aztecs.

THE CUSTOM of eating bread sacramentally as the body of a god was
practised by the Aztecs before the discovery and conquest of Mexico by
the Spaniards. Twice a year, in May and December, an image of the great
Mexican god Huitzilopochtli or Vitzilipuztli was made of dough, then
broken in pieces, and solemnly eaten by his worshippers. The May
ceremony is thus described by the historian Acosta: “The Mexicans in the
month of May made their principal feast to their god Vitzilipuztli, and
two days before this feast, the virgins whereof I have spoken (the which
were shut up and secluded in the same temple and were as it were
religious women) did mingle a quantity of the seed of beets with roasted
maize, and then they did mould it with honey, making an idol of that
paste in bigness like to that of wood, putting instead of eyes grains of
green glass, of blue or white; and for teeth grains of maize set forth
with all the ornament and furniture that I have said. This being
finished, all the noblemen came and brought it an exquisite and rich
garment, like unto that of the idol, wherewith they did attire it. Being
thus clad and deckt, they did set it in an azured chair and in a litter
to carry it on their shoulders. The morning of this feast being come, an
hour before day all the maidens came forth attired in white, with new
ornaments, the which that day were called the Sisters of their god
Vitzilipuztli, they came crowned with garlands of maize roasted and
parched, being like unto azahar or the flower of orange; and about their
necks they had great chains of the same, which went bauldrick-wise under
their left arm. Their cheeks were dyed with vermilion, their arms from
the elbow to the wrist were covered with red parrots’ feathers.” Young
men, dressed in red robes and crowned like the virgins with maize, then
carried the idol in its litter to the foot of the great pyramid-shaped
temple, up the steep and narrow steps of which it was drawn to the music
of flutes, trumpets, cornets, and drums. “While they mounted up the idol
all the people stood in the court with much reverence and fear. Being
mounted to the top, and that they had placed it in a little lodge of
roses which they held ready, presently came the young men, which strewed
many flowers of sundry kinds, wherewith they filled the temple both
within and without. This done, all the virgins came out of their
convent, bringing pieces of paste compounded of beets and roasted maize,
which was of the same paste whereof their idol was made and compounded,
and they were of the fashion of great bones. They delivered them to the
young men, who carried them up and laid them at the idol’s feet,
wherewith they filled the whole place that it could receive no more.
They called these morsels of paste the flesh and bones of Vitzilipuztli.
Having laid abroad these bones, presently came all the ancients of the
temple, priests, Levites, and all the rest of the ministers, according
to their dignities and antiquities (for herein there was a strict order
amongst them) one after another, with their veils of diverse colours and
works, every one according to his dignity and office, having garlands
upon their heads and chains of flowers about their necks; after them
came their gods and goddesses whom they worshipped, of diverse figures,
attired in the same livery; then putting themselves in order about those
morsels and pieces of paste, they used certain ceremonies with singing
and dancing. By means whereof they were blessed and consecrated for the
flesh and bones of this idol. This ceremony and blessing (whereby they
were taken for the flesh and bones of the idol) being ended, they
honoured those pieces in the same sort as their god. … All the city came
to this goodly spectacle, and there was a commandment very strictly
observed throughout all the land, that the day of the feast of the idol
of Vitzilipuztli they should eat no other meat but this paste, with
honey, whereof the idol was made. And this should be eaten at the point
of day, and they should drink no water nor any other thing till after
noon: they held it for an ill sign, yea, for sacrilege to do the
contrary: but after the ceremonies ended, it was lawful for them to eat
anything. During the time of this ceremony they hid the water from their
little children, admonishing all such as had the use of reason not to
drink any water; which, if they did, the anger of God would come upon
them, and they should die, which they did observe very carefully and
strictly. The ceremonies, dancing, and sacrifice ended, the went to
unclothe themselves, and the priests and superiors of the temple took
the idol of paste, which they spoiled of all the ornaments it had, and
made many pieces, as well of the idol itself as of the truncheons which
they consecrated, and then they gave them to the people in manner of a
communion, beginning with the greater, and continuing unto the rest,
both men, women, and little children, who received it with such tears,
fear, and reverence as it was an admirable thing, saying that they did
eat the flesh and bones of God, where-with they were grieved. Such as
had any sick folks demanded thereof for them, and carried it with great
reverence and veneration.”   1

  From this interesting passage we learn that the ancient Mexicans, even
before the arrival of Christian missionaries, were fully acquainted with
the doctrine of transubstantiation and acted upon it in the solemn rites
of their religion. They believed that by consecrating bread their
priests could turn it into the very body of their god, so that all who
thereupon partook of the consecrated bread entered into a mystic
communion with the deity by receiving a portion of his divine substance
into themselves. The doctrine of transubstantiation, or the magical
conversion of bread into flesh, was also familiar to the Aryans of
ancient India long before the spread and even the rise of Christianity.
The Brahmans taught that the rice-cakes offered in sacrifice were
substitutes for human beings, and that they were actually converted into
the real bodies of men by the manipulation of the priest. We read that
“when it (the rice-cake) still consists of rice-meal, it is the hair.
When he pours water on it, it becomes skin. When he mixes it, it becomes
flesh: for then it becomes consistent; and consistent also is the flesh.
When it is baked, it becomes bone: for then it becomes somewhat hard;
and hard is the bone. And when he is about to take it off (the fire) and
sprinkles it with butter, he changes it into marrow. This is the
completeness which they call the fivefold animal sacrifice.”   2

  Now, too, we can perfectly understand why on the day of their solemn
communion with the deity the Mexicans refused to eat any other food than
the consecrated bread which they revered as the very flesh and bones of
their God, and why up till noon they might drink nothing at all, not
even water. They feared no doubt to defile the portion of God in their
stomachs by contact with common things. A similar pious fear led the
Creek and Seminole Indians, as we saw, to adopt the more thoroughgoing
expedient of rinsing out their bodies by a strong purgative before they
dared to partake of the sacrament of first-fruits.   3

  At the festival of the winter solstice in December the Aztecs killed
their god Huitzilopochtli in effigy first and ate him afterwards. As a
preparation for this solemn ceremony an image of the deity in the
likeness of a man was fashioned out of seeds of various sorts, which
were kneaded into a dough with the blood of children. The bones of the
god were represented by pieces of acacia wood. This image was placed on
the chief altar of the temple, and on the day of the festival the king
offered incense to it. Early next day it was taken down and set on its
feet in a great hall. Then a priest, who bore the name and acted the
part of the god Quetzalcoatl, took a flint-tipped dart and hurled it
into the breast of the dough-image, piercing it through and through.
This was called “killing the god Huitzilopochtli so that his body might
be eaten.” One of the priests cut out the heart of the image and gave it
to the king to eat. The rest of the image was divided into minute
pieces, of which every man great and small, down to the male children in
the cradle, receive one to eat. But no woman might taste a morsel. The
ceremony was called teoqualo, that is, “god is eaten.”   4

  At another festival the Mexicans made little images like men, which
stood for the cloud-capped mountains. These images were moulded of a
paste of various seeds and were dressed in paper ornaments. Some people
fashioned five, others ten, others as many as fifteen of them. Having
been made, they were placed in the oratory of each house and worshipped.
Four times in the course of the night offerings of food were brought to
them in tiny vessels; and people sang and played the flute before them
through all the hours of darkness. At break of day the priests stabbed
the images with a weaver’s instrument, cut off their heads, and tore out
their hearts, which they presented to the master of the house on a green
saucer. The bodies of the images were then eaten by all the family,
especially by the servants, “in order that by eating them they might be
preserved from certain distempers, to which those persons who were
negligent of worship to those deities conceived themselves to be
subject.”   5
