[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb05100)  [Next](gb05202.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 52. Killing the Divine Animal.

## Section 1. Killing the Sacred Buzzard.

IN THE PRECEDING chapters we saw that many communities which have
progressed so far as to subsist mainly by agriculture have been in the
habit of killing and eating their farinaceous deities either in their
proper form of corn, rice, and so forth, or in the borrowed shapes of
animals and men. It remains to show that hunting and pastoral tribes, as
well as agricultural peoples, have been in the habit of killing the
beings whom they worship. Among the worshipful beings or gods, if indeed
they deserve to be dignified by that name, whom hunters and shepherds
adore and kill are animals pure and simple, not animals regarded as
embodiments of other supernatural beings. Our first example is drawn
from the Indians of California, who living in a fertile country under a
serene and temperate sky, nevertheless rank near the bottom of the
savage scale. The Acagchemem tribe adored the great buzzard, and once a
year they celebrated a great festival called Panes or bird-feast in its
honour. The day selected for the festival was made known to the public
on the evening before its celebration and preparations were at once made
for the erection of a special temple (vanquech), which seems to have
been a circular or oval enclosure of stakes with the stuffed skin of a
coyote or prairie-wolf set up on a hurdle to represent the god
Chinigchinich. When the temple was ready, the bird was carried into it
in solemn procession and laid on an altar erected for the purpose. Then
all the young women, whether married or single, began to run to and fro,
as if distracted, some in one direction and some in another, while the
elders of both sexes remained silent spectators of the scene, and the
captains, tricked out in paint and feathers, danced round their adored
bird. These ceremonies being concluded, they seized upon the bird and
carried it to the principal temple, all the assembly uniting in the
grand display, and the captains dancing and singing at the head of the
procession. Arrived at the temple, they killed the bird without losing a
drop of its blood. The skin was removed entire and preserved with the
feathers as a relic or for the purpose of making the festal garment or
paelt. The carcase was buried in a hole in the temple, and the old women
gathered round the grave weeping and moaning bitterly, while they threw
various kinds of seeds or pieces of food on it, crying out, “Why did you
run away? Would you not have been better with us? you would have made
pinole (a kind of gruel) as we do, and if you had not run away, you
would not have become a Panes,” and so on. When this ceremony was
concluded, the dancing was resumed and kept up for three days and
nights. They said that the Panes was a woman who had run off to the
mountains and there been changed into a bird by the god Chinigchinich.
They believed that though they sacrificed the bird annually, she came to
life again and returned to her home in the mountains. Moreover, they
thought that “as often as the bird was killed, it became multiplied;
because every year all the different Capitanes celebrated the same feast
of Panes, and were firm in the opinion that the birds sacrificed were
but one and the same female.”   1

  The unity in multiplicity thus postulated by the Californians is very
noticeable and helps to explain their motive for killing the divine
bird. The notion of the life of a species as distinct from that of an
individual, easy and obvious as it seems to us, appears to be one which
the Californian savage cannot grasp. He is unable to conceive the life
of the species otherwise than as an individual life, and therefore as
exposed to the same dangers and calamities which menace and finally
destroy the life of the individual. Apparently he imagines that a
species left to itself will grow old and die like an individual, and
that therefore some step must be taken to save from extinction the
particular species which he regards as divine. The only means he can
think of to avert the catastrophe is to kill a member of the species in
whose veins the tide of life is still running strong and has not yet
stagnated among the fens of old age. The life thus diverted from one
channel will flow, he fancies, more freshly and freely in a new one; in
other words, the slain animal will revive and enter on a new term of
life with all the spring and energy of youth. To us this reasoning is
transparently absurd, but so too is the custom. A similar confusion, it
may be noted, between the individual life and the life of the species
was made by the Samoans. Each family had for its god a particular
species of animal; yet the death of one of these animals, for example an
owl, was not the death of the god, “he was supposed to be yet alive, and
incarnate in all the owls in existence.”   2
