[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb05704)  [Next](gb05802) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 58. Human Scapegoats in Classical Antiquity.

## Section 1. The Human Scapegoat in Ancient Rome.

WE are now prepared to notice the use of the human scapegoat in
classical antiquity. Every year on the fourteenth of March a man clad in
skins was led in procession through the streets of Rome, beaten with
long white rods, and driven out of the city. He was called Mamurius
Veturius, that is, “the old Mars,” and as the ceremony took place on the
day preceding the first full moon of the old Roman year (which began on
the first of March), the skin-clad man must have represented the Mars of
the past year, who was driven out at the beginning of a new one. Now
Mars was originally not a god of war but of vegetation. For it was to
Mars that the Roman husbandman prayed for the prosperity of his corn and
his vines, his fruit-trees and his copses; it was to Mars that the
priestly college of the Arval Brothers, whose business it was to
sacrifice for the growth of the crops, addressed their petitions almost
exclusively; and it was to Mars, as we saw, that a horse was sacrificed
in October to secure an abundant harvest. Moreover, it was to Mars,
under his title of “Mars of the woods” (Mars Silvanus), that farmers
offered sacrifice for the welfare of their cattle. We have already seen
that cattle are commonly supposed to be under the special patronage of
tree-gods. Once more, the consecration of the vernal month of March to
Mars seems to point him out as the deity of the sprouting vegetation.
Thus the Roman custom of expelling the old Mars at the beginning of the
new year in spring is identical with the Slavonic custom of “carrying
out Death,” if the view here taken of the latter custom is correct. The
similarity of the Roman and Slavonic customs has been already remarked
by scholars, who appear, however, to have taken Mamurius Veturius and
the corresponding figures in the Slavonic ceremonies to be
representatives of the old year rather than of the old god of
vegetation. It is possible that ceremonies of this kind may have come to
be thus interpreted in later times even by the people who practised
them. But the personification of a period of time is too abstract an
idea to be primitive. However, in the Roman, as in the Slavonic,
ceremony, the representative of the god appears to have been treated not
only as a deity of vegetation but also as a scapegoat. His expulsion
implies this; for there is no reason why the god of vegetation, as such,
should be expelled the city. But it is otherwise if he is also a
scapegoat; it then becomes necessary to drive him beyond the boundaries,
that he may carry his sorrowful burden away to other lands. And, in
fact, Mamurius Veturius appears to have been driven away to the land of
the Oscans, the enemies of Rome.   1
