[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb06800.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 69. Farewell to Nemi.

WE are at the end of our enquiry, but as often happens in the search
after truth, if we have answered one question, we have raised many more;
if we have followed one track home, we have had to pass by others that
opened off it and led, or seemed to lead, to far other goals than the
sacred grove at Nemi. Some of these paths we have followed a little way;
others, if fortune should be kind, the writer and the reader may one day
pursue together. For the present we have journeyed far enough together,
and it is time to part. Yet before we do so, we may well ask ourselves
whether there is not some more general conclusion, some lesson, if
possible, of hope and encouragement, to be drawn from the melancholy
record of human error and folly which has engaged our attention in this
book.   1

  If then we consider, on the one hand, the essential similarity of
man’s chief wants everywhere and at all times, and on the other hand,
the wide difference between the means he has adopted to satisfy them in
different ages, we shall perhaps be disposed to conclude that the
movement of the higher thought, so far as we can trace it, has on the
whole been from magic through religion to science. In magic man depends
on his own strength to meet the difficulties and dangers that beset him
on every side. He believes in a certain established order of nature on
which he can surely count, and which he can manipulate for his own ends.
When he discovers his mistake, when he recognises sadly that both the
order of nature which he had assumed and the control which he had
believed himself to exercise over it were purely imaginary, he ceases to
rely on his own intelligence and his own unaided efforts, and throws
himself humbly on the mercy of certain great invisible beings behind the
veil of nature, to whom he now ascribes all those far-reaching powers
which he once arrogated to himself. Thus in the acuter minds magic is
gradually superseded by religion, which explains the succession of
natural phenomena as regulated by the will, the passion, or the caprice
of spiritual beings like man in kind, though vastly superior to him in
power.   2

  But as time goes on this explanation in its turn proves to be
unsatisfactory. For it assumes that the succession of natural events is
not determined by immutable laws, but is to some extent variable and
irregular, and this assumption is not borne out by closer observation.
On the contrary, the more we scrutinise that succession the more we are
struck by the rigid uniformity, the punctual precision with which,
wherever we can follow them, the operations of nature are carried on.
Every great advance in knowledge has extended the sphere of order and
correspondingly restricted the sphere of apparent disorder in the world,
till now we are ready to anticipate that even in regions where chance
and confusion appear still to reign, a fuller knowledge would everywhere
reduce the seeming chaos to cosmos. Thus the keener minds, still
pressing forward to a deeper solution of the mysteries of the universe,
come to reject the religious theory of nature as inadequate, and to
revert in a measure to the older standpoint of magic by postulating
explicitly, what in magic had only been implicitly assumed, to wit, an
inflexible regularity in the order of natural events, which, if
carefully observed, enables us to foresee their course with certainty
and to act accordingly. In short, religion, regarded as an explanation
of nature, is displaced by science.   3

  But while science has this much in common with magic that both rest on
a faith in order as the underlying principle of all things, readers of
this work will hardly need to be reminded that the order presupposed by
magic differs widely from that which forms the basis of science. The
difference flows naturally from the different modes in which the two
orders have been reached. For whereas the order on which magic reckons
is merely an extension, by false analogy, of the order in which ideas
present themselves to our minds, the order laid down by science is
derived from patient and exact observation of the phenomena themselves.
The abundance, the solidity, and the splendour of the results already
achieved by science are well fitted to inspire us with a cheerful
confidence in the soundness of its method. Here at last, after groping
about in the dark for countless ages, man has hit upon a clue to the
labyrinth, a golden key that opens many locks in the treasury of nature.
It is probably not too much to say that the hope of progress—moral and
intellectual as well as material—in the future is bound up with the
fortunes of science, and that every obstacle placed in the way of
scientific discovery is a wrong to humanity.   4

  Yet the history of thought should warn us against concluding that
because the scientific theory of the world is the best that has yet been
formulated, it is necessarily complete and final. We must remember that
at bottom the generalisations of science or, in common parlance, the
laws of nature are merely hypotheses devised to explain that
ever-shifting phantasmagoria of thought which we dignify with the
high-sounding names of the world and the universe. In the last analysis
magic, religion, and science are nothing but theories of thought; and as
science has supplanted its predecessors, so it may hereafter be itself
superseded by some more perfect hypothesis, perhaps by some totally
different way of looking at the phenomena—of registering the shadows on
the screen—of which we in this generation can form no idea. The advance
of knowledge is an infinite progression towards a goal that for ever
recedes. We need not murmur at the endless pursuit:

Fatti non foste a viver come bruti

Ma per seguir virtute e conoscenza.   5

  Great things will come of that pursuit, though we may not enjoy them.
Brighter stars will rise on some voyager of the future—some great
Ulysses of the realms of thought—than shine on us. The dreams of magic
may one day be the waking realities of science. But a dark shadow lies
athwart the far end of this fair prospect. For however vast the increase
of knowledge and of power which the future may have in store for man, he
can scarcely hope to stay the sweep of those great forces which seem to
be making silently but relentlessly for the destruction of all this
starry universe in which our earth swims as a speck or mote. In the ages
to come man may be able to predict, perhaps even to control, the wayward
courses of the winds and clouds, but hardly will his puny hands have
strength to speed afresh our slackening planet in its orbit or rekindle
the dying fire of the sun. Yet the philosopher who trembles at the idea
of such distant catastrophes may console himself by reflecting that
these gloomy apprehensions, like the earth and the sun themselves, are
only parts of that unsubstantial world which thought has conjured up out
of the void, and that the phantoms which the subtle enchantress has
evoked to-day she may ban to-morrow. They too, like so much that to
common eyes seems solid, may melt into air, into thin air.   6

  Without dipping so far into the future, we may illustrate the course
which thought has hitherto run by likening it to a web woven of three
different threads—the black thread of magic, the red thread of religion,
and the white thread of science, if under science we may include those
simple truths, drawn from observation of nature, of which men in all
ages have possessed a store. Could we then survey the web of thought
from the beginning, we should probably perceive it to be at first a
chequer of black and white, a patchwork of true and false notions,
hardly tinged as yet by the red thread of religion. But carry your eye
farther along the fabric and you will remark that, while the black and
white chequer still runs through it, there rests on the middle portion
of the web, where religion has entered most deeply into its texture, a
dark crimson stain, which shades off insensibly into a lighter tint as
the white thread of science is woven more and more into the tissue. To a
web thus chequered and stained, thus shot with threads of diverse hues,
but gradually changing colour the farther it is unrolled, the state of
modern thought, with all its divergent aims and conflicting tendencies,
may be compared. Will the great movement which for centuries has been
slowly altering the complexion of thought be continued in the near
future? or will a reaction set in which may arrest progress and even
undo much that has been done? To keep up our parable, what will be the
colour of the web which the Fates are now weaving on the humming loom of
time? will it be white or red? We cannot tell. A faint glimmering light
illumines the backward portion of the web. Clouds and thick darkness
hide the other end.   7

  Our long voyage of discovery is over and our bark has drooped her
weary sails in port at last. Once more we take the road to Nemi. It is
evening, and as we climb the long slope of the Appian Way up to the
Alban Hills, we look back and see the sky aflame with sunset, its golden
glory resting like the aureole of a dying saint over Rome and touching
with a crest of fire the dome of St. Peter’s. The sight once seen can
never be forgotten, but we turn from it and pursue our way darkling
along the mountain side, till we come to Nemi and look down on the lake
in its deep hollow, now fast disappearing in the evening shadows. The
place has changed but little since Diana received the homage of her
worshippers in the sacred grove. The temple of the sylvan goddess,
indeed, has vanished and the King of the Wood no longer stands sentinel
over the Golden Bough. But Nemi’s woods are still green, and as the
sunset fades above them in the west, there comes to us, borne on the
swell of the wind, the sound of the church bells of Aricia ringing the
Angelus. Ave Maria! Sweet and solemn they chime out from the distant
town and die lingeringly away across the wide Campagnan marshes. Le roi
est mort, vive le roi! Ave Maria!   8
