[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb06600)  [Next](gb06702.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 67. The External Soul in Folk-Custom.

## Section 1. The External Soul in Inanimate Things.

THUS the idea that the soul may be deposited for a longer or shorter
time in some place of security outside the body, or at all events in the
hair, is found in the popular tales of many races. It remains to show
that the idea is not a mere figment devised to adorn a tale, but is a
real article of primitive faith, which has given rise to a corresponding
set of customs.   1

  We have seen that in the tales the hero, as a preparation for battle,
sometimes removes his soul from his body, in order that his body may be
invulnerable and immortal in the combat. With a like intention the
savage removes his soul from his body on various occasions of real or
imaginary peril. Thus among the people of Minahassa in Celebes, when a
family moves into a new house, a priest collects the souls of the whole
family in a bag, and afterwards restores them to their owners, because
the moment of entering a new house is supposed to be fraught with
supernatural danger. In Southern Celebes, when a woman is brought to
bed, the messenger who fetches the doctor or the midwife always carries
with him something made of iron, such as a chopping-knife, which he
delivers to the doctor. The doctor must keep the thing in his house till
the confinement is over, when he gives it back, receiving a fixed sum of
money for doing so. The chopping-knife, or whatever it is, represents
the woman’s soul, which at this critical time is believed to be safer
out of her body than in it. Hence the doctor must take great care of the
object; for were it lost, the woman’s soul would assuredly, they think,
be lost with it.   2

  Among the Dyaks of Pinoeh, a district of South-eastern Borneo, when a
child is born, a medicine-man is sent for, who conjures the soul of the
infant into half a coco-nut, which he thereupon covers with a cloth and
places on a square platter or charger suspended by cords from the roof.
This ceremony he repeats at every new moon for a year. The intention of
the ceremony is not explained by the writer who describes it, but we may
conjecture that it is to place the soul of the child in a safer place
than its own frail little body. This conjecture is confirmed by the
reason assigned for a similar custom observed elsewhere in the Indian
Archipelago. In the Kei Islands, when there is a newly-born child in a
house, an empty coco-nut, split and spliced together again, may
sometimes be seen hanging beside a rough wooden image of an ancestor.
The soul of the infant is believed to be temporarily deposited in the
coco-nut in order that it may be safe from the attacks of evil spirits;
but when the child grows bigger and stronger, the soul will take up its
permanent abode in its own body. Similarly among the Esquimaux of
Alaska, when a child is sick, the medicine-man will sometimes extract
its soul from its body and place it for safe-keeping in an amulet, which
for further security he deposits in his own medicine-bag. It seems
probable that many amulets have been similarly regarded as soul-boxes,
that is, as safes in which the souls of the owners are kept for greater
security. An old Mang’anje woman in the West Shire district of British
Central Africa used to wear round her neck an ivory ornament, hollow,
and about three inches long, which she called her life or soul.
Naturally, she would not part with it; a planter tried to buy it of her,
but in vain. When Mr. James Macdonald was one day sitting in the house
of a Hlubi chief, awaiting the appearance of that great man, who was
busy decorating his person, a native pointed to a pair of magnificent
ox-horns, and said, “Ntame has his soul in these horns.” The horns were
those of an animal which had been sacrificed, and they were held sacred.
A magician had fastened them to the roof to protect the house and its
inmates from the thunder-bolt. “The idea,” adds Mr. Macdonald, “is in no
way foreign to South African thought. A man’s soul there may dwell in
the roof of his house, in a tree, by a spring of water, or on some
mountain scaur.” Among the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula in New
Britain there is a secret society which goes by the name of Ingniet or
Ingiet. On his entrance into it every man receives a stone in the shape
either of a human being or of an animal, and henceforth his soul is
believed to be knit up in a manner with the stone. If it breaks, it is
an evil omen for him; they say that the thunder has struck the stone and
that he who owns it will soon die. If nevertheless the man survives the
breaking of his soul-stone, they say that it was not a proper soul-stone
and he gets a new one instead. The emperor Romanus Lecapenus was once
informed by an astronomer that the life of Simeon, prince of Bulgaria,
was bound up with a certain column in Constantinople, so that if the
capital of the column were removed, Simeon would immediately die. The
emperor took the hint and removed the capital, and at the same hour, as
the emperor learned by enquiry, Simeon died of heart disease in
Bulgaria.   3

  Again, we have seen that in folk-tales a man’s soul or strength is
sometimes represented as bound up with his hair, and that when his hair
is cut off he dies or grows weak. So the natives of Amboyna used to
think that their strength was in their hair and would desert them if it
were shorn. A criminal under torture in a Dutch Court of that island
persisted in denying his guilt till his hair was cut off, when he
immediately confessed. One man, who was tried for murder, endured
without flinching the utmost ingenuity of his torturers till he saw the
surgeon standing with a pair of shears. On asking what this was for, and
being told that it was to cut his hair, he begged they would not do it,
and made a clean breast. In subsequent cases, when torture failed to
wring a confession from a prisoner, the Dutch authorities made a
practice of cutting off his hair.   4

  Here in Europe it used to be thought that the maleficent powers of
witches and wizards resided in their hair, and that nothing could make
any impression on the miscreants so long as they kept their hair on.
Hence in France it was customary to shave the whole bodies of persons
charged with sorcery before handing them over to the torturer. Millaeus
witnessed the torture of some persons at Toulouse, from whom no
confession could be wrung until they were stripped and completely
shaven, when they readily acknowledged the truth of the charge. A woman
also, who apparently led a pious life, was put to the torture on
suspicion of witchcraft, and bore her agonies with incredible constancy,
until complete depilation drove her to admit her guilt. The noted
inquisitor Sprenger contented himself with shaving the head of the
suspected witch or wizard; but his more thoroughgoing colleague Cumanus
shaved the whole bodies of forty-seven women before committing them all
to the flames. He had high authority for this rigorous scrutiny, since
Satan himself, in a sermon preached from the pulpit of North Berwick
church, comforted his many servants by assuring them that no harm could
befall them “sa lang as their hair wes on, and sould newir latt ane teir
fall fra thair ene.” Similarly in Bastar, a province of India, “if a man
is adjudged guilty of witchcraft, he is beaten by the crowd, his hair is
shaved, the hair being supposed to constitute his power of mischief, his
front teeth are knocked out, in order, it is said, to prevent him from
muttering incantations… . Women suspected of sorcery have to undergo the
same ordeal; if found guilty, the same punishment is awarded, and after
being shaved, their hair is attached to a tree in some public place.” So
among the Bhils of India, when a woman was convicted of witchcraft and
had been subjected to various forms of persuasion, such as hanging head
downwards from a tree and having pepper put into her eyes, a lock of
hair was cut from her head and buried in the ground, “that the last link
between her and her former powers of mischief might be broken.” In like
manner among the Aztecs of Mexico, when wizards and witches “had done
their evil deeds, and the time came to put an end to their detestable
life, some one laid hold of them and cropped the hair on the crown of
their heads, which took from them all their power of sorcery and
enchantment, and then it was that by death they put an end to their
odious existence.”   5
