[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb06002)  [Next](gb06004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 60. Between Heaven and Earth.

## Section 3. The Seclusion of Girls at Puberty.

NOW it is remarkable that the foregoing two rules—not to touch the
ground and not to see the sun—are observed either separately or
conjointly by girls at puberty in many parts of the world. Thus amongst
the negroes of Loango girls at puberty are confined in separate huts,
and they may not touch the ground with any part of their bare body.
Among the Zulus and kindred tribes of South Africa, when the first signs
of puberty show themselves “while a girl is walking, gathering wood, or
working in the field, she runs to the river and hides herself among the
reeds for the day, so as not to be seen by men. She covers her head
carefully with her blanket that the sun may not shine on it and shrivel
her up into a withered skeleton, as would result from exposure to the
sun’s beams. After dark she returns to her home and is secluded” in a
hut for some time. With the Awa-nkonde, a tribe at the northern end of
Lake Nyassa, it is a rule that after her first menstruation a girl must
be kept apart, with a few companions of her own sex, in a darkened
house. The floor is covered with dry banana leaves, but no fire may be
lit in the house, which is called “the house of the Awasungu,” that is,
“of maidens who have no hearts.”   1

  In New Ireland girls are confined for four or five years in small
cages, being kept in the dark and not allowed to set foot on the ground.
The custom has been thus described by an eye-witness. “I heard from a
teacher about some strange custom connected with some of the young girls
here, so I asked the chief to take me to the house where they were. The
house was about twenty-five feet in length, and stood in a reed and
bamboo enclosure, across the entrance to which a bundle of dried grass
was suspended to show that it was strictly ‘tabu.’ Inside the house were
three conical structures about seven or eight feet in height, and about
ten or twelve feet in circumference at the bottom, and for about four
feet from the ground, at which point they tapered off to a point at the
top. These cages were made of the broad leaves of the pandanus-tree,
sewn quite close together so that no light and little or no air could
enter. On one side of each is an opening which is closed by a double
door of plaited cocoa-nut tree and pandanus-tree leaves. About three
feet from the ground there is a stage of bamboos which forms the floor.
In each of these cages we were told there was a young woman confined,
each of whom had to remain for at least four or five years, without ever
being allowed to go outside the house. I could scarcely credit the story
when I heard it; the whole thing seemed too horrible to be true. I spoke
to the chief, and told him that I wished to see the inside of the cages,
and also to see the girls that I might make them a present of a few
beads. He told me that it was ‘tabu,’ forbidden for any men but their
own relations to look at them; but I suppose the promised beads acted as
an inducement, and so he sent away for some old lady who had charge, and
who alone is allowed to open the doors. While we were waiting we could
hear the girls talking to the chief in a querulous way as if objecting
to something or expressing their fears. The old woman came at length and
certainly she did not seem a very pleasant jailor or guardian; nor did
she seem to favour the request of the chief to allow us to see the
girls, as she regarded us with anything but pleasant looks. However, she
had to undo the door when the chief told her to do so, and then the
girls peeped out at us, and, when told to do so, they held out their
hands for the beads. I, however, purposely sat at some distance away and
merely held out the beads to them, as I wished to draw them quite
outside, that I might inspect the inside of the cages. This desire of
mine gave rise to another difficulty, as these girls were not allowed to
put their feet to the ground all the time they were confined in these
places. However, they wished to get the beads, and so the old lady had
to go outside and collect a lot of pieces of wood and bamboo, which she
placed on the ground, and then going to one of the girls, she helped her
down and held her hand as she stepped from one piece of wood to another
until she came near enough to get the beads I held out to her. I then
went to inspect the inside of the cage out of which she had come, but
could scarely put my head inside of it, the atmosphere was so hot and
stifling. It was clean and contained nothing but a few short lengths of
bamboo for holding water. There was only room for the girl to sit or lie
down in a crouched position on the bamboo platform, and when the doors
are shut it must be nearly or quite dark inside. The girls are never
allowed to come out except once a day to bathe in a dish or wooden bowl
placed close to each cage. They say that they perspire profusely. They
are placed in these stifling cages when quite young, and must remain
there until they are young women, when they are taken out and have each
a great marriage feast provided for them. One of them was about fourteen
or fifteen years old, and the chief told us that she had been there for
five years, but would soon be taken out now. The other two were about
eight and ten years old, and they have to stay there for several years
longer.”   2

  In Kabadi, a district of British New Guinea, “daughters of chiefs,
when they are about twelve or thirteen years of age, are kept indoors
for two or three years, never being allowed, under any pretence, to
descend from the house, and the house is so shaded that the sun cannot
shine on them.” Among the Yabim and Bukaua, two neighbouring and kindred
tribes on the coast of Northern New Guinea, a girl at puberty is
secluded for some five or six weeks in an inner part of the house; but
she may not sit on the floor, lest her uncleanliness should cleave to
it, so a log of wood is placed for her to squat on. Moreover, she may
not touch the ground with her feet; hence if she is obliged to quit the
house for a short time, she is muffled up in mats and walks on two
halves of a coco-nut shell, which are fastened like sandals to her feet
by creeping plants. Among the Ot Danoms of Borneo girls at the age of
eight or ten years are shut up in a little room or cell of the house,
and cut off from all intercourse with the world for a long time. The
cell, like the rest of the house, is raised on piles above the ground,
and is lit by a single small window opening on a lonely place, so that
the girl is in almost total darkness. She may not leave the room on any
pretext whatever, not even for the most necessary purposes. None of her
family may see her all the time she is shut up, but a single slave woman
is appointed to wait on her. During her lonely confinement, which often
lasts seven years, the girl occupies herself in weaving mats or with
other handiwork. Her bodily growth is stunted by the long want of
exercise, and when, on attaining womanhood, she is brought out, her
complexion is pale and wax-like. She is now shown the sun, the earth,
the water, the trees, and the flowers, as if she were newly born. Then a
great feast is made, a slave is killed, and the girl is smeared with his
blood. In Ceram girls at puberty were formerly shut up by themselves in
a hut which was kept dark. In Yap, one of the Caroline Islands, should a
girl be overtaken by her first menstruation on the public road, she may
not sit down on the earth, but must beg for a coco-nut shell to put
under her. She is shut up for several days in a small hut at a distance
from her parents’ house, and afterwards she is bound to sleep for a
hundred days in one of the special houses which are provided for the use
of menstruous women.   3

  In the island of Mabuiag, Torres Straits, when the signs of puberty
appear on a girl, a circle of bushes is made in a dark corner of the
house. Here, decked with shoulder-belts, armlets, leglets just below the
knees, and anklets, wearing a chaplet on her head, and shell ornaments
in her ears, on her chest, and on her back, she squats in the midst of
the bushes, which are piled so high round about her that only her head
is visible. In this state of seclusion she must remain for three months.
All this time the sun may not shine upon her, but at night she is
allowed to slip out of the hut, and the bushes that hedge her in are
then changed. She may not feed herself or handle food, but is fed by one
or two old women, her maternal aunts, who are especially appointed to
look after her. One of these women cooks food for her at a special fire
in the forest. The girl is forbidden to eat turtle or turtle eggs during
the season when the turtles are breeding; but no vegetable food is
refused her. No man, not even her own father, may come into the house
while her seclusion lasts; for if her father saw her at this time he
would certainly have bad luck in his fishing, and would probably smash
his canoe the very next time he went out in it. At the end of the three
months she is carried down to a freshwater creek by her attendants,
hanging on to their shoulders in such a way that her feet do not touch
the ground, while the women of the tribe form a ring round her, and thus
escort her to the beach. Arrived at the shore, she is stripped of her
ornaments, and the bearers stagger with her into the creek, where they
immerse her, and all the other women join in splashing water over both
the girl and her bearers. When they come out of the water one of the two
attendants makes a heap of grass for her charge to squat upon. The other
runs to the reef, catches a small crab, tears off its claws, and hastens
back with them to the creek. Here in the meantime a fire has been
kindled, and the claws are roasted at it. The girl is then fed by her
attendants with the roasted claws. After that she is freshly decorated,
and the whole party marches back to the village in a single rank, the
girl walking in the centre between her two old aunts, who hold her by
the wrists. The husbands of her aunts now receive her and lead her into
the house of one of them, where all partake of food, and the girl is
allowed once more to feed herself in the usual manner. A dance follows,
in which the girl takes a prominent part, dancing between the husbands
of the two aunts who had charge of her in her retirement.   4

  Among the Yaraikanna tribe of Cape York Peninsula, in Northern
Queensland, a girl at puberty is said to live by herself for a month or
six weeks; no man may see her, though any woman may. She stays in a hut
or shelter specially made for her, on the floor of which she lies
supine. She may not see the sun, and towards sunset she must keep her
eyes shut until the sun has gone down, otherwise it is thought that her
nose will be diseased. During her seclusion she may eat nothing that
lives in salt water, or a snake would kill her. An old woman waits upon
her and supplies her with roots, yams, and water. Some Australian tribes
are wont to bury their girls at such seasons more or less deeply in the
ground, perhaps in order to hide them from the light of the sun.   5

  Among the Indians of California a girl at her first menstruation “was
thought to be possessed of a particular degree of supernatural power,
and this was not always regarded as entirely defiling or malevolent.
Often, however, there was a strong feeling of the power of evil inherent
in her condition. Not only was she secluded from her family and the
community, but an attempt was made to seclude the world from her. One of
the injunctions most strongly laid upon her was not to look about her.
She kept her head bowed and was forbidden to see the world and the sun.
Some tribes covered her with a blanket. Many of the customs in this
connection resembled those of the North Pacific Coast most strongly,
such as the prohibition to the girl to touch or scratch her head with
her hand, a special implement being furnished her for the purpose.
Sometimes she could eat only when fed and in other cases fasted
altogether.”   6

  Among the Chinook Indians who inhabited the coast of Washington State,
when a chief’s daughter attained to puberty, she was hidden for five
days from the view of the people; she might not look at them nor at the
sky, nor might she pick berries. It was believed that if she were to
look at the sky, the weather would be bad; that if she picked berries,
it would rain; and that when she hung her towel of cedar-bark on a
spruce-tree, the tree withered up at once. She went out of the house by
a separate door and bathed in a creek far from the village. She fasted
for some days, and for many days more she might not eat fresh food.   7

  Amongst the Aht or Nootka Indians of Vancouver Island, when girls
reach puberty they are placed in a sort of gallery in the house “and are
there surrounded completely with mats, so that neither the sun nor any
fire can be seen. In this cage they remain for several days. Water is
given them, but no food. The longer a girl remains in this retirement
the greater honour is it to the parents; but she is disgraced for life
if it is known that she has seen fire or the sun during this initiatory
ordeal.” Pictures of the mythical thunder-bird are painted on the
screens behind which she hides. During her seclusion she may neither
move nor lie down, but must always sit in a squatting posture. She may
not touch her hair with her hands, but is allowed to scratch her head
with a comb or a piece of bone provided for the purpose. To scratch her
body is also forbidden, as it is believed that every scratch would leave
a scar. For eight months after reaching maturity she may not eat any
fresh food, particularly salmon; moreover, she must eat by herself, and
use a cup and dish of her own.   8

  In the Tsetsaut tribe of British Columbia a girl at puberty wears a
large hat of skin which comes down over her face and screens it from the
sun. It is believed that if she were to expose her face to the sun or to
the sky, rain would fall. The hat protects her face also against the
fire, which ought not to strike her skin; to shield her hands she wears
mittens. In her mouth she carries the tooth of an animal to prevent her
own teeth from becoming hollow. For a whole year she may not see blood
unless her face is blackened; otherwise she would grow blind. For two
years she wears the hat and lives in a hut by herself, although she is
allowed to see other people. At the end of two years a man takes the hat
from her head and throws it away. In the Bilqula or Bella Coola tribe of
British Columbia, when a girl attains puberty she must stay in the shed
which serves as her bedroom, where she has a separate fireplace. She is
not allowed to descend to the main part of the house, and may not sit by
the fire of the family. For four days she is bound to remain motionless
in a sitting posture. She fasts during the day, but is allowed a little
food and drink very early in the morning. After the four days’ seclusion
she may leave her room, but only through a separate opening cut in the
floor, for the houses are raised on piles. She may not yet come into the
chief room. In leaving the house she wears a large hat which protects
her face against the rays of the sun. It is believed that if the sun
were to shine on her face her eyes would suffer. She may pick berries on
the hills, but may not come near the river or sea for a whole year. Were
she to eat fresh salmon she would lose her senses, or her mouth would be
changed into a long beak.   9

  Amongst the Tlingit (Thlinkeet) or Kolosh Indians of Alaska, when a
girl showed signs of womanhood she used to be confined to a little hut
or cage, which was completely blocked up with the exception of a small
air-hole. In this dark and filthy abode she had to remain a year,
without fire, exercise, or associates. Only her mother and a female
slave might supply her with nourishment. Her food was put in at the
little window; she had to drink out of the wing-bone of a white-headed
eagle. The time of her seclusion was afterwards reduced in some places
to six or three months or even less. She had to wear a sort of hat with
long flaps, that her gaze might not pollute the sky; for she was thought
unfit for the sun to shine upon, and it was imagined that her look would
destroy the luck of a hunter, fisher, or gambler, turn things to stone,
and do other mischief. At the end of her confinement her old clothes
were burnt, new ones were made, and a feast was given, at which a slit
was cut in her under lip parallel to the mouth, and a piece of wood or
shell was inserted to keep the aperture open. Among the Koniags, an
Esquimau people of Alaska, a girl at puberty was placed in a small hut
in which she had to remain on her hands and feet for six months; then
the hut was enlarged a little so as to allow her to straighten her back,
but in this posture she had to remain for six months more. All this time
she was regarded as an unclean being with whom no one might hold
intercourse.   10

  When symptoms of puberty appeared on a girl for the first time, the
Guaranis of Southern Brazil, on the borders of Paraguay, used to sew her
up in her hammock, leaving only a small opening in it to allow her to
breathe. In this condition, wrapt up and shrouded like a corpse, she was
kept for two or three days or so long as the symptoms lasted, and during
this time she had to observe a most rigorous fast. After that she was
entrusted to a matron, who cut the girl’s hair and enjoined her to
abstain most strictly from eating flesh of any kind until her hair
should be grown long enough to hide her ears. In similar circumstances
the Chiriguanos of South-eastern Bolivia hoisted the girl in her hammock
to the roof, where she stayed for a month: the second month the hammock
was let half-way down from the roof; and in the third month old women,
armed with sticks, entered the hut and ran about striking everything
they met, saying they were hunting the snake that had wounded the
girl.   11

  Among the Matacos or Mataguayos, an Indian tribe of the Gran Chaco, a
girl at puberty has to remain in seclusion for some time. She lies
covered up with branches or other things in a corner of the hut, seeing
no one and speaking to no one, and during this time she may eat neither
flesh nor fish. Meantime a man beats a drum in front of the house. Among
the Yuracares, an Indian tribe of Eastern Bolivia, when a girl perceives
the signs of puberty, her father constructs a little hut of palm leaves
near the house. In this cabin he shuts up his daughter so that she
cannot see the light, and there she remains fasting rigorously for four
days.   12

  Amongst the Macusis of British Guiana, when a girl shows the first
signs of puberty, she is hung in a hammock at the highest point of the
hut. For the first few days she may not leave the hammock by day, but at
night she must come down, light a fire, and spend the night beside it,
else she would break out in sores on her neck, throat, and other parts
of her body. So long as the symptoms are at their height, she must fast
rigorously. When they have abated, she may come down and take up her
abode in a little compartment that is made for her in the darkest corner
of the hut. In the morning she may cook her food, but it must be at a
separate fire and in a vessel of her own. After about ten days the
magician comes and undoes the spell by muttering charms and breathing on
her and on the more valuable of the things with which she has come in
contact. The pots and drinking-vessels which she used are broken and the
fragments buried. After her first bath, the girl must submit to be
beaten by her mother with thin rods without uttering a cry. At the end
of the second period she is again beaten, but not afterwards. She is now
“clean,” and can mix again with people. Other Indians of Guiana, after
keeping the girl in her hammock at the top of the hut for a month,
expose her to certain large ants, whose bite is very painful. Sometimes,
in addition to being stung with ants, the sufferer has to fast day and
night so long as she remains slung up on high in her hammock, so that
when she comes down she is reduced to a skeleton.   13

  When a Hindoo maiden reaches maturity she is kept in a dark room for
four days, and is forbidden to see the sun. She is regarded as unclean;
no one may touch her. Her diet is restricted to boiled rice, milk,
sugar, curd, and tamarind without salt. On the morning of the fifth day
she goes to a neighbouring tank, accompanied by five women whose
husbands are alive. Smeared with turmeric water, they all bathe and
return home, throwing away the mat and other things that were in the
room. The Rarhi Brahmans of Bengal compel a girl at puberty to live
alone, and do not allow her to see the face of any male. For three days
she remains shut up in a dark room, and has to undergo certain penances.
Fish, flesh, and sweetmeats are forbidden her; she must live upon rice
and ghee. Among the Tiyans of Malabar a girl is thought to be polluted
for four days from the beginning of her first menstruation. During this
time she must keep to the north side of the house, where she sleeps on a
grass mat of a particular kind, in a room festooned with garlands of
young coco-nut leaves. Another girl keeps her company and sleeps with
her, but she may not touch any other person, tree or plant. Further, she
may not see the sky, and woe betide her if she catches sight of a crow
or a cat! Her diet must be strictly vegetarian, without salt, tamarinds,
or chillies. She is armed against evil spirits by a knife, which is
placed on the mat or carried on her person.   14

  In Cambodia a girl at puberty is put to bed under a mosquito curtain,
where she should stay a hundred days. Usually, however, four, five, ten,
or twenty days are thought enough; and even this, in a hot climate and
under the close meshes of the curtain, is sufficiently trying. According
to another account, a Cambodian maiden at puberty is said to “enter into
the shade.” During her retirement, which, according to the rank and
position of her family, may last any time from a few days to several
years, she has to observe a number of rules, such as not to be seen by a
strange man, not to eat flesh or fish, and so on. She goes nowhere, not
even to the pagoda. But this state of seclusion is discontinued during
eclipses; at such times she goes forth and pays her devotions to the
monster who is supposed to cause eclipses by catching the heavenly
bodies between his teeth. This permission to break her rule of
retirement and appear abroad during an eclipse seems to show how
literally the injunction is interpreted which forbids maidens entering
on womanhood to look upon the sun.   15

  A superstition so widely diffused as this might be expected to leave
traces in legends and folk-tales. And it has done so. The old Greek
story of Danae, who was confined by her father in a subterranean chamber
or a brazen tower, but impregnated by Zeus, who reached her in the shape
of a shower of gold, perhaps belongs to this class of tales. It has its
counterpart in the legend which the Kirghiz of Siberia tell of their
ancestry. A certain Khan had a fair daughter, whom he kept in a dark
iron house, that no man might see her. An old woman tended her; and when
the girl was grown to maidenhood she asked the old woman, “Where do you
go so often?” “My child,” said the old dame, “there is a bright world.
In that bright world your father and mother live, and all sorts of
people live there. That is where I go.” The maiden said, “Good mother, I
will tell nobody, but show me that bright world.” So the old woman took
the girl out of the iron house. But when she saw the bright world, the
girl tottered and fainted; and the eye of God fell upon her, and she
conceived. Her angry father put her in a golden chest and sent her
floating away (fairy gold can float in fairyland) over the wide sea. The
shower of gold in the Greek story, and the eye of God in the Kirghiz
legend, probably stand for sunlight and the sun. The idea that women may
be impregnated by the sun is not uncommon in legends, and there are even
traces of it in marriage customs.   16
