[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb06201)  [Next](gb06203.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 62. The Fire-Festivals of Europe.

## Section 2. The Lenten Fires.

THE CUSTOM of kindling bonfires on the first Sunday in Lent has
prevailed in Belgium, the north of France, and many parts of Germany.
Thus in the Belgian Ardennes for a week or a fortnight before the “day
of the great fire,” as it is called, children go about from farm to farm
collecting fuel. At Grand Halleux any one who refuses their request is
pursued next day by the children, who try to blacken his face with the
ashes of the extinct fire. When the day has come, they cut down bushes,
especially juniper and broom, and in the evening great bonfires blaze on
all the heights. It is a common saying that seven bonfires should be
seen if the village is to be safe from conflagrations. If the Meuse
happens to be frozen hard at the time, bonfires are lit also on the ice.
At Grand Halleux they set up a pole called makral, or “the witch,” in
the midst of the pile, and the fire is kindled by the man who was last
married in the village. In the neighbourhood of Morlanwelz a straw man
is burnt in the fire. Young people and children dance and sing round the
bonfires, and leap over the embers to secure good crops or a happy
marriage within the year, or as a means of guarding themselves against
colic. In Brabant on the same Sunday, down to the beginning of the
nineteenth century, women and men disguised in female attire used to go
with burning torches to the fields, where they danced and sang comic
songs for the purpose, as they alleged, of driving away “the wicked
sower,” who is mentioned in the Gospel for the day. At Pâturages, in the
province of Hainaut, down to about 1840 the custom was observed under
the name of Escouvion or Scouvion. Every year on the first Sunday of
Lent, which was called the Day of the Little Scouvion, young folks and
children used to run with lighted torches through the gardens and
orchards. As they ran they cried at the pitch of their voices:

“Bear apples, bear pears, and cherries all black

To Scouvion!”    1

  At these words the torch-bearer whirled his blazing brand and hurled
it among the branches of the apple-trees, the pear-trees, and the
cherry-trees. The next Sunday was called the Day of the Great Scouvion,
and the same race with lighted torches among the trees of the orchards
was repeated in the afternoon till darkness fell.   2

  In the French department of the Ardennes the whole village used to
dance and sing around the bonfires which were lighted on the first
Sunday in Lent. Here, too, it was the person last married, sometimes a
man and sometimes a woman, who put the match to the fire. The custom is
still kept up very commonly in the district. Cats used to be burnt in
the fire or roasted to death by being held over it; and while they were
burning the shepherds drove their flocks through the smoke and flames as
a sure means of guarding them against sickness and witchcraft. In some
communes it was believed that the livelier the dance round the fire, the
better would be the crops that year.   3

  In the French province of Franche-Comté, to the west of the Jura
Mountains, the first Sunday of Lent is known as the Sunday of the
Firebrands (Brandons), on account of the fires which it is customary to
kindle on that day. On the Saturday or the Sunday the village lads
harness themselves to a cart and drag it about the streets, stopping at
the doors of the houses where there are girls and begging fora faggot.
When they have got enough, they cart the fuel to a spot at some little
distance from the village, pile it up, and set it on fire. All the
people of the parish come out to see the bonfire. In some villages, when
the bells have rung the Angelus, the signal for the observance is given
by cries of, “To the fire! to the fire!” Lads, lasses, and children
dance round the blaze, and when the flames have died down they vie with
each other in leaping over the red embers. He or she who does so without
singeing his or her garments will be married within the year. Young folk
also carry lighted torches about the streets or the fields, and when
they pass an orchard they cry out, “More fruit than leaves!” Down to
recent years at Laviron, in the department of Doubs, it was the young
married couples of the year who had charge of the bonfires. In the midst
of the bonfire a pole was planted with a wooden figure of a cock
fastened to the top. Then there were races, and the winner received the
cock as a prize.   4

  In Auvergne fires are everywhere kindled on the evening of the first
Sunday in Lent. Every village, every hamlet, even every ward, every
isolated farm has its bonfire or figo, as it is called, which blazes up
as the shades of night are falling. The fires may be seen flaring on the
heights and in the plains; the people dance and sing round about them
and leap through the flames. Then they proceed to the ceremony of the
Grannas-mias. A granno-mio is a torch of straw fastened to the top of a
pole. When the pyre is half consumed, the bystanders kindle the torches
at the expiring flames and carry them into the neighbouring orchards,
fields, and gardens, wherever there are fruit-trees. As they march they
sing at the top of their voices, “Granno my friend, Granno my father,
Granno my mother.” Then they pass the burning torches under the branches
of every tree, singing.

“Brando, brandounci tsaque brantso, in plan panei!” 

that is, “Firebrand burn; every branch a basketful!” In some villages
the people also run across the sown fields and shake the ashes of the
torches on the ground; also they put some of the ashes in the fowls’
nests, in order that the hens may lay plenty of eggs throughout the
year. When all these ceremonies have been performed, everybody goes home
and feasts; the special dishes of the evening are fritters and pancakes.
Here the application of the fire to the fruit-trees, to the sown fields,
and to the nests of the poultry is clearly a charm intended to ensure
fertility; and the Granno to whom the invocations are addressed, and who
gives his name to the torches, may possibly be, as Dr. Pommerol
suggests, no other than the ancient Celtic god Grannus, whom the Romans
identified with Apollo, and whose worship is attested by inscriptions
found not only in France but in Scotland and on the Danube.   5

  The custom of carrying lighted torches of straw (brandons) about the
orchards and fields to fertilise them on the first Sunday of Lent seems
to have been common in France, whether it was accompanied with the
practice of kindling bonfires or not. Thus in the province of Picardy
“on the first Sunday of Lent people carried torches through the fields,
exorcising the field-mice, the darnel, and the smut. They imagined that
they did much good to the gardens and caused the onions to grow large.
Children ran about the fields, torch in hand, to make the land more
fertile.” At Verges, a village between the Jura and the Combe d’Ain, the
torches at this season were kindled on the top of a mountain, and the
bearers went to every house in the village, demanding roasted peas and
obliging all couples who had been married within the year to dance. In
Berry, a district of Central France, it appears that bonfires are not
lighted on this day, but when the sun has set the whole population of
the villages, armed with blazing torches of straw, disperse over the
country and scour the fields, the vineyards, and the orchards. Seen from
afar, the multitude of moving lights, twinkling in the darkness, appear
like will-o’-the-wisps chasing each other across the plains, along the
hillsides, and down the valleys. While the men wave their flambeaus
about the branches of the fruit-trees, the women and children tie bands
of wheaten-straw round the tree-trunks. The effect of the ceremony is
supposed to be to avert the various plagues from which the fruits of the
earth are apt to suffer; and the bands of straw fastened round the stems
of the trees are believed to render them fruitful.   6

  In Germany, Austria, and Switzerland at the same season similar
customs have prevailed. Thus in the Eifel Mountains, Rhenish Prussia, on
the first Sunday in Lent young people used to collect straw and
brushwood from house to house. These they carried to an eminence and
piled up round a tall, slim beech-tree, to which a piece of wood was
fastened at right angles to form a cross. The structure was known as the
“hut” or “castle.” Fire was set to it and the young people marched round
the blazing “castle” bareheaded, each carrying a lighted torch and
praying aloud. Sometimes a straw-man was burned in the “hut.” People
observed the direction in which the smoke blew from the fire. If it blew
towards the corn-fields, it was a sign that the harvest would be
abundant. On the same day, in some parts of the Eifel, a great wheel was
made of straw and dragged by three horses to the top of the hill.
Thither the village boys marched at nightfall, set fire to the wheel,
and sent it rolling down the slope. At Oberstattfeld the wheel had to be
provided by the young man who was last married. About Echternach in
Luxemburg the same ceremony is called “burning the witch.” At Voralberg
in the Tyrol, on the first Sunday in Lent, a slender young fir-tree is
surrounded with a pile of straw and firewood. To the top of the tree is
fastened a human figure called the “witch,” made of old clothes and
stuffed with gunpowder. At night the whole is set on fire and boys and
girls dance round it, swinging torches and singing rhymes in which the
words “corn in the winnowing-basket, the plough in the earth” may be
distinguished. In Swabia on the first Sunday in Lent a figure called the
“witch” or the “old wife” or “winter’s grandmother” is made up of
clothes and fastened to a pole. This is stuck in the middle of a pile of
wood, to which fire is applied. While the “witch” is burning, the young
people throw blazing discs into the air. The discs are thin round pieces
of wood, a few inches in diameter, with notched edges to imitate the
rays of the sun or stars. They have a hole in the middle, by which they
are attached to the end of a wand. Before the disc is thrown it is set
on fire, the wand is swung to and fro, and the impetus thus communicated
to the disc is augmented by dashing the rod sharply against a sloping
board. The burning disc is thus thrown off, and mounting high into the
air, describes a long fiery curve before it reaches the ground. The
charred embers of the burned “witch” and discs are taken home and
planted in the flax-fields the same night, in the belief that they will
keep vermin from the fields. In the Rhön Mountains, situated on the
borders of Hesse and Bavaria, the people used to march to the top of a
hill or eminence on the first Sunday in Lent. Children and lads carried
torches, brooms daubed with tar, and poles swathed in straw. A wheel,
wrapt in combustibles, was kindled and rolled down the hill; and the
young people rushed about the fields with their burning torches and
brooms, till at last they flung them in a heap, and standing round them,
struck up a hymn or a popular song. The object of running about the
fields with the blazing torches was to “drive away the wicked sower.” Or
it was done in honour of the Virgin, that she might preserve the fruits
of the earth throughout the year and bless them. In neighbouring
villages of Hesse, between the Rhön and the Vogel Mountains, it is
thought that wherever the burning wheels roll, the fields will be safe
from hail and strom.   7

  In Switzerland, also, it is or used to be customary to kindle bonfires
on high places on the evening of the first Sunday in Lent, and the day
is therefore popularly known as Spark Sunday. The custom prevailed, for
example, throughout the canton of Lucerne. Boys went about from house to
house begging for wood and straw, then piled the fuel on a conspicuous
mountain or hill round about a pole, which bore a straw effigy called
“the witch.” At nightfall the pile was set on fire, and the young folks
danced wildly round it, some of them cracking whips or ringing bells;
and when the fire burned low enough, they leaped over it. This was
called “burning the witch.” In some parts of the canton also they used
to wrap old wheels in straw and thorns, put a light to them, and send
them rolling and blazing down hill. The more bonfires could be seen
sparkling and flaring in the darkness, the more fruitful was the year
expected to be; and the higher the dancers leaped beside or over the
fire, the higher, it was thought, would grow the flax. In some districts
it was the last married man or woman who must kindle the bonfire.   8

  It seems hardly possible to separate from these bonfires, kindled on
the first Sunday in Lent, the fires in which, about the same season, the
effigy called Death is burned as part of the ceremony of “carrying out
Death.” We have seen that at Spachendorf, in Austrian Silesia, on the
morning of Rupert’s Day (Shrove Tuesday?), a straw-man, dressed in a fur
coat and a fur cap, is laid in a hole outside the village and there
burned, and that while it is blazing every one seeks to snatch a
fragment of it, which he fastens to a branch of the highest tree in his
garden or buries in his field, believing that this will make the crops
to grow better. The ceremony is known as the “burying of Death.” Even
when the straw-man is not designated as Death, the meaning of the
observance is probably the same; for the name Death, as I have tried to
show, does not express the original intention of the ceremony. At Cobern
in the Eifel Mountains the lads make up a straw-man on Shrove Tuesday.
The effigy is formally tried and accused of having perpetrated all the
thefts that have been committed in the neighbourhood throughout the
year. Being condemned to death, the straw-man is led through the
village, shot, and burned upon a pyre. They dance round the blazing
pile, and the last bride must leap over it. In Oldenburg on the evening
of Shrove Tuesday people used to make long bundles of straw, which they
set on fire, and then ran about the fields waving them, shrieking, and
singing wild songs. Finally they burned a straw-man on the field. In the
district of Düsseldorf the straw-man burned on Shrove Tuesday was made
of an unthreshed sheaf of corn. On the first Monday after the spring
equinox the urchins of Zurich drag a straw-man on a little cart through
the streets, while at the same time the girls carry about a May-tree.
When vespers ring, the straw-man is burned. In the district of Aachen on
Ash Wednesday, a man used to be encased in peas-straw and taken to an
appointed place. Here he slipped quietly out of his straw casing, which
was then burned, the children thinking that it was the man who was being
burned. In the Val di Ledro (Tyrol) on the last day of the Carnival a
figure is made up of straw and brushwood and then burned. The figure is
called the Old Woman, and the ceremony “burning the Old Woman.”   9
