[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb05900)  [Next](gb06002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 60. Between Heaven and Earth.

## Section 1. Not to touch the Earth.

AT THE OUTSET of this book two questions were proposed for answer: Why
had the priest of Aricia to slay his predecessor? And why, before doing
so, had he to pluck the Golden Bough? Of these two questions the first
has now been answered. The priest of Aricia, if I am right, was one of
those sacred kings or human divinities on whose life the welfare of the
community and even the course of nature in general are believed to be
intimately dependent. It does not appear that the subjects or
worshippers of such a spiritual potentate form to themselves any very
clear notion of the exact relationship in which they stand to him;
probably their ideas on the point are vague and fluctuating, and we
should err if we attempted to define the relationship with logical
precision. All that the people know, or rather imagine, is that somehow
they themselves, their cattle, and their crops are mysteriously bound up
with their divine king, so that according as he is well or ill the
community is healthy or sickly, the flocks and herds thrive or languish
with disease, and the fields yield an abundant or a scanty harvest. The
worst evil which they can conceive of is the natural death of their
ruler, whether he succumb to sickness or old age, for in the opinion of
his followers such a death would entail the most disastrous consequences
on themselves and their possessions; fatal epidemics would sweep away
man and beast, the earth would refuse her increase, nay, the very frame
of nature itself might be dissolved. To guard against these catastrophes
it is necessary to put the king to death while he is still in the full
bloom of his divine manhood, in order that his sacred life, transmitted
in unabated force to his successor, may renew its youth, and thus by
successive transmissions through a perpetual line of vigorous
incarnations may remain eternally fresh and young, a pledge and security
that men and animals shall in like manner renew their youth by a
perpetual succession of generations, and that seedtime and harvest, and
summer and winter, and rain and sunshine shall never fail. That, if my
conjecture is right, was why the priest of Aricia, the King of the Wood
at Nemi, had regularly to perish by the sword of his successor.   1

  But we have still to ask, What was the Golden Bough? and why had each
candidate for the Arician priesthood to pluck it before he could slay
the priest? These questions I will now try to answer.   2

  It will be well to begin by noticing two of those rules or taboos by
which, as we have seen, the life of divine kings or priests is
regulated. The first of the rules to which I would call the reader’s
attention is that the divine personage may not touch the ground with his
foot. This rule was observed by the supreme pontiff of the Zapotecs in
Mexico; he profaned his sanctity if he so much as touched the ground
with his foot. Montezuma, emperor of Mexico, never set foot on the
ground; he was always carried on the shoulders of noblemen, and if he
lighted anywhere they laid rich tapestry for him to walk upon. For the
Mikado of Japan to touch the ground with his foot was a shameful
degradation; indeed, in the sixteenth century, it was enough to deprive
him of his office. Outside his palace he was carried on men’s shoulders;
within it he walked on exquisitely wrought mats. The king and queen of
Tahiti might not touch the ground anywhere but within their hereditary
domains; for the ground on which they trod became sacred. In travelling
from place to place they were carried on the shoulders of sacred men.
They were always accompanied by several pairs of these sanctified
attendants; and when it became necessary to change their bearers, the
king and queen vaulted on to the shoulders of their new bearers without
letting their feet touch the ground. It was an evil omen if the king of
Dosuma touched the ground, and he had to perform an expiatory ceremony.
Within his palace the king of Persia walked on carpets on which no one
else might tread; outside of it he was never seen on foot but only in a
chariot or on horseback. In old days the king of Siam never set foot
upon the earth, but was carried on a throne of gold from place to place.
Formerly neither the kings of Uganda, nor their mothers, nor their
queens might walk on foot outside of the spacious enclosures in which
they lived. Whenever they went forth they were carried on the shoulders
of men of the Buffalo clan, several of whom accompanied any of these
royal personages on a journey and took it in turn to bear the burden.
The king sat astride the bearer’s neck with a leg over each shoulder and
his feet tucked under the bearer’s arms. When one of these royal
carriers grew tired he shot the king onto the shoulders of a second man
without allowing the royal feet to touch the ground. In this way they
went at a great pace and travelled long distances in a day, when the
king was on a journey. The bearers had a special hut in the king’s
enclosure in order to be at hand the moment they were wanted. Among the
Bakuba, or rather Bushongo, a nation in the southern region of the
Congo, down to a few years ago persons of the royal blood were forbidden
to touch the ground; they must sit on a hide, a chair, or the back of a
slave, who crouched on hands and feet; their feet rested on the feet of
others. When they travelled they were carried on the backs of men; but
the king journeyed in a litter supported on shafts. Among the Ibo people
about Awka, in Southern Nigeria, the priest of the Earth has to observe
many taboos; for example, he may not see a corpse, and if he meets one
on the road he must hide his eyes with his wristlet. He must abstain
from many foods, such as eggs, birds of all sorts, mutton, dog,
bush-buck, and so forth. He may neither wear nor touch a mask, and no
masked man may enter his house. If a dog enters his house, it is killed
and thrown out. As priest of the Earth he may not sit on the bare
ground, nor eat things that have fallen on the ground, nor may earth be
thrown at him. According to ancient Brahmanic ritual a king at his
inauguration trod on a tiger’s skin and a golden plate; he was shod with
shoes of boar’s skin, and so long as he lived thereafter he might not
stand on the earth with his bare feet.   3

  But besides persons who are permanently sacred or tabooed and are
therefore permanently forbidden to touch the ground with their feet,
there are others who enjoy the character of sanctity or taboo only on
certain occasions, and to whom accordingly the prohibition in question
only applies at the definite seasons during which they exhale the odour
of sanctity. Thus among the Kayans or Bahaus of Central Borneo, while
the priestesses are engaged in the performance of certain rites they may
not step on the ground, and boards are laid for them to tread on.
Warriors, again, on the war-path are surrounded, so to say, by an
atmosphere of taboo; hence some Indians of North America might not sit
on the bare ground the whole time they were out on a warlike expedition.
In Laos the hunting of elephants gives rise to many taboos; one of them
is that the chief hunter may not touch the earth with his foot.
Accordingly, when he alights from his elephant, the others spread a
carpet of leaves for him to step upon.   4

  Apparently holiness, magical virtue, taboo, or whatever we may call
that mysterious quality which is supposed to pervade sacred or tabooed
persons, is conceived by the primitive philosopher as a physical
substance or fluid, with which the sacred man is charged just as a
Leyden jar is charged with electricity; and exactly as the electricity
in the jar can be discharged by contact with a good conductor, so the
holiness or magical virtue in the man can be discharged and drained away
by contact with the earth, which on this theory serves as an excellent
conductor for the magical fluid. Hence in order to preserve the charge
from running to waste, the sacred or tabooed personage must be carefully
prevented from touching the ground; in electrical language he must be
insulated, if he is not to be emptied of the precious substance or fluid
with which he, as a vial, is filled to the brim. And in many cases
apparently the insulation of the tabooed person is recommended as a
precaution not merely for his own sake but for the sake of others; for
since the virtue of holiness or taboo is, so to say, a powerful
explosive which the smallest touch may detonate, it is necessary in the
interest of the general safety to keep it within narrow bounds, lest
breaking out it should blast, blight, and destroy whatever it comes into
contact with.   5
