[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb06202)  [Next](gb06204.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 62. The Fire-Festivals of Europe.

## Section 3. The Easter Fires.

ANOTHER occasion on which these fire-festivals are held is Easter Eve,
the Saturday before Easter Sunday. On that day it has been customary in
Catholic countries to extinguish all the lights in the churches, and
then to make a new fire, sometimes with flint and steel, sometimes with
a burning-glass. At this fire is lit the great Paschal or Easter candle,
which is then used to rekindle all the extinguished lights in the
church. In many parts of Germany a bonfire is also kindled, by means of
the new fire, on some open space near the church. It is consecrated, and
the people bring sticks of oak, walnut, and beech, which they char in
the fire, and then take home with them. Some of these charred sticks are
thereupon burned at home in a newly-kindled fire, with a prayer that God
will preserve the homestead from fire, lightning, and hail. Thus every
house receives “new fire.” Some of the sticks are kept throughout the
year and laid on the hearth-fire during heavy thunder-storms to prevent
the house from being struck by lightning, or they are inserted in the
roof with the like intention. Others are placed in the fields, gardens,
and meadows, with a prayer that God will keep them from blight and hail.
Such fields and gardens are thought to thrive more than others; the corn
and the plants that grow in them are not beaten down by hail, nor
devoured by mice, vermin, and beetles; no witch harms them, and the ears
of corn stand close and full. The charred sticks are also applied to the
plough. The ashes of the Easter bonfire, together with the ashes of the
consecrated palm-branches, are mixed with the seed at sowing. A wooden
figure called Judas is sometimes burned in the consecrated bonfire, and
even where this custom has been abolished the bonfire itself in some
places goes by the name of “the burning of Judas.”   1

  The essentially pagan character of the Easter fire festival appears
plainly both from the mode in which it is celebrated by the peasants and
from the superstitious beliefs which they associate with it. All over
Northern and Central Germany, from Altmark and Anhalt on the east,
through Brunswick, Hanover, Oldenburg, the Harz district, and Hesse to
Westphalia the Easter bonfires still blaze simultaneously on the
hill-tops. As many as forty may sometimes be counted within sight at
once. Long before Easter the young people have been busy collecting
firewood; every farmer contributes, and tar-barrels, petroleum cases,
and so forth go to swell the pile. Neighbouring villages vie with each
other as to which shall send up the greatest blaze. The fires are always
kindled, year after year, on the same hill, which accordingly often
takes the name of Easter Mountain. It is a fine spectacle to watch from
some eminence the bonfires flaring up one after another on the
neighbouring heights. As far as their light reaches, so far, in the
belief of the peasants, the fields will be fruitful, and the houses on
which they shine will be safe from conflagration or sickness. At
Volkmarsen and other places in Hesse the people used to observe which
way the wind blew the flames, and then they sowed flax seed in that
direction, confident that it would grow well. Brands taken from the
bonfires preserve houses from being struck by lightning; and the ashes
increase the fertility of the fields, protect them from mice, and mixed
with the drinking-water of cattle make the animals thrive and ensure
them against plague. As the flames die down, young and old leap over
them, and cattle are sometimes driven through the smouldering embers. In
some places tar-barrels or wheels wrapt in straw used to be set on fire,
and then sent rolling down the hillside. In others the boys light
torches and wisps of straw at the bonfires and rush about brandishing
them in their hands.   2

  In Münsterland these Easter fires are always kindled upon certain
definite hills, which are hence known as Easter or Paschal Mountains.
The whole community assembles about the fire. The young men and maidens,
singing Easter hymns, march round and round the fire, till the blaze
dies down. Then the girls jump over the fire in a line, one after the
other, each supported by two young men who hold her hands and run beside
her. In the twilight boys with blazing bundles of straw run over the
fields to make them fruitful. At Delmenhorst, in Oldenburg, it used to
be the custom to cut down two trees, plant them in the ground side by
side, and pile twelve tar-barrels against each. Brush-wood was then
heaped about the trees, and on the evening of Easter Saturday the boys,
after rushing about with blazing bean-poles in their hands, set fire to
the whole. At the end of the ceremony the urchins tried to blacken each
other and the clothes of grown-up people. In the Altmark it is believed
that as far as the blaze of the Easter bonfire is visible, the corn will
grow well throughout the year, and no conflagration will break out. At
Braunröde, in the Harz Mountains, it was the custom to burn squirrels in
the Easter bonfire. In the Altmark, bones were burned in it.   3

  Near Forchheim, in Upper Franken, a straw-man called the Judas used to
be burned in the churchyards on Easter Saturday. The whole village
contributed wood to the pyre on which he perished, and the charred
sticks were afterwards kept and planted in the fields on Walpurgis Day
(the first of May) to preserve the wheat from blight and mildew. About a
hundred years ago or more the custom at Althenneberg, in Upper Bavaria,
used to be as follows. On the afternoon of Easter Saturday the lads
collected wood, which they piled in a cornfield, while in the middle of
the pile they set up a tall wooden cross all swathed in straw. After the
evening service they lighted their lanterns at the consecrated candle in
the church, and ran with them at full speed to the pyre, each striving
to get there first. The first to arrive set fire to the heap. No woman
or girl might come near the bonfire, but they were allowed to watch it
from a distance. As the flames rose the men and lads rejoiced and made
merry, shouting, “We are burning the Judas!” The man who had been the
first to reach the pyre and to kindle it was rewarded on Easter Sunday
by the women, who gave him coloured eggs at the church door. The object
of the whole ceremony was to keep off the hail. At other villages of
Upper Bavaria the ceremony, which took place between nine and ten at
night on Easter Saturday, was called “burning the Easter Man.” On a
height about a mile from the village the young fellows set up a tall
cross enveloped in straw, so that it looked like a man with his arms
stretched out. This was the Easter Man. No lad under eighteen years of
age might take part in the ceremony. One of the young men stationed
himself beside the Easter Man, holding in his hand a consecrated taper
which he had brought from the church and lighted. The rest stood at
equal intervals in a great circle round the cross. At a given signal
they raced thrice round the circle, and then at a second signal ran
straight at the cross and at the lad with the lighted taper beside it;
the one who reached the goal first had the right of setting fire to the
Easter Man. Great was the jubilation while he was burning. When he had
been consumed in the flames, three lads were chosen from among the rest,
and each of the three drew a circle on the ground with a stick thrice
round the ashes. Then they all left the spot. On Easter Monday the
villagers gathered the ashes and strewed them on their fields; also they
planted in the fields palmbranches which had been consecrated on Palm
Sunday, and sticks which had been charred and hallowed on Good Friday,
all for the purpose of protecting their fields against showers of hail.
In some parts of Swabia the Easter fires might not be kindled with iron
or steel or flint, but only by the friction of wood.   4

  The custom of the Easter fires appears to have prevailed all over
Central and Western Germany from north to south. We find it also in
Holland, where the fires were kindled on the highest eminences, and the
people danced round them and leaped through the flames or over the
glowing embers. Here too, as often in Germany, the materials for the
bonfire were collected by the young folk from door to door. In many
parts of Sweden firearms are discharged in all directions on Easter Eve,
and huge bonfires are lighted on hills and eminences. Some people think
that the intention is to keep off the Troll and other evil spirits who
are especially active at this season.   5
