[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb06003)  [Next](gb06100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 60. Between Heaven and Earth.

## Section 4. Reasons for the Seclusion of Girls at Puberty.

THE MOTIVE for the restraints so commonly imposed on girls at puberty is
the deeply engrained dread which primitive man universally entertains of
menstruous blood. He fears it at all times but especially on its first
appearance; hence the restrictions under which women lie at their first
menstruation are usually more stringent than those which they have to
observe at any subsequent recurrence of the mysterious flow. Some
evidence of the fear and of the customs based on it has been cited in an
earlier part of this work; but as the terror, for it is nothing less,
which the phenomenon periodically strikes into the mind of the savage
has deeply influenced his life and institutions, it may be well to
illustrate the subject with some further examples.   1

  Thus in the Encounter Bay tribe of South Australia there is, or used
to be, a “superstition which obliges a woman to separate herself from
the camp at the time of her monthly illness, when if a young man or boy
should approach, she calls out, and he immediately makes a circuit to
avoid her. If she is neglectful upon this point, she exposes herself to
scolding, and sometimes to severe beating by her husband or nearest
relation, because the boys are told from their infancy, that if they see
the blood they will early become grey-headed, and their strength will
fail prematurely.” The Dieri of Central Australia believe that if women
at these times were to eat fish or bathe in a river, the fish would all
die and the water would dry up. The Arunta of the same region forbid
menstruous women to gather the irriakura bulbs, which form a staple
article of diet for both men and women. They think that were a woman to
break this rule, the supply of bulbs would fail.   2

  In some Australian tribes the seclusion of menstruous women was even
more rigid, and was enforced by severer penalties than a scolding or a
beating. Thus “there is a regulation relating to camps in the Wakelbura
tribe which forbids the women coming into the encampment by the same
path as the men. Any violation of this rule would in a large camp be
punished with death. The reason for this is the dread with which they
regard the menstrual period of women. During such a time, a woman is
kept entirely away from the camp, half a mile at least. A woman in such
a condition has boughs of some tree of her totem tied round her loins,
and is constantly watched and guarded, for it is thought that should any
male be so unfortunate as to see a woman in such a condition, he would
die. If such a woman were to let herself be seen by a man, she would
probably be put to death. When the woman has recovered, she is painted
red and white, her head covered with feathers, and returns to the
camp.”   3

  In Muralug, one of the Torres Straits Islands, a menstruous woman may
not eat anything that lives in the sea, else the natives believe that
the fisheries would fail. In Galela, to the west of New Guinea, women at
their monthly periods may not enter a tobacco-field, or the plants would
be attacked by disease. The Minangkabauers of Sumatra are persuaded that
if a woman in her unclean state were to go near a rice-field, the crop
would be spoiled.   4

  The Bushmen of South Africa think that, by a glance of a girl’s eye at
the time when she ought to be kept in strict retirement, men become
fixed in whatever positions they happen to occupy, with whatever they
were holding in their hands, and are changed into trees that talk.
Cattle-rearing tribes of South Africa hold that their cattle would die
if the milk were drunk by a menstruous woman; and they fear the same
disaster if a drop of her blood were to fall on the ground and the oxen
were to pass over it. To prevent such a calamity women in general, not
menstruous women only, are forbidden to enter the cattle enclosure; and
more than that, they may not use the ordinary paths in entering the
village or in passing from one hut to another. They are obliged to make
circuitous tracks at the back of the huts in order to avoid the ground
in the middle of the village where the cattle stand or lie down. These
women’s tracks may be seen at every Caffre village. Among the Baganda,
in like manner, no menstruous woman might drink milk or come into
contact with any milk-vessel; and she might not touch anything that
belonged to her husband, nor sit on his mat, nor cook his food. If she
touched anything of his at such a time it was deemed equivalent to
wishing him dead or to actually working magic for his destruction. Were
she to handle any article of his, he would surely fall ill; were she to
touch his weapons, he would certainly be killed in the next battle.
Further, the Baganda would not suffer a menstruous woman to visit a
well; if she did so, they feared that the water would dry up, and that
she herself would fall sick and die, unless she confessed her fault and
the medicine-man made atonement for her. Among the Akikuyu of British
East Africa, if a new hut is built in a village and the wife chances to
menstruate in it on the day she lights the first fire there, the hut
must be broken down and demolished the very next day. The woman may on
no account sleep a second night in it; there is a curse both on her and
on it.   5

  According to the Talmud, if a woman at the beginning of her period
passes between two men, she thereby kills one of them. Peasants of the
Lebanon think that menstruous women are the cause or many misfortunes;
their shadow causes flowers to wither and trees to perish, it even
arrests the movements of serpents; if one of them mounts a horse, the
animal might die or at least be disabled for a long time.   6

  The Guayquiries of the Orinoco believe that when a woman has her
courses, everything upon which she steps will die, and that if a man
treads on the place where she has passed, his legs will immediately
swell up. Among the Bri-bri Indians of Costa Rica a married woman at her
periods uses for plates only banana leaves, which, when she has done
with them, she throws away in a sequestered spot; for should a cow find
and eat them, the animal would waste away and perish. Also she drinks
only out of a special vessel, because any person who should afterwards
drink out of the same vessel would infallibly pine away and die.   7

  Among most tribes of North American Indians the custom was that women
in their courses retired from the camp or the village and lived during
the time of their uncleanness in special huts or shelters which were
appropriated to their use. There they dwelt apart, eating and sleeping
by themselves, warming themselves at their own fires, and strictly
abstaining from all communications with men, who shunned them just as if
they were stricken with the plague.   8

  Thus, to take examples, the Creek and kindred Indians of the United
States compelled women at menstruation to live in separate huts at some
distance from the village. There the women had to stay, at the risk of
being surprised and cut off by enemies. It was thought “a most horrid
and dangerous pollution” to go near the women at such times; and the
danger extended to enemies who, if they slew the women, had to cleanse
themselves from the pollution by means of certain sacred herbs and
roots. The Stseelis Indians of British Columbia imagined that if a
menstruous woman were to step over a bundle of arrows, the arrows would
thereby be rendered useless and might even cause the death of their
owner; and similarly that if she passed in front of a hunter who carried
a gun, the weapon would never shoot straight again. Among the Chippeways
and other Indians of the Hudson Bay Territory, menstruous women are
excluded from the camp, and take up their abode in huts of branches.
They wear long hoods, which effectually conceal the head and breast.
They may not touch the household furniture nor any objects used by men;
for their touch “is supposed to defile them, so that their subsequent
use would be followed by certain mischief or misfortune,” such as
disease or death. They must drink out of a swan’s bone. They may not
walk on the common paths nor cross the tracks of animals. They “are
never permitted to walk on the ice of rivers or lakes, or near the part
where the men are hunting beaver, or where a fishing-net is set, for
fear of averting their success. They are also prohibited at those times
from partaking of the head of any animal, and even from walking in or
crossing the track where the head of a deer, moose, beaver, and many
other animals have lately been carried, either on a sledge or on the
back. To be guilty of a violation of this custom is considered as of the
greatest importance; because they firmly believe that it would be a
means of preventing the hunter from having an equal success in his
future excursions.” So the Lapps forbid women at menstruation to walk on
that part of the shore where the fishers are in the habit of setting out
their fish; and the Esquimaux of Bering Strait believe that if hunters
were to come near women in their courses they would catch no game. For a
like reason the Carrier Indians will not suffer a menstruous woman to
cross the tracks of animals; if need be, she is carried over them. They
think that if she waded in a stream or a lake, the fish would die.   9

  Amongst the civilised nations of Europe the superstitions which
cluster round this mysterious aspect of woman’s nature are not less
extravagant than those which prevail among savages. In the oldest
existing cyclopaedia—the Natural History of Pliny—the list of dangers
apprehended from menstruation is longer than any furnished by mere
barbarians. According to Pliny, the touch of a menstruous woman turned
wine to vinegar, blighted crops, killed seedlings, blasted gardens,
brought down the fruit from trees, dimmed mirrors, blunted razors,
rusted iron and brass (especially at the waning of the moon), killed
bees, or at least drove them from their hives, caused mares to miscarry,
and so forth. Similarly, in various parts of Europe, it is still
believed that if a woman in her courses enters a brewery the beer will
turn sour; if she touches beer, wine, vinegar, or milk, it will go bad;
if she makes jam, it will not keep; if she mounts a mare, it will
miscarry; if she touches buds, they will wither; if she climbs a cherry
tree, it will die. In Brunswick people think that if a menstruous woman
assists at the killing of a pig, the pork will putrefy. In the Greek
island of Calymnos a woman at such times may not go to the well to draw
water, nor cross a running stream, nor enter the sea. Her presence in a
boat is said to raise storms.   10

  Thus the object of secluding women at menstruation is to neutralise
the dangerous influences which are supposed to emanate from them at such
times. That the danger is believed to be especially great at the first
menstruation appears from the unusual precautions taken to isolate girls
at this crisis. Two of these precautions have been illustrated above,
namely, the rules that the girls may not touch the ground nor see the
sun. The general effect of these rules is to keep her suspended, so to
say, between heaven and earth. Whether enveloped in her hammock and
slung up to the roof, as in South America, or raised above the ground in
a dark and narrow cage, as in New Ireland, she may be considered to be
out of the way of doing mischief, since, being shut off both from the
earth and from the sun, she can poison neither of these great sources of
life by her deadly contagion. In short, she is rendered harmless by
being, in electrical language, insulated. But the precautions thus taken
to isolate or insulate the girl are dictated by a regard for her own
safety as well as for the safety of others. For it is thought that she
herself would suffer if she were to neglect the prescribed regimen. Thus
Zulu girls, as we have seen, believe that they would shrivel to
skeletons if the sun were to shine on them at puberty, and the Macusis
imagine that, if a young woman were to transgress the rules, she would
suffer from sores on various parts of her body. In short, the girl is
viewed as charged with a powerful force which, if not kept within
bounds, may prove destructive both to herself and to all with whom she
comes in contact. To repress this force within the limits necessary for
the safety of all concerned is the object of the taboos in
question.   11

  The same explanation applies to the observance of the same rules by
divine kings and priests. The uncleanness, as it is called, of girls at
puberty and the sanctity of holy men do not, to the primitive mind,
differ materially from each other. They are only different
manifestations of the same mysterious energy which, like energy in
general, is in itself neither good nor bad, but becomes beneficent or
maleficent according to its application. Accordingly, if, like girls at
puberty, divine personages may neither touch the ground nor see the sun,
the reason is, on the one hand, a fear lest their divinity might, at
contact with earth or heaven, discharge itself with fatal violence on
either; and, on the other hand, an apprehension that the divine being,
thus drained of his ethereal virtue, might thereby be incapacitated for
the future performance of those magical functions, upon the proper
discharge of which the safety of the people and even of the world is
believed to hang. Thus the rules in question fall under the head of the
taboos which we examined in an earlier part of this book; they are
intended to preserve the life of the divine person and with it the life
of his subjects and worshippers. Nowhere, it is thought, can his
precious yet dangerous life be at once so safe and so harmless as when
it is neither in heaven nor in earth, but, as far as possible, suspended
between the two.   12
