[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb06001)  [Next](gb06003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 60. Between Heaven and Earth.

## Section 2. Not to see the Sun.

THE SECOND rule to be here noted is that the sun may not shine upon the
divine person. This rule was observed both by the Mikado and by the
pontiff of the Zapotecs. The latter “was looked upon as a god whom the
earth was not worthy to hold, nor the sun to shine upon.” The Japanese
would not allow that the Mikado should expose his sacred person to the
open air, and the sun was not thought worthy to shine on his head. The
Indians of Granada, in South America, “kept those who were to be rulers
or commanders, whether men or women, locked up for several years when
they were children, some of them seven years, and this so close that
they were not to see the sun, for if they should happen to see it they
forfeited their lordship, eating certain sorts of food appointed; and
those who were their keepers at certain times went into their retreat or
prison and scourged them severely.” Thus, for example, the heir to the
throne of Bogota, who was not the son but the sister’s son of the king,
had to undergo a rigorous training from his infancy; he lived in
complete retirement in a temple, where he might not see the sun nor eat
salt nor converse with a woman; he was surrounded by guards who observed
his conduct and noted all his actions; if he broke a single one of the
rules laid down for him, he was deemed infamous and forfeited all his
rights to the throne. So, too, the heir to the kingdom of Sogamoso,
before succeeding to the crown, had to fast for seven years in the
temple, being shut up in the dark and not allowed to see the sun or
light. The prince who was to become Inca of Peru had to fast for a month
without seeing light.   1
