[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Theosophy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iu002)  [Next](iu004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

> "I choose the nobler part of Emerson, when, after various
> disenchantments, he exclaimed, 'I covet Truth.' The gladness of true
> heroism visits the heart of him who is really competent to say
> this."--**T**YNDALL.

> "A testimony is sufficient when it rests on:  
> 1st. A great number of very sensible witnesses who agree in having
> seen *well*.  
> 2d. Who are sane, bodily and mentally.  
> 3d. Who are impartial and disinterested.  
> 4th. Who unanimously agree.  
> 5th. Who solemnly certify to the fact."--**V**OLTAIRE,
>
> Dictiannaire Philosophique.

THE Count Agenor de Gasparin is a devoted Protestant. His battle with
des Mousseaux, de Mirville and other fanatics who laid the whole of the
spiritual phenomena at the door of Satan, was long and fierce. Two
volumes of over fifteen hundred pages are the result, proving the
*effects,* denying the *cause,* and employing superhuman efforts to
invent every other possible explanation that could be suggested rather
than the true one.

The severe rebuke received by the *Journal des Debats* from M. de
Gasparin, was read by all civilized Europe. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[\*](#fn_132) After that gentleman had minutely
described numerous manifestations that he had witnessed himself, this
journal very impertinently proposed to the authorities in France to send
all those who, after having read the *fine* analysis of the "spiritual
hallucinations" published by Faraday, should insist on crediting this
delusion, to the lunatic asylum for *Incurables.* "Take care," wrote de
Gasparin in answer, "the representatives of the exact sciences are on
their way to become . . . the *Inquisitors* of our days. . . . Facts are
stronger than Academies. Rejected, denied, mocked, they nevertheless are
facts, and *do* exist." <span id="fr_133"></span>[\*\*](#fn_133)

The following affirmations of physical phenomena, as witnessed by
himself and Professor Thury, may be found in de Gasparin's voluminous
work.

"The experimenters have often seen the legs of the table *glued,* so to
say, to the floor, and, notwithstanding the excitement of those present,
refuse to be moved from their place. On other occasions they have seen
the tables levitated in quite an energetic way. They heard, with their
own

###### <span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

ears, loud as well as gentle raps, the former threatening to shatter the
table to pieces on account of their violence, the latter so soft as to
become hardly perceptible. . . . As to LEVITATIONS WITHOUT CONTACT, we
found means to produce them easily, and with success. . . . And such
levitations do not pertain to isolated results. We have reproduced them
over THIRTY times. <span id="fr_134"></span>[\*](#fn_134) . . . One day
the table will turn, and lift its legs successively, its weight being
augmented by a man weighing eighty-seven *kilogrammes* seated on it;
another time it will remain motionless and *immovable*, notwithstanding
that the person placed on it weighs but sixty. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[\*\*](#fn_135). . . On one occasion we willed it to
turn upside down, and it turned over, with its legs in the air,
notwithstanding that our fingers *never touched it once.*" <span
id="fr_136"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_136)

"It is certain," remarks de Mirville, "that a man who had repeatedly
witnessed such a phenomenon, could not accept the *fine* analysis of the
English physicist." <span id="fr_137"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_137)

Since 1850, des Mousseaux and de Mirville, uncompromising Roman
Catholics, have published many volumes whose titles are cleverly
contrived to attract public attention. They betray on the part of the
authors a very serious alarm, which, moreover, they take no pains to
conceal. Were it possible to consider the phenomena spurious, the church
of Rome would never have gone so much out of her way to repress them.

Both sides having agreed upon the facts, leaving skeptics out of the
question, people could divide themselves into but two parties: the
believers in the direct agency of the devil, and the believers in
disembodied and other spirits. The fact alone, that theology dreaded a
great deal more the revelations which might come through this mysterious
agency than all the threatening "conflicts" with Science and the
categorical denials of the latter, ought to have opened the eyes of the
most skeptical. The church of Rome has never been either credulous or
cowardly, as is abundantly proved by the Machiavellism which marks her
policy. Moreover, she has never troubled herself much about the clever
prestidigitateurs whom she *knew* to be simply adepts in juggling.
Robert Houdin, Comte, Hamilton and Bosco, slept secure in their beds,
while she persecuted such men as Paracelsus, Cagliostro, and Mesmer, the
Hermetic philosophers and mystics--and effectually stopped every genuine
manifestation of an occult nature by killing the mediums.

Those who are unable to believe in a personal devil and the dogmas of
the church must nevertheless accord to the clergy enough of shrewdness

###### <span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

to prevent the compromising of her reputation for infallibility by
making so much of manifestations which, if fraudulent, must inevitably
be some day exposed.

But the best testimony to the reality of this force was given by Robert
Houdin himself, the king of jugglers, who, upon being called as an
expert by the Academy to witness the wonderful *clairvoyant* powers and
occasional mistakes of a table, said: "We jugglers never make mistakes,
and my second-sight never failed me yet."

The learned astronomer Babinet was not more fortunate in his selection
of Comte, the celebrated ventriloquist, as an expert to testify against
the phenomena of direct voices and the rappings. Comte, if we may
believe the witnesses, laughed in the face of Babinet at the bare
suggestion that the raps were produced by "*unconscious ventriloquism*!"
The latter theory, worthy twin-sister of "*unconscious cerebration,*"
caused many of the most skeptical academicians to blush. Its absurdity
was too apparent.

"The problem of the supernatural," says de Gasparin, "such as it was
presented by the middle ages, and as it stands now, is not among the
number of those which we are permitted to despise; its breadth and
grandeur escape the notice of no one. . . . Everything is profoundly
serious in it, both the evil and the remedy, the superstitious
recrudescency, and the physical fact which is destined to conquer the
latter." <span id="fr_138"></span>[\*](#fn_138)

Further, he pronounces the following decisive opinion, to which he came,
conquered by the various manifestations, as he says himself--"The number
of facts which claim their place in the broad daylight of truth, has so
much increased of late, that of two consequences one is henceforth
inevitable: either the domain of natural sciences must consent to expand
itself, or the domain of the supernatural will become so enlarged as to
have no bounds." <span id="fr_139"></span>[\*\*](#fn_139)

Among the multitude of books against spiritualism emanating from
Catholic and Protestant sources, none have produced a more appalling
effect than the works of de Mirville and des Mousseaux: *La Magie au
XIXme Siecle--Moeurs et Pratiques des Demons--Hauts Phenomees de la
Magie--Les Mediateurs de la Magie--Des Esprits et de leurs
Manifestations,* etc. They comprise the most cyclopaedic biography of
the devil and his imps that has appeared for the private delectation of
good Catholics since the middle ages.

According to the authors, *he* who was "a liar and murderer from the
beginning," was also the principal motor of spiritual phenomena. He had
been for thousands of years at the head of pagan theurgy; and

###### <span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

it was he, again, who, encouraged by the increase of heresies,
infidelity, and atheism, had reappeared in our century. The French
Academy lifted up its voice in a general outcry of indignation, and M.
de Gasparin even took it for a personal insult. "This is a declaration
of war, a 'levee of shields' "--wrote he in his voluminous book of
refutations. "The work of M. de Mirville is a real *manifesto*. . . . I
would be glad to see in it the expression of a strictly individual
opinion, but, in truth, it is *impossible.* The success of the work,
these solemn adhesions, the faithful reproduction of its theses by the
journals and writers of the party, the solidarity established throughout
between them and the whole body of catholicity . . . everything goes to
show a work which *is essentially an act, and has the value of a
collective labor.* As it is, I felt that I had a duty to perform. . . .
I felt obliged to pick up the glove. . . . and lift high the Protestant
flag against the Ultramontane banner." <span
id="fr_140"></span>[\*](#fn_140)

The medical faculties, as might have been expected, assuming the part of
the Greek chorus, echoed the various expostulations against the
demonological authors. The *Medico-Psychological Annals,* edited by Drs.
Brierre de Boismont and Cerise, published the following: "Outside these
controversies of antagonistical parties, never in our country did a
writer dare to face, with a more aggressive serenity, . . . the
sarcasms, the scorn of what we term common sense; and, as if to defy and
challenge at the same time thundering peals of laughter and shrugging of
shoulders, the author strikes an attitude, and placing himself with
effrontery before the members of the Academy . . . addresses to them
what he modestly terms his *Memoire on the Devil*!" <span
id="fr_141"></span>[\*\*](#fn_141)

That was a cutting insult to the Academicians, to be sure; but ever
since 1850 they seem to have been doomed to suffer in their pride more
than most of them can bear. The idea of asking the attention of the
forty "Immortals" to the pranks of the Devil! They vowed revenge, and,
leaguing themselves together, propounded a theory which exceeded in
absurdity even de Mirville's demonolatry! Dr. Royer and Jobart de
Lamballe--both celebrities in their way--formed an alliance and
presented to the Institute a German whose cleverness afforded, according
to his statement, the key to all the knockings and rappings of both
hemispheres. "We blush"--remarks the Marquis de Mirville--"to say that
the whole of the trick consisted simply in the reiterated displacement
of one of the muscular tendons of the legs. Great demonstration of the
system in full sitting of the Institute--and on the spot . . .
expressions of Academical gratitude for this *interesting*
communication, and, a few days later, a full assurance given to the
public by a professor of the medical

###### <span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

faculty, that, scientists having pronounced their opinion, the mystery
was at last unravelled!" <span id="fr_142"></span>[\*](#fn_142)

But such *scientific* explanations neither prevented the phenomenon from
quietly following its course, nor the two writers on demonology from
proceeding to expound their strictly orthodox theories.

Denying that the Church had anything to do with his books, des Mousseaux
gravely gave the Academy, in addition to his *Memoire,* the following
interesting and profoundly philosophical thoughts on Satan:

"*The Devil is the chief pillar of Faith.* He is one of the grand
personages whose life is closely allied to that of the church; and
without his speech which issued out so triumphantly from the mouth of
the Serpent, *his* *medium,* the fall of man could not have taken place.
Thus, if it was not for him, the Saviour, the Crucified, the Redeemer,
would be but the most ridiculous of supernumeraries, and the Cross an
insult to good sense!" <span id="fr_143"></span>[\*\*](#fn_143)

This writer, be it remembered, is only the faithful echo of the church,
which anathematizes equally the one who denies God and him who doubts
the objective existence of Satan.

But the Marquis de Mirville carries this idea of God's partnership with
the Devil still further. According to him it is a regular commercial
affair, in which the senior "silent partner" suffers the active business
of the firm to be transacted as it may please his junior associate, by
whose audacity and industry he profits. Who could be of any other
opinion, upon reading the following?

"At the moment of this spiritual invasion of 1853, so slightingly
regarded, we had dared to pronounce the word of a 'threatening
catastrophe.' The world was nevertheless at peace, but history showing
us the same symptoms at all disastrous epochs, we had a presentiment of
the sad effects of a law which Goerres has formulated thus: \[vol. v.,
p. 356.\] 'These mysterious apparitions have invariably indicated the
chastening hand of God on earth.' " <span
id="fr_144"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_144)

These guerilla-skirmishes between the champions of the clergy and the
materialistic Academy of Science, prove abundantly how little the latter
has done toward uprooting blind fanaticism from the minds of even very
educated persons. *Evidently science has neither completely conquered
nor muzzled theology.* She will master her only on that day when she
will condescend to see in the spiritual phenomenon something besides
mere hallucination and charlatanry. But how can she do it without
investigating it thoroughly? Let us suppose that before the time when

###### <span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

electro-magnetism was publicly acknowledged, the Copenhagen Professor
Oersted, its discoverer, had been suffering from an attack of what we
call *psychophobia,* or *pneumatophobia.* He notices that the wire along
which a voltaic current is passing shows a tendency to turn the magnetic
needle from its natural position to one perpendicular to the direction
of the current. Suppose, moreover, that the professor had heard much of
certain superstitious people who used that kind of magnetized needles to
converse with unseen intelligences. That they received signals and even
held correct conversations with them by means of the tippings of such a
needle, and that in consequence he suddenly felt a scientific horror and
disgust for such an ignorant belief, and refused, point-blank, to have
anything to do with such a needle. What would have been the result?
Electro-magnetism might not have been discovered till now, and our
experimentalists would have been the principal losers thereby.

Babinet, Royer, and Jobert de Lamballe, all three members of the
Institute, particularly distinguished themselves in this struggle
between skepticism and supernaturalism, and most assuredly have reaped
no laurels. The famous astronomer had imprudently risked himself on the
battlefield of the phenomenon. He had *explained* scientifically the
manifestations. But, emboldened by the fond belief among scientists that
the new epidemic could not stand close investigation nor outlive the
year, he had the still greater imprudence to publish two articles on
them. As M. de Mirville very wittily remarks, if both of the articles
had but a poor success in the scientific press, they had, on the other
hand, none at all in the daily one.

M. Babinet began by accepting *a priori,* the rotation and movements of
the furniture, which fact he declared to be "*hors de doute.*" "This
rotation," he said, "being able to manifest itself with a considerable
energy, either by a very great speed, or by a strong resistance when it
is desired that it should stop." <span id="fr_145"></span>[\*](#fn_145)

Now comes the explanation of the eminent scientist. "Gently pushed by
little concordant impulsions of the hands laid upon it, the table begins
to oscillate from right to left. . . . At the moment when, after more or
less delay, a nervous trepidation is established in the hands and the
little individual impulsions of all the experimenters have become
harmonized, the table is set in motion." <span
id="fr_146"></span>[\*\*](#fn_146)

He finds it very simple, for "all muscular movements are determined over
bodies by levers of the third order, in which the fulcrum is very near
to the point where the force acts. This, consequently, communicates a

###### <span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

great speed to the mobile parts for the very little distance which the
motor force has to run. . . . Some persons are astonished to see a table
subjected to the action of several well-disposed individuals in a fair
way to *conquer powerful obstacles,* even break its legs, when suddenly
stopped; but that is *very simple* if we consider the power of the
*little concordant actions*. . . . Once more, the physical explanation
offers no difficulty." <span id="fr_147"></span>[\*](#fn_147)

In this dissertation, two results are clearly shown: the reality of the
phenomena proved, and the scientific explanation made ridiculous. But M.
Babinet can well afford to be laughed at a little; he knows, as an
astronomer, that dark spots are to be found even in the sun.

There is one thing, though, that Babinet has always stoutly denied,
viz.: the levitation of furniture without contact. De Mirville catches
him proclaiming that such levitation is impossible: "simply
*impossible,*" he says, "as impossible as perpetual motion." <span
id="fr_148"></span>[\*\*](#fn_148)

Who can take upon himself, after such a declaration, to maintain that
the word *impossible* pronounced by science is infallible?

But the tables, after having waltzed, oscillated and turned, began
tipping and rapping. The raps were sometimes as powerful as
pistol-detonations. What of this? Listen: "The witnesses and
investigators are *ventriloquists!*"

De Mirville refers us to the *Revue des Deux Mondes,* in which is
published a very interesting dialogue, invented by M. Babinet speaking
of himself to himself, like the Chaldean En-Soph of the Kabalists: "What
can we finally say of all these facts brought under our observation? Are
there such raps produced? Yes. Do such raps answer questions? Yes. Who
produces these sounds? The mediums. By what means? *By the ordinary
acoustic method of the ventriloquists.* But we were given to suppose
that these sounds might result from the *cracking of the toes and
fingers?* No; for then they would always proceed from the same point,
and such is not the fact." <span id="fr_149"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_149)

"Now," asks de Mirville, "what are we to believe of the Americans, and
their *thousands of mediums* who produce the same raps before millions
of witnesses?" "*Ventriloquism,* to be sure," answers Babinet. "But how
can you explain such an impossibility?" The easiest thing in the world;
listen only: "All that was necessary to produce the first manifestation
in the *first house* in America was, a street-boy knocking at the door
of a mystified citizen, perhaps with a leaden ball attached to a

###### <span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

string, and if Mr. Weekman (the first believer in America) (?) <span
id="fr_150"></span>[\*](#fn_150) when he watched for the third time,
heard no shouts of laughter in the street, it is because of the
essential difference which exists between a French street-Arab, and an
English or Trans-Atlantic one, the latter being amply provided with what
we call a *sad merriment,* "*gaite triste*." <span
id="fr_151"></span>[\*\*](#fn_151)

Truly says de Mirville in his famous reply to the attacks of de
Gasparin, Babinet, and other scientists: "and thus according to our
great physicist, *the tables turn* very quickly, very energetically,
resist likewise, and, as M. de Gasparin has proved, they *levitate
without contact.* Said a minister: 'With three words of a man's
handwriting, I take upon myself to have him hung.' With the above three
lines, we take upon ourselves, in our turn, to throw into the greatest
confusion the physicists of all the globe, or rather to revolutionize
the world--if at least, M. de Babinet had taken the precaution of
suggesting, like M. de Gasparin, some yet unknown law or force. For this
would cover the whole ground." <span
id="fr_152"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_152)

But it is in the notes embracing the "facts and physical theories," that
we find the acme of the consistency and logic of Babinet as an expert
investigator on the field of Spiritualism.

It would appear, that M. de Mirville in his narrative of the wonders
manifested at the *Presbytere de Cideville*, <span
id="fr_153"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_153) was much struck by the
marvellousness of some facts. Though authenticated before the inquest
and magistrates, they were of so miraculous a nature as to force the
demonological author himself to shrink from the responsibility of
publishing them.

These facts were as follows: "At the precise moment *predicted* by a
*sorcerer*"*--*case of revenge--"a violent clap of thunder was heard
above one of the chimneys of the presbytery, after which the *fluid*
descended with a formidable noise through that passage, threw down
believers as well as skeptics (as to the power of the sorcerer) who were
warming themselves by the fire; and, having filled the room with a
multitude of *fantastic animals,* returned to the chimney, and having
reascended it, disappeared, after producing the same terrible noise.
"As," adds de Mirville, "we were already but too rich in facts, we
recoiled before this new enormity added to so many others." <span
id="fr_154"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_153)

But Babinet, who in common with his learned colleagues had made such fun
of the two writers on demonology, and who was determined, moreover, to
prove the absurdity of all like stories, felt himself obliged

###### <span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

to discredit the above-mentioned fact of the Cideville phenomena, by
presenting one still more incredible. We yield the floor to M. Babinet,
himself.

The following circumstance which he gave to the Academy of Sciences, on
July 5, 1852, can be found *without further commentary,* and merely as
an instance of a *sphere-like lightning,* in the "Œuvres de F. Arago,"
vol. i., p. 52. We offer it

verbatim.

"After a strong clap of thunder," says M. Babinet, "but not immediately
following it, a tailor apprentice, living in the Rue St. Jacques, was
just finishing his dinner, when he saw the paper-screen which shut the
fireplace fall down as if pushed out of its place by a moderate gust of
wind. Immediately after that he perceived a globe of fire, as large as
the head of a child, come out *quietly* and *softly* from within the
grate and slowly move about the room, without touching the bricks of the
floor. The aspect of this fire-globe was that of a *young cat,* of
middle size . . . moving itself without the use of its paws. The
fire-globe was rather brilliant and luminous than hot or inflamed, and
the tailor had no sensation of warmth. This globe approached his feet
like a young cat which wishes to play and rub itself against the legs,
as is habitual to these animals; but the apprentice withdrew his feet
from it, and moving with great caution, avoided contact with the
*meteor.* The latter remained for a few seconds moving about his legs,
the tailor examining it with great curiosity and bending over it. After
having tried several excursions in opposite directions, but without
leaving the centre of the room, the fire-globe elevated itself
vertically to the level of the man's head, who to avoid its contact with
his face, threw himself backward on his chair. Arrived at about a yard
from the floor the fire-globe slightly lengthened, took an oblique
direction toward a hole in the wall over the fireplace, at about the
height of a *metre* above the mantelpiece." This hole had been made for
the purpose of admitting the pipe of a stove in winter; but, according
to the expression of the tailor, "*the thunder could not see it,* for it
was papered over like the rest of the wall. The fire-globe went directly
to that hole, *unglued the paper without damaging it,* and reasscended
the chimney . . . when it arrived at the top, which it did very slowly .
. . at least sixty feet above ground . . . it produced a most frightful
explosion, which partly destroyed the chimney, . . ." etc.

"It seems," remarks de Mirville in his review, "that we could apply to
M. Babinet the following remark made by a very witty woman to Raynal,
'If you are not a Christian, it is not for lack of faith.' " <span
id="fr_155"></span>[\*](#fn_154)

It was not alone believers who wondered at the credulity displayed by

###### <span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

M. Babinet, in persisting to call the manifestation a *meteor;* for Dr.
Boudin mentions it very seriously in a work on *lightning* he was just
then publishing. "If these details are exact," says the doctor, "as they
seem to be, since they are admitted by MM. Babinet and Arago, it appears
very difficult for the phenomenon to retain its appellation of
*sphere-shaped lightning.* However, we leave it to others to explain, if
they can, the *essence of a fire-globe emitting no sensation of heat,
having the aspect of a cat, slowly promenading in a room, which finds
means to escape by reascending the chimney through an aperture in the
wall covered over with a paper which it unglues without
damaging*!" <span id="fr_156"></span>[\*](#fn_155)

"We are of the same opinion," adds the marquis, "as the learned doctor,
on the difficulty of an exact definition, and we do not see why we
should not have in future lightning in the shape of a dog, of a monkey,
etc., etc. One shudders at the bare idea of a whole meteorological
*menagerie,* which, thanks to *thunder,* might come down to our rooms to
promenade themselves at will."

Says de Gasparin, in his monster volume of refutations: "In questions of
testimony, certitude must absolutely cease the moment we cross the
borders of the supernatural." <span id="fr_157"></span>[\*\*](#fn_156)

The line of demarcation not being sufficiently fixed and determined,
which of the opponents is best fitted to take upon himself the difficult
task? Which of the two is better entitled to become the public arbiter?
Is it the party of superstition, which is supported in its testimony by
the evidence of many thousands of people? For nearly two years they
crowded the country where were daily manifested the unprecedented
miracles of Cideville, now nearly forgotten among other countless
spiritual phenomena; shall we believe them, or shall we bow to science,
represented by Babinet, who, on the testimony of *one* man (the tailor),
accepts the manifestation of the fire-globe, or the *meteor-cat,* and
henceforth claims for it a place among the established facts of
*natural* phenomena?

Mr. Crookes, in his first article in the *Quarterly Journal of Science,*
October 1, 1871, mentions de Gasparin and his work *Science* v*.
Spiritualism.* He remarks that "the author finally arrived at the
conclusion that all these phenomena are to be accounted for by the
action of natural causes, and do not require the supposition of
miracles, nor the intervention of spirits and diabolical influences!
Gasparin considers it as a fact fully established by his experiments,
that *the will, in certain* 

###### <span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

states of organism, can act at a distance on inert matter, and most of
his work is devoted to ascertaining the laws and conditions under which
this action manifests itself." <span id="fr_158"></span>[\*](#fn_157)

Precisely; but as the work of de Gasparin called forth numberless
*Answers, Defenses,* and *Memoirs,* it was then demonstrated by his own
work that as he was a Protestant, in point of religious fanaticism, he
was as little to be relied upon as des Mousseaux and de Mirville. The
former is a profoundly pious Calvinist, while the two latter are
fanatical Roman Catholics. Moreover, the very words of de Gasparin
betray the spirit of partisanship:--"I feel I have a duty to perform. .
. . I lift high the Protestant flag against the Ultramontane banner!"
etc. <span id="fr_159"></span>[\*\*](#fn_158) In such matters as the
nature of the so-called spiritual phenomena, no evidence can be relied
upon, except the disinterested testimony of cold *unprejudiced*
witnesses and science. Truth is one, and Legion is the name for
religious sects; every one of which claims to have found the
unadulterated truth; as "the Devil is the chief pillar of the (Catholic)
Church," so all supernaturalism and miracles ceased, in de Gasparin's
opinion, "with apostleship."

But Mr. Crookes mentioned another eminent scholar, Thury, of Geneva,
professor of natural history, who was a brother-investigator with
Gasparin in the phenomena of Valleyres. This professor contradicts
point-blank the assertions of his colleague. "The first and most
necessary condition," says Gasparin, "is the *will* of the experimenter;
without the will, one would obtain nothing; you can form the chain (the
circle) for twenty-four hours consecutively, without obtaining the least
movement." <span id="fr_160"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_159)

The above proves only that de Gasparin makes no difference between
phenomena purely magnetic, produced by the persevering will of the
sitters among whom there may be not even a single medium, developed or
undeveloped, and the so-called spiritual ones. While the first can be
produced *consciously* by nearly every person, who has a firm and
determined will, the latter overpowers the sensitive very often against
his own consent, and always acts independently of him. *The mesmerizer
wills a thing, and if he is powerful enough, that thing is done. The
medium,* even if he had an honest purpose to succeed, *may get no
manifestations at all; the less he exercises his will, the better the
phenomena: the more he feels anxious, the less he is likely to get
anything;* to mesmerize requires a positive nature, to be a medium a
perfectly passive one. This is the Alphabet of Spiritualism, and no
medium is ignorant of it.

###### <span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

The opinion of Thury, as we have said, disagrees entirely with
Gasparin's theories of will-power. He states it in so many plain words,
in a letter, in answer to the invitation of the count to modify the last
article of his *memoire.* As the book of Thury is not at hand, we
translate the letter as it is found in the *resume* of de Mirville's
*Defense.* Thury's article which so shocked his religious friend,
related to the possibility of the existence and intervention in those
manifestations "of *wills* other than those of men and animals."

"I feel, sir, the justness of your observations in relation to the last
pages of this *memoire:* they may provoke a very bad feeling for me on
the part of scientists in general. I regret it the more as my
determination seems *to affect you so much;* nevertheless, I persist in
my resolution, because I think it a duty, to shirk which would be a kind
of treason.

"If, *against all expectations,* there were some truth in Spiritualism,
by abstaining from saying on the part of science, as I conceive it to
be, *that the absurdity of the belief in the intervention of spirits is
not as yet demonstrated scientifically* (for such is the *resume,* and
the thesis of the past pages of my *memoire*), by abstaining from saying
it to those who, after having read my work, will feel inclined to
experiment with the phenomena, I might risk to entice such persons on a
path many issues of which are very

equivocal.

"*Without leaving the domain of science,* as I esteem it, I will pursue
my duty to the end, without any reticence to the profit of my own glory,
and, to use your own words, 'as the great scandal lies there,' I do not
wish to assume the shame of it. I, moreover, insist that 'this is as
scientific as anything else*.'* If I wanted to sustain now the theory of
the intervention of disembodied spirits, I would have no power for it,
for the facts which are made known are not sufficient for the
demonstration of such a hypothesis. As it is, and in the position I have
assumed, I feel I am strong against every one. Willingly or not, all the
scientists must learn, through experience and their own errors, to
suspend their judgment as to things which they have not sufficiently
examined. The lesson you gave them in this direction cannot be lost.

"**G**ENEVA, 21 *December,* 1854."

Let us analyze the above letter, and try to discover what the writer
thinks, or rather what he does not think of this new force. One thing is
certain, at least: Professor Thury, a distinguished physicist and
naturalist, admits, and even scientifically proves that various
manifestations take place. Like Mr. Crookes, he does not believe that
they are produced by the interference of spirits or disembodied men who
have lived

###### <span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

and died on earth; for he says in his letter that nothing has
demonstrated this theory. He certainly believes no more in the Catholic
devils or demons, for de Mirville, who quotes this letter as a
triumphant proof against de Gasparin's naturalistic theory, once arrived
at the above sentence, hastens to emphasize it by a foot-note, which
runs thus: "At Valleyres--*perhaps,* but everywhere else!" <span
id="fr_161"></span>[\*](#fn_160) showing himself anxious to convey the
idea that the professor only meant the manifestations of Valleyres, when
denying their being produced by demons.

The contradictions, and we are sorry to say, the absurdities in which de
Gasparin allows himself to be caught, are numerous. While bitterly
criticizing the pretensions of the learned Faradaysiacs, he attributes
things which he declares *magical,* to causes perfectly natural. "If,"
he says, "we had to deal but with such phenomena (as witnessed and
explained (?) by the great physicist), we might as well hold our
tongues; but we have passed *beyond,* and what good can they do now, I
would ask, these apparatus which demonstrate that an *unconscious
pressure* explains the whole? It explains *all*, and the table resists
pressure and guidance! It explains *all*, and a piece of furniture which
*nobody touches* follows the fingers pointed at it; it *levitates*
(without contact), and it turns itself *upside down*!" <span
id="fr_162"></span>[\*\*](#fn_161)

But for all that, he takes upon himself to *explain* the phenomena.

"People will be advocating miracles, you say--magic! Every new law
appears to them as a prodigy. Calm yourselves; I take upon myself the
task to quiet those who are alarmed. In the face of such phenomena, we
do not cross at all the boundaries of natural law." <span
id="fr_163"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_162)

Most assuredly, we do not. But can the scientists assert that they have
in their possession the keys to such law? M. de Gasparin thinks he has.
Let us see.

"I do not risk myself to explain anything; *it is no business of mine.*
(?) To authenticate simple facts, and maintain a truth which science
desires to smother, is all I pretend to do. Nevertheless, I cannot
resist the temptation to point out to those who would treat us as so
many *illuminati* or sorcerers, that the manifestation in question
affords an interpretation which agrees with

the ordinary laws of science.

"Suppose a fluid, emanating from the experimenters, and chiefly from
*some of them;* suppose that the will determined the direction taken by
the fluid, and you will readily understand the rotation and levitation
of that one of the legs of the table toward which is ejected with every
action of the will an excess of fluid. Suppose that the glass causes the

###### <span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

fluid to escape, and you will understand how a tumbler placed on the
table can interrupt its rotation, and that the tumbler, placed on one of
its sides, causes the accumulation of the fluid in the opposite side,
which, in consequence of that, *is lifted*!"

If every one of the experimenters were clever mesmerizers, the
explanation, *minus* certain important details, might be acceptable. So
much for the power of *human will* on inanimate matter, according to the
learned minister of Louis Philippe. But how about the intelligence
exhibited by the table? What explanation does he give as to answers
obtained through the agency of this table to questions? answers which
could not possibly have been the "reflections of the brain" of those
present (one of the favorite theories of de Gasparin), for their own
ideas were quite the reverse of the very *liberal* philosophy given by
this wonderful table? On this he is silent. Anything but *spirits,*
whether human, satanic, or elemental.

Thus, the "simultaneous concentration of thought," and the "accumulation
of fluid," will be found no better than "the unconscious cerebration"
and "psychic force" of other scientists. We must try again; and we may
predict beforehand that the thousand and one theories of science will
prove of no avail until they will confess that this force, far from
being a projection of the accumulated wills of the circle, is, on the
contrary, a force which is abnormal, foreign to themselves, and
*supra-intelligent*.

Professor Thury, who denies the theory of departed human spirits,
rejects the Christian devil-doctrine, and shows himself unwilling to
pronounce in favor of Crookes's theory (the 6th), that of the hermetists
and ancient theurgists, adopts the one, which, he says in his letter, is
"*the most prudent*, and makes him feel strong against every one."
Moreover, he accepts as little of de Gasparin's hypothesis of
"unconscious will-power." This is what he says in his work:

"As to the announced phenomena, such as the *levitation without
contact,* and the displacement of furniture by invisible hands--unable
to demonstrate their impossibility, *a priori,* no one has the right to
treat as absurd the serious evidences which affirm their occurrence" (p.
9).

As to the theory proposed by M. de Gasparin, Thury judges it very
severely. "While admitting that in the experiments of Valleyres," says
de Mirville, "the seat of the *force* might have been in the
*individual*--and we say that it was intrinsic and extrinsic at the same
time--and that the will might be generally necessary (p. 20), he repeats
but what he had said in his preface, to wit: 'M. de Gasparin presents us
with crude facts, and the explanations following he offers for what they
are worth. *Breathe on them,* and not many will be found standing after
this. No,

###### <span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

very little, if anything, will remain of his explanations. As to facts,
they are *henceforth demonstrated*' " (p. 10).

As Mr. Crookes tells us, Professor Thury refutes "all these
explanations, and considers the effects due to a peculiar substance,
fluid, or agent, pervading in a manner similar to the luminiferous ether
of the scientists, all matter, nervous, organic or inorganic, which he
terms *psychode.* He enters into full discussion as to the properties of
this state, or form, or matter, and proposes the term *ectenic* force .
. . for the power exerted when the mind acts at a distance through the
influence of the psychode." <span id="fr_164"></span>[\*](#fn_163)

Mr. Crookes remarks further, that "Professor Thury's *ectenic* force*,*
and his own 'psychic force' are evidently equivalent terms."

We certainly could very easily demonstrate that the two forces are
identical, moreover, the astral or *sidereal* light as explained by the
alchemists and Eliphas Levi, in his *Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie;*
and that, under the name of **A**KASA, or life-principle, this
all-pervading force was known to the gymnosophists, Hindu magicians, and
adepts of all countries, thousands of years ago; and, that it is still
known to them, and used at present by the Thibetan lamas, fakirs,
thaumaturgists of all nationalities, and even by many of the Hindu
"jugglers."

In many cases of trance, artificially induced by mesmerization, it is
also quite possible, even quite probable, that it is the "spirit" of the
subject which acts under the guidance of the operator's will. But, if
the medium remains conscious, and psycho-physical phenomena occur which
indicate a directing intelligence, then, unless it be conceded that he
is a "magician," and can project his double, physical exhaustion can
signify nothing more than nervous prostration. The proof that he is the
passive instrument of unseen entities controlling occult potencies,
seems conclusive. Even if Thury's *ectenic* and Crookes's *psychic*
force are substantially of the same derivation, the respective
discoverers seem to differ widely as to the properties and potencies of
this force; while Professor Thury candidly admits that the phenomena are
often produced by "wills *not* human," and so, of course, gives a
qualified endorsement to Mr. Crookes's theory No. 6, the latter,
admitting the genuineness of the phenomena, has as yet pronounced no
definite opinion as to their cause.

Thus, we find that neither M. Thury, who investigated these
manifestations with de Gasparin in 1854, nor Mr. Crookes, who conceded
their undeniable genuineness in 1874, have reached anything definite.
Both are chemists, physicists, and very learned men. Both have given all
their attention to the puzzling question; and besides these two
scientists

###### <span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

there were many others who, while coming to the same conclusion, have
hitherto been as unable to furnish the world with a final solution. It
follows then, that in twenty years none of the scientists have made a
single step toward the unravelling of the mystery, which remains as
immovable and impregnable as the walls of an enchanted castle in a fairy
tale.

Would it be too impertinent to surmise that perhaps our modern
scientists have got in what the French term *un cercle vicieux?* That,
hampered by the weight of their materialism, and the insufficiency of
what they name "the exact sciences" to demonstrate to them tangibly the
existence of a spiritual universe, peopled and inhabited much more than
our visible one, they are doomed forever to creep around *inside* that
circle, unwilling rather than unable to penetrate beyond its enchanted
ring, and explore it in its length and breadth? It is but prejudice
which keeps them from making a compromise with well-established facts
and seek alliance with such expert magnetists and mesmerizers as were Du
Potet and Regazzoni.

"What, then, is produced from death?" inquired Socrates of Cebes.
"*Life,*" was the reply. <span id="fr_165"></span>[\*](#fn_164) . . .
"Can the soul, since it is immortal, be anything else than
imperishable?" <span id="fr_166"></span>[\*\*](#fn_165) The "seed cannot
develop unless it is in part consumed," says Prof. Lecomte; "it is not
quickened unless it die," says St. Paul.

A flower blossoms; then withers and dies. It leaves a fragrance behind,
which, long after its delicate petals are but a little dust, still
lingers in the air. Our material sense may not be cognizant of it, but
it nevertheless exists. Let a note be struck on an instrument, and the
faintest sound produces an eternal echo. A disturbance is created on the
invisible waves of the shoreless ocean of space, and the vibration is
never wholly lost. Its energy being once carried from the world of
matter into the immaterial world will live for ever. And man, we are
asked to believe, man, the living, thinking, reasoning entity, the
indwelling deity of our nature's crowning masterpiece, will evacuate his
casket and be no more! Would the principle of continuity which exists
even for the so-called *inorganic* matter, for a floating atom, be
denied to the spirit, whose attributes are consciousness, memory, mind,
LOVE! Really, the very idea is preposterous. The more we think and the
more we learn, the more difficult it becomes for us to account for the
atheism of the scientist. We may readily understand that a man ignorant
of the laws of nature, unlearned in either chemistry or physics, may be
fatally drawn into materialism through his very ignorance; his
incapacity of

###### <span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

understanding the philosophy of the exact sciences, or drawing any
inference by analogy from the *visible* to the *invisible.* A
natural-born metaphysician, an ignorant dreamer, may awake abruptly and
say to himself: "I dreamed it; I have no tangible proof of that which I
imagined; it is all illusion," etc. But for a man of science, acquainted
with the characteristics of the universal energy, to maintain that
*life* is merely a phenomenon of matter, a species of energy, amounts
simply to a confession of his own incapability of analyzing and properly
understanding the alpha and the omega even of that--matter.

Sincere skepticism as to the immortality of man's soul is a malady; a
malformation of the physical brain, and has existed in every age. As
there are infants born with a caul upon their heads, so there are men
who are incapable to their last hour of ridding themselves of that kind
of caul evidently enveloping their organs of spirituality. But it is
quite another feeling which makes them reject the possibility of
spiritual and magical phenomena. The true name for that feeling
is--*vanity.* "We can neither produce nor explain it--hence, it *does
not* exist, and moreover, could *never* have existed." Such is the
irrefutable argument of our present-day philosophers. Some thirty years
ago, E. Salverte startled the world of the "credulous" by his work, *The
Philosophy of Magic.* The book claimed to unveil the whole of the
miracles of the Bible as well as those of the Pagan sanctuaries. Its
*resume* ran thus: Long ages of observation; a great knowledge (for
those days of ignorance) of natural sciences and philosophy; imposture;
legerdemain; optics; phantasmagoria; exaggeration. Final and logical
conclusion: Thaumaturgists, prophets, magicians, rascals, and knaves;
the rest of the world, fools.

Among many other conclusive proofs, the reader can find him offering the
following: "The enthusiastic disciples of Iamblichus affirmed that when
he prayed, he was raised to the height of ten cubits from the ground;
and *dupes* to the same metaphor, although Christians, have had the
simplicity to attribute a similar miracle to St. Clare, and St. Francis
of Assisi." <span id="fr_167"></span>[\*](#fn_166)

Hundreds of travellers claimed to have seen fakirs produce the same
phenomena, and they were all thought either liars or hallucinated. But
it was but yesterday that the same phenomenon was witnessed and endorsed
by a well-known scientist; it was produced under test conditions;
declared by Mr. Crookes to be genuine, and to be *beyond* the
possibility of an illusion or a trick. And so was it manifested many a
time before and attested by numerous witnesses, though the latter are
now invariably disbelieved.

###### <span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

Peace to thy scientific ashes, O credulous Eusebe Salverte! Who knows
but before the close of the present century popular wisdom will have
invented a new proverb: "As incredibly credulous as a scientist."

Why should it appear so impossible that when the spirit is once
separated from its body, it may have the power to animate some
evanescent form, created out of that magical "psychic" or "ectenic" or
"ethereal" force, with the help of the elementaries who furnish it with
the sublimated matter of their own bodies? The only difficulty is, to
realize the fact that surrounding space is not an empty void, but a
reservoir filled to repletion with the models of all things that ever
were, that are, and that will be; and with beings of countless races,
unlike our own. Seemingly supernatural facts--supernatural in that they
openly contradict the demonstrated natural laws of gravitation, as in
the above-mentioned instance of levitation--are recognized by many
scientists. Every one who has dared to investigate with thoroughness has
found himself compelled to admit their existence; only in their
unsuccessful efforts to account for the phenomena on theories based on
the laws of such forces as were already known, some of the highest
representatives of science have involved themselves in inextricable
difficulties!

In his *Resume* de Mirville describes the argumentation of these
adversaries of spiritualism as consisting of five paradoxes, which he
terms

distractions.

First distraction: that of Faraday, who explains the table phenomenon,
by the table which *pushes* you "in consequence of the resistance which
*pushes it back.*"

Second distraction: that of Babinet, explaining all the communications
(by raps) which are produced, as he says, "in good faith and with
perfect conscientiousness, correct in every way and sense--by
*ventriloquism,*" the use of which faculty implies of necessity--

bad faith.

Third distraction: that of Dr. Chevreuil, explaining the faculty of
moving furniture *without* contact, by the preliminary acquisition of
that faculty.

Fourth distraction: that of the French Institute and its members, who
consent to accept the miracles, on condition that the latter will not
contradict in any way those natural laws with which they are acquainted.

Fifth distraction: that of M. de Gasparin, introducing as a very
*simple* and perfectly *elementary* phenomenon that which every one
rejects, precisely because no one ever saw the like of it. <span
id="fr_168"></span>[\*](#fn_167)

While the great, world-known scientists indulge in such fantastic
theories, some less known neurologists find an explanation for occult
phenomena

###### <span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

of every kind in an abnormal effluvium resulting from epilepsy. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[\*](#fn_168) Another would treat mediums--and poets,
too, we may infer--with assafoetida and ammonia, <span
id="fr_170"></span>[\*\*](#fn_169) and declare every one of the
believers in spiritual manifestations lunatics and hallucinated mystics.

To the latter lecturer and professed pathologist is commended that
sensible bit of advice to be found in the New Testament: "Physician,
heal thyself." Truly, no sane man would so sweepingly charge insanity
upon four hundred and forty-six millions of people in various parts of
the world, who believe in the intercourse of spirits with ourselves!

Considering all this, it remains to us but to wonder at the preposterous
presumption of these men, who claim to be regarded by right of learning
as the high priests of science, to classify a phenomenon they know
nothing about. Surely, several millions of their countrymen and women,
if deluded, deserve at least as much attention as potato-bugs or
grasshoppers! But, instead of that, what do we find? The Congress of the
United States, at the demand of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, enacts statutes for organization of National
Insect Commissions; chemists are busying themselves in boiling frogs and
bugs; geologists amuse their leisure by osteological surveys of
armor-plated *ganoids,* and discuss the odontology of the various
species of *dinichtys;* and entomologists suffer their enthusiasm to
carry them to the length of supping on grasshoppers boiled, fried, and
in soup. <span id="fr_171"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_170) Meanwhile, millions
of Americans are either losing themselves in the maze of "crazy
delusions," according to the opinion of some of these very learned
encyclopaedists, or perishing physically from "nervous disorders,"
brought on or brought out by mediumistic diathesis.

At one time, there was reason to hope that Russian scientists would have
undertaken the task of giving the phenomena a careful and impartial
study. A commission was appointed by the Imperial University of St.
Petersburg, with Professor Mendeleyeff, the great physicist, at its
head. The advertised programme provided for a series of forty seances to
test mediums, and invitations were extended to all of this class who
chose to come to the Russian capital and submit their powers to
examination. As a rule they refused--doubtless from a prevision of the
trap that had been laid for them. After *eight* sittings, upon a shallow
pretext, and just when the manifestations were becoming interesting, the
commission prejudged the case, and published a decision adverse to the
claims of mediumism. Instead of pursuing dignified, scientific methods,
they set spies to peep

###### <span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

through the key-holes. Professor Mendeleyeff declared in a public
lecture that spiritualism, or any such belief in our souls' immortality,
was a mixture of *superstition, delusion,* and *fraud;* adding that
every "manifestation" of such nature--including mind-reading, trance,
and other psychological phenomena, we must suppose--could be, and *was*
produced by means of clever apparatus and machinery concealed under the
clothing of mediums!

After such a public exhibition of ignorance and prejudice, Mr. Butlerof,
Professor of Chemistry at the St. Petersburg University, and Mr.
Aksakof, Counsellor of State in the same city, who had been invited to
assist on the committee for mediums, became so disgusted that they
withdrew. Having published their protests in the Russian papers, they
were supported by the majority of the press, who did not spare either
Mendeleyeff or his officious committee with their sarcasms. The public
acted fairly in that case. One hundred and thirty names, of the most
influential persons of the best society of St. Petersburg, many of them
no spiritualists at all, but simply investigators, added their
signatures to the well-deserved protest.

The inevitable result of such a procedure followed; universal attention
was drawn to the question of spiritualism; private circles were
organized throughout the empire; some of the most liberal journals began
to discuss the subject; and, as we write, a new commission is being
organized to finish the interrupted task.

But now--as a matter of course--they will do their duty less than ever.
They have a better pretext than they ever had in the pretended *expose*
of the medium Slade, by Professor Lankester, of London. True, to the
evidence of one scientist and his friend,--Messrs. Lankester and
Donkin--the accused opposed the testimony of Wallace, Crookes, and a
host of others, which totally nullifies an accusation based merely on
circumstantial evidence and prejudice. As the *London Spectator* very
pertinently observes:

"It is really a pure superstition and nothing else to assume that we are
so fully acquainted with the laws of nature, that even carefully
examined facts, attested by an experienced observer, ought to be cast
aside as utterly unworthy of credit, only because they do not, at first
sight, seem to be in keeping with what is most clearly known already. To
assume, as Professor Lankester appears to do, that because there are
fraud and credulity in plenty to be found in connection with these
facts--as there is, no doubt, in connection with all nervous
diseases--fraud and credulity will account for all the carefully
attested statements of accurate and conscientious observers, is to saw
away at the very branch of the tree of knowledge on which inductive
science necessarily rests, and to bring the whole structure toppling to
the ground."

###### <span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

But what matters all this to scientists? The torrent of superstition,
which, according to them, sweeps away millions of bright intellects in
its impetuous course, cannot reach them. The modern deluge called
spiritualism is unable to affect their strong minds; and the muddy waves
of the flood must expend their raging fury without wetting even the
soles of their boots. Surely it must be but traditional stubbornness on
the part of the Creator that prevents him from confessing what a poor
chance his miracles have in our day in blinding professed scientists. By
this time even He ought to know and take notice that long ago they
decided to write on the porticoes of their universities and colleges:

> Science commands that God shall not  
> Do miracles upon this spot!  <span id="fr_172"></span>[\*](#fn_171)

Both the infidel spiritualists and the orthodox Roman Catholics seem to
have leagued themselves this year against the iconoclastic pretensions
of materialism. Increase of skepticism has developed of late a like
increase of credulity. The champions of the Bible "divine" miracles
rival the panegyrist's mediumistic phenomena, and the middle ages revive
in the nineteenth century. Once more we see the Virgin Mary resume her
epistolary correspondence with the faithful children of her church; and
while the "angel friends" scribble messages to spiritualists through
their mediums, the "mother of God" drops letters direct from heaven to
earth. The shrine of Notre Dame de Lourdes has turned into a
spiritualistic cabinet for "materializations," while the cabinets of
popular American mediums are transformed into sacred shrines, into which
Mohammed, Bishop Polk, Joan of Arc and other aristocratic spirits from
over the "dark river," having descended, "materialize" in full light.
And if the Virgin Mary is seen taking her daily walk in the woods about
Lourdes in full human form, why not the Apostle of Islam, and the late
Bishop of Louisiana? Either both "miracles" are possible, or both kinds
of these manifestations, the "divine" as well as the "spiritual," are
arrant impostures. Time alone will prove which; but meanwhile, as
science refuses the loan of her magic lamp to illuminate these
mysteries, common people must go stumbling on whether they be mired or
not.

The recent "miracles" at Lourdes having been unfavorably discussed in
the London papers, Monsignor Capel communicates to the *Times* the views
of the Roman Church in the following terms:

###### <span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

"As to the miraculous cures which are effected, I would refer your
readers to the calm, judicious work, *La Grotte de Lourdes,* written by
Dr. Dozous, an eminent resident practitioner, inspector of epidemic
diseases for the district, and medical assistant of the Court of
Justice. He prefaces a number of detailed cases of miraculous cures,
which he says he has studied with great care and perseverance, with
these words: 'I declare that these cures effected at the Sanctuary of
Lourdes by means of the water of the fountain, have established their
supernatural character in the eyes of men of good faith. I ought to
confess that without these cures, my mind, little prone to listen to
miraculous explanations of any kind, would have had great difficulty in
accepting even this fact (the apparition), remarkable as it is from so
many points of view. But the cures, of which I have been so often an
ocular witness, have given to my mind a light which does not permit me
to ignore the importance of the visits of Bernadette to the Grotto, and
the reality of the apparitions with which she was favored.' The
testimony of a distinguished medical man, who has carefully watched from
the beginning Bernadette, and the miraculous cures at the Grotto, is at
least worthy of respectful consideration. I may add, that the vast
number of those who come to the Grotto do so to repent of their sins, to
increase their piety, to pray for the regeneration of their country, to
profess publicly their belief in the Son of God and his Immaculate
Mother. Many come to be cured of bodily ailments; and on the testimony
of eye-witnesses several return home freed from their sickness. To
upbraid with non-belief, as does your article, those who use also the
waters of the Pyrenees, is as reasonable as to charge with unbelief the
magistrates who inflict punishment on the peculiar people for neglecting
to have medical aid. Health obliged me to pass the winters of 1860 to
1867 at Pau. This gave me the opportunity of making the most minute
inquiry into the apparition at Lourdes. After frequent and lengthened
examinations of Bernadette and of some of the miracles effected, I am
convinced that, *if facts are to be received on human testimony, then
has the apparition at Lourdes every claim to be received as an
undeniable fact.* It is, however, no part of the Catholic faith, and may
be accepted or rejected by any Catholic without the least praise or
condemnation."

Let the reader observe the sentence we have italicized. This makes it
clear that the Catholic Church, despite her infallibility and her
liberal postage convention with the Kingdom of Heaven, is content to
accept even the validity of *divine* miracles upon human testimony. Now
when we turn to the report of Mr. Huxley's recent New York lectures on
evolution, we find him saying that it is upon "human historical evidence
that we depend for the greater part of our knowledge for the doings of

###### <span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

the past." In a lecture on Biology, he has said " . . . every man who
has the interest of truth at heart must earnestly desire that every
well-founded and just criticism that can be made should be made; but it
is essential . . . that the critic should know what he is talking
about." An aphorism that its author should recall when he undertakes to
pronounce upon psychological subjects. Add this to his views, as
expressed above, and who could ask a better platform upon which to meet
him?

Here we have a representative materialist, and a representative Catholic
prelate, enunciating an identical view of the sufficiency of *human
testimony* to prove facts that it suits the prejudices of each to
believe. After this, what need for either the student of occultism, or
even the spiritualist, to hunt about for endorsements of the argument
they have so long and so persistently advanced, that the psychological
phenomena of ancient and modern thaumaturgists being superabundantly
proven upon human testimony must be accepted as facts? Church and
College having appealed to the tribunal of human evidence, they cannot
deny the rest of mankind an equal privilege. One of the fruits of the
recent agitation in London of the subject of mediumistic phenomena, is
the expression of some remarkably liberal views on the part of the
secular press. "In any case, we are for admitting spiritualism to a
place among tolerated beliefs, and letting it alone accordingly," says
the London *Daily* *News,* in 1876. "It has many votaries who are as
intelligent as most of us, and to whom any obvious and palpable defect
in the evidence meant to convince must have been obvious and palpable
long ago. Some of *the wisest men in the world believed in ghosts,* and
would have continued to do so even though half-a-dozen persons in
succession had been convicted of frightening people with sham goblins."

It is not for the first time in the history of the world, that the
invisible world has to contend against the materialistic skepticism of
soul-blind Sadducees. Plato deplores such an unbelief, and refers to
this pernicious tendency more than once in his works.

From Kapila, the Hindu philosopher, who many centuries before Christ
demurred to the claim of the mystic Yogins, that in ecstasy a man has
the power of seeing Deity face to face and conversing with the "highest"
beings, down to the Voltaireans of the eighteenth century, who laughed
at everything that was held sacred by other people, each age had its
unbelieving Thomases. Did they ever succeed in checking the progress of
truth? No more than the ignorant bigots who sat in judgment over Galileo
checked the progress of the earth's rotation. No exposures whatever are
able to vitally affect the stability or instability of a belief which
humanity inherited from the first races of men, those, who--if we

###### <span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

can believe in the evolution of spiritual man as in that of the physical
one--had the great truth from the lips of their ancestors, the *gods of
their fathers,* "that were on the other side of the flood." The identity
of the Bible with the legends of the Hindu sacred books and the
cosmogonies of other nations, must be demonstrated at some future day.
*The fables of the mythopoeic ages will be found to have but allegorized
the greatest truths of geology and anthropology.* It is in these
ridiculously expressed fables that science will have to look for her
"missing links."

Otherwise, whence such strange "coincidences" in the respective
histories of nations and peoples so widely thrown apart? Whence that
identity of primitive conceptions which, fables and legends though they
are termed now, contain in them nevertheless the kernel of historical
facts, of a truth thickly overgrown with the husks of popular
embellishment, but still a truth? Compare only this verse of *Genesis*
vi.: "And it came to pass, when *men began to multiply* on the face of
the earth, and daughters were born unto them, that the sons of God saw
the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of
all which they chose. . . . There were *giants in the earth in those
days,*" etc., with this part of the Hindu cosmogony, in the *Vedas,*
which speaks of the descent of the Brahmans. The first Brahman complains
of being *alone* among all his brethren without a wife. Notwithstanding
that the Eternal advises him to devote his days solely to the study of
the Sacred Knowledge (*Veda*)*,* the *first-born* of mankind insists.
Provoked at such ingratitude, the eternal gave Brahman a wife of the
race of the *Daints,* or *giants,* from whom all the Brahmans maternally
descend. Thus the entire Hindu priesthood is descended, on the one hand,
from the *superior* spirits (the sons of God), and from *Daintany,* a
daughter of the earthly giants, the primitive men. <span
id="fr_173"></span>[\*](#fn_172) "And they bare children to them; the
same became mighty men which were of old; men of renown." <span
id="fr_174"></span>[\*\*](#fn_173)

The same is found in the Scandinavian cosmogonical fragment. In the
*Edda* is given the description to Gangler by Har, one of the three
informants (Har, Jafuhar, and Tredi) of the first man, called Bur, "the
father of Bor, who took for wife Besla, a daughter of the giant
Bolthara, of the race of the *primitive giants.*" The full and
interesting narrative may be found in the *Prose Edda,* sects. 4-8, in
Mallett's *Northern Antiquities*. <span
id="fr_175"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_174)

The same groundwork underlies the Grecian fables about the Titans; and
may be found in the legend of the Mexicans--the four successive races of
*Popol-Vuh.* It constitutes one of the many ends to be found in

###### <span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

the entangled and seemingly inextricable skein of mankind, viewed as a
psychological phenomenon. Belief in supernaturalism would be otherwise
inexplicable. To say that it sprang up, and grew and developed
throughout the countless ages, without either cause or the least firm
basis to rest upon, but merely as an empty fancy, would be to utter as
great an absurdity as the theological doctrine that the universe sprang
into creation out of nothing.

It is too late now to kick against an evidence which manifests itself as
in the full glare of noon. Liberal, as well as Christian papers, and the
organs of the most advanced scientific authorities, begin to protest
unanimously against the dogmatism and narrow prejudices of sciolism. The
*Christian World,* a religious paper, adds its voice to that of the
unbelieving London press. Following is a good specimen of its common
sense:

"If a medium," it says, <span id="fr_176"></span>[\*](#fn_175) "can be
shown ever so conclusively to be an impostor, we shall still object to
the disposition manifested by persons of some authority in scientific
matters, to pooh-pooh and knock on the head all careful inquiry into
those subjects of which Mr. Barrett took note in his paper before the
British Association. Because spiritualists have committed themselves to
many absurdities, that is no reason why the phenomena to which they
appeal should be scouted as unworthy of examination. They may be
mesmeric, or clairvoyant, or something else. But let our wise men tell
us what they are, and not snub us, as ignorant people too often snub
inquiring youth, by the easy but unsatisfactory apothegm, 'Little
children should not ask questions.' "

Thus the time has come when the scientists have lost all right to be
addressed with the Miltonian verse, "O thou who, for the testimony of
truth, hast borne universal reproach!" Sad degeneration, and one that
recalls the exclamation of that "doctor of physic" mentioned one hundred
and eighty years ago by Dr. Henry More, and who, upon hearing the story
told of the drummer of Tedworth and of Ann Walker, "*cryed* out
presently, *If this be true, I have been in a wrong box all this time,
and must begin my account anew.*" <span
id="fr_177"></span>[\*\*](#fn_176)

But in our century, notwithstanding Huxley's endorsement of the value of
"human testimony," even Dr. Henry More has become "an enthusiast and a
visionary, both of which, united in the same person, constitute a
*canting madman.*" <span id="fr_178"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_177)

###### <span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

What psychology has long lacked to make its mysterious laws better
understood and applied to the ordinary as well as extraordinary affairs
of life, is not facts. These it has had in abundance. The need has been
for their recording and classification--for trained observers and
competent analysts. From the scientific body these ought to have been
supplied. If error has prevailed and superstition run riot these many
centuries throughout Christendom, it is the misfortune of the common
people, the reproach of science. The generations have come and gone,
each furnishing its quota of martyrs to conscience and moral courage,
and psychology is little better understood in our day than it was when
the heavy hand of the Vatican sent those brave unfortunates to their
untimely doom, and branded their memories with the stigma of heresy and
sorcery.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[99:\*](iu003.htm#fr_132) "Des Tables," vol. i,
p. 213.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[99:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_133) Ibid., 216.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[100:\*](iu003.htm#fr_134) "Des Tables," vol.
i., p. 48.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[100:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_135) Ibid., p. 24.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[100:\*\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_136) Ibid., p. 35.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[100:\*\*\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_137) De Mirville:
"Des Esprits," p. 26.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[101:\*](iu003.htm#fr_138) "Avant propos," pp.
12 and 16.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[101:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_139) Vol. i., p. 244.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[102:\*](iu003.htm#fr_140) Vol. ii., p. 524.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[102:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_141)
"Medico-Psychological Annals," Jan. 1, 1854.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[103:\*](iu003.htm#fr_142) De Mirville: "Des
Esprits," "Constitutionnel," June 16, 1854.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[103:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_143) Chevalier des
Mousseaux: "Moeurs et Pratiques des Demons," p. x.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[103:\*\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_144) De Mirville:
"Des Esprits," p. 4.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[104:\*](iu003.htm#fr_145) Ibid., "Revue des
Deux Mondes," January 15, 1854, p. 108.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[104:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_146) This is a
repetition and variation of Faraday's theory.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[105:\*](iu003.htm#fr_147) "Revue des Deux
Mondes," p. 410.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[105:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_148) "Revue des Deux
Mondes," January, 1854, p. 414.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[105:\*\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_149) "Revue des Deux
Mondes," May 1, 1854, p. 531.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[106:\*](iu003.htm#fr_150) We translate
*verbatim*. We doubt whether Mr. Weekman was the first investigator.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[106:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_151) Babinet: "Revue
des Deux Mondes," May 1, 1854, p. 511.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[106:\*\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_152) De Mirville:
"Des Esprits," p. 33.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[106:\*\*\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_154) Notes, "Des
Esprits," p. 38.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[107:\*](iu003.htm#fr_155) De Mirville: "Faits
et Theories Physiques," p. 46.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[108:\*](iu003.htm#fr_156) See Monograph: "Of
the Lightning considered from the point of view of the history of Legal
Medicine and Public Hygiene," by M. Boudin, Chief Surgeon of the
Military Hospital of Boule.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[108:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_157) De Gasparin: vol.
i., page 288.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[109:\*](iu003.htm#fr_158) Crookes: "Physical
Force," page 26.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[109:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_159) De Gasparin:
"Science *versus* Spirit," vol. i., p. 313.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[109:\*\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_160) Ibid., vol. i.,
p. 313.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[111:\*](iu003.htm#fr_161) De Mirville pleads
here the devil-theory, of course.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[111:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_162) "Des Tables," vol.
i., p. 213.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[111:\*\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_163) Vol. i., p. 217.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[113:\*](iu003.htm#fr_164) Crookes: "Psychic
Force," part i., pp. 26-27.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[114:\*](iu003.htm#fr_165) Plato: "Phaedo," §
44.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[114:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_166) Ibid., § 128.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[115:\*](iu003.htm#fr_167) "Philosophy of
Magic," English translation, p. 47.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[116:\*](iu003.htm#fr_168) De Mirville: "Des
Esprits," p. 159.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[117:\*](iu003.htm#fr_169) See F. Gerry
Fairfield's "Ten Years with Spiritual Mediums," New York, 1875.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[117:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_170) Marvin: "Lecture
on Mediomania."

<span id="fn_170"></span>[117:\*\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_171) "Scientific
American," N. Y., 1875.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[119:\*](iu003.htm#fr_172)

> "De par le Roi, defense a Dieu,  
> De faire miracle, en ces lieux."

A satire that was found written upon the walls of the cemetery at the
time of the Jansenist miracles and their prohibition by the police of
France.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[122:\*](iu003.htm#fr_173) Polier: "Mythologie
des Indous."

<span id="fn_173"></span>[122:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_174) Genesis vi., 4.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[122:\*\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_175) Mallett:
"Northern Antiquities," Bohn's edition, pp. 401-405.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[123:\*](iu003.htm#fr_176) In the "Quarterly
Review" of 1859, Graham gives a strange account of many now deserted
Oriental cities, in which the stone doors are of enormous dimensions,
often seemingly out of proportion with the buildings themselves, and
remarks that dwellings and doors bear all of them the impress of an
ancient race of giants.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[123:\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_177) Dr. More: "Letter
to Glanvil, author of 'Saducismus Triumphatus.' "

<span id="fn_177"></span>[123:\*\*\*](iu003.htm#fr_178) J. S. Y.:
"Demonologia, or Natural Knowledge Revealed," 1827, p. 219.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](iu004)
