[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Theosophy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iu003)  [Next](iu005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

### CHAPTER V.

> "Ich bin der Geist der stets verneint."  
> (I am the spirit which still denies.)--(*Mephisto* in **F**AUST.)

> "The Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive because it seeth
> Him not; neither knoweth Him."--*Gospel according to John,* xiv., 17.

> "Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth  
> Unseen, both when we wake and when we sleep."--**M**ILTON.

> "Mere intellectual enlightenment cannot recognize the spiritual. As
> the sun puts out a fire, so spirit puts out the eyes of mere
> intellect.--**W**. **H**OWITT.

THERE has been an infinite confusion of names to express one and the
same thing.

The chaos of the ancients; the Zoroastrian sacred fire, or the
*Antusbyrum* of the Parsees; the Hermes-fire; the Elmes-fire of the
ancient Germans; the lightning of Cybele; the burning torch of Apollo;
the flame on the altar of Pan; the inextinguishable fire in the temple
on the Acropolis, and in that of Vesta; the fire-flame of Pluto's helm;
the brilliant sparks on the hats of the Dioscuri, on the Gorgon head,
the helm of Pallas, and the staff of Mercury; the πυρ ασβεστον the
Egyptian Phtha, or Ra; the Grecian *Zeus Cataibates* (the
descending); <span id="fr_179"></span>[\*](#fn_178) the pentecostal
fire-tongues; the burning bush of Moses; the pillar of fire of the
*Exodus,* and the "burning lamp" of Abram; the eternal fire of the
"bottomless pit"; the Delphic oracular vapors; the Sidereal light of the
Rosicrucians; the **A**KASA of the Hindu adepts; the Astral light of
Eliphas Levi; the nerve-aura and the fluid of the magnetists; the *od*
of Reichenbach; the fire-globe, or meteor-*cat* of Babinet; the
*Psychod* and ectenic force of Thury; the psychic force of Sergeant Cox
and Mr. Crookes; the atmospheric magnetism of some naturalists;
galvanism; and finally, electricity, are but various names for many
different manifestations, or effects of the same mysterious,
all-pervading cause--the Greek *Archeus,* or Αρχαιοσ.

Sir E. Bulwer-Lytton, in his *Coming Race,* describes it as the
VRIL, <span id="fr_180"></span>[\*\*](#fn_179) used by the subterranean
populations, and allowed his readers to take it

###### <span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

for a fiction. "These people," he says, "consider that in the vril they
had arrived at the unity in natural energic agencies"; and proceeds to
show that Faraday intimated them "under the more cautious term of
correlation," thus:

"I have long held an opinion, almost amounting to a conviction, in
common, I believe, with many other lovers of natural knowledge, that the
various forms under which the forces of matter are made manifest, HAVE
ONE COMMON ORIGIN; or, in other words, are so directly related and
naturally dependent, that they are convertible, as it were, into one
another, and possess equivalents of power in their action."

Absurd and unscientific as may appear our comparison of a fictitious
*vril* invented by the great novelist, and the primal force of the
equally great experimentalist, with the kabalistic astral light, it is
nevertheless the true definition of this force. Discoveries are
constantly being made to corroborate the statement thus boldly put
forth. Since we began to write this part of our book, an announcement
has been made in a number of papers of the supposed discovery of a new
force by Mr. Edison, the electrician, of Newark, New Jersey, which force
seems to have little in common with electricity, or galvanism, except
the principle of conductivity. If demonstrated, it may remain for a long
time under some pseudonymous scientific name; but, nevertheless, it will
be but one of the numerous family of children brought forth from the
commencement of time by our kabalistic mother, the *Astral Virgin.* In
fact, the discoverer says that, "it is as distinct, and has as regular
laws as heat, magnetism, or electricity." The journal which contains the
first account of the discovery adds that, "Mr. Edison thinks that it
exists in connection with heat, and that it can also be generated by
independent and *as yet undiscovered means.*"

Another of the most startling of recent discoveries, is the possibility
of annihilating distance between human voices--by means of the
*telephone* (distance-sounder), an instrument invented by Professor A.
Graham Bell. This possibility, first suggested by the little "lovers'
telegraph," consisting of small tin cups with vellum and drug-twine
apparatus, by which a conversation can be carried on at a distance of
two hundred feet, has developed into the telephone, which will become
the wonder of this age. A long conversation has taken place between
Boston and Cambridgeport by telegraph; "every word being distinctly
heard and perfectly understood, and the modulations of voices being
quite distinguishable," according to the official report. *The voice is
seized upon,* so to say, *and held in form by a magnet, and the
sound-wave transmitted by electricity acting in unison and co-operating
with the magnet.* The whole success depends upon a perfect control of
the electric currents and the

###### <span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

power of the magnets used, with which the former must co-operate. "The
invention," reports the paper, "may be rudely described as a sort of
trumpet, over the bell-mouth of which is drawn a delicate membrane,
which, when the voice is thrown into the tube, swells outward in
proportion to the force of the sound-wave. To the outer side of the
membrane is attached a piece of metal, which, as the membrane swells
outward, connects with a magnet, and this, with the electric circuit, is
controlled by the operator. By some principle, not yet fully understood,
the electric current transmits the sound-wave just as delivered by the
voice in the trumpet, and the listener at the other end of the line,
with a twin or facsimile trumpet at his ear, hears every word
distinctly, and readily detects the modulations of the speaker's voice."

Thus, in the presence of such wonderful discoveries of our age, and the
further magical possibilities lying latent and yet undiscovered in the
boundless realm of nature, and further, in view of the great probability
that Edison's Force and Professor Graham Bell's Telephone may unsettle,
if not utterly upset all our ideas of the imponderable fluids, would it
not be well for such persons as may be tempted to traverse our
statements, to wait and see whether they will be corroborated or refuted
by further discoveries.

Only in connection with these *discoveries,* we may, perhaps, well
remind our readers of the many hints to be found in the ancient
histories as to a certain secret in the possession of the Egyptian
priesthood, who could instantly communicate, during the celebration of
the Mysteries, from one temple to another, even though the former were
at Thebes and the latter at the other end of the country; the legends
attributing it, as a matter of course, to the "invisible tribes" of the
air, which carry messages for mortals. The author of *Pre-Adamite Man*
quotes an instance, which being given merely on his own authority, and
he seeming uncertain whether the story comes from Macrinus or some other
writer, may be taken for what it is worth. He found good evidence, he
says, during his stay in Egypt, that "one of the Cleopatras (?) sent
news by a wire to all the cities, from Heliopolis to Elephantine, on the
Upper Nile." <span id="fr_181"></span>[\*](#fn_180)

It is not so long since Professor Tyndall ushered us into a new world,
peopled with airy shapes of the most ravishing beauty.

"The discovery consists," he says, "in subjecting the vapors of volatile
liquids to the action of concentrated sun-light, or to the concentrated
beam of the electric light." The vapors of certain nitrites, iodides,
and acids are subjected to the action of the light in an *experimental
tube,* lying horizontally, and so arranged that the axis of the tube and
that of

###### <span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

the parallel beams issuing from the lamp are coincident. The vapors form
clouds of gorgeous tints, and arrange themselves into the shapes of
vases, of bottles and cones, in nests of six or more; of shells, of
tulips, roses, sunflowers, leaves, and of involved scrolls. "In one
case," he tells us, "the cloud-bud grew rapidly into a serpent's head; a
mouth was formed, and from the cloud, a cord of cloud resembling a
tongue was discharged." Finally, to cap the climax of marvels, "once it
positively assumed the form of a fish, with eyes, gills, and feelers.
The twoness of the animal form was displayed throughout, and no *disk,
coil, or speck existed on one side that did not exist on the other.*"

These phenomena may possibly be explained in part by the mechanical
action of a beam of light, which Mr. Crookes has recently demonstrated.
For instance, it is a supposable case, that the beams of light may have
constituted a horizontal axis, about which the disturbed molecules of
the vapors gathered into the forms of globes and spindles. But how
account for the fish, the serpent's head, the vases, the flowers of
different varieties, the shells? This seems to offer a dilemma to
science as baffling as the meteor-cat of Babinet. We do not learn that
Tyndall ventured as absurd an explanation of his extraordinary phenomena
as that of the Frenchman about his.

Those who have not given attention to the subject may be surprised to
find how much was known in former days of that all-pervading, subtile
principle which has recently been baptized **T**HE **U**NIVERSAL
**E**THER.

Before proceeding, we desire once more to enunciate in two categorical
propositions, what was hinted at before. These propositions were
demonstrated laws with the ancient theurgists.

I. The so-called miracles, to begin with Moses and end with Cagliostro,
when genuine, were as de Gasparin very justly insinuates in his work on
the phenomena, "perfectly in accordance with natural law"; hence--no
miracles. Electricity and magnetism were unquestionably used in the
production of some of the prodigies; but now, the same as then, they are
put in requisition by every sensitive, who is made to use
*unconsciously* these powers by the peculiar nature of his or her
organization, which serves as a conductor for some of these imponderable
fluids, as yet so imperfectly known to science. This force is the
prolific parent of numberless attributes and properties, many, or
rather, most of which, are as yet unknown to modern physics.

II\. The phenomena of natural magic to be witnessed in Siam, India,
Egypt, and other Oriental countries, bear no relationship whatever to
sleight of hand; the one being an absolute physical effect, due to the
action of occult natural forces, the other, a mere deceptive result

###### <span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

obtained by dexterous manipulations supplemented with confederacy. <span
id="fr_182"></span>[\*](#fn_181)

The thaumaturgists of all periods, schools, and countries, produced
their wonders, because they were perfectly familiar with the
imponderable--in their effects--but otherwise perfectly tangible waves
of the astral light. They controlled the currents by guiding them with
their will-power. The wonders were both of physical and psychological
character; the former embracing effects produced upon material objects,
the latter the mental phenomena of Mesmer and his successors. This class
has been represented in our time by two illustrious men, Du Potet and
Regazzoni, whose wonderful powers were well attested in France and other
countries. Mesmerism is the most important branch of magic; and its
phenomena are the effects of the universal agent which underlies all
magic and has produced at all ages the so-called miracles.

The ancients called it *Chaos;* Plato and the Pythagoreans named it *the
Soul of the World.* According to the Hindus, the Deity in the shape of
Æther pervades all things. It is the invisible, but, as we have said
before, too tangible Fluid. Among other names this universal Proteus--or
"the nebulous Almighty," as de Mirville calls it in derision--was termed
by the theurgists "the living fire," <span
id="fr_183"></span>[\*\*](#fn_182) the "Spirit of Light," and *Magnes.*
This last appellation indicates its magnetic properties and shows its
magical nature. For, as truly expressed by one of its enemies--μαγος and
μαγνες are two branches growing from the same trunk, and shooting forth
the same resultants.

Magnetism is a word for the derivation of which we have to look to an
incredibly early epoch. The stone called *magnet* is believed by many to
owe its name to Magnesia, a city or district in Thessaly, where these
stones were found in quantity. We believe, however, the opinion of the
Hermetists to be the correct one. The word *Magh, magus,* is derived
from the Sanskrit *Mahaji,* the *great* or *wise* (the anointed by the
divine wisdom). "Eumolpus is the *mythic* founder of the Eumolpidae
(priests);

###### <span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

the priests traced their own wisdom to the Divine Intelligence." <span
id="fr_184"></span>[\*](#fn_183) The various cosmogonies show that the
Archaeal Universal Soul was held by every nation as the "mind" of the
Demiurgic Creator, the *Sophia* of the Gnostics, or *the Holy Ghost as a
female principle.* As the Magi derived their name from it, so the
Magnesian stone or Magnet was called in their honor, for they were the
first to discover its wonderful properties. Their temples dotted the
country in all directions, and among these were some temples of
Hercules, <span id="fr_185"></span>[\*\*](#fn_184)--hence the stone,
when it once became known that the priests used it for their curative
and magical purposes, received the name of the Magnesian or Heraclean
stone. Socrates, speaking of it, remarks: "Euripides calls it the
Magnesian stone, but the common people, the Heraclean." <span
id="fr_186"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_185) It was the country and stone which
were called after the Magi, not the Magi after one or the other. Pliny
informs us that the wedding-ring among the Romans was magnetized by the
priests before the ceremony. The old Pagan historians are careful to
keep silent on certain Mysteries of the "wise" (Magi) and Pausanias was
warned in a dream, he says, not to unveil the holy rites of the temple
of Demeter and Persephoneia at Athens. <span
id="fr_187"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_186)

Modern science, after having ineffectually denied *animal magnetism,*
has found herself forced to accept it as a fact. It is now a recognized
property of human and animal organization; as to its psychological,
occult influence, the Academies battle with it, in our century, more
ferociously than ever. It is the more to be regretted and even wondered
at, as the representatives of "exact science" are unable to either
explain or even offer us anything like a reasonable hypothesis for the
undeniable mysterious potency contained in a simple magnet. We begin to
have daily proofs that these potencies underlie the theurgic mysteries,
and therefore might perhaps explain the occult faculties possessed by
ancient and modern thaumaturgists as well as a good many of their most
astounding achievements. Such were the gifts transmitted by Jesus to
some of

###### <span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

his disciples. At the moment of his miraculous cures, the Nazarene felt
a *power* issuing from him. Socrates, in his dialogue with
Theages, <span id="fr_188"></span>[\*](#fn_187) telling him of his
familiar god (demon), and his power of either imparting his (Socrates')
wisdom to his disciples or preventing it from benefiting those he
associates with, brings the following instance in corroboration of his
words: "I will tell you, Socrates," says Aristides, "a thing incredible,
indeed, by the gods, but true. I made a proficiency when I associated
with you, even if I was only in the same house, though not in the same
room; but more so, when I *was in the same room* . . . and much more
when I *looked at you*. . . . But I made by far the greatest proficiency
when I sat near you and *touched you.*"

This is the modern magnetism and mesmerism of Du Potet and other
masters, who, when they have subjected a person to their *fluidic*
influence, can impart to them all their thoughts even at a distance, and
with an irresistible power force their subject to obey their *mental*
orders. But how far better was this psychic force known to the ancient
philosophers! We can glean some information on that subject from the
earliest sources. Pythagoras taught his disciples that God is the
universal *mind* diffused through all things, and that this mind by the
sole virtue of its universal sameness could be communicated from one
object to another and be made to create all things by the sole
will-power of man. With the ancient Greeks, *Kurios* was the god-Mind
(*Nous*). "Now Koros (Kurios) signifies the pure and unmixed nature of
intellect--wisdom," says Plato. <span id="fr_189"></span>[\*\*](#fn_188)
Kurios is Mercury, the Divine Wisdom, and "Mercury is the Sol"
(Sun), <span id="fr_190"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_189) from whom
Thaut--Hermes--received this divine wisdom, which, in his turn, he
imparted to the world in his books. Hercules is also the Sun--the
celestial storehouse of the universal magnetism; <span
id="fr_191"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_190) or rather Hercules is the
magnetic light which, when having made its way through the "opened eye
of heaven," enters into the regions of our planet and thus becomes the
Creator. Hercules passes through the twelve labors, the valiant Titan!
He is called "Father of All" and

###### <span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

"self-born" "(autophues)." <span id="fr_192"></span>[\*](#fn_191)
Hercules, the Sun, is killed by the Devil, Typhon, <span
id="fr_193"></span>[\*\*](#fn_192) and so is Osiris, who is the father
and brother of Horus, and at the same time is identical with him; and we
must not forget that the magnet was called the "bone of Horus," and iron
the "bone of Typhon." He is called "Hercules *Invictus*," only when he
descends to Hades (the subterranean garden), and plucking the "golden
apples" from the "tree of life," slays the dragon. <span
id="fr_194"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_193) The rough Titanic power, the
"lining" of every sun-god, opposes its force of blind matter to the
divine magnetic spirit, which tries to harmonize everything in nature.

All the sun-gods, with their symbol, the visible sun, are the creators
of *physical* nature only. The *spiritual* is the work of the Highest
God--the Concealed, the Central, Spiritual **S**UN, and of his
Demiurge--the Divine Mind of Plato, and the Divine Wisdom of Hermes
Trismegistus <span id="fr_195"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_194)--the wisdom
effused from Oulom or Kronos.

"After the distribution of pure Fire, in the Samothracian Mysteries, a
new life began." <span id="fr_196"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_195) This was
the "new birth," that is alluded to by Jesus, in his nocturnal
conversation with Nicodemus. "Initiated into the most blessed of all
Mysteries, being ourselves pure . . . we become just and holy with
wisdom." <span id="fr_197"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_196) "He *breathed*
on them and saith unto them, 'Take the Holy Pneuma.' " <span
id="fr_198"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_197) And this simple act of
will-power was sufficient to impart vaticination in its nobler and most
perfect form if both the initiator and the initiated were worthy of it.
To deride this gift, even in its present aspect, "as the corrupt
offspring and lingering remains of an ignorant age of superstition, and
hastily to condemn it as unworthy of sober investigation, would be as
unphilosophical as it is wrong," remarks the Rev. J. B. Gross. "To
remove the veil which hides our vision from the future, has been
attempted--in all ages of the world; and therefore the propensity to pry
into the lap of time, contemplated as one of the faculties of human
mind, comes recommended to us under the sanction of God. . . .
Zuinglius, the Swiss reformer, attested the comprehensiveness of his
faith in the providence of the Supreme Being, in the cosmopolitan
doctrine that the Holy Ghost was not excluded from the more worthy
portion of the heathen world. Admitting its truth, we cannot

###### <span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

easily conceive a valid reason why a heathen, thus favored, should not
be capable of true prophecy." <span id="fr_199"></span>[\*](#fn_198)

Now, what is this mystic, primordial substance? In the book of
*Genesis,* at the beginning of the first chapter, it is termed the "face
of the waters," said to have been incubated by the "Spirit of God." Job
mentions, in chap. xxvi., 5, that "dead things are formed from under the
waters, and inhabitants thereof." In the original text, instead of "dead
things," it is written dead *Rephaim* (giants, or mighty primitive men),
from whom "Evolution" may one day trace our present race. In the
Egyptian mythology, Kneph the Eternal *unrevealed* God is represented by
a snake-emblem of eternity encircling a water-urn, with his head
hovering over the waters, which it incubates with his breath. In this
case the serpent is the Agathodaimon, the good spirit; in its opposite
aspect it is the Kakodaimon--the bad one. In the Scandinavian *Eddas,*
the honey-dew--the food of the gods and of the creative, busy
Yggdrasill--bees--falls during the hours of night, when the atmosphere
is impregnated with humidity; and in the Northern mythologies, as the
passive principle of creation, it typifies the creation of the universe
*out of water;* this dew is the astral light in one of its combinations
and possesses creative as well as destructive properties. In the
Chaldean legend of Berosus, Oannes or Dagon, the man-fish, instructing
the people, shows the infant world created out of *water* and all beings
originating from this *prima materia.* Moses teaches that only earth and
*water* can bring a living soul; and we read in the Scriptures that
herbs could not grow until the Eternal caused it to *rain* upon earth.
In the Mexican *Popol-Vuh* man is created out of *mud* or clay (*terre
glaise*)*,* taken from under the water. Brahma creates Lomus, the great
Muni (or first man), seated on his lotus, only after having called into
being, *spirits,* who thus enjoyed among mortals a priority of
existence, and he creates him out of water, air, and earth. Alchemists
claim that primordial or pre-Adamic earth when reduced to its first
substance is in its *second* stage of transformation like clear-water,
the first being the *alkahest* <span id="fr_200"></span>[\*\*](#fn_199)
proper. This primordial substance is said to contain within itself the
essence of all that goes to make up man; it has not only all the
elements of his physical being, but even the "breath of life" itself in
a latent state, ready to be awakened. This it derives from the
"incubation" of the Spirit of God upon the face of the waters--chaos; in
fact, this substance is chaos itself. From this it was that Paracelsus
claimed to be able to make his "homunculi"; and

###### <span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

this is why Thales, the great natural philosopher, maintained that
*water* was the principle of all things in nature.

What is the primordial Chaos but Æther? The *modern* Ether; not such as
is recognized by our scientists, but such as it *was* known to the
ancient philosophers, long before the time of Moses; Ether, with all its
mysterious and occult properties, containing in itself the germs of
universal creation; Ether, the celestial virgin, the spiritual mother of
every existing form and being, from whose bosom as soon as "incubated"
by the Divine Spirit, are called into existence Matter and Life, Force
and Action. Electricity, magnetism, heat, light, and chemical action are
so little understood even now that fresh facts are constantly widening
the range of our knowledge. Who knows where ends the power of this
protean giant--Ether; or whence its mysterious origin?--Who, we mean,
that denies the spirit that works in it and evolves out of it all
visible forms?

It is an easy task to show that the cosmogonical legends all over the
world are based on a knowledge by the ancients of those sciences which
have allied themselves in our days to support the doctrine of evolution;
and that further research may demonstrate that they were far better
acquainted with the fact of evolution itself, embracing both its
physical and spiritual aspects, than we are now. With the old
philosophers, evolution was a universal theorem, a doctrine embracing
the *whole,* and an established principle; while our modern
evolutionists are enabled to present us merely with speculative
theoretics; with *particular,* if not wholly *negative* theorems. It is
idle for the representatives of our modern wisdom to close the debate
and pretend that the question is settled, merely because the obscure
phraseology of the Mosaic account clashes with the definite exegesis of
"exact science."

One fact at least is proved: there is not a cosmogonical fragment, to
whatever nation it may belong, but proves by this universal allegory of
water and the spirit brooding over it, that no more than our modern
physicists did any of them hold the universe to have sprung into
existence out of nothing; for all their legends begin with that period
when nascent vapors and Cimmerian darkness lay brooding over a fluid
mass ready to start on its journey of activity at the first flutter of
the breath of Him, who is the Unrevealed One. Him they felt, if they saw
Him not. Their spiritual intuitions were not so darkened by the subtile
sophistry of the forecoming ages as ours are now. If they talked less of
the Silurian age slowly developing into the Mammalian, and if the
Cenozoic time was only recorded by various allegories of the primitive
man--the Adam of *our* race--it is but a negative proof after all that
their "wise men" and leaders did not know of these successive periods as
well as we do now.

###### <span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

In the days of Democritus and Aristotle, the cycle had already begun to
enter on its downward path of progress. And if these two philosophers
could discuss so well the atomic theory and trace the atom to its
material or physical *point,* their ancestors may have gone further
still and followed its genesis far beyond that limit where Mr. Tyndall
and others seem rooted to the spot, not daring to cross the line of the
"Incomprehensible." The *lost arts* are a sufficient proof that if even
their achievements in physiography are now doubted, because of the
unsatisfactory writings of their physicists and naturalists,--on the
other hand their practical knowledge in phytochemistry and mineralogy
far exceeded our own. Furthermore, they might have been perfectly
acquainted with the physical history of our globe without publishing
their knowledge to the ignorant masses in those ages of religious
Mysteries.

 

<span id="img_13500"></span> ![](img/13500.jpg)

 

Therefore, it is not only from the Mosaic books that we mean to adduce
proof for our further arguments. The ancient Jews got all their
knowledge--religious as well as profane--from the nations with which we
see them mixed up from the earliest periods. Even the oldest of all
sciences, their kabalistic "secret doctrine," may be traced in each
detail to its primeval source, Upper India, or Turkestan, far before the
time of a distinct separation between the Aryan and Semitic nations. The
King Solomon so celebrated by posterity, as Josephus the historian
says, <span id="fr_201"></span>[\*](#fn_200) for his magical skill, got
his secret learning from India through Hiram, the king of Ophir, and
perhaps Sheba. His ring, commonly known as "Solomon's seal," so
celebrated for the potency of its sway over the various kinds of genii
and demons, in all the popular legends, is equally of Hindu origin.
Writing on the pretentious and abominable skill of the
"devil-worshippers" of Travancore, the Rev. Samuel Mateer, of the London
Missionary Society, claims at the same time to be in possession of a
very old manuscript volume of magical incantations and spells in the
Malayalim language, giving directions for effecting a great variety of
purposes. Of course he adds, that "many of these are *fearful* in their
malignity and obscenity," and gives in his work the *fac-simile* of some
amulets bearing the magical figures and designs on them. We find among
them one with the following legend: "To remove trembling

###### <span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

arising from demoniacal possession--write this figure on a plant that
has milky juice, and drive a nail through it; the trembling will
cease." <span id="fr_202"></span>[\*](#fn_201) The figure is the
identical Solomon's *seal,* or double triangle of the Kabalists. Did the
Hindu get it from the Jewish kabalist, or the latter from India, by
inheritance from their great king-kabalist, the wise Solomon? <span
id="fr_203"></span>[\*\*](#fn_202) But we will leave this trifling
dispute to continue the more interesting question of the astral light,
and its unknown properties.

Admitting, then, that this mythical agent is Ether, we will proceed to
see what and how much of it is known to science.

With respect to the various effects of the different solar rays, Robert
Hunt, F. R. S., remarks, in his *Researches on Light in its Chemical
Relations,* that:

"Those rays which give the *most* light--the yellow and the orange
rays--will not produce change of color in the chloride of silver"; while
"those rays which have the *least* illuminating power--the blue and
violet--produce the greatest change, and in exceedingly short time. . .
. The

###### <span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

yellow glasses obstruct scarcely any light; the blue glasses may be so
dark as to admit of the permeation of a very small quantity."

And still we see that under the *blue* ray both vegetable and animal
life manifest an inordinate development, while under the yellow ray it
is proportionately arrested. How is it possible to account for this
satisfactorily upon any other hypothesis than that both animal and
vegetable life are differently modified electrico-magnetic phenomena, as
yet unknown in their fundamental principles?

Mr. Hunt finds that the undulatory theory does not account for the
results of his experiments. Sir David Brewster, in his *Treatise on
Optics,* showing that "the colors of vegetable life arise . . . from a
specific attraction which the particles of these bodies exercise over
the differently-colored rays of light," and that "it is by the light of
the sun that the colored juices of plants are elaborated, that the
colors of bodies are changed, etc. . . ." remarks that it is not easy to
allow "that such effects can be produced by the mere vibration of an
ethereal medium." And he is *forced,* he says, "by this class of facts,
to reason as if light was *material* (?)*.*" Professor Josiah P. Cooke,
of Harvard University, says that he "cannot agree . . . with those who
regard the wave-theory of light as an established principle of
science." <span id="fr_204"></span>[\*](#fn_203) Herschel's doctrine,
that the intensity of light, in effect of each undulation, "is inversely
as the square of the distance from the luminous body," if correct,
damages a good deal if it does not kill the undulatory theory. That he
is right, was proved repeatedly by experiments with photometers; and,
though it begins to be much doubted, the undulatory theory is still
alive.

As General Pleasonton, of Philadelphia, has undertaken to combat this
anti-Pythagorean hypothesis, and has devoted to it a whole volume, we
cannot do any better than refer the reader to his recent work on the
*Blue Ray,* etc. We leave the theory of Thomas Young, who, according to
Tyndall, "placed on an immovable basis the undulatory theory of light,"
to hold its own if it can, with the Philadelphia experimenter.

Eliphas Levi, the modern magician, describes the astral light in the
following sentence: "We have said that to acquire magical power, two
things are necessary: to disengage the will from all servitude, and to
exercise it in control."

"The sovereign will is represented in our symbols by the woman who
crushes the serpent's head, and by the resplendent angel who represses
the dragon, and holds him under his foot and spear; the great magical
agent, the dual current of light, the living and astral *fire* of the
earth, has been represented in the ancient theogonies by the serpent
with the head

###### <span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

of a bull, a ram, or a dog. It is the double serpent of the *caduceus,*
it is the Old Serpent of the *Genesis,* but it is also the *brazen
serpent of Moses* entwined around the *tau,* that is to say, the
generative *lingha*. It is also the goat of the witch-sabbath, and the
Baphomet of the Templars; it is the *Hyle* of the Gnostics; it is the
double-tail of serpent which forms the legs of the solar cock of the
Abraxas; finally, it is the Devil of M. Eudes de Mirville. But in very
fact it is the blind force which souls have to conquer to liberate
themselves from the bonds of the earth; for if their will does not free
"them from this *fatal attraction,* they will be absorbed in the current
by the force which has produced them, and *will return to the central
and eternal fire.*"

This last kabalistic figure of speech, notwithstanding its strange
phraseology, is precisely the one used by Jesus; and in his mind it
could have had no other significance than the one attributed to it by
the Gnostics and the Kabalists. Later the Christian theologians
interpreted it differently, and with them it became the doctrine of
Hell. Literally, though, it simply means what it says--the astral light,
or the generator and destroyer of all forms.

"All the magical operations," continues Levi, "consist in freeing one's
self from the coils of the Ancient Serpent; then to place the foot on
its head, and lead it according to the operator's will. 'I will give
unto thee,' says the Serpent, in the Gospel myth, 'all the kingdoms of
the earth, if thou wilt fall down and worship me.' The initiate should
reply to him, 'I will not fall down, but thou shalt crouch at my feet;
thou wilt give me nothing, but I will make use of thee and take whatever
I wish. For *I am thy Lord and Master*!' This is the real meaning of the
ambiguous response made by Jesus to the tempter. . . . Thus, the Devil
is not an Entity. It is an errant force, as the name signifies. An *odic
or magnetic current* formed by a chain (a circle) of pernicious wills
must create this evil spirit which the Gospel calls *legion,* and which
forces into the sea a herd of swine--another evangelical allegory
showing how base natures can be driven headlong by the blind forces set
in motion by error and sin." <span id="fr_205"></span>[\*](#fn_204)

In his extensive work on the mystical manifestations of human nature,
the German naturalist and philosopher, Maximilian Perty, has devoted a
whole chapter to the *Modern Forms of Magic.* "The manifestations of
magical life," he says in his Preface, "partially repose on quite
another order of things than the nature in which we are acquainted with
time, space, and causality; these manifestations can be experimented
with but little; they cannot be called out at our bidding, but may be
observed

###### <span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

and carefully followed whenever they occur in our presence; we can only
group them by analogy under certain divisions, and deduce from them
general principles and laws." Thus, for Professor Perty, who evidently
belongs to the school of Schopenhauer, the possibility and *naturalness*
of the phenomena which took place in the presence of Kavindasami, the
fakir, and are described by Louis Jacolliot, the Orientalist, are fully
demonstrated on that principle. The fakir was a man who, through the
entire subjugation of the matter of his corporeal system has attained to
that state of purification at which the spirit becomes nearly freed from
its prison, <span id="fr_206"></span>[\*](#fn_205) and can produce
wonders. His *will*, nay, a simple desire of his has become creative
force, and he can command the elements and powers of nature. His body is
no more an impediment to him; hence he can converse "spirit to spirit,
breath to breath." Under his extended palms, a seed, unknown to him (for
Jacolliot has chosen it at random among a variety of seeds, from a bag,
and planted it himself, after *marking* it, in a flower pot), will
germinate instantly, and push its way through the soil. Developing in
less than two hours' time to a size and height which, perhaps, under
ordinary circumstances, would require several days or weeks, it grows
miraculously under the very eyes of the perplexed experimenter, and
mockingly upsets every accepted formula in Botany. Is this a miracle? By
no means; it may be one, perhaps, if we take Webster's definition, that
a miracle is "every event contrary to the *established* constitution and
course of things--a deviation from the *known* laws of nature." But are
our naturalists prepared to support the claim that what they have once
*established* on observation is infallible? Or that *every* law of
nature is known to them? In this instance, the "miracle" is but a little
*more* prominent than the now well-known experiments of General
Pleasonton, of Philadelphia. While the vegetation and fruitage of his
vines were stimulated to an incredible activity by the artificial violet
light, the magnetic fluid emanating from the hands of the fakir effected
still more intense and rapid changes in the vital function of the Indian
plants. It attracted and concentrated the *akasa,* or life-principle, on
the germ. <span id="fr_207"></span>[\*\*](#fn_206) His magnetism,
obeying his will,

###### <span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

drew up the *akasa* in a concentrated current through the plant towards
his hands, and by keeping up an unintermitted flow for the requisite
space of time, the life-principle of the plant built up cell after cell,
layer after layer, with preternatural activity, until the work was done.
The life-principle is but a blind force obeying a controlling influence.
In the ordinary course of nature the plant-protoplasm would have
concentrated and directed it at a certain established rate. This rate
would have been controlled by the prevalent atmospheric conditions; its
growth being rapid or slow, and, in stalk or head, in proportion to the
amount of light, heat, and moisture of the season. But the fakir, coming
to the help of nature with his powerful will and spirit purified from
the contact with matter, <span id="fr_208"></span>[\*](#fn_207)
condenses, so to speak, the essence of plant-life into its germ, and
forces it to maturity ahead of its time. This blind force being totally
submissive to his will, obeys it with servility. If he chose to
*imagine* the plant as a monster, it would as surely become such, as
ordinarily it would grow in its natural shape; for the concrete
image--slave to the subjective model outlined in the imagination of the
fakir--is forced to follow the original in its least detail, as the hand
and brush of the painter follow the image which they copy from his mind.
The will of the fakir-conjurer forms an invisible but yet, to it,
perfectly objective matrix, in which the vegetable matter is caused to
deposit itself and assume the fixed shape. The will creates; for the
will in motion is *force,* and force produces *matter*.

###### <span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

If some persons object to the explanation on the ground that the fakir
could by no means create the model in his imagination, since he was kept
ignorant by Jacolliot of the kind of seed he had selected for the
experiment; to these we will answer that the spirit of man is like that
of his Creator--omniscient in its essence. While in his natural state
the fakir did *not,* and *could not* know whether it was a melon-seed,
or seed of any other plant; once entranced, *i.e.*, bodily dead to all
outward appearance--the spirit, for which there exist neither distance,
material obstacle, nor space of time, experienced no difficulty in
perceiving the melon-seed, whether as it lay deeply buried in the mud of
the flower-pot, or reflected in the faithful picture-gallery of
Jacolliot's brain. Our visions, portents, and other psychological
phenomena, all of which exist in nature, are corroborative of the above
fact.

And now, perhaps, we might as well meet at once another impending
objection. Indian *jugglers,* they will tell us, do the same, and as
well as the fakir, if we can believe newspapers and travellers'
narratives. Undoubtedly so; and moreover these strolling jugglers are
neither pure in their modes of living nor considered holy by any one;
neither by foreigners nor their own people. *They are generally* FEARED
*and despised by the natives,* for they are *sorcerers*; men practising
the *black art*. While such a holy man as Kavindasami requires but the
help of his own divine soul, closely united with the astral spirit, and
the help of a few familiar *pitris--*pure, ethereal beings, who rally
around their elect brother in flesh--the sorcerer can summon to his help
but that class of spirits which we know as the elementals. Like attracts
like; and greed for money, impure purposes, and selfish views, cannot
attract any other spirits than those that the Hebrew kabalists know as
the *klippoth,* dwellers of *Asiah,* the fourth world, and the Eastern
magicians as the *afrits,* or elementary spirits of error, or the

devs.

This is how an English paper describes the astounding *trick* of
plant-growth, as performed by Indian

jugglers:

"An empty flower-pot was now placed upon the floor by the juggler, who
requested that his comrades might be allowed to bring up some garden
mould from the little plot of ground below. Permission being accorded,
the man went, and in two minutes returned with a small quantity of fresh
earth tied up in a corner of his chudder, which was deposited in the
flower-pot and lightly pressed down. Taking from his basket a dry
mango-stone, and handing it round to the company that they might examine
it, and satisfy themselves that it was really what it seemed to be, the
juggler scooped out a little earth from the centre of the flower-pot and
placed the stone in the cavity. He then turned the earth lightly over
it, and, having poured a little water over the surface, shut the
flower-pot out

###### <span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

of view by means of a sheet thrown over a small triangle. And now, amid
a full chorus of voices and rat-tat-tat accompaniment of the tabor, the
stone germinated; presently a section of the cloth was drawn aside, and
gave to view the tender shoot, characterized by two long leaves of a
blackish-brown color. The cloth was readjusted, and the incantation
resumed. Not long was it, however, before the cloth was a second time
drawn aside, and it was then seen that the two first leaves had given
place to several green ones, and that the plant now stood nine or ten
inches high. A third time, and the foliage was much thicker, the sapling
being about thirteen to fourteen inches in height. A fourth time, and
the little miniature tree, now about eighteen inches in height, had ten
or twelve mangoes about the size of walnuts hanging about its branches.
Finally, after the lapse of three or four minutes, the cloth was
altogether removed, and the fruit, having the perfection of size, though
not of maturity, was plucked and handed to the spectators, and, on being
tasted, was found to be approaching ripeness, being sweetly acid."

We may add to this, that we have witnessed the same experiment in India
and Thibet, and that more than once we provided the flower-pot
ourselves, by emptying an old tin box of some Liebig extracts. We filled
it with earth with our own hands, and planted in it a small root handed
to us by the conjurer, and until the experiment was ended never once
removed our eyes from the pot, which was placed *in our own room.* The
result was invariably the same as above described. Does the reader
imagine that any prestidigitator could produce the same manifestation
under the same conditions?

The learned Orioli, Corresponding Member of the Institute of France,
gives a number of instances which show the marvellous effects produced
by the will-power acting upon the invisible Proteus of the mesmerists.
"I have seen," says he, "certain persons, who simply by pronouncing
certain words, arrest wild bulls and horses at headlong speed, and
suspend in its flight the arrow which cleaves the air." Thomas
Bartholini affirms the same.

Says Du Potet: "When I trace upon the floor with chalk or charcoal this
figure . . . a *fire*, a *light* fixes itself on it. Soon it attracts to
itself the person who approaches it: it detains and fascinates him . . .
and it is useless for him to try to cross the line. A *magic* power
compels him to stand still. At the end of a few moments he yields,
uttering sobs. . . . *The cause is not in me,* it is in this entirely
kabalistic sign; in vain would you employ violence." <span
id="fr_209"></span>[\*](#fn_208)

In a series of remarkable experiments made by Regazzoni in the

###### <span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

presence of certain well-known French physicians, at Paris, on the 18th
of May, 1856, they assembled on one night together, and Regazzoni, with
his finger, traced an imaginary kabalistic line upon the floor, over
which he made a few rapid passes. It was agreed that the mesmeric
subjects, selected by the investigators and the committee for the
experiments, and all strangers to him, should be brought blindfold into
the room, and caused to walk toward the line, without a word being
spoken to indicate what was expected of them. The subjects moved along
unsuspiciously till they came to the invisible barrier, when, as it is
described, "their feet, *as if they had been suddenly seized and
riveted,* adhere to the ground, while their bodies, carried forward by
the rapid impulse of the motion, fall and strike the floor. The sudden
rigidity of their limbs was like that of a frozen corpse, and their
heels were rooted with mathematical precision upon the fatal
line!" <span id="fr_210"></span>[\*](#fn_209)

In another experiment it was agreed that upon one of the physicians
giving a certain signal by a glance of the eye, the blindfolded girl
should be made to fall on the ground, as if struck by lightning, by the
magnetic fluid emitted by Regazzoni's will. She was placed at a distance
from the magnetizer; the signal was given, and instantly the subject was
felled to the earth, without a word being spoken or a gesture made.
Involuntarily one of the spectators stretched out his hand as if to
catch her; but Regazzoni, in a voice of thunder, exclaimed, "Do not
touch her! Let her fall; a magnetized subject is never hurt by falling."
Des Mousseaux, who tells the story, says that "marble is not more rigid
than was her body; her head did not touch the ground; one of her arms
remained stretched in the air; one of her legs was raised and the other
horizontal. She remained in this unnatural posture an indefinite time.
Less rigid is a statue of bronze." <span
id="fr_211"></span>[\*\*](#fn_210)

All the effects witnessed in the experiments of public lecturers upon
mesmerism, were produced by Regazzoni in perfection, and without one
spoken word to indicate what the subject was to do. He even by his
silent will produced the most surprising effects upon the physical
systems of persons totally unknown to him. Directions whispered by the
committee in Regazzoni's ear were immediately obeyed by the subjects,
whose ears were stuffed with cotton, and whose eyes were bandaged. Nay,
in some cases it was not even necessary for them to express to the
magnetizer what they desired, for their own mental requests were
complied with with perfect fidelity.

Experiments of a similar character were made by Regazzoni in England, at
a distance of three hundred paces from the subject brought to

###### <span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

him. The *jettatura,* or evil eye, is nothing but the direction of this
invisible fluid, charged with malicious will and hatred, from one person
to another, and sent out with the intention of harming him. It may
equally be employed for a good or evil purpose.

In the former case it is magic; in the latter, sorcery.

What is the WILL? Can "exact science" tell? What is the nature of that
intelligent, intangible, and powerful something which reigns supreme
over all inert matter? The great Universal Idea willed, and the cosmos
sprang into existence. I *will*, and my limbs obey. I *will*, and, my
thought traversing space, which does not exist for it, envelops the body
of another individual who is not a part of myself, penetrates through
his pores, and, superseding his own faculties, if they are weaker,
forces him to a predetermined action. It acts like the fluid of a
galvanic battery on the limbs of a corpse. The mysterious effects of
attraction and repulsion are the *unconscious* agents of that will;
fascination, such as we see exercised by some animals, by serpents over
birds, for instance, is a *conscious* action of it, and the result of
thought. Sealing-wax, glass, and amber, when rubbed, *i.e*., when the
latent heat which exists in every substance is awakened, attract light
bodies; they exercise unconsciously, *will*; for inorganic as well as
organic matter possesses a particle of the *divine* essence in itself,
however infinitesimally small it may be. And how could it be otherwise?
Notwithstanding that in the progress of its evolution it may from
beginning to end have passed through millions of various forms, it must
ever retain its germ-point of that *preexistent matter,* which is the
first manifestation and emanation of the Deity itself. What is then this
inexplicable power of attraction but an atomical portion of that essence
that scientists and kabalists equally recognize as the "principle of
life"--the *akasa?* Granted that the attraction exercised by such bodies
may be blind; but as we ascend higher the scale of the organic beings in
nature, we find this principle of life developing attributes and
faculties which become more determined and marked with every rung of the
endless ladder. Man, the most perfect of organized beings on earth, in
whom matter and spirit--*i.e., will--*are the most developed and
powerful, is alone allowed to give a conscious impulse to that principle
which emanates from him; and only he can impart to the magnetic fluid
opposite and various impulses without limit as to the direction. "He
wills," says Du Potet, "and *organized* matter obeys. It has *no
poles.*"

Dr. Brierre de Boismont, in his volume on *Hallucinations,* reviews a
wonderful variety of visions, apparitions, and ecstasies, generally
termed hallucinations. "We cannot deny," he says, "that in certain
diseases we see developed a great surexcitation of sensibility, which
lends to the

###### <span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

senses a prodigious acuteness of perception. Thus, some individuals will
perceive at considerable distances, others will announce the approach of
persons who are really on their way, although those present can neither
hear nor see them coming." <span id="fr_212"></span>[\*](#fn_211)

A lucid patient, lying in his bed, announces the arrival of persons to
see whom he must possess *transmural vision,* and this faculty is termed
by Brierre de Boismont--*hallucination.* In our ignorance, we have
hitherto innocently supposed that in order to be rightly termed a
*hallucination,* a vision must be subjective. It must have an existence
only in the delirious brain of the patient. But if the latter announces
the visit of a person, miles away, and this person arrives at the very
moment predicted by the *seer,* then his vision was no more subjective,
but on the contrary perfectly *objective,* for he saw that person in the
act of coming. And how could the patient see, through solid bodies and
space, an object shut out from the reach of our mortal sight, if he had
not exercised his *spiritual* eyes on that occasion? Coincidence?

Cabanis speaks of certain nervous disorders in which the patients easily
distinguished with the naked eye infusoria and other microscopical
beings which others could only perceive through powerful lenses. "I have
met subjects," he says, "who saw in Cimmerian darkness as well as in a
lighted room; . . ." others "who followed persons, tracing them out like
dogs, and recognizing by the smell objects belonging to such persons or
even such as had been only touched by them, with a sagacity which was
hitherto observed only in animals." <span
id="fr_213"></span>[\*\*](#fn_212)

Exactly; because reason, which, as Cabanis says, develops only at the
expense and loss of natural instinct, is a Chinese wall slowly rising on
the soil of sophistry, and which finally shuts out man's spiritual
perceptions of which the instinct is one of the most important examples.
Arrived at certain stages of physical prostration, when mind and the
reasoning faculties seem paralyzed through weakness and bodily
exhaustion, instinct--the spiritual *unity* of the five senses--sees,
hears, feels, tastes, and smells, unimpaired by either time or space.
What do we know of the exact limits of mental action? How can a
physician take upon himself to distinguish the imaginary from the real
senses in a man who may be living a spiritual life, in a body so
exhausted of its usual vitality that it actually is unable to prevent
the soul from *oozing* out from its prison?

The divine light through which, unimpeded by matter, the soul perceives

###### <span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

things past, present, and to come, as though their rays were focused in
a mirror; the death-dealing bolt projected in an instant of fierce anger
or at the climax of long-festering hate; the blessing wafted from a
grateful or benevolent heart; and the curse hurled at an
object--offender or victim--all have to pass through that universal
agent, which under one impulse is the breath of God, and under
another--the venom of the devil. It was *discovered* (?) by Baron
Reichenbach and called OD, whether intentionally or otherwise we cannot
say, but it is singular that a name should have been chosen which is
mentioned in the most ancient books of the Kabala.

Our readers will certainly inquire what then is this invisible *all*?
How is it that our scientific methods, however perfected, have never
discovered any of the magical properties contained in it? To this we can
answer, that it is no reason because modern scientists are ignorant of
them that it should not possess all the properties with which the
ancient philosophers endowed it. Science rejects many a thing to-day
which she may find herself forced to accept to-morrow. A little less
than a century ago the Academy denied Franklin's electricity, and, at
the present day, we can hardly find a house without a conductor on its
roof. Shooting at the barn-door, the Academy missed the barn itself.
Modern scientists, by their wilful skepticism and learned ignorance, do
this very frequently.

Emepht, the supreme, first principle, produced an egg; by brooding over
which, and permeating the substance of it with its own vivifying
essence, the germ contained within was developed; and *Phtha,* the
active creative principle proceeded from it, and began his work. From
the boundless expanse of cosmic matter, which had formed itself under
his breath, or *will*, this cosmic matter--astral light, aether,
fire-mist, principle of life--it matters not how we may call it, this
creative principle, or, as our modern philosophy terms it, law of
evolution, by setting in motion the potencies latent in it, formed suns
and stars, and satellites; controlled their emplacement by the immutable
law of harmony, and peopled them "with every form and quality of life."
In the ancient Eastern mythologies, the cosmogonic myth states that
there was but water (the father) and the prolific slime (the mother,
*Ilus* or *Hyle*)*,* from which crept forth the mundane snake-*matter*.
It was the god *Phanes,* the revealed one, the Word, or *logos.* How
willingly this myth was accepted, even by the Christians who compiled
the New Testament, may be easily inferred from the following fact:
Phanes, the revealed god, is represented in this snake-symbol as a
*protogonos,* a being furnished with the heads of a *man*, a hawk or an
eagle, a bull--*taurus,* and a lion, with wings on both sides. The heads
relate to the zodiac, and typify the four seasons of the year, for the
*mundane* serpent is the *mundane* year, while the ser-

###### <span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

pent itself is the symbol of Kneph, the hidden, or *unrevealed*
deity--God the Father. Time is winged, therefore the serpent is
represented with wings. If we remember that each of the four evangelists
is represented as having near him one of the described animals--grouped
together in Solomon's triangle in the pentacle of Ezekiel, and to be
found in the four cherubs or sphinxes of the sacred arch--we will
perhaps understand the secret meaning, as well as the reason why the
early Christians adopted this symbol; and how it is that the present
Roman Catholics and the Greeks of the Oriental Church still represent
these animals in the pictures of their evangelists which sometimes
accompany the four *Gospels.* We will also understand why Irenaeus,
Bishop of Lyons, had so insisted upon the necessity of the *fourth*
gospel; giving as a reason that there could not be less than four of
them, as there were *four* zones in the world, and four principal winds
coming from the four cardinal points, etc. <span
id="fr_214"></span>[\*](#fn_213)

According to one of the Egyptian myths, the phantom-form of the isle of
Chemmis (*Chemi*, ancient Egypt), which floats on the ethereal waves of
the empyrean sphere, was called into being by Horus-Apollo, the sun-god,
who caused it to evolve out of the mundane egg.

In the cosmogonical poem of *Voluspa* (the song of the prophetess),
which contains the Scandinavian legends of the very dawn of ages, the
phantom-germ of the universe is represented as lying in the
*Ginnungagap--*or the cup of illusion, a boundless and void abyss. In
this world's matrix, formerly a region of night and desolation,
*Nebelheim* (the Mist-place) dropped a ray of cold light (aether), which
overflowed this cup and froze in it. Then the Invisible blew a scorching
wind which dissolved the frozen waters and cleared the mist. These
waters, called the streams of *Elivagar,* distilled in vivifying drops
which, falling down, created the earth and the giant *Ymir,* who only
had "the semblance of man" (male principle). With him was created the
cow, *Audhumla* <span id="fr_215"></span>[\*\*](#fn_214) (female
principle), from whose udder flowed *four* streams of milk, <span
id="fr_216"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_215) which diffused themselves
throughout space (the astral light in its purest emanation). The cow
Audhumla produces a *superior* being, called Bur, handsome and powerful,
by licking the stones that were covered with

mineral salt.

Now, if we take into consideration that this mineral was universally

###### <span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

regarded by ancient philosophers as one of the chief formative
principles in organic creation; by the alchemists as the universal
menstruum, which, they said, was to be wrought from water; and by every
one else, even as it is regarded now by science as well as in the
popular ideas, to be an indispensable ingredient for man and beast; we
may readily comprehend the hidden wisdom of this allegory of the
creation of man. Paracelsus calls salt "the centre of water, wherein
metals ought to die," etc., and Van Helmont terms the *Alkahest,*
"*summum et felicissimum omnium salium,*" the most successful of all
salts.

In the *Gospel according to Matthew,* Jesus says: "Ye are the *salt of
the earth:* but if the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be
salted?" and following the parable he adds: "Ye are *the light* of the
world" (v. 14). This is more than an allegory; these words point to a
direct and unequivocal meaning in relation to the spiritual and physical
organisms of man in his dual nature, and show, moreover, a knowledge of
the "secret doctrine," the direct traces of which we find equally in the
oldest ancient and current popular traditions, in both the Old and New
Testaments, and in the writings of the ancient and mediaeval mystics and
philosophers.

But to return to our *Edda*-legend. Ymir, the giant, falls asleep, and
sweats profusely. This perspiration causes the pit of his left arm to
generate out of that place a man and a woman, while his foot produces a
son for them. Thus, while the mythic "cow" gives being to a race of
superior spiritual men, the giant Ymir begets a race of evil and
depraved men, the Hrimthursen, or frost-giants. Comparing notes with the
Hindu *Vedas,* we find it then, with slight modifications, the same
cosmogonic legend in substance and details. Brahma, as soon as
Bhagaveda, the Supreme God, endows him with creative powers, produces
animated beings, wholly spiritual at first. The Dejotas, inhabitants of
the Surg's (the celestial) region, are unfit to live on earth, therefore
Brahma creates the Daints (giants, who become the dwellers of the
Patals, the lower regions of space), who are also unfit to inhabit
Mirtlok (the earth). To palliate the evil, the creative power evolves
*from his mouth* the first Brahman, who thus becomes the progenitor of
our race; from his right arm Brahma creates Raettris, the warrior, and
from his left Shaterany, the wife of Raettris. Then their son Bais
springs from the right foot of the creator, and his wife Basany from the
left. While in the Scandinavian legend Bur (the son of the cow
Audhumla), a *superior* being, marries Besla, a daughter of the depraved
race of giants, in the Hindu tradition the first Brahman marries
Daintary, also a daughter of the race of the giants; and in *Genesis* we
see the sons of God taking for wives the daughters of men, and likewise
producing mighty men of old; the

###### <span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

whole establishing an unquestionable identity of origin between the
Christian inspired Book, and the heathen "fables" of Scandinavia and
Hindustan. The traditions of nearly every other nation, if examined,
will yield a like result.

What modern cosmogonist could compress within so simple a symbol as the
Egyptian serpent in a circle such a world of meaning? Here we have, in
this creature, the whole philosophy of the universe: matter vivified by
spirit, and the two conjointly evolving out of chaos (Force) everything
that was to be. To signify that the elements are fast bound in this
cosmic matter, which the serpent symbolizes, the Egyptians tied its tail

into a knot.

There is one more important emblem connected with the sloughing of the
serpent's skin, which, so far as we are aware, has never been heretofore
noticed by our symbolists. As the reptile upon casting his coat becomes
freed from a casing of gross matter, which cramped a body grown too
large for it, and resumes its existence with renewed activity, so *man,
by casting off the gross material body, enters upon the next stage of
his existence with enlarged powers and quickened vitality.* Inversely,
the Chaldean Kabalists tell us that primeval man, who, contrary to the
Darwinian theory was purer, wiser, and far more spiritual, as shown by
the myths of the Scandinavian Bur, the Hindu Dejotas, and the Mosaic
"sons of God,"--in short, of a far higher nature than the man of the
present Adamic race, became *despiritualized* or tainted with matter,
and then, for the first time, was given the *fleshly body,* which is
typified in *Genesis* in that profoundly-significant verse: "Unto Adam
also and to his wife did the Lord God *make coats of skin,* and clothed
them." <span id="fr_217"></span>[\*](#fn_216) Unless the commentators
would make of the First Cause a *celestial tailor,* what else can the
apparently absurd words mean, but that the spiritual man had reached,
through the progress of involution, to that point where matter,
predominating over and conquering spirit, had transformed him into the
physical man, or the second Adam, of the second chapter of

Genesis?

This kabalistical doctrine is much more elaborated in the *Book of
Jasher*. <span id="fr_218"></span>[\*\*](#fn_217) In chapter vii., these
garments of skin are taken by Noah into the ark, he having obtained them
by inheritance from Methuselah and Enoch, who had them from Adam and his
wife. Ham steals them from

###### <span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

his father Noah; gives them "in secret" to Cush, who conceals them from
his sons and brothers, and passes them to Nimrod.

While some Kabalists, and even archeologists say that "Adam, Enoch, and
Noah might, in outward appearance, be different men, but they were
really the selfsame divine person." <span
id="fr_219"></span>[\*](#fn_218) Others explain that between Adam and
Noah there intervened several cycles. That is to say, that every one of
the antediluvian patriarchs stood as the representative of a race which
had its place in a succession of cycles; and each of which races was
less spiritual than its predecessor. Thus Noah, though a good man, could
not have borne comparison with his ancestor, Enoch, who "walked with God
and did not die." Hence the allegorical interpretation which makes Noah
have this coat of skin by inheritance from the second Adam and Enoch,
but not wear it himself, for if otherwise, Ham could not have stolen it.
But Noah and his children bridged the flood; and while the former
belonged to the old and still spiritual antediluvian generation,
insomuch as he was selected from all mankind for his purity, his
children were *post*-diluvian. The coat of skin worn by Cush "in
secret,"--*i.e.,* when his spiritual nature began to be tainted by the
material--is placed on Nimrod, the most powerful and strongest of
physical men on this side of the flood--the last remnant of the
antediluvian giants. <span id="fr_220"></span>[\*\*](#fn_219)

In the Scandinavian legend, Ymir, the giant, is slain by the sons of
Bur, and the streams of blood flowing from his wounds were so copious
that the flood drowned the whole race of ice and frost giants, and
Bergelmir alone of that race was saved, with his wife, by taking refuge
in a bark; which fact permitted him to transmit a new branch of giants
from the old stock. But all the sons of Bur remained untouched by the
flood. <span id="fr_221"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_220)

When the symbolism of this diluvian legend is unravelled, one perceives
at once the real meaning of the allegory. The giant Ymir typifies the
primitive rude organic *matter,* the blind cosmical forces, in their
chaotic state, before they received the intelligent impulse of the
Divine Spirit which set them into a regular motion dependent on
immovable laws. The progeny of Bur are the "sons of God," or the minor
gods mentioned by Plato in the *Timaeus,* and who were intrusted, as he
expresses it, with the creation of men; for we see them taking the
mangled remains of Ymir to the Ginnunga-gap, the chaotic abyss, and
employing them for the creation of our world. His blood goes to form
oceans and rivers; his bones, the mountains; his teeth, the rocks and
cliffs;

###### <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

his hair, the trees, etc.; while his skull forms the heavenly vault,
supported by four pillars representing the four cardinal points. From
the eye-brows of Ymir was created the future abode of man--Midgard. This
abode (the earth), says the *Edda,* in order to be correctly described
in all its minute particulars, must be conceived as *round as a ring,*
or as a disk, floating in the midst of the Celestial Ocean (Ether). It
is encircled by Yormungand, the gigantic Midgard or Earth Serpent,
holding its tail in its mouth. This is the mundane snake, matter and
spirit, combined product and emanation of Ymir, the gross rudimental
matter, and of the spirit of the "sons of God," who fashioned and
created all forms. This emanation is the astral light of the Kabalists,
and the as yet problematical, and hardly known, aether, or the
"hypothetical agent of great elasticity" of our physicists.

How sure the ancients were of this doctrine of man's trinitarian nature
may be inferred from the same Scandinavian legend of the creation of
mankind. According to the *Voluspa,* Odin, Honir, and Lodur, who are the
progenitors of our race, found in one of their walks on the ocean-beach,
two sticks floating on the waves, "powerless and without destiny." Odin
breathed in them the breath of life; Honir endowed them with soul and
motion; and Lodur with beauty, speech, sight, and hearing. The man they
called *Askr*--the ash, <span id="fr_222"></span>[\*](#fn_221) and the
woman *Embla*--the alder. These first men are placed in Midgard
(mid-garden, or Eden) and thus inherit, from their creators, matter or
inorganic life; mind, or soul; and pure spirit; the first corresponding
to that part of their organism which sprung from the remains of Ymir,
the giant-matter, the second from the *&Ælig;sir,* or gods, the
descendants of Bur, and the third from the *Vanr,* or the representative
of pure spirit.

Another version of the *Edda* makes our visible universe spring from
beneath the luxuriant branches of the mundane tree--the Yggdrasill, the
tree with the *three* roots. Under the first root runs the fountain of
life, Urdar; under the second is the famous well of Mimer, in which lie
deeply buried Wit and Wisdom. Odin, the Alfadir, asks for a draught of
this water; he gets it, but finds himself obliged to pledge one of his
eyes for it; the eye being in this case the symbol of the Deity
revealing itself in the wisdom of its own creation; for Odin leaves it
at the bottom of the deep well. The care of the mundane tree is
intrusted to three maidens (the Norns or Parcae), Urdhr, Verdandi, and
Skuld--or the Present, the Past, and the Future. Every morning, while
fixing the term

###### <span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

of human life, they draw water from the Urdar-fountain, and sprinkle
with it the roots of the mundane tree, that it may live. The exhalations
of the ash, Yggdrasill, condense, and falling down upon our earth call
into existence and change of form every portion of the inanimate matter.
This tree is the symbol of the *universal* Life, organic as well as
inorganic; its emanations represent the spirit which vivifies every form
of creation; and of its three roots, one extends to heaven, the second
to the dwelling of the magicians--giants, inhabitants of the *lofty
mountains*--and at the third, under which is the spring Hvergelmir,
gnaws the monster Nidhogg, who constantly leads mankind into evil. The
Thibetans have also their mundane tree, and the legend is of an untold
antiquity. With them it is called *Zampun.* The first of its three roots
also extends to heaven, to the top of the highest mountains; the second
passes down to the lower region; the third remains midway, and reaches
the east. The mundane tree of the Hindus is the *Aswatha*. <span
id="fr_223"></span>[\*](#fn_222) Its branches are the components of the
visible world; and its leaves the *Mantras* of the Vedas, symbols of the
universe in its intellectual or moral character.

Who can study carefully the ancient religious and cosmogonic myths
without perceiving that this striking similitude of conceptions, in
their exoteric form and esoteric spirit, is the result of no mere
coincidence, but manifests a concurrent design? It shows that already in
those ages which are shut out from our sight by the impenetrable mist of
tradition, human religious thought developed in uniform sympathy in
every portion of the globe. Christians call this adoration of nature in
her most concealed verities--Pantheism. But if the latter, which
worships and reveals to us God in space in His only possible objective
form--that of visible nature--perpetually reminds humanity of Him who
created it, and a religion of theological dogmatism only serves to
conceal Him the more from our sight, which is the better adapted to the
needs of mankind?

Modern science insists upon the doctrine of evolution; so do human
reason and the "secret doctrine," and the idea is corroborated by the
ancient legends and myths, and even by the Bible itself when it is read
between the lines. We see a flower slowly developing from a bud, and the
bud from its seed. But whence the latter, with all its predetermined
programme of physical transformation, and its invisible, therefore
*spiritual* forces which gradually develop its form, color, and odor?
The word *evolution* speaks for itself. The germ of the present human
race must have preexisted in the parent of this race, as the seed, in
which lies hidden

###### <span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

the flower of next summer, was developed in the capsule of its
parent-flower; the parent may be but *slightly* different, but it still
differs from its future progeny. The antediluvian ancestors of the
present elephant and lizard were, perhaps, the mammoth and the
plesiosaurus; why should not the progenitors of our human race have been
the "giants" of the *Vedas,* the *Voluspa,* and the Book of *Genesis?*
While it is positively absurd to believe the "transformation of species"
to have taken place according to some of the more materialistic views of
the evolutionists, it is but natural to think that each genus, beginning
with the mollusks and ending with monkey-man, has modified from its own
primordial and distinctive form. Supposing that we concede that "animals
have descended from at most only four or five progenitors"; <span
id="fr_224"></span>[\*](#fn_223) and that even *a la rigueur* "all the
organic beings which have ever lived on *this earth* have descended from
some one primordial form"; <span id="fr_225"></span>[\*\*](#fn_224)
still no one but a stone-blind materialist, one utterly devoid of
intuitiveness, can seriously expect to see "in the distant future . . .
psychology based on a new foundation, that of the necessary acquirement
of each mental power and capacity by gradation." <span
id="fr_226"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_225)

Physical man, as a product of evolution, may be left in the hands of the
man of exact science. None but he can throw light upon the *physical*
origin of the race. But, we must positively deny the materialist the
same privilege as to the question of man's psychical and spiritual
evolution, for he and his highest faculties *cannot* be proved on any
conclusive evidence to be "as much products of evolution as the humblest
plant or the lowest worm." <span id="fr_227"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_226)

Having said so much, we will now proceed to show the
evolution-hypothesis of the old Brahmans, as embodied by them in the
allegory of the mundane tree. The Hindus represent their mythical tree,
which they call *Aswatha,* in a way which differs from that of the
Scandinavians. It is described by them as growing in a reversed
position, the branches extending downward and the roots upward; the
former typifying the external world of sense, *i.e*., the visible
cosmical universe, and the latter the invisible world of spirit, because
the roots have their *genesis* in the heavenly regions where, from the
world's creation, humanity has placed its invisible deity. The creative
energy having originated in the primordial point, the religious symbols
of every people are so many illustrations of this metaphysical
hypothesis expounded by Pythagoras, Plato, and other

###### <span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

philosophers. "These Chaldeans," says Philo, <span
id="fr_228"></span>[\*](#fn_227) "were of opinion that the Kosmos, among
the things that exist, is a single point, either being itself God
(Theos) or that in it is God, comprehending the soul of all the things."

The Egyptian Pyramid also symbolically represents this idea of the
mundane tree. Its apex is the mystic link between heaven and earth, and
stands for the root, while the base represents the spreading branches,
extending to the four cardinal points of the universe of matter. It
conveys the idea that all things had their origin in spirit--evolution
having originally begun from above and proceeded downward, instead of
the reverse, as taught in the Darwinian theory. In other words, there
has been a gradual materialization of forms until a fixed ultimate of
debasement is reached. This point is that at which the doctrine of
modern evolution enters into the arena of speculative hypothesis.
Arrived at this period we will find it easier to understand Haeckel's
*Anthropogeny*, which traces the pedigree of man "from its protoplasmic
root, sodden in the mud of seas which existed before the oldest of the
fossiliferous rocks were deposited," according to Professor Huxley's
exposition. We may believe man evolved "by gradual modification of a
mammal of ape-like organization" still easier when we remember that
(though in a more condensed and less elegant, but still as
comprehensible, phraseology) the same theory was said by Berosus to have
been taught many thousands of years before his time by the man-fish
Oannes or Dagon, the semi-demon of Babylonia. <span
id="fr_229"></span>[\*\*](#fn_228) We may add, as a fact of interest,
that this ancient theory of evolution is not only embalmed in allegory
and legend, but also depicted upon the walls of certain temples in
India, and, in a fragmentary form, has been found in those of Egypt and
on the slabs of Nimroud and Nineveh, excavated by Layard.

But what lies back of the Darwinian line of descent? So far as he is
concerned nothing but "unverifiable hypotheses." For, as he puts it, he
views all beings "as the lineal descendants of some few beings which
lived long before the first bed of the Silurian system was
deposited." <span id="fr_230"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_229) He does not
attempt to show us who these "few beings" were. But it answers our
purpose quite as well, for in the admission of their existence at all,
resort to the ancients for corroboration and elaboration of the idea
receives the stamp of scientific approbation. With all the changes that
our globe has passed through as regards temperature, climate, soil,
and--if we may be pardoned, in view of recent developments--its
electromagnetic condition, he would be bold indeed who dare say that
anything

###### <span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

in present science contradicts the ancient hypothesis of ante-Silurian
man. The flint-axes first found by Boucher de Perthes, in the valley of
the Somme, prove that men must have existed at a period so remote as to
be beyond calculation. If we believe Buchner, man must have lived even
during and before the glacial epoch, a subdivision of the quaternary or
diluvial period probably extending very far back in it. But who can tell
what the next discovery has in store for us?

Now, if we have indisputable proof that man has existed so long as this,
there must have been wonderful modifications of his physical system,
corresponding with the changes of climate and atmosphere. Does not this
seem to show by analogy that, tracing backward, there may have been
other modifications, which fitted the most remote progenitors of the
"frost-giants" to live even contemporaneously with the Devonian fishes
or the Silurian mollusks? True, they left no flint-hatchets behind them,
nor any bones or cave-deposits; but, if the ancients are correct, the
races at that time were composed not only of giants, or "mighty men of
renown," but also of "sons of God." If those who believe in the
evolution of *spirit* as firmly as the materialists believe in that of
*matter* are charged with teaching "unverifiable hypotheses," how
readily can they retort upon their accusers by saying that, by *their*
own confession, their physical evolution is still "an unverified, if not
actually an unverifiable hypothesis." <span
id="fr_231"></span>[\*](#fn_230) The former have at least the
inferential proof of legendary myth, the vast antiquity of which is
admitted by both philologists and archaeologists; while their
antagonists have nothing of a similar nature,

unless they help themselves to a portion of the ancient
picture-writings, and suppress the rest.

It is more than fortunate that, while the works of some men of
science--who have justly won their great reputations--will flatly
contradict our hypotheses, the researches and labors of others not less
eminent seem to fully confirm our views. In the recent work of Mr.
Alfred R. Wallace, *The Geographical Distribution of Animals,* we find
the author seriously favoring the idea of "some slow process of
development" of the present species from others which have preceded
them, his idea extending back over an innumerable series of cycles. And
if animals, why not animal man, preceded still farther back by a
thoroughly "spiritual" one--a "son of God"?

And now, we may once more return to the symbolology of the olden times,
and their physico-religious myths. Before we close this work, we hope to
demonstrate more or less successfully how closely the conceptions of the
latter were allied with many of the achievements of modern science

###### <span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

in physics and natural philosophy. Under the emblematical devices and
peculiar phraseology of the priesthood of old lie latent hints of
sciences as yet undiscovered during the present cycle. Well acquainted
as may be a scholar with the hieratic writing and hieroglyphical system
of the Egyptians, he must first of all learn to sift their records. He
has to assure himself, compasses and rule in hand, that the
picture-writing he is examining fits, to a line, certain fixed
geometrical figures which are the hidden keys to such records, before he
ventures on an interpretation.

But there are myths which speak for themselves. In this class we may
include the double-sexed first creators, of every cosmogony. The Greek
Zeus-Zen (aether), and Chthonia (the chaotic earth) and Metis (the
water), his wives; Osiris and Isis-Latona--the former god representing
also ether--the first emanation of the Supreme Deity, Amun, the primeval
source of light; the goddess earth and water again; Mithras, <span
id="fr_232"></span>[\*](#fn_231) the rock-born god, the symbol of the
male mundane-fire, or the personified primordial light, and Mithra, the
fire-goddess, at once his mother and his wife; the pure element of fire
(the active, or male principle) regarded as light and heat, in
conjunction with earth and water, or matter (female or passive elements
of cosmical generation). Mithras is the son of Bordj, the Persian
mundane mountain <span id="fr_233"></span>[\*\*](#fn_232) from which he
flashes out as a radiant ray of light. Brahma, the fire-god, and his
prolific consort; and the Hindu *Unghi,* the refulgent deity, from whose
body issue a thousand streams of glory and *seven* tongues of flame, and
in whose honor the Sagniku Brahmans preserve to this day a *perpetual*
fire; Siva, personated by the mundane mountain of the Hindus--the *Meru*
(Himalaya). This terrific fire-god, who is said in the legend to have
descended from heaven, like the Jewish Jehovah, *in a pillar of fire,*
and a dozen of other archaic, double-sexed deities, all loudly proclaim
their hidden meaning. And what can these dual myths mean but the
physico-chemical principle of primordial creation? The first revelation
of the Supreme Cause in its triple manifestation of spirit, force, and
matter; the divine *correlation,* at its startingpoint of evolution,
allegorized as the marriage of *fire* and water, products of
electrifying spirit, union of the male active principle with the female
passive element, which become the parents of their tellurian child,
cosmic matter, the *prima materia,* whose spirit is ether, the
**A**STRAL **L**IGHT!

Thus all the world-mountains and mundane eggs, the mundane trees, and
the mundane snakes and pillars, may be shown to embody scientifically

###### <span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

demonstrated truths of natural philosophy. All of these mountains
contain, with very trifling variations, the allegorically-expressed
description of primal cosmogony; the mundane trees, that of subsequent
evolution of spirit and matter; the mundane snakes and pillars,
symbolical memorials of the various attributes of this double evolution
in its endless correlation of cosmic forces. Within the mysterious
recesses of the mountain--the matrix of the universe--the gods (powers)
prepare the atomic germs of organic life, and at the same time the
life-drink, which, when tasted, awakens in man-matter the man-*spirit*.
The soma, the sacrificial drink of the Hindus, is that sacred beverage.
For, at the creation of the *prima materia,* while the grossest portions
of it were used for the physical embryo-world, the more divine essence
of it pervaded the universe, invisibly permeating and enclosing within
its ethereal waves the newly-born infant, developing and stimulating it
to activity as it slowly evolved out of the eternal chaos.

From the poetry of abstract conception, these mundane myths gradually
passed into the concrete images of cosmic symbols, as archaeology now
finds them. The snake, which plays such a prominent part in the imagery
of the ancients, was degraded by the absurd interpretation of the
serpent of the Book of *Genesis* into a synonym of Satan, the Prince of
Darkness, whereas it is the most ingenious of all the myths in its
various symbolisms. For one, as *agathodaimon,* it is the emblem of the
healing art and of the immortality of man. It encircles the images of
most of the sanitary or hygienic gods. *The cup of health,* in the
Egyptian Mysteries, was entwined by serpents. As evil can only arise
from an extreme in good, the serpent, under some other aspects, became
typical of matter; which, the more it recedes from its primal spiritual
source, the more it becomes subject of evil. In the oldest Egyptian
imagery, as in the cosmogonic allegories of Kneph, the mundane snake,
when typifying matter, is usually represented as contained within a
circle; he lies straight across its equator, thus indicating that the
universe of astral light, out of which the physical world evolved, while
bounding the latter, is itself bound by Emepht, or the Supreme First
Cause. *Phtha* producing *Ra*, and the myriad forms to which he gives
life, are shown as creeping out of the mundane egg, because it is the
most familiar form of that in which is deposited and developed the germ
of every living being. When the serpent represents eternity and
immortality, it encircles the world, biting its tail, and thus offering
no solution of continuity. It then becomes the astral light. The
disciples of the school of Pherecydes taught that ether (Zeus or Zen) is
the highest empyrean heaven, which encloses the supernal world, and its
light (the astral) is the concentrated primordial element.

Such is the origin of the serpent, metamorphosed in Christian ages

###### <span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

into Satan. It is the *Od*, the *Ob*, and the *Aour* of Moses and the
Kabalists. When in its passive state, when it acts on those who are
unwittingly drawn within its current, the astral light is the *Ob,* or
Python. Moses was determined to exterminate all those who, sensitive to
its influence, allowed themselves to fall under the easy control of the
vicious beings which move in the astral waves like fish in the water;
beings who surround us, and whom Bulwer-Lytton calls in *Zanoni* "the
dwellers of the threshold." It becomes the *Od*, as soon as it is
vivified by the *conscious efflux* of an immortal soul; for then the
astral currents are acting under the guidance of either an adept, a pure
spirit, or an able mesmerizer, who is pure himself and knows how to
direct the blind forces. In such cases even a high Planetary Spirit, one
of the class of beings that have never been embodied (though there are
many among these hierarchies who have lived on our earth), descends
occasionally to our sphere, and purifying the surrounding atmosphere
enables the *subject* to see, and opens in him the springs of true
divine prophecy. As to the term *Aour,* the word is used to designate
certain occult properties of the universal agent. It pertains more
directly to the domain of the alchemist, and is of no interest to the
general public.

The author of the *Homoiomerian* system of philosophy, Anaxagoras of
Clazomene, firmly believed that the spiritual prototypes of all things,
as well as their elements, were to be found in the boundless ether,
where they were generated, whence they evolved, and whither they
returned from earth. In common with the Hindus who had personified their
Akas'a (sky or ether) and made of it a deific entity, the Greeks and
Latins had deified Æther. Virgil calls Zeus, *pater omnipotens
aether*; <span id="fr_234"></span>[\*](#fn_233) *Magnus,* the great god,
Ether.

These beings above alluded to are the elemental spirits of the
Kabalists, <span id="fr_235"></span>[\*\*](#fn_234) whom the Christian
clergy denounce as "devils," the enemies of mankind.

###### <span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

"Already Tertullian," gravely remarks Des Mousseaux, in his chapter on
the devils, "has *formally* discovered the secret of their cunning."

A priceless discovery, that. And now that we have learned so much of the
mental labors of the holy fathers and their achievements in astral
anthropology, need we be surprised at all, if, in the zeal of their
spiritual explorations, they have so far neglected their own planet as
at times to deny not only its right to motion but even its sphericity?

And this is what we find in Langhorne, the translator of *Plutarch:*
Dionysius of Halicarnassus \[L. ii.\] is of opinion that Numa built the
temple of Vesta in a *round* form, to represent the figure of the earth,
for by Vesta they meant the earth." Moreover Philolaus, in common with
all other Pythagoreans, held that the element of fire was placed in the
centre of the universe; and Plutarch, speaking on the subject, remarks
of the Pythagoreans that "the earth they suppose not to be without
motion, *nor* situated in the centre of the world, but to make its
revolution round the sphere of fire, being neither one of the most
valuable, nor principal parts of the great machine." Plato, too, is
reported to have been of the same opinion. It appears, therefore, that
the Pythagoreans anticipated Galileo's

discovery.

The existence of such an invisible universe being once admitted--as
seems likely to be the fact if the speculations of the authors of the
*Unseen Universe* are ever accepted by their colleagues--many of the
phenomena, hitherto mysterious and inexplicable, become plain. It acts
on the organism of the magnetized mediums, it penetrates and saturates
them through and through, either directed by the powerful will of a
mesmerizer, or by unseen beings who achieve the same result. Once that
the silent operation is performed, the astral or sidereal phantom of the
mesmerized subject quits its paralyzed, earthly casket, and, after
having roamed in the boundless space, alights at the threshold of the
mysterious "bourne." For it, the gates of the portal which marks the
entrance to the "silent land," are now but partially ajar; they will fly
wide open before the soul of the entranced somnambulist only on that day
when, united with its higher immortal essence, it will have quitted
forever its mortal frame. Until then, the seer or seeress can look but
through a chink; it depends on the acuteness of the clairvoyant's
spiritual sight to see more or less through it.

###### <span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

The trinity in unity is an idea which all the ancient nations held in
common. The three Dejotas--the Hindu Trimurti; the *Three Heads* of the
Jewish Kabala. <span id="fr_236"></span>[\*](#fn_235) "Three heads are
hewn in one another and over one another." The trinity of the Egyptians
and that of the mythological Greeks were alike representations of the
first triple emanation containing two male and one female principles. It
is the union of the male *Logos,* or wisdom, the revealed Deity, with
the female *Aura* or *Anima Mundi--*"the holy *Pneuma,*" which is the
*Sephira* of the Kabalists and the *Sophia* of the refined
Gnostics--that produced all things visible and invisible. While the true
metaphysical interpretation of this universal dogma remained within the
sanctuaries, the Greeks, with their poetical instincts, impersonated it
in many charming myths. In the *Dionysiacs* of Nonnus, the god Bacchus,
among other allegories, is represented as in love with the soft, genial
breeze (the Holy Pneuma), under the name of *Aura Placida*. <span
id="fr_237"></span>[\*\*](#fn_236) And now we will leave Godfrey Higgins
to speak: "When the *ignorant* Fathers were constructing their calendar,
they made out of this gentle zephyr two Roman Catholic saints!! " SS.
Aura and Placida;--nay, they even went so far as to transfer the jolly
god into St. Bacchus, and actually *show his coffin and relics at Rome.*
The festival of the two "blessed saints," Aura and Placida, occurs on
the 5th of October, close to the festival of St. Bacchus. <span
id="fr_238"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_237)

How far more poetical, and how much greater the religious spirit to be
found in the "heathen" Norse legends of creation! In the boundless abyss
of the mundane pit, the Ginnunga-gap, where rage in blind fury and
conflict cosmic matter and the primordial forces, suddenly blows the
thaw-wind. It is the "unrevealed God," who sends his beneficent breath
from Muspellheim, the sphere of empyreal fire, within whose glowing rays
dwells this great Being, far beyond the limits of the world of matter;
and the *animus* of the Unseen, the Spirit brooding over the dark,
abysmal waters, calls order out of chaos, and once having given the
impulse to all creation the **F**IRST **C**AUSE retires, and remains for
evermore in *statu abscondito*! <span
id="fr_239"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_238)

There is both religion and science in these Scandinavian songs of
heathendom. As an example of the latter, take the conception of Thor,
the son of Odin. Whenever this Hercules of the North would grasp the
handle of his terrible weapon, the thunderbolt or electric hammer, he is
obliged to put on his *iron* gantlets. He also wears a magical belt

###### <span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

known as the "*girdle of strength*," which, whenever girded about his
person, greatly augments his celestial power. He rides upon a car drawn
by two rams with silver bridles, and his awful brow is encircled by a
wreath of stars. His chariot has a pointed iron pole, and the
spark-scattering wheels continually roll over rumbling thunder-clouds.
He hurls his hammer with resistless force against the rebellious
frost-giants, whom he dissolves and annihilates. When he repairs to the
Urdar fountain, where the gods meet in conclave to decide the destinies
of humanity, he alone goes on foot, the rest of the deities being
mounted. He walks, for fear that in crossing Bifrost (the rainbow), the
many-hued Æsirbridge, he might set it on fire with his thunder-car, at
the same time causing the Urdar waters to boil.

Rendered into plain English, how can this myth be interpreted but as
showing that the Norse legend-makers were thoroughly acquainted with
electricity? Thor, the euhemerization of electricity, handles his
peculiar element only when protected by gloves of *iron*, which is its
natural conductor. His belt of strength is a closed circuit, around
which the isolated current is compelled to run instead of diffusing
itself through space. When he rushes with his car through the clouds, he
is electricity in its *active* condition, as the sparks scattering from
his wheels and the rumbling thunder of the clouds testify. The pointed
iron pole of the chariot is suggestive of the lightning-rod; the two
rams which serve as his coursers are the familiar ancient symbols of the
male or generative power; their silver bridles typify the female
principle, for silver is the metal of Luna, Astarte, Diana. Therefore in
the ram and his bridle we see combined the active and passive principles
of nature in opposition, one rushing forward, and the other restraining,
while both are in subordination to the world-permeating, electrical
principle, which gives them their impulse. With the electricity
supplying the impulse, and the male and female principle combining and
recombining in endless correlation, the result is--evolution of visible
nature, the crown-glory of which is the planetary system, which in the
mythic Thor is allegorized by the circlet of glittering orbs which
bedeck his brow. When in his active condition, his awful thunderbolts
destroy everything, even the lesser other Titanic forces. But he goes
afoot over the rainbow bridge, Bifrost, because to mingle with other
less powerful gods than himself, he is obliged to be in a *latent*
state, which he could not be in his car; otherwise he would set on fire
and annihilate all. The meaning of the Urdar-fountain, that Thor is
afraid to make boil, and the cause of his reluctance, will only be
comprehended by our physicists when the reciprocal electro-magnetic
relations of the innumerable members of the planetary system, now just
suspected, shall be thoroughly determined. Glimpses of the truth are
given in the

###### <span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

recent scientific essays of Professors Mayer and Sterry Hunt. The
ancient philosophers believed that not only volcanos, but boiling
springs were caused by concentrations of underground electric currents,
and that this same cause produced mineral deposits of various natures,
which form curative springs. If it be objected that this fact is not
distinctly stated by the ancient authors, who, in the opinion of our
century were hardly acquainted with electricity, we may simply answer
that not all the works embodying ancient wisdom are now extant among our
scientists. The clear and cool waters of Urdar were required for the
daily irrigation of the mystical mundane tree; and if they had been
disturbed by Thor, or active electricity, they would have been converted
into mineral springs unsuited for the purpose. Such examples as the
above will support the ancient claim of the philosophers that *there is
a logos in every mythos,* or a ground-work of truth in every fiction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_178"></span>[125:\*](iu004.htm#fr_179) Pausanias: "Eliae,"
lib. i., cap. xiv.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[125:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_180) We apprehend that
the noble author coined his curious names by contracting words in
classical languages. *Gy* would come from *gune; vril* from *virile*.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[127:\*](iu004.htm#fr_181) P. B. Randolph:
"Pre-Adamite Man," p. 48.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[129:\*](iu004.htm#fr_182) On this point at
least we are on firm ground. Mr. Crookes's testimony corroborates our
assertions. On page 84 of his pamphlet on "Phenomenal Spiritualism" he
says: "The many hundreds of facts I am prepared to attest--facts which
to imitate by known mechanics or physical means would baffle the skill
of a Houdin, a Bosco, or an Anderson, backed with all the resources of
elaborate machinery and the practice of years--have all taken place in
my own house; at times appointed by myself and under circumstances which
absolutely precluded the employment of the very simplest instrumental
aids."

<span id="fn_182"></span>[129:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_183) In this
appellation, we may discover the meaning of the puzzling sentence to be
found in the Zend-Avesta that "fire gives knowledge of the future,
science, and amiable speech," as it develops an extraordinary eloquence
in some sensitives.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[130:\*](iu004.htm#fr_184) Dunlap: "Musah, His
Mysteries," p. iii.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[130:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_185) "Hercules was
known as the king of the Musians," says Schwab, ii., 44; and Musien was
the feast of "Spirit and Matter," Adonis and Venus, Bacchus and Ceres.
(See Dunlap: "Mystery of Adonis," p. 95.) Dunlap shows, on the authority
of Julian and Anthon (67), Æsculapius, "the Savior of all," identical
with Phtha (the creative Intellect, the Divine Wisdom), and with Apollo,
Baal, Adonis, and Hercules (ibid., p. 93), and Phtha is the "Anima
mundi," the Universal Soul, of Plato, the Holy Ghost of the Egyptians,
and the Astral Light of the Kabalists. M. Michelet, however, regards the
Grecian Herakles as a different character, the adversary of the Bacchic
revellings and their attendant human sacrifices.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[130:\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_186) Plato: "Ion"
(Burgess), vol. iv., p. 294.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[130:\*\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_187) "Attica," i.,
xiv.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[131:\*](iu004.htm#fr_188) Plato: "Theages."
Cicero renders this word δαιμονιον, quiddam divinum, a divine something,
not anything personal.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[131:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_189) "Cratylus," p. 79.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[131:\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_190) "Arnobius," vi.,
xii.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[131:\*\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_191) As we will
show in subsequent chapters, the sun was not considered by the ancients
as the direct cause of the light and heat, but only as an agent of the
former, through which the light passes on its way to our sphere. Thus it
was always called by the Egyptians "the eye of Osiris," who was himself
the *Logos,* the First-begotten, or light made manifest to the world,
"which is the mind and divine intellect of the Concealed." It is only
that light of which we are cognizant that is the Demiurge, the *creator*
of our planet and everything pertaining to it; with the invisible and
unknown universes disseminated through space, none of the sun-gods had
anything to do. The idea is expressed very clearly in the "Books of
Hermes."

<span id="fn_191"></span>[132:\*](iu004.htm#fr_192) "Orphic Hymn," xii.;
Hermann; Dunlap: "Musah, His Mysteries," p. 91.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[132:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_193) Movers, 525.
Dunlap: "Mysteries of Adonis," 94.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[132:\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_194) Preller: ii.,
153. This is evidently the origin of the Christian dogma of Christ
descending into hell and overcoming Satan.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[132:\*\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_195) This important
fact accounts admirably for the gross polytheism of the masses, and the
refined, highly-philosophical conception of *one* God, which was taught
only in sanctuaries of the "pagan" temples.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[132:\*\*\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_196) Anthon:
"Cabeiria."

<span id="fn_196"></span>[132:\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_197) Plato:
"Phaedrus," Cary's translation.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[132:\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_198) John
xx., 22.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[133:\*](iu004.htm#fr_199) "Heathen Religion,"
104.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[133:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_200) Alkahest, a word
first used by Paracelsus, to denote the menstruum or universal solvent,
that is capable of reducing all things.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[135:\*](iu004.htm#fr_201) Josephus:
"Antiquities," vol. viii., c. *2,* 5.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[136:\*](iu004.htm#fr_202) "The Land of
Charity," p. 210.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[136:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_203) The claims of
certain "adepts," which do not agree with those of the students of the
purely Jewish *Kabala,* and show that the "secret doctrine" has
originated in India, from whence it was brought to Chaldea, passing
subsequently into the hands of the Hebrew "Tanaim," are singularly
corroborated by the researches of the Christian missionaries. These
pious and learned travellers have inadvertently come to our help. Dr.
Caldwell, in his "Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian Languages," p.
66, and Dr. Mateer, in the "Land of Charity," p. 83, fully support our
assertions that the "wise" King Solomon got all his kabalistic lore from
India, as the above-given magical figure well shows. The former
missionary is desirous to prove that very old and huge specimens of the
baobab-tree, which is not, as it appears, indigenous to India, but
belongs to the African soil, and "found only at several ancient sites of
foreign commerce (at Travancore), may, for aught we know," he adds,
"have been introduced into India, and planted by the servants of King
Solomon." The other proof is still more conclusive. Says Dr. Mateer, in
his chapter on the Natural History of Travancore: "There is a curious
fact connected with the name of this bird (the peacock) which throws
some light upon Scripture history. King Solomon sent his navy to
Tarshish (I Kings, x. 22), which returned once in three years, bringing
'gold and silver, ivory and apes, and peacocks.' Now the word used in
the Hebrew Bible for peacock is '*tukki*,' and as the Jews had, of
course, no word for these fine birds till they were first imported into
Judea by King Solomon, there is no doubt that 'tukki' is simply the old
Tamil word '*toki*,' the name of the peacock. The ape or monkey also is,
in Hebrew, called *'koph,'* the Indian word for which is '*kaphi.*'
Ivory, we have seen, is abundant in South India, and gold is widely
distributed in the rivers of the western coast. Hence the 'Tarshish'
referred to was doubtless the western coast of India, and Solomon's
ships were ancient 'East Indiamen.' " And hence also we may add, besides
"the gold and silver, and apes and peacocks," King Solomon and his
friend Hiram, of masonic renown, got their "magic" and "wisdom" from
India.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[137:\*](iu004.htm#fr_204) Cooke: "New
Chemistry," p. 22.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[138:\*](iu004.htm#fr_205) Eliphas Levi: "Dogme
et Rituel de la Haute Magie."

<span id="fn_205"></span>[139:\*](iu004.htm#fr_206) Plato hints at a
ceremony used in the Mysteries during the performance of which the
neophyte was taught that men are *in this life* in a kind of prison, and
taught *how to escape from it temporarily.* As usual, the too-learned
translators disfigured this passage, partially because they *could not*
understand it, and partially because they *would not.* See *Phaedo* §
16, and commentaries on it by Henry More, the well-known Mystic
philosopher and Platonist.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[139:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_207) The *akasa* is a
Sanscrit word which means sky, but it also designates the imponderable
and intangible life-principle--the astral and celestial lights combined
together, and which two form the *anima mundi,* and constitute the soul
and spirit of man; the celestial light forming his νουσ,πνευμα, or
divine spirit, and the other his <span id="page_140">p. 140</span> ψυχε,
soul or *astral* spirit. The grosser particles of the latter enter into
the fabrication of his outward form--the body. *Akasa* is the mysterious
fluid termed by scholastic science, "the all-pervading ether"; it enters
into all the magical operations of nature, and produces mesmeric,
magnetic, and spiritual phenomena. *As*, in Syria, Palestine, and India,
meant the sky, *life,* and the *sun* at the same time; the sun being
considered by the ancient sages as the great magnetic well of our
universe. The softened pronunciation of this word was *Ah*--says Dunlap,
for "the *s* continually softens to *h* from Greece to Calcutta." *Ah*
is Iah, Ao, and Iao. God tells Moses that his name is "I am" (*Ahiah*),
a reduplication of Ah or Iah. The word "As" Ah, or Iah means *life*,
*existence,* and is evidently the root of the word *akasa,* which in
Hindustan is pronounced a*h*asa, the life-principle, or Divine
life-giving fluid or medium. It is the Hebrew *ruah*, and means the
"wind," the breath, *the air in motion,* or "moving spirit," according
to Parkhurst's *Lexicon;* and is identical with the spirit of God
*moving* on the face of the waters.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[140:\*](iu004.htm#fr_208) Bear in mind that
Kavindasami made Jacolliot swear that he would neither approach nor
*touch* him during the time he was entranced. The least contact with
*matter* would have paralyzed the action of the freed spirit, which, if
we are permitted to use such an unpoetical comparison, would re-enter
its dwelling like a frightened snail, drawing in its horns at the
approach of any foreign substance. In some cases such a *brusque*
interruption and oozing back of the spirit (sometimes it may suddenly
and altogether break the delicate thread connecting it with the body)
kills the entranced *subject.* See the several works of Baron du Potet
and Puysegur on this question.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[142:\*](iu004.htm#fr_209) "La Magie Devoilee,"
p. 147.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[143:\*](iu004.htm#fr_210) "Magie au **XIX**me
Siecle," p. 268.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[143:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_211) Ibid.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[145:\*](iu004.htm#fr_212) Brierre de Boismont:
"Des Hallucinations, ou Histoire raisonnee des apparitions, des songes,
des visions, de l'extase du Magnetisme," 1845, p. 301 (French edition).
See also Fairfield: "Ten Years Among the Mediums."

<span id="fn_212"></span>[145:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_213) Cabanis, seventh
memoir: "De l'Influence des Maladies sur la Formation des Idees," etc. A
respected N. Y. legislator has this faculty.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[147:\*](iu004.htm#fr_214) Irenaeus: Book iii.,
chap. ii., sec. 8.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[147:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_215) The cow is the
symbol of prolific generation and of intellectual nature. She was sacred
to Isis in Egypt; to Christna, in India, and to an infinity of other
gods and goddesses personifying the various productive powers of nature.
The cow was held, in short, as the impersonation of the Great Mother of
all beings, both of the mortals and of the gods, of physical and
spiritual generation of things.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[147:\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_216) In Genesis the
river of Eden was parted, "and became into *four* heads" (Gen. ii., 5).

<span id="fn_216"></span>[149:\*](iu004.htm#fr_217) Genesis iii. 21.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[149:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_218) This is claimed to
be one of the missing books of the sacred Canon of the Jews, and is
referred to in Joshua and II. Samuel. It was discovered by Sidras, an
officer of Titus, during the sack of Jerusalem, and published in Venice
in the seventeenth century, as alleged in its preface by the Consistory
of Rabbins, but the American edition, as well as the English, is reputed
by the modern Rabbis, to be a forgery of the twelfth century.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[150:\*](iu004.htm#fr_219) See Godfrey Higgins:
"Anacalypsis," quoting Faber.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[150:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_220) See Cory's
"Ancient Fragments." **B**EROSUS.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[150:\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_221) We refer the
reader for further particulars to the "Prose Edda" in Mallett's
"Northern Antiquities."

<span id="fn_221"></span>[151:\*](iu004.htm#fr_222) It is worthy of
attention that in the Mexican "Popol-Vuh" the human race is created out
of a reed, and in Hesiod out of the ash-tree, as in the Scandinavian
narrative.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[152:\*](iu004.htm#fr_223) See Kanne's
"Pantheum der &Ælig;ltesten Philosophie."

<span id="fn_223"></span>[153:\*](iu004.htm#fr_224) "Origin of Species,"
p. 484.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[153:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_225) Ibid. Which latter
word we cannot accept unless that "primordial form" is conceded to be
the primal concrete form that spirit assumed as the *revealed* Deity.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[153:\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_226) Ibid., p. 488.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[153:\*\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_227) Lecture by T.
H. Huxley, **F.R.S**.: "Darwin and Haeckel."

<span id="fn_227"></span>[154:\*](iu004.htm#fr_228) "Migration of
Abraham," § 32.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[154:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_229) Cory: "Ancient
Fragments."

<span id="fn_229"></span>[154:\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_230) "Origin of
Species," pp. 448, 489, first edition.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[155:\*](iu004.htm#fr_231) Huxley: "Darwin and
Haeckel."

<span id="fn_231"></span>[156:\*](iu004.htm#fr_232) Mithras was regarded
among the Persians as the *Theos ek petros--*god of the rock.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[156:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_233) Bordj is called a
fire-mountain--a volcano; therefore it contains fire, rock, earth, and
water--the male and active, and the female or passive elements. The myth
is suggestive.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[158:\*](iu004.htm#fr_234) Virgil: "Georgica,"
book ii.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[158:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_235) Porphyry and other
philosophers explain the nature of the *dwellers.* They are mischievous
and deceitful, though some of them are perfectly gentle and harmless,
but so weak as to have the greatest difficulty in communicating with
mortals whose company they seek incessantly. The former are not wicked
through intelligent malice. The law of spiritual evolution not having
yet developed their instinct into intelligence, whose highest light
belongs but to immortal spirits, their powers of reasoning are in a
latent state and, therefore, they themselves, irresponsible.

But the Latin Church contradicts the Kabalists. St. Augustine has even a
discussion on that account with Porphyry, the Neo-platonist. "These
spirits," he says, "are deceitful, *not by their nature,* as Porphyry,
the theurgist, will have it, but through malice. They pass themselves
off for *gods* and *for the souls of the defunct*" ("Civit. Dei," book
x., ch. 2). So far Porphyry agrees with him; "but they do not claim to
be <span id="page_159">p. 159</span> *demons* \[read devils\], for they
are such in reality!" adds the Bishop of Hippo. But then, under what
class should we place the men *without heads,* whom Augustine wishes us
to believe he saw himself? or the satyrs of St. Jerome, which he asserts
were exhibited for a considerable length of time at Alexandria? They
were, he tells us, "men with the legs and tails of goats"; and, if we
may believe him, one of these Satyrs was actually *pickled* and sent in
a cask to the Emperor Constantine!

<span id="fn_235"></span>[160:\*](iu004.htm#fr_236) "Tria capita
exsculpta sunt, una intra alterum, et alterum supra alterum"--(Sohar;
"Idra Suta," sectio vii.)

<span id="fn_236"></span>[160:\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_237) Gentle gale (lit.)

<span id="fn_237"></span>[160:\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_238) Higgins:
"Anacalypsis"; also "Dupuis."

<span id="fn_238"></span>[160:\*\*\*\*](iu004.htm#fr_239) Mallett:
"Northern Antiquities," pp. 401-406, and "The Songs of a Voluspa" in the
Edda.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](iu005)
