[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Theosophy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iu006)  [Next](iu008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

> "Think not my magic wonders wrought by aid  
> Of Stygian angels summoned up from Hell;  
> Scorned and accursed by those who have essay'd  
> Her gloomy Divs and Afrites to compel.  
> But by perception of the secret powers  
> Of mineral springs, in nature's inmost cell,  
> Of herbs in curtain of her greenest bowers,  
> And of the moving stars o'er mountain tops and towers."--**T**ASSO,
> Canto **XIV**., xliii.

> "Who dares think *one* thing and *another* tell  
> My heart detests him as the gates of Hell!"--**P**OPE.

> "If man ceases to exist when he disappears in the grave, you must be
> compelled to affirm that he is the only creature in existence whom
> nature or providence has condescended to deceive and cheat by
> capacities for which there are no available
> objects."--**B**ULWER-**L**YTTON:
>
> Strange Story.

THE preface of Richard A. Proctor's latest work on astronomy, entitled
*Our Place among Infinities,* contains the following extraordinary
words: "It was their ignorance of the earth's place among infinities,
which led the ancients to regard the heavenly bodies as ruling favorably
or adversely the fates of men and nations, and to dedicate the days in
sets of seven to the seven planets of their astrological system."

Mr. Proctor makes two distinct assertions in this sentence: 1. That the
ancients were ignorant of the earth's place among infinities; and 2.
That they regarded the heavenly bodies as ruling, favorably or
adversely, the fates of men and nations. <span
id="fr_371"></span>[\*](#fn_370)We are very confident that there is at
least good reason to suspect that the ancients were familiar with the
movements, emplacement, and mutual relations of the heavenly bodies. The
testimony of Plutarch, Professor Draper, and Jowett, are sufficiently
explicit. But we would ask Mr. Proctor how it happens, if the ancient
astronomers were so ignorant of the law of the birth and death of worlds
that, in the fragmentary bits which the hand of time has spared us of
ancient lore there should be--albeit couched in obscure language--so
much information which the most recent discoveries of science have
verified? Beginning with the tenth page of the work under notice, Mr.
Proctor

###### <span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

sketches for us the theory of the formation of our earth, and the
successive changes through which it passed until it became habitable for
man. In vivid colors he depicts the gradual accretion of cosmic matter
into gaseous spheres surrounded with "a liquid non-permanent shell"; the
condensation of both; the ultimate solidification of the external crust;
the slow cooling of the mass; the chemical results following the action
of intense heat upon the primitive earthy matter; the formation of soils
and their distribution; the change in the constitution of the
atmosphere; the appearance of vegetation and animal life; and, finally,
the advent of man.

Now, let us turn to the oldest written records left us by the Chaldeans,
the Hermetic *Book of Numbers*, <span id="fr_372"></span>[\*](#fn_371)
and see what we shall find in the allegorical language of Hermes,
Kadmus, or Thuti, the thrice great Trismegistus. "In the beginning of
time the great invisible one had his holy hands full of celestial matter
which he scattered throughout the infinity; and lo, behold! it became
balls of fire and balls of clay; and they scattered like the moving
metal <span id="fr_373"></span>[\*\*](#fn_372) into many smaller balls,
and began their ceaseless turning; and some of them which were balls of
fire became balls of clay; and the balls of clay became balls of fire;
and the balls of fire were waiting their time to become balls of clay;
and the others envied them and bided their time to become balls of pure
divine fire."

Could any one ask a clearer definition of the cosmic changes which Mr.
Proctor so elegantly expounds?

Here we have the distribution of matter throughout space; then its
concentration into the spherical form; the separation of smaller spheres
from the greater ones; axial rotation; the gradual change of orbs from
the incandescent to the earthy consistence; and, finally, the total loss
of heat which marks their entrance into the stage of planetary death.
The change of the balls of clay into balls of fire would be understood
by materialists to indicate some such phenomenon as the sudden ignition
of the star in Cassiopeia, A.D. 1572, and the one in Serpentarius, in
1604, which was noted by Kepler. But, do the Chaldeans evince in this
expression a profounder philosophy than of our day? Does this change
into balls of "pure divine fire" signify a continuous planetary
existence,

###### <span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

correspondent with the spirit-life of man, beyond the awful mystery of
death? If worlds have, as the astronomers tell us, their periods of
embryo, infancy, adolescence, maturity, decadence, and death, may they
not, like man, have their continued existence in a sublimated, ethereal,
or spiritual form? The magians so affirm. They tell us that the fecund
mother Earth is subject to the same laws as every one of her children.
At her appointed time she brings forth all created things; in the
fulness of her days she is gathered to the tomb of worlds. Her gross,
material body slowly parts with its atoms under the inexorable law which
demands their new arrangement in other combinations. Her own perfected
vivifying spirit obeys the eternal attraction which draws it toward that
central spiritual sun from which it was originally evolved, and which we
vaguely know under the name of **G**OD.

"And the heaven was visible in seven circles, and the planets appeared
with all their signs, in star-form, and the stars were divided and
numbered with the rulers that were in them, and their *revolving* course
was bounded with *the air,* and borne with a circular course, through
the agency of the divine SPIRIT." <span id="fr_374"></span>[\*](#fn_373)

We challenge any one to indicate a single passage in the works of Hermes
which proves him guilty of that crowning absurdity of the Church of Rome
which assumed, upon the geocentric theory of astronomy, that the
heavenly bodies were made for our use and pleasure, and that it was
worth while for the only son of God to descend upon this cosmic mote and
die in expiation for our sins! Mr. Proctor tells us of a liquid
non-permanent shell of uncongealed matter enclosing a "viscous plastic
ocean," within which "there is another interior *solid globe* rotating."
We, on our part, turn to the *Magia Adamica* of Eugenius Philalethes,
published in 1650, and at page 12, we find him quoting from Trismegistus
in the following terms: "Hermes affirmeth that in the *Beginning* the
earth was a quackmire or quivering kind of jelly, it being nothing else
but *water congealed* by the incubation and heat of the divine spirit;
*cum adhuc* (sayeth he) *Terra tremula esset, Lucente sole compacta
est.*"

In the same work Philalethes, speaking in his quaint, symbolical way,
says, "The earth is invisible . . . on my soul it is so, and which is
more, the *eye* of *man* never *saw* the *earth,* nor can it be *seen*
without *art.* To make this *element invisible,* is the *greatest
secret* in *magic* . . . as for this *faeculent,* gross *body* upon
*which we walk,* it is a *compost,* and no earth *but it hath earth in
it*, . . . in a word all the *elements* are *visible* but *one,* namely
the *earth,* and when thou hast attained to so much *perfection* 

###### <span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

as to know why *God* hath placed the *earth in abscondito*, <span
id="fr_375"></span>[\*](#fn_374) thou hast an excellent figure whereby
to know *God Himself,* and how He is *visible,* how *invisible.*" <span
id="fr_376"></span>[\*\*](#fn_375)

Ages before our savants of the nineteenth century came into existence, a
wise man of the Orient thus expressed himself, in addressing the
invisible Deity: "For thy Almighty Hand, that made the world of
*formless matter.*" <span id="fr_377"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_376)

There is much more contained in this language than we are willing to
explain, but we will say that the secret is worth the seeking; perhaps
in this formless matter, the *pre*-Adamite earth, is contained a
"potency" with which Messrs. Tyndall and Huxley would be glad to
acquaint themselves.

###### <span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

But to descend from universals to particulars, from the ancient theory
of planetary evolution to the evolution of plant and animal life, as
opposed to the theory of special creation, what does Mr. Proctor call
the following language of Hermes but an anticipation of the modern
theory of evolution of species? "When God had filled his powerful hands
with those things which are in nature, and in that which compasseth
nature, then shutting them close again, he said: 'Receive from me, O
holy earth! that art ordained to be the *mother of all,* lest thou
shouldst want anything'; when presently opening such hands as it becomes
a God to have, he poured down all that was necessary to the constitution
of things." Here we have primeval matter imbued with "the promise and
potency of every future form of life," and the earth declared to be the
predestined mother of everything that should thenceforth spring from her
bosom.

More definite is the language of Marcus Antoninus in his discourse to
himself. "The nature of the universe delights not in anything so much as
to alter all things, and present them under another form. This is her
conceit to play one game and begin another. Matter is placed before her
like a piece of wax and she shapes it to all forms and figures. Now she
makes *a bird, then out of the bird a beast--*now a *flower,* then a
frog, and she is pleased with her own magical performances as men are
with their own fancies." <span id="fr_378"></span>[\*](#fn_377)

Before any of our modern teachers thought of evolution, the ancients
taught us, through Hermes, that nothing can be abrupt in nature; that
she never proceeds by jumps and starts, that everything in her works is
slow harmony, and that there is nothing sudden--not even violent death.

The slow development from preexisting forms was a doctrine with the
Rosicrucian Illuminati. The *Tres Matres* showed Hermes the mysterious
progress of their work, before they condescended to reveal themselves to
mediaeval alchemists. Now, in the Hermetic dialect, these three mothers
are the symbol of light, heat, and electricity, or magnetism, the two
latter being as convertible as the whole of the forces or agents which
have a place assigned them in the modern "Force-correlation." Synesius
mentions books of stone which he found in the temple of Memphis, on
which was engraved the following sentence: "One *nature* delights in
another, one nature overcomes another, one nature overrules another, and
the whole of them are *one.*"

The inherent restlessness of matter is embodied in the saying of Hermes:
"Action is the life of Phta"; and Orpheus calls nature πολυμεχανος
μετερ, "the mother that makes many things," or the ingenious, the
contriving, the inventive mother.

###### <span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

Mr. Proctor says: "All that *that is upon and within the earth, all
vegetable forms and* all animal forms, our bodies, our brains, are
formed of materials which have been drawn in from those depths of space
surrounding us on all sides." The Hermetists and the later Rosicrucians
held that all things visible and invisible were produced by the
contention of light with darkness, and that every particle of matter
contains within itself a spark of the divine essence--or light,
*spirit--*which, through its tendency to free itself from its
entanglement and return to the central source, produced motion in the
particles, and from motion forms were born. Says Hargrave Jennings,
quoting Robertus di Fluctibus: "Thus all minerals in this spark of life
have the rudimentary possibility of plants and growing organisms; thus
all plants have rudimentary sensations which might (in the ages) enable
them to perfect and transmute into locomotive new creatures, lesser or
higher in their grade, or nobler or meaner in their functions; thus all
plants, and all vegetation might pass off (by side roads) into more
distinguished highways as it were, of independent, completer advance,
allowing their original spark of light to expand and thrill with higher
and more vivid force, and to urge forward with more abounding, informed
purpose, all wrought by planetary influence directed by the unseen
spirits (or workers) of the great original architect." <span
id="fr_379"></span>[\*](#fn_378)

Light--the first mentioned in *Genesis,* is termed by the kabalists,
Sephira, or the Divine *Intelligence,* the mother of all the Sephiroth,
while the *Concealed Wisdom* is the father. Light is the first begotten,
and the first emanation of the Supreme, and Light is Life, says the
evangelist. Both are electricity--the life-principle, the *anima mundi,*
pervading the universe, the electric vivifier of all things. Light is
the great Protean magician, and under the Divine Will of the architect,
its multifarious, omnipotent waves gave birth to every form as well as
to every living being. From its swelling, electric bosom, springs
*matter* and *spirit.* Within its beams lie the beginnings of all
physical and chemical action, and of all cosmic and spiritual phenomena;
it vitalizes and disorganizes; it gives life and produces death, and
from its primordial point gradually emerged into existence the myriads
of worlds, visible and invisible celestial bodies. It was at the ray of
this *First* mother, one in three, that God, according to Plato,
"lighted a fire, which we now call the sun," <span
id="fr_380"></span>[\*\*](#fn_379) and, which is *not* the cause of
either light or heat, but merely the focus, or, as we might say, the
lens, by which the rays of the primordial light become materialized, are
concentrated upon our solar system, and produce all the correlations of
forces.

###### <span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

So much for the first of Mr. Proctor's two propositions; now for the
second.

The work which we have been noticing, comprises a series of twelve
essays, of which the last is entitled *Thoughts on Astrology.* The
author treats the subject with so much more consideration than is the
custom of men of his class, that it is evident he has given it
thoughtful attention. In fact, he goes so far as to say that, "If we
consider the matter aright, we must concede . . . that of all the errors
into which men have fallen in their desire to penetrate into futurity,
astrology is the most respectable, we may even say the most
reasonable." <span id="fr_381"></span>[\*](#fn_380)

He admits that "The heavenly bodies *do* rule the fates of men and
nations in the most unmistakable manner, seeing that without the
controlling and beneficent influences of the chief among those orbs--the
sun--every living creature on the earth must perish." <span
id="fr_382"></span>[\*\*](#fn_381) He admits, also, the influence of the
moon, and sees nothing strange in the ancients reasoning by analogy,
that if two among these heavenly bodies were thus potent in terrestrial
influences, it was " . . . natural that the other moving bodies known to
the ancients, should be thought to possess also their special
powers." <span id="fr_383"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_382) Indeed, the
professor sees nothing unreasonable in their supposition that the
influences exerted by the slower moving planets "might be even more
potent that those of the sun himself." Mr. Proctor thinks that the
system of astrology "was formed gradually and perhaps tentatively." Some
influences may have been inferred from observed events, the fate of this
or that king or chief, guiding astrologers in assigning particular
influences to such planetary aspects as were presented at the time of
his nativity. Others may have been invented, and afterward have found
general acceptance, because confirmed by some

curious coincidences.

A witty joke may sound very prettily, even in a learned treatise, and
the word "coincidence" may be applied to anything we are unwilling to
accept. But a sophism is not a truism; still less is it a mathematical
demonstration, which alone ought to serve as a beacon--to astronomers,
at least. Astrology is a science *as infallible* as astronomy itself,
with the condition, however, that its interpreters must be equally
infallible; and it is this condition, *sine qua non,* so very difficult
of realization, that has always proved a stumbling-block to both.
Astrology is to exact astronomy what psychology is to exact physiology.
In astrology and psychology one has to step beyond the visible world of
matter, and enter into the domain of transcendent spirit. It is the old
struggle between the Platonic and Aristotelean schools, and it is not in
our century of Sadducean

###### <span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

skepticism that the former will prevail over the latter. Mr. Proctor, in
his professional capacity, is like the uncharitable person of the Sermon
on the Mount, who is ever ready to attract public attention to the mote
in his despised neighbor's eye, and overlook the beam in his own. Were
we to record the failures and ridiculous blunders of astronomers, we are
afraid they would outnumber by far those of the astrologers. Present
events fully vindicate Nostradamus, who has been so much ridiculed by
our skeptics. In an old book of prophecies, published in the fifteenth
century (an edition of 1453), we read the following, among other
astrological predictions: <span id="fr_384"></span>[\*](#fn_383)

> "In twice two hundred years, the Bear  
> The Crescent will assail;  
> But if the Cock and Bull unite,  
> The Bear will not prevail.  
> In twice ten years again --  
> Let Islam know and fear --  
> The Cross shall stand, the Crescent wane,  
> Dissolve, and disappear."

In just twice two hundred years from the date of that prophecy, we had
the Crimean war, during which the alliance of the Gallic Cock and
English Bull interfered with the political designs of the Russian Bear.
In 1856 the war was ended, and Turkey, or the Crescent, closely escaped
destruction. In the present year (1876) the most unexpected events of a
political character have just taken place, and *twice ten years* have
elapsed since peace was proclaimed. Everything seems to bid fair for a
fulfilment of the old prophecy; the future will tell whether the Moslem
Crescent, which seems, indeed, to be *waning,* will irrevocably "wane,
dissolve, and disappear," as the outcome of the present troubles.

In explaining away the heterodox facts which he appears to have
encountered in his pursuit of knowledge, Mr. Proctor is obliged more
than once in his work, to fall back upon these "curious coincidences."
One of the most curious of these is stated by him in a foot-note (page
301) as follows: "I do not here dwell on the curious coincidence--if,
indeed, Chaldean astrologers had not discovered the ring of Saturn--that
they showed the god corresponding within a ring and *triple*. . . . Very
moderate optical knowledge--such, indeed, as we may fairly infer from
the

###### <span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

presence of optical instruments among Assyrian remains--might have led
to the discovery of Saturnal rings and Jupiter's moons. . . . Bel, the
Assyrian Jupiter," he adds, "was represented sometimes with four
star-tipped wings. *But it is possible that these are mere
coincidences.*"

In short, Mr. Proctor's theory of coincidence becomes finally more
suggestive of miracle than the facts themselves. For coincidences our
friends the skeptics appear to have an unappeasable appetite. We have
brought sufficient testimony in the preceding chapter to show that the
ancients must have used as good optical instruments as we have now. Were
the instruments in possession of Nebuchadnezzar of such moderate power,
and the knowledge of his astronomers so very contemptible, when,
according to Rawlinson's reading of the tiles, the Birs-Nimrud, or
temple of Borsippa, had seven stages, symbolical of the concentric
circles of the seven spheres, each built of tiles and metals to
correspond with the color of the ruling planet of the sphere typified?
Is it a coincidence again, that they should have appropriated to each
planet the color which our latest telescopic discoveries show to be the
real one? <span id="fr_385"></span>[\*](#fn_384) Or is it again a
coincidence, that Plato should have indicated in the *Timaeus* his
knowledge of the indestructibility of matter, of conservation of energy,
and correlation of forces? "The latest word of modern philosophy," says
Jowett, "is continuity and development, but to Plato *this is the
beginning and foundation of science.*" <span
id="fr_386"></span>[\*\*](#fn_385)

The radical element of the oldest religions was essentially *sabaistic;*
and we maintain that their myths and allegories--if once correctly and
thoroughly interpreted, will dovetail with the most exact astronomical
notions of our day. We will say more; there is hardly a scientific
law--whether pertaining to physical astronomy or physical
geography--that could not be easily pointed out in the ingenious
combinations of their fables. They allegorized the most important as
well as the most trifling causes of the celestial motions; the nature of
every phenomenon was personified; and in the mythical biographies of the
Olympic gods and goddesses, one well acquainted with the latest
principles of physics and chemistry can find their causes,
inter-agencies, and mutual relations embodied in the deportment and
course of action of the fickle deities. The atmospheric electricity in
its neutral and latent states is embodied usually in demi-gods and
goddesses, whose scene of action is more limited to earth and who, in
their occasional flights to the higher deific regions, display their
electric tempers always *in strict proportion with the increase of
distance from the earth's surface:* the weapons of Hercules and Thor
were

###### <span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

never more mortal than when the gods soared into the clouds. We must
bear in mind that before the time when the Olympian Jupiter was
anthropomorphized by the genius of Pheidias into the Omnipotent God, the
*Maximus,* the God of gods, and thus abandoned to the adoration of the
multitudes, in the earliest and abstruse science of symbology he
embodied in his person and attributes the whole of the cosmic forces.
The Myth was less metaphysical and complicated, but more truly eloquent
as an expression of natural philosophy. Zeus, the male element of the
creation with Chthonia--Vesta (the earth), and Metis (the water) the
first of the Oceanides (the feminine principles)--was viewed according
to Porphyry and Proclus as the *zoon-ek-zoon,* the chief of living
beings. In the Orphic theology, the oldest of all, metaphysically
speaking, he represented both the *potentia* and *actus,* the unrevealed
*cause* and the Demiurge, or the active creator as an emanation from the
invisible potency. In the latter demiurgic capacity, in conjunction with
his consorts, we find in him all the mightiest agents of cosmic
evolution--chemical affinity, atmospheric electricity, attraction, and
repulsion.

It is in following his representations in this physical qualification
that we discover how well acquainted were the ancients with all the
doctrines of physical science in their modern development. Later, in the
Pythagorean speculations, Zeus became the metaphysical trinity; the
monad evolving from its invisible SELF the *active* cause, effect, and
intelligent will, the whole forming the *Tetractis.* Still later we find
the earlier Neoplatonists leaving the primal monad aside, on the ground
of its utter incomprehensibleness to human intellect, speculating merely
on the *demiurgic triad* of this deity as visible and intelligible in
its effects; and thus the metaphysical continuation by Plotinus,
Porphyry, Proclus, and other philosophers of this view of Zeus the
father, Zeus *Poseidon,* or *dunamis,* the son and power, and the spirit
or *nous.* This triad was also accepted as a whole by the Irenaeic
school of the second century; the more substantial difference between
the doctrines of the Neo-platonists and the Christians being merely the
forcible amalgamation by the latter of the incomprehensible monad with
its actualized creative trinity.

In his astronomical aspect Zeus-Dionysus has his origin in the zodiac,
the ancient solar year. In Libya he assumed the form of a ram, and is
identical with the Egyptian Amun, who begat Osiris, the taurian god.
Osiris is also a personified emanation of the Father-Sun, and himself
the Sun in Taurus. The Parent-Sun being the Sun in Aries. As the latter,
Jupiter, is in the guise of a ram, and as Jupiter-Dionysus or
Jupiter-Osiris, he is the bull. This animal is, as it is well known, the
symbol of the creative power; moreover the Kabala explains, through the
medium of one of

###### <span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

its chief expounders, Simon-Ben-Iochai, <span
id="fr_387"></span>[\*](#fn_386) the origin of this strange worship of
the bulls and cows. It is neither Darwin nor Huxley--the founders of the
doctrine of evolution and its necessary complement, the transformation
of species--that can find anything against the rationality of this
symbol, except, perhaps, a natural feeling of uneasiness upon finding
that they were preceded by the ancients even in this particular modern
discovery. Elsewhere, we will give the doctrine of the kabalists as
taught by Simon-Ben-Iochai.

It may be easily proved that from time immemorial Saturn or Kronos,
whose ring, most positively, *was* discovered by the Chaldean
astrologers, and whose symbolism is no "coincidence," was considered the
father of Zeus, before the latter became himself the father of all the
gods, and was the highest deity. He was the Bel or Baal of the
Chaldeans, and originally imported among them by the Akkadians.
Rawlinson insists that the latter came from Armenia; but if so, how can
we account for the fact that Bel is but a Babylonian personification of
the Hindu Siva, or Bala, the fire-god, the omnipotent creative, and at
the same time, destroying Deity, in many senses higher than Brahma
himself?

"Zeus," says an Orphic hymn, "is the first and the last, the head, and
the extremities; from him have proceeded all things. He is a man and an
immortal nymph (male and female element); the soul of all things; and
the principal motor in fire; he is the sun and the moon; the fountain of
the ocean; the demiurgus of the universe; one power, one God; the mighty
creator and governor of the cosmos. Everything, fire, water, earth,
ether, night, the heavens, Metis, the primeval architecturess (the
Sophia of the Gnostics, and the Sephira of the Kabalists), the beautiful
Eros, Cupid, all is included within the vast dimensions of his glorious
body!" <span id="fr_388"></span>[\*\*](#fn_387)

This short hymn of laudation contains within itself the groundwork of
every mythopoeic conception. The imagination of the ancients proved as
boundless as the visible manifestations of the Deity itself which
afforded them the themes for their allegories. Still the latter,
exuberant as they seem, never departed from the two principal ideas
which may be ever found running parallel in their sacred imagery; a
strict adherence to the physical as well as moral or spiritual aspect of
natural law. Their metaphysical researches never clashed with scientific
truths, and their religions may be truly termed the psycho-physiological
creeds of the priests and scientists, who built them on the traditions
of the infant-world, such as the unsophisticated minds of the primitive
races received them, and on their own experimental knowledge, hoary with
all the wisdom of the intervening ages.

###### <span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

As the sun, what better image could be found for Jupiter emitting his
golden rays than to personify this emanation in Diana, the
all-illuminating virgin Artemis, whose oldest name was Diktynna,
literally the emitted *ray*, from the word *dikein.* The moon is
non-luminous, and it shines only by the reflected light of the sun;
hence, the imagery of his daughter, the goddess of the moon, and
herself, Luna, Astarte, or Diana. As the Cretan Diktynna, she wears a
wreath made of the magic plant *diktamnon,* or *dictamnus,* the
evergreen shrub whose contact is said, at the same time, to develop
somnambulism and cure finally of it; and, as Eilithyia and Juno Pronuba,
she is the goddess who presides over births; she is an AEsculapian
deity, and the use of the dictamnus-wreath, in association with the
moon, shows once more the profound observation of the ancients. This
plant is known in botany as possessing strongly sedative properties; it
grows on Mount Dicte, a Cretan mountain, in great abundance; on the
other hand, the moon, according to the best authorities on animal
magnetism, acts upon the juices and ganglionic system, or nerve-cells,
the seat from whence proceed all the nerve-fibres which play such a
prominent part in mesmerization. During childbirth the Cretan women were
covered with this plant, and its roots were administered as best
calculated to soothe acute pain, and allay the irritability so dangerous
at this period. They were placed, moreover, within the precincts of the
temple sacred to the goddess, and, if possible, under the direct rays of
the resplendent daughter of Jupiter--the bright and warm Eastern moon.

The Hindu Brahmans and Buddhists have complicated theories on the
influence of the sun and moon (the male and female elements), as
containing the negative and positive principles, the opposites of the
magnetic polarity. "The influence of the moon on women is well known,"
write all the old authors on magnetism; and Ennemoser, as well as Du
Potet, confirm the theories of the Hindu seers in every particular.

The marked respect paid by the Buddhists to the sapphire-stone--which
was also sacred to Luna, in every other country--may be found based on
something more scientifically exact than a mere groundless superstition.
They ascribed to it a sacred magical power, which every student of
psychological mesmerism will readily understand, for its polished and
deep-blue surface produces extraordinary somnambulic phenomena. The
varied influence of the prismatic colors on the growth of vegetation,
and especially that of the "blue ray," has been recognized but recently.
The Academicians quarrelled over the unequal heating power of the
prismatic rays until a series of experimental demonstrations by General
Pleasonton, proved that under the blue ray, the most electric of all,
animal and vegetable growth was increased to a magical

###### <span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

proportion. Thus Amoretti's investigations of the electric polarity of
precious stones show that the diamond, the garnet, the amethyst, are -
E., while the sapphire is + E. <span id="fr_389"></span>[\*](#fn_388)
Thus, we are enabled to show that the latest experiments of science only
corroborate that which was known to the Hindu sages before any of the
modern academies were founded. An old Hindu legend says that
Brahma-Prajapati, having fallen in love with his own daughter, *Ushas*
(Heaven, sometimes the Dawn also), assumed the form of a buck (*ris'ya*)
and Ushas that of a female deer (*rohit*) and thus committed the first
sin. <span id="fr_390"></span>[\*\*](#fn_389) Upon seeing such a
desecration, the gods felt so terrified, that uniting their most
fearful-looking bodies--each god possessing as many bodies as he
desires--they produced Bhutavan (the spirit of evil), who was created by
them on purpose to destroy the *incarnation* of the first sin committed
by the Brahma himself. Upon seeing this, Brahma-Hiranyagarbha <span
id="fr_391"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_390) repented bitterly and began
repeating the Mantras, or prayers of purification, and, in his grief,
dropped on earth a tear, the *hottest* that ever fell from an eye; and
from it was formed the first sapphire.

This half-sacred, half-popular legend shows that the Hindus knew which
was the most electric of all the prismatic colors; moreover, the
particular influence of the sapphire-stone was as well defined as that
of all the other minerals. Orpheus teaches how it is possible to affect
a whole audience by means of a lodestone; Pythagoras pays a particular
attention to the color and nature of precious stones; while Apollonius
of Tyana imparts to his disciples the secret virtues of each, and
changes his jewelled rings daily, using a particular stone for every day
of the month and according to the laws of judicial astrology. The
Buddhists assert that the sapphire produces peace of mind, equanimity,
and chases all evil thoughts by establishing a healthy circulation in
man. So does an electric battery, with its well-directed fluid, say our
electricians. "The sapphire," say the Buddhists, "will open barred doors
and dwellings (for the spirit of man); it produces a desire for prayer,
and brings with it more peace than any other gem; but he who would wear
it must lead a pure and holy life." <span
id="fr_392"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_391)

Diana-Luna is the daughter of Zeus by Proserpina, who represents the
Earth in her active labor, and, according to Hesiod, as Diana
Eilythia-Lucina

###### <span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

she is Juno's daughter. But Juno, devoured by Kronos or Saturn, and
restored back to life by the Oceanid Metis, is also known as the Earth.
Saturn, as the evolution of Time, swallows the earth in one of the
ante-historical cataclysms, and it is only when Metis (the waters) by
retreating in her many beds, frees the continent, that Juno is said to
be restored to her first shape. The idea is expressed in the 9th and
10th verses of the first chapter of *Genesis.* In the frequent
matrimonial quarrels between Juno and Jupiter, Diana is always
represented as turning her back on her mother and smiling upon her
father, though she chides him for his numerous frolics. The Thessalian
magicians are said to have been obliged, during such eclipses, to draw
her attention to the earth by the power of their spells and
incantations, and the Babylonian astrologers and magi never desisted in
their spells until they brought about a reconciliation between the
irritated couple, after which Juno "radiantly smiled on the bright
goddess" Diana, who, encircling her brow with her crescent, returned to
her hunting-place in the mountains.

It seems to us that the fable illustrates the different phases of the
moon. We, the inhabitants of the earth, never see but one-half of our
bright satellite, who thus turns *her back* to her mother Juno. The sun,
the moon, and the earth are constantly changing positions with relation
to each other. With the *new* moon there is constantly a change of
weather; and sometimes the wind and storms may well suggest a quarrel
between the sun and earth, especially when the former is concealed by
grumbling thunder-clouds. Furthermore, the new moon, when her dark side
is turned toward us, is invisible; and it is only after a
*reconciliation* between the sun and the earth, that a bright crescent
becomes visible on the side nearest to the sun, though this time Luna is
not illuminated by sunlight *directly* received, but by sunlight
reflected from the earth to the moon, and by her reflected back to us.
Hence, the Chaldean astrologers and the magicians of Thessaly, who
probably watched and determined as accurately as a Babinet the course of
the celestial bodies, were said by their enchantments to force the moon
to descend on earth, *i.e*., to show her crescent, which she could do
but after receiving the "radiant smile" from her mother-earth, who put
it on after the conjugal reconciliation. Diana-Luna, having adorned her
head with her crescent, returns back to hunt in

her mountains.

As to calling in question the intrinsic knowledge of the ancients on the
ground of their "*superstitious* deductions from natural phenomena," it
is as appropriate as it would be if, five hundred years hence, our
descendants should regard the pupils of Professor Balfour Stewart as
*ancient* ignoramuses, and himself a shallow philosopher. If modern
science, in the person of this gentleman, can condescend to make experi-

###### <span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

ments to determine whether the appearance of the spots on the sun's
surface is in any way connected with the potato disease, and finds *it
is;* and that, moreover, "the earth is very seriously affected by what
takes place in the sun," <span id="fr_393"></span>[\*](#fn_392) why
should the ancient astrologers be held up as either fools or arrant
knaves? There is the same relation between natural and judicial or
judiciary astrology, as between physiology and psychology, the physical
and the moral. If in later centuries these sciences were degraded into
charlatanry by some money-making impostors, is it just to extend the
accusation to those mighty men of old who, by their persevering studies
and holy lives, bestowed an immortal name upon Chaldea and Babylonia?
Surely those who are now found to have made correct astronomical
observations ranging back to "within 100 years from the flood," from the
top observatory of the "cloud-encompassed Bel," as Prof. Draper has it,
can hardly be considered impostors. If their mode of impressing upon the
popular minds the great astronomical truths differed from the "system of
education" of our present century and appears ridiculous to some, the
question still remains unanswered: which of the two systems was the
best? With them science went hand in hand with religion, and the idea of
God was inseparable from that of his works. And while in the present
century there is not one person out of ten thousand who knows, if he
ever knew the fact at all, that the planet Uranus is *next* to Saturn,
and revolves about the sun in eighty-four years; and that Saturn is
*next* to Jupiter, and takes twenty-nine and a half years to make one
complete revolution in its orbit; while Jupiter performs his revolution
in twelve years; the uneducated masses of Babylon and Greece, having
impressed on their minds that Uranus was the father of Saturn, and
Saturn that of Jupiter, considering them furthermore deities as well as
all their satellites and attendants, we may perhaps infer from it, that
while Europeans only discovered Uranus in 1781, a curious coincidence is
to be noticed in the above myths.

We have but to open the most common book on astrology, and compare the
descriptions embraced in the *Fable of the Twelve Houses* with the most
modern discoveries of science as to the nature of the planets and the
elements in each star, to see that without any spectroscope the ancients
were perfectly well acquainted with the same. Unless the fact is again
regarded as "a coincidence," we can learn, to a certain extent, of the
degree of the solar heat, light, and nature of the planets by simply
studying their symbolic representations in the Olympic gods, and the
twelve signs of the zodiac, to each of which in astrology is attributed
a particular quality. If the goddesses of our own planet vary in no
particular

###### <span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

from other gods and goddesses, but all have a like physical nature, does
not this imply that the sentinels who watched from the top of Bel's
tower, by day as well as by night, holding communion with the
euhemerized deities, had remarked, before ourselves, the physical unity
of the universe and the fact that the planets above are made of
precisely the same chemical elements as our own? The sun in Aries,
Jupiter, is shown in astrology as a masculine, diurnal, cardinal,
equinoctial, easterly sign, hot and dry, and answers perfectly to the
character attributed to the fickle "Father of the gods." When angry
Zeus-Akrios snatches from his fiery belt the thunderbolts which he hurls
forth from heaven, he rends the clouds and descends as Jupiter *Pluvius*
in torrents of rain. He is the greatest and highest of gods, and his
movements are as rapid as lightning itself. The planet Jupiter is known
to revolve on its axis so rapidly that the point of its equator turns at
the rate of 450 miles a minute. An immense excess of centrifugal force
at the equator is believed to have caused the planet to become extremely
flattened at the poles; and in Crete the personified god Jupiter was
represented without ears. The planet Jupiter's disk is crossed by dark
belts; varying in breadth, they appear to be connected with its rotation
on its axis, and are produced by disturbances in its atmosphere. The
face of Father Zeus, says Hesiod, became spotted with rage when he
beheld the Titans ready to rebel.

In Mr. Proctor's book, astronomers seem especially doomed by Providence
to encounter all kinds of curious "coincidences," for he gives us many
cases out of the "multitude," and even of the "*thousands* of facts
\[sic\]." To this list we may add the army of Egyptologists and
archaeologists who of late have been the chosen pets of the capricious
*Dame Chance,* who, moreover, generally selects "well-to-do Arabs" and
other Eastern gentlemen, to play the part of benevolent *genii* to
Oriental scholars in difficulties. Professor Ebers is one of the latest
favored ones. It is a well-known fact, that whenever Champollion needed
important links, he fell in with them in the most various and unexpected
ways.

Voltaire, the greatest of "infidels" of the eighteenth century, used to
say, that if there were no God, people would have to invent one. Volney,
another "materialist," nowhere throughout his numerous writings denies
the existence of God. On the contrary, he plainly asserts several times
that the universe is the work of the "All-wise," and is convinced that
there is a Supreme Agent, a universal and identical Artificer,
designated by the name of God. <span id="fr_394"></span>[\*](#fn_393)
Voltaire becomes, toward the end of his life, Pythagorical, and
concludes by saying: "I have consumed forty

###### <span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

years of my pilgrimage . . . seeking the philosopher's stone called
truth. I have consulted all the adepts of antiquity, Epicurus and
Augustine, Plato and Malebranche, and I still remain in ignorance. . . .
All that I have been able to obtain by comparing and combining the
system of Plato, of the tutor of Alexander, Pythagoras, and the
Oriental, is this: *Chance is a word void of sense.* The world is
arranged according to mathematical laws." <span
id="fr_395"></span>[\*](#fn_394)

It is pertinent for us to suggest that Mr. Proctor's stumbling-block is
that which trips the feet of all materialistic scientists, whose views
he but repeats; he confounds the physical and spiritual operations of
nature. His very theory of the probable inductive reasoning of the
ancients as to the subtile influences of the more remote planets, by
comparison with the familiar and potent effects of the sun and moon upon
our earth, shows the drift of his mind. Because science *affirms* that
the sun imparts physical *heat* and *light* to us, and the moon affects
the tides, he thinks that the ancients must have regarded the other
heavenly bodies as exerting the same kind of influence upon us
physically, and indirectly upon our fortunes. <span
id="fr_396"></span>[\*\*](#fn_395) And here we must permit ourselves a
digression.

How the ancients regarded the heavenly bodies is very hard to determine,
for one unacquainted with the esoteric explanation of their doctrines.
While philology and comparative theology have begun the arduous work of
analysis, they have as yet arrived at meagre results. The allegorical
form of speech has often led our commentators so far astray, that they
have confounded causes with effects, and *vice versa.* In the baffling
phenomenon of force-correlation, even our greatest scientists would find
it very hard to explain which of these forces is the cause, and which
the effect, since each may be both by turns, and convertible. Thus, if
we should inquire of the physicists, "Is it light which generates heat,
or the latter which produces light?" we would in all probability be
answered that it is certainly light which creates heat. Very well; but
how? did the great Artificer first produce light, or did He first
construct the sun, which is said to be the sole dispenser of light, and,
consequently, heat? These questions may appear at first glance
indicative of ignorance; but, perhaps, if we ponder them deeply, they
will assume another appearance. In *Genesis,* the "Lord" first creates
*light*, and three days and three nights are alleged to pass away before
He creates the sun, the moon, and the stars. This gross blunder against
*exact* science has created much merriment among materialists. And they
certainly would be warranted in laughing, if their doctrine that our
light and heat are

###### <span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

derived from the sun were unassailable. Until recently, nothing has
happened to upset this theory, which, for lack of a better one,
according to the expression of a preacher, "reigns sovereign in the
Empire of Hypothesis." The ancient sun-worshippers regarded the Great
Spirit as a nature-god, identical with nature, and the sun as the deity,
"in whom the Lord of life dwells." Gama is the sun, according to the
Hindu theology, and "The sun is the source of the souls and of *all
life.*" <span id="fr_397"></span>[\*](#fn_396) Agni, the "Divine Fire,"
the deity of the Hindu, is the sun, <span
id="fr_398"></span>[\*\*](#fn_397) for the fire and sun are the same.
Ormazd is light, the Sun-God, or the Life-giver. In the Hindu
philosophy, "The souls issue from the soul of the world, and return to
it as sparks to the fire." <span id="fr_399"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_398)
But, in another place, it is said that "*The Sun* is the soul *of all
things;* all has proceeded out of it, and will return to it," <span
id="fr_400"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_399) which shows that the sun is meant
allegorically here, and refers to the *central,* invisible sun, **GOD**,
whose first manifestation was Sephira, the emanation of En-Soph--Light,
in short.

"And I looked, and behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great
cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about it," says
Ezekiel (i., 4, 22, etc.), ". . . and the likeness of a throne . . . and
as the appearance of a man above upon it . . . and I saw as it were the
appearance *of fire* and it had brightness round about it." And Daniel
speaks of the "ancient of days," the kabalistic En-Soph, whose throne
was "the fiery flame, his wheels burning fire. . . . A fiery stream
issued and came forth from before him." <span
id="fr_401"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_400) Like the Pagan Saturn, who had
his castle of flame in the seventh heaven, the Jewish Jehovah had his
"castle of fire over the seventh heavens." <span
id="fr_402"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_401)

If the limited space of the present work would permit we might easily
show that none of the ancients, the sun-worshippers included, regarded
our visible sun otherwise than as an emblem of their metaphysical
invisible central sun-god. Moreover, they did *not* believe what our
modern science teaches us, namely, that light and heat proceed from
*our* sun, and that it is this planet which imparts all life to our
visible nature. "His radiance is undecaying," says the *Rig-Veda,* "the
intensely-shining, all-pervading, unceasing, undecaying rays of Agni
desist not, neither night nor day." This evidently related to the
spiritual, central sun, whose rays are all-pervading and unceasing, the
eternal and boundless life-giver. **H**E the *Point;* the centre (which
is everywhere) of the circle (which is nowhere), the ethereal, spiritual
fire, the soul and spirit of the all-pervading, mysterious ether; the
despair and puzzle of the materialist, who will some day find that that
which causes the numberless cos-

###### <span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

mic forces to manifest themselves in eternal correlation is but a divine
electricity, or rather *galvanism,* and that the sun is but one of the
myriad *magnets* disseminated through space--a reflector--as General
Pleasonton has it. That the sun has no more heat in it than the moon or
the space-crowding host of sparkling stars. That there is no
*gravitation* in the Newtonian sense, <span
id="fr_403"></span>[\*](#fn_402) but only magnetic attraction and
repulsion; and that it is by their magnetism that the planets of the
solar system have their motions regulated in their respective orbits by
the still more powerful magnetism of the sun, not by their weight or
gravitation. This and much more they may learn; but, until then we must
be content with being merely laughed at, instead of being burned alive
for impiety, or shut up in an insane asylum.

The laws of Manu are the doctrines of Plato, Philo, Zoroaster,
Pythagoras, and of the Kabala. The esoterism of every religion may be
solved by the latter. The kabalistic doctrine of the allegorical Father
and Son, or Πατερ and Λογος is identical with the groundwork of
Buddhism. Moses could not reveal to the multitude the sublime secrets of
religious speculation, nor the cosmogony of the universe; the whole
resting upon the Hindu *Illusion,* a clever mask veiling the *Sanctum
Sanctorum,* and which has misled so many theological commentators. <span
id="fr_404"></span>[\*\*](#fn_403)

###### <span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

The kabalistic heresies receive an unexpected support in the heterodox
theories of General Pleasonton. According to his opinions (which he
supports on far more unimpeachable facts than orthodox scientists
theirs) the space between the sun and the earth must be filled with a
material medium, which, so far as we can judge from his description,
answers to our kabalistic astral light. The passage of light through
this must produce enormous friction. Friction generates electricity, and
it is this electricity and its correlative magnetism which forms those
tremendous forces of nature that produce in, on, and about our planet
the various changes which we everywhere encounter. He proves that
terrestrial heat *cannot* be directly derived from the sun, for heat
*ascends.* The force by which heat is effected is a repellent one, he
says, and as it is associated with positive electricity, it is attracted
to the upper atmosphere by its negative electricity, always associated
with cold, which is opposed to positive electricity. He strengthens his
position by showing that the earth, which when covered with snow cannot
be affected by the sun's rays, is warmest where the snow is deepest.
This he explains upon the theory that the radiation of heat from the
interior of the earth, positively electrified, meeting at the *surface*
of the earth with the snow in contact with it, negatively electrified,
produces the heat.

Thus he shows that it is not at all to the sun that we are indebted for
light and heat; that light is a creation *sui generis,* which sprung
into existence at the instant when the Deity *willed*, and uttered the
fiat: "Let there be light"; and that it is this independent material
agent which produces heat *by friction,* on account of its enormous and
incessant velocity. In short, it is the first kabalistic emanation to
which General Pleasonton introduces us, that Sephira or divine
*Intelligence* (the female principle), which, in unity with En-Soph, or
divine wisdom (male principle) produced every thing visible and
invisible. He laughs at the current theory of the incandescence of the
sun and its gaseous substance. The reflection from the photosphere of
the sun, he says, passing through planetary and stellar spaces, must
have thus created a vast amount of electricity and magnetism.
Electricity, by the union of its opposite polarities, evolves heat and
imparts magnetism to all substances capable of receiving it. The sun,
planets, stars, and nebulae are all magnets, etc.

If this courageous gentleman should prove his case, future generations
will have but little disposition to laugh at Paracelsus and his sidereal
or astral light, and at his doctrine of the magnetic influence exercised
by

###### <span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

the stars and planets upon every living creature, plant, or mineral of
our globe. Moreover, if the Pleasonton hypothesis is established, the
transcendent glory of Professor Tyndall will be rather obscured.
According to public opinion, the General makes a terrible onslaught on
the learned physicist, for attributing to the sun calorific effects
experienced by him in an Alpine ramble, that were simply due to his own
vital electricity. <span id="fr_405"></span>[\*](#fn_404)

The prevalence of such revolutionary ideas in science, embolden us to
ask the representatives of science whether they can explain *why* the
tides follow the moon in her circling motion? The fact is, they cannot
demonstrate even so familiar a phenomenon as this, one that has no
mystery for even the neophytes in alchemy and magic. We would also like
to learn whether they are equally incapable of telling us why the moon's
rays are so poisonous, even fatal, to some organisms; why in some parts
of Africa and India a person sleeping in the moonlight is often made
insane; why the crises of certain diseases correspond with lunar
changes; why somnambulists are more affected at her full; and why
gardeners, farmers, and woodmen cling so tenaciously to the idea that
vegetation is affected by lunar influences? Several of the mimosae
alternately open and close their petals as the full moon emerges from or
is obscured by clouds. And the Hindus of Travancore have a popular but
extremely suggestive proverb which says: "Soft words are better than
harsh; the sea is attracted by the cool moon and not by the hot sun."
Perhaps the one man or the many men who launched this proverb on the
world knew more about the cause of such attraction of the waters by the
moon than we do. Thus if science cannot explain the cause of this
physical influence, what can she know of the moral and occult influences
that may be exercised by the celestial bodies on men and their destiny;
and why contradict that which it is impossible for her to prove false?
If certain aspects of the moon effect tangible results so familiar in
the experience of men throughout all time, what violence are we doing to
logic in assuming the possibility that a certain combination of sidereal
influences may also be more or less potential?

If the reader will recall what is said by the learned authors of the

###### <span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

Unseen Universe, as to the positive effect produced upon the universal
ether by so small a cause as the evolution of thought in a single human
brain, how reasonable will it not appear that the terrific impulses
imparted to this common medium by the sweep of the myriad blazing orbs
that are rushing through "the interstellar depths," should affect us and
the earth upon which we live, in a powerful degree? If astronomers
cannot explain to us the occult law by which the drifting particles of
cosmic matter aggregate into worlds, and then take their places in the
majestic procession which is ceaselessly moving around some central
point of attraction, how can anyone assume to say what mystic influences
may or may not be darting through space and affecting the issues of life
upon this and other planets? Almost nothing is known of the laws of
magnetism and the other imponderable agents; almost nothing of their
effects upon our bodies and minds; even that which is known and moreover
perfectly demonstrated, is attributed to chance, and curious
*coincidences.* But we do know, by these coincidences, <span
id="fr_406"></span>[\*](#fn_405) that "there are periods when certain
diseases, propensities, fortunes, and misfortunes of humanity are more
rife than at others." There are times of epidemic in moral and physical
affairs. In one epoch "the spirit of religious controversy will arouse
the most ferocious passions of which human nature is susceptible,
provoking mutual persecution, bloodshed, and wars; at another, an
epidemic of resistance to constituted authority will spread over half
the world (as in the year 1848), rapid and simultaneous as the most
virulent bodily disorder."

Again, the *collective character* of mental phenomena is illustrated by
an anomalous psychological condition invading and dominating over
thousands upon thousands, depriving them of everything but automatic
action, and giving rise to the popular opinion of demoniacal possession,
an opinion in some sense justified by the satanic passions, emotions,
and acts which accompany the condition. At one period, the aggregate
tendency is to retirement and contemplation; hence, the countless
votaries of monachism and anchoretism; at another the mania is directed
toward *action,* having for its proposed end some utopian scheme,
equally impracticable and useless; hence, the myriads who have forsaken
their kindred, their homes, and their country, to seek a land whose
stones were gold, or to wage exterminating war for the possession of
worthless cities and trackless deserts. <span
id="fr_407"></span>[\*\*](#fn_406)

###### <span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

The author from whom the above is quoted says that "the seeds of vice
and crime appear to be sown under the surface of society, and to spring
up and bring forth fruit with appalling rapidity and paralyzing
succession."

In the presence of these striking phenomena science stands speechless;
she does not even attempt to conjecture as to their cause, and
naturally, for she has not yet learned to look outside of this ball of
dirt upon which we live, and its heavy atmosphere, for the hidden
influences which are affecting us day by day, and even minute by minute.
But the ancients, whose "ignorance" is assumed by Mr. Proctor, fully
realized the fact that the reciprocal relations between the planetary
bodies is as perfect as those between the corpuscles of the blood, which
float in a common fluid; and that each one is affected by the combined
influences of all the rest, as each in its turn affects each of the
others. As the planets differ in size, distance, and activity, so differ
in intensity their impulses upon the ether or astral light, and the
magnetic and other subtile forces radiated by them in certain aspects of
the heavens. Music is the combination and modulation of sounds, and
sound is the effect produced by the vibration of the ether. Now, if the
impulses communicated to the ether by the different planets may be
likened to the tones produced by the different notes of a musical
instrument, it is not difficult to conceive that the Pythagorean "music
of the spheres" is something more than a mere fancy, and that certain
planetary aspects may imply disturbances in the ether of our planet, and
certain others rest and harmony. Certain kinds of music throw us into
frenzy; some exalt the soul to religious aspirations. In fine, there is
scarcely a human creation which does not respond to certain vibrations
of the atmosphere. It is the same with colors; some excite us, some
soothe and please. The nun clothes herself in black to typify the
despondency of a faith crushed under the sense of original sin; the
bride robes herself in white; red inflames the anger of certain animals.
If we and the animals are affected by vibrations acting upon a very
minute scale, why may we not be influenced in the mass by vibrations
acting upon a grand scale as the effect of combined stellar influences?

"We know," says Dr. Elam, "that certain pathological conditions have a
tendency to become epidemic, *influenced by causes not yet
investigated*. . . . We see how strong is the tendency of opinion once
promulgated to run into an epidemic form--no opinion, no delusion, is
too absurd to assume this collective character. We observe, also, how
remarkably the same ideas reproduce themselves and *reappear in
successive ages;* . . . no crime is too horrible to become popular,
homicide, infanticide, suicide, poisoning, or any other diabolical human
conception.

###### <span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

. . . In epidemics, the cause of the rapid spread at that particular
period *remains a mystery!*"

These few lines contain an undeniable *psychological* fact, sketched
with a masterly pen, and at the same time a *half*-confession of utter
ignorance--"*Causes not yet investigated.*" Why not be honest and add at
once, "*impossible* to investigate with present scientific methods"?

Noticing an epidemic of incendiarism, Dr. Elam quotes from the *Annales
d'Hygiene Publique* the following cases: "A girl about seventeen years
of age was arrested on suspicion . . . she confessed that twice she had
set fire to dwellings by *instinct,* by *irresistible necessity*. . . .
A boy about eighteen committed many acts of this nature. He was not
moved by any passion, but the bursting-out of the flames excited a
profoundly pleasing emotion."

Who but has noticed in the columns of the daily press similar incidents?
They meet the eye constantly. In cases of murder, of every description,
and of other crimes of a diabolical character, the act is attributed, in
nine cases out of ten, by the offenders themselves, to *irresistible
obsessions.* "*Something* whispered constantly in my ear. . . .
*Somebody* was incessantly pushing and leading me on." Such are the
too-frequent confessions of the criminals. Physicians attribute them to
hallucinations of disordered brains, and call the homicidal impulse
temporary *lunacy.* But is lunacy itself well understood by any
psychologist? Has its cause ever been brought under a hypothesis capable
of withstanding the challenge of an uncompromising investigator? Let the
controversial works of our contemporary alienists answer for themselves.

Plato acknowledges man to be the toy of the element of necessity, which
he enters upon in appearing in this world of matter; he is influenced by
external causes, and these causes are *daimonia,* like that of Socrates.
Happy is the man physically pure, for if his *external* soul (body) is
pure, it will strengthen the second one (astral body), or the soul which
is termed by him the *higher mortal soul,* which though liable to err
from its own motives, will always side with reason against the animal
proclivities of the body. The lusts of man arise in consequence of his
perishable material body, so do other diseases; but though he regards
crimes as *involuntary* sometimes, for they result like bodily disease
from external causes, Plato clearly makes a wide distinction between
these *causes.* The fatalism which he concedes to humanity, does not
preclude the possibility of avoiding them, for though pain, fear, anger,
and other feelings are given to men by *necessity,* "if they conquered
these they would live righteously, and if they were conquered by them,
*unrighteously*." <span id="fr_408"></span>[\*](#fn_407) The

###### <span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

dual man, *i.e.,* one from whom the divine *immortal* spirit has
departed, leaving but the animal form and astral body (Plato's higher
*mortal* soul)*,* is left merely to his *instincts,* for he was
conquered by all the evils entailed on matter; hence, he becomes a
docile tool in the hands of the *invisibles--*beings of sublimated
matter, hovering in our atmosphere, and ever ready to inspire those who
are deservedly deserted by their *immortal* counsellor, the Divine
Spirit, called by Plato "genius." <span id="fr_409"></span>[\*](#fn_408)
According to this great philosopher and initiate, one "who lived well
during his appointed time would return to the habitation *of his star,*
and there have a blessed and suitable existence. But if he failed in
attaining this in the second generation he would pass *into a
woman--*become helpless and weak as a woman; <span
id="fr_410"></span>[\*\*](#fn_409) and should he not cease from evil in
that condition, he would be changed into some brute, which resembled him
in his evil ways, and would not cease from his toils and transformations
until he followed the original principle of sameness and likeness within
him, and overcame, by the help of reason, the latter secretions of
turbulent and irrational *elements* (elementary daemons) composed of
fire and air, and water and earth, and returned to the form of his first
and better nature." <span id="fr_411"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_410)

But Dr. Elam thinks otherwise. On page 194 of his book, *A Physician's
Problems,* he says that the cause of the rapid spread of certain
epidemics of disease which he is noticing "remains a mystery"; but as
regards the incendiarism he remarks that "in all this we find nothing
mysterious," though the epidemic is strongly developed. Strange
contradiction! De Quincey, in his paper, entitled *Murder Considered as
One of the Fine Arts,* treats of the epidemic of assassination, between
1588 and 1635, by which seven of the most distinguished characters of

###### <span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

the time lost their lives at the hands of assassins, and neither he, nor
any other commentator has been able to explain the mysterious cause of
this homicidal mania.

If we press these gentlemen for an explanation, which as pretended
philosophers they are bound to give us, we are answered that it is a
great deal more *scientific* to assign for such epidemics "agitation of
the mind," " . . . a time of political excitement (1830)" " . . .
imitation and impulse," " . . . excitable and idle boys," and
"*hysterical* girls*,*" than to be absurdly seeking for the verification
of superstitious traditions in a hypothetical astral light. It seems to
us that if, by some providential fatality, *hysteria* were to disappear
entirely from the human system, the medical fraternity would be entirely
at a loss for explanations of a large class of phenomena now
conveniently classified under the head of "normal symptoms of certain
pathological conditions of the nervous centres." Hysteria has been
hitherto the sheet-anchor of skeptical pathologists. Does a dirty
peasant-girl begin suddenly to speak with fluency different foreign
languages hitherto unfamiliar to her, and to write poetry--"hysterics!"
Is a medium levitated, in full view of a dozen of witnesses, and carried
out of one third-story window and brought back through
another--"disturbance of the nervous centres, followed by a *collective*
hysterical delusion." <span id="fr_412"></span>[\*](#fn_411) A Scotch
terrier, caught in the room during a manifestation, is hurled by an
invisible hand across the room, breaks to pieces, in his *salto
mortali,* a chandelier, under a ceiling eighteen feet high, to fall down
killed <span id="fr_413"></span>[\*\*](#fn_412)--"*canine
hallucination!*"

"True science has no belief," says Dr. Fenwick, in Bulwer-Lytton's
*Strange Story;* "true science knows but three states of mind: denial,
conviction, and the vast interval between the two, which is not belief,
but the *suspension of judgment.*" Such, perhaps, was true science in
Dr. Fenwick's days. But the true science of our modern times proceeds
otherwise; it either denies point-blank, without any preliminary
investigation, or sits in the interim, between denial and conviction,
and, dictionary in hand, invents new Graeco-Latin appellations for
non-existing kinds of hysteria!

How often have powerful clairvoyants and adepts in mesmerism described
the epidemics and *physical* (though to others invisible) manifestations
which science attributes to epilepsy, haemato-nervous disorders, and
what not, of *somatic origin,* as their lucid vision saw them in the
astral light. They affirm that the "electric waves" were in violent
perturbation, and that they discerned a direct relation between this
ethereal disturbance and the mental or physical epidemic then raging.
But

###### <span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

science has heeded them not, but gone on with her encyclopaedic labor of
devising new names for old things.

"History," says Du Potet, the prince of French mesmerists, "keeps but
too well the sad records of sorcery. These facts were but too real, and
lent themselves but too readily to dreadful malpractices of the art, to
monstrous abuse! . . . But how did I come to find out that art? Where
did I learn it? In my thoughts? no; it is *nature* herself which
discovered to me the secret. And how? By producing before my own eyes,
without waiting for me to search for it, indisputable facts of sorcery
and magic. . . . What is, after all, somnambulistic sleep? *A result of
the potency of magic.* And what is it which determines these
attractions, these *sudden impulses,* these raving epidemics, rages,
antipathies, crises;--these convulsions which *you can make durable? .*
. . what is it which determines them, if not the *very principle* we
employ, the agent *so decidedly well known to the ancients?* What you
call nervous fluid or *magnetism,* the men of old called *occult power,*
or the potency of the soul, subjection, **MAGIC**!"

"Magic is based on the existence of a mixed world placed *without,* not
*within* us; and with which we can enter in communication by the use of
certain arts and practices. . . . An element *existing in nature,*
unknown to most men, gets hold of a person and withers and breaks him
down, as the fearful hurricane does a bulrush; it scatters men far away,
it strikes them in a *thousand places at the same time,* without their
perceiving the invisible foe, or being able to protect themselves . . .
all this is *demonstrated;* but that this element could choose friends
and select *favorites,* obey their *thoughts,* answer to the human
voice, and understand the meaning of *traced signs,* that is what people
cannot realize, and *what their reason rejects,* and that is *what I
saw;* and I say it here most emphatically, that for me it is a fact and
*a truth* demonstrated for ever." <span id="fr_414"></span>[\*](#fn_413)

"If I entered into greater details, one could readily understand that
there do exist *around* us*, as in ourselves,* mysterious beings who
have *power* and *shape,* who enter and go out at will, notwithstanding
the well-closed doors." <span id="fr_415"></span>[\*\*](#fn_414)
Further, the great mesmerizer teaches us that the faculty of directing
this fluid is a "physical property, resulting from our organization . .
. it passes through all bodies . . . everything can be used as a
conductor for magical operations, and it will retain the power of
producing effects in its turn." This is the theory common to all
hermetic philosophers. Such is the power of the fluid, "that *no
chemical or physical forces are able to destroy it*. . . . There is very
little analogy between

###### <span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

the imponderable fluids known to physicists and this animal magnetic
fluid." <span id="fr_416"></span>[\*](#fn_415)

If we now refer to mediaeval ages, we find, among others, Cornelius
Agrippa telling us precisely the same: "The ever-changing universal
force, the 'soul of the world,' can fecundate anything by infusing in it
its own celestial properties. Arranged according to the formula taught
*by science,* these objects receive the gift of communicating to us
their virtue. It is sufficient to wear them, to feel them immediately
operating on the soul as on the body. . . . Human soul possesses, from
the fact of its being of the same essence as all creation, a *marvellous
power.* One who possesses the secret is enabled to rise in science and
knowledge as high as his imagination will carry him; but he does that
only on the condition of becoming closely united to this universal force
. . . Truth, even the future, can be then made ever present to the eyes
of the soul; and this fact has been many times demonstrated by things
coming to pass as they were seen and described beforehand . . . time and
space vanish before the eagle eye of the immortal soul . . . her power
becomes boundless . . . she can shoot through space and envelop with her
presence a man, *no matter at what distance;* she can plunge and
penetrate him through, and make him hear the voice of the person she
belongs to, as if that person were in the room." <span
id="fr_417"></span>[\*\*](#fn_416)

If unwilling to seek for proof or receive information from mediaeval,
hermetic philosophy, we may go still further back into antiquity, and
select, out of the great body of philosophers of the pre-Christian ages,
one who can least be accused of superstition and credulity--Cicero.
Speaking of those whom he calls *gods,* and who are either human or
atmospheric spirits, "We know," says the old orator, "that of all living
beings man is the best formed, and, as the gods belong to this number,
they must have a human form. . . . I do not mean to say that the gods
have body and blood in them; but I say that they *seem* as if they had
bodies with blood in them. . . . Epicurus, for whom hidden things were
as tangible as if he had touched them with his finger, teaches us that
gods are not generally visible, but that they are *intelligible;* that
they are not bodies having a certain solidity . . . but that we can
recognize them by their *passing* images; that as there are *atoms*
enough in the infinite space *to produce such images,* these are
produced before us . . . and make us realize what are these happy,
immortal beings." <span id="fr_418"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_417)

"When the initiate," says Levi, in his turn, "has become quite *lucide*,

###### <span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

he communicates and directs at will the *magnetic* vibrations in the
mass of astral light. . . . Transformed in human light at the moment of
the conception, *it* (the light) becomes the *first envelope of the
soul;* by combination with the subtlest fluids it forms an ethereal
body, or the *sidereal phantom,* which is entirely disengaged *only* at
the moment of death." <span id="fr_419"></span>[\*](#fn_418) To project
this ethereal body, at no matter what distance; to render it more
objective and tangible by condensing over its fluidic form the waves of
the parent essence, is the great secret of the adept

-magician.

Theurgical magic is the last expression of occult psychological science.
The Academicians reject it as the hallucination of diseased brains, or
brand it with the opprobrium of charlatanry. We deny to them most
emphatically the right of expressing their opinion on a subject which
they have never investigated. They have no more right, in their present
state of knowledge, to judge of magic and Spiritualism than a Fiji
islander to venture his opinion about the labors of Faraday or Agassiz.
About all they can do on any one day is to correct the errors of the
preceding day. Nearly three thousand years ago, earlier than the days of
Pythagoras, the ancient philosophers claimed that light was
ponderable--hence *matter,* and that light was force. The corpuscular
theory, owing to certain Newtonian failures to account for it, was
laughed down, and the undulatory theory, which proclaimed light
*imponderable,* accepted. And now the world is startled by Mr.Crookes
*weighing* light with his radiometer! The Pythagoreans held that neither
the sun nor the stars were the *sources* of light and heat, and that the
former was but an agent; but the modern schools teach the contrary.

The same may be said respecting the Newtonian law of gravitation.
Following strictly the Pythagorean doctrine, Plato held that gravitation
was not merely a law of the magnetic attraction of lesser bodies to
larger ones, but a magnetic repulsion of similars and attraction of
dissimilars. "Things brought together," says he, "contrary to nature,
are naturally at war, and repel one another." <span
id="fr_420"></span>[\*\*](#fn_419) This cannot be taken to mean that
repulsion occurs of necessity between bodies of dissimilar properties,
but simply that when naturally antagonistic bodies are brought together
they repel one another. The researches of Bart and Schweigger leave us
in little or no doubt that the ancients were well acquainted with the
mutual attractions of iron and the lodestone, as well as with the
positive and negative properties of electricity, by whatever name they
may have called

###### <span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

it. The reciprocal magnetic relations of the planetary orbs, which are
all magnets, was with them an accepted fact, and aerolites were not only
called by them magnetic stones, but used in the Mysteries for purposes
to which we now apply the magnet. When, therefore, Professor A. M.
Mayer, of the Stevens Institute of Technology, in 1872, told the Yale
Scientific Club that the earth is a great magnet, and that "on any
sudden agitation of the sun's surface the magnetism of the earth
receives a profound disturbance in its equilibrium, causing fitful
tremors in the magnets of our observatories, and producing those grand
outbursts of the polar lights, whose lambent flames dance in rhythm to
the quivering needle," <span id="fr_421"></span>[\*](#fn_420) he only
restated, in good English, what was taught in good Doric untold
centuries before the first Christian philosopher saw the light.

The prodigies accomplished by the priests of theurgical magic are so
well authenticated, and the evidence--if human testimony is worth
anything at all--is so overwhelming, that, rather than confess that the
Pagan theurgists far outrivalled the Christians in miracles, Sir David
Brewster piously concedes to the former the greatest proficiency in
physics, and everything that pertains to natural philosophy. Science
finds herself in a very disagreeable dilemma. She must either confess
that the ancient physicists were superior in knowledge to her modern
representatives, or that there exists something in nature beyond
physical science, and that *spirit* possesses powers of which our
philosophers never dreamed.

"The mistake we make in some science we have specially cultivated," says
Bulwer-Lytton, "is often only to be seen by the light of a separate
science as especially cultivated by another." <span
id="fr_422"></span>[\*\*](#fn_421)

Nothing can be easier accounted for than the highest possibilities of
magic. By the radiant light of the universal magnetic ocean, whose
electric waves bind the cosmos together, and in their ceaseless motion
penetrate every atom and molecule of the boundless creation, the
disciples of mesmerism--howbeit insufficient their various
experiments--intuitionally perceive the alpha and omega of the great
mystery. Alone, the study of this agent, which is the divine breath, can
unlock the secrets of psychology and physiology, of cosmical and
spiritual phenomena.

"Magic," says Psellus, "formed the last part of the sacerdotal science.
It investigated the nature, power, and quality of everything sublunary;
of the elements and their parts, of animals, all various plants and
their fruits, of stones and herbs. In short, it explored the essence and
power of everything. From hence, therefore, it produced its effects.

###### <span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

And it formed *statues* (magnetized) which procure health, and made all
various figures and things (talismans) which could equally become the
instruments of disease as well as of health. Often, too, celestial fire
is made to appear through magic, and then statues laugh and lamps are
spontaneously enkindled." <span id="fr_423"></span>[\*](#fn_422)

If Galvani's modern discovery can set in motion the limbs of a dead
frog, and force a dead man's face to express, by the distortion of its
features, the most varied emotions, from joy to diabolical rage,
despair, and horror, the Pagan priests, unless the combined evidence of
the most trustworthy men of antiquity is not to be relied upon,
accomplished the still greater wonders of making their stone and metal
statues to sweat and laugh. The *celestial,* pure fire of the Pagan
altar was electricity drawn from the astral light. Statues, therefore,
if properly prepared, might, without any accusation of superstition, be
allowed to have the property of imparting health and disease by contact,
as well as any modern galvanic belt, or overcharged battery.

Scholastic skeptics, as well as ignorant materialists, have greatly
amused themselves for the last two centuries over the *absurdities*
attributed to Pythagoras by his biographer, Iamblichus. The Samian
philosopher is said to have persuaded a she-bear to give up eating human
flesh; to have forced a white eagle to descend to him from the clouds,
and to have subdued him by stroking him gently with the hand, and by
talking to him. On another occasion, Pythagoras actually persuaded an ox
to renounce eating beans, by merely whispering in the animal's
ear! <span id="fr_424"></span>[\*\*](#fn_423) Oh, ignorance and
superstition of our forefathers, how ridiculous they appear in the eyes
of our enlightened generations! Let us, however, analyze this absurdity.
Every day we see unlettered men, proprietors of strolling menageries,
taming and completely subduing the most ferocious animals, merely by the
power of their irresistible will. Nay, we have at the present moment in
Europe several young and physically-weak girls, under twenty years of
age, fearlessly doing the same thing. Every one has either witnessed or
heard of the seemingly magical power of some mesmerizers and
psychologists. They are able to subjugate their patients for any length
of time. Regazzoni, the mesmerist who excited such wonder in France and
London, has achieved far more extraordinary feats than what is above
attributed to Pythagoras. Why, then, accuse the ancient biographers of
such men as Pythagoras and Apollonius of Tyana of either wilful
misrepresentation or absurd superstition? When we realize that

###### <span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

the majority of those who are so skeptical as to the magical powers
possessed by the ancient philosophers, who laugh at the old theogonies
and the fallacies of mythology, nevertheless have an implicit faith in
the records and inspiration of their Bible, hardly daring to doubt even
that monstrous absurdity that Joshua arrested the course of the sun, we
may well say *Amen* to Godfrey Higgins' just rebuke: "When I find," he
says, "learned men believing *Genesis literally,* which the ancients,
with all their failings, had too much sense to receive except
allegorically, I am tempted to doubt the reality of the improvement of
the human mind." <span id="fr_425"></span>[\*](#fn_424)

One of the very few commentators on old Greek and Latin authors, who
have given their just dues to the ancients for their mental development,
is Thomas Taylor. In his translation of Iamblichus' *Life of
Pythagoras,* we find him remarking as follows: "Since Pythagoras, as
Iamblichus informs us, was initiated in all the Mysteries of Byblus and
Tyre, in the sacred operations of the Syrians, and in the Mysteries of
the Phoenicians, and also that he spent two and twenty years in the
adyta of temples in Egypt, associated with the magians in Babylon, and
was instructed by them in their venerable knowledge, it is not at all
wonderful that he was skilled in magic, or theurgy, and was therefore
able to perform things which surpass merely human power, and which
appear to be perfectly incredible to the vulgar." <span
id="fr_426"></span>[\*\*](#fn_425)

The universal ether was not, in their eyes, simply a something
stretching, tenantless, throughout the expanse of heaven; it was a
boundless ocean peopled like our familiar seas with monstrous and minor
creatures, and having in its every molecule the germs of life. Like the
finny tribes which swarm in our oceans and smaller bodies of water, each
kind having its *habitat* in some spot to which it is curiously adapted,
some friendly and some inimical to man, some pleasant and some frightful
to behold, some seeking the refuge of quiet nooks and land-locked
harbors, and some traversing great areas of water, the various races of
the *elemental* spirits were believed by them to inhabit the different
portions of the great ethereal ocean, and to be exactly adapted to their
respective conditions. If we will only bear in mind the fact that the
rushing of planets through space must create as absolute a disturbance
in this plastic and attenuated medium, as the passage of a cannon shot
does in the air or that of a steamer in the water, and on a cosmic
scale, we can understand that certain planetary aspects, admitting our
premises to be true, may produce much more violent agitation and cause
much stronger currents to flow in a given direction, than others. With
the same premises conceded, we may also see why, by such various aspects
of the stars, shoals of

###### <span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

friendly or hostile "elementals" might be poured in upon our atmosphere,
or some particular portion of it, and make the fact appreciable by the
effects which ensue.

According to the ancient doctrines, the soulless elemental spirits were
evolved by the ceaseless motion inherent in the astral light. Light is
force, and the latter is produced by the *will*. As this will proceeds
from an intelligence which cannot err, for it has nothing of the
material organs of *human* thought in it, being the superfine pure
emanation of the highest divinity itself--(Plato's "Father") it proceeds
from the beginning of time, according to immutable laws, to evolve the
elementary fabric requisite for subsequent generations of what we term
human races. All of the latter, whether belonging to this planet or to
some other of the myriads in space, have their earthly bodies evolved in
the matrix out of the bodies of a certain class of these elemental
beings which have passed away in the invisible worlds. In the ancient
philosophy there was no missing link to be supplied by what Tyndall
calls an "educated imagination"; no hiatus to be filled with volumes of
materialistic speculations made necessary by the absurd attempt to solve
an equation with but one set of quantities; our "ignorant" ancestors
traced the law of evolution throughout the whole universe. As by gradual
progression from the star-cloudlet to the development of the physical
body of man, the rule holds good, so from the universal ether to the
incarnate human spirit, they traced one uninterrupted series of
entities. These evolutions were from the world of spirit into the world
of gross matter; and through that back again to the source of all
things. The "descent of species" was to them a descent from the spirit,
primal source of all, to the "degradation of matter." In this complete
chain of unfoldings the elementary, spiritual beings had as distinct a
place, midway between the extremes, as Mr. Darwin's missing-link between
the ape and man.

No author in the world of literature ever gave a more truthful or more
poetical description of these beings than Sir E. Bulwer-Lytton, the
author of *Zanoni.* Now, himself "a thing not of matter" but an "Idea of
joy and light," his words sound more like the faithful echo of memory
than the exuberant outflow of mere imagination.

"Man is arrogant in proportion of his ignorance," he makes the wise
Mejnour say to Glyndon. "For several ages he saw in the countless worlds
that sparkle through space like the bubbles of a shoreless ocean, only
the petty candles . . . that Providence has been pleased to light for no
other purpose but to make the night more agreeable to man. . . .
Astronomy has corrected this delusion of human vanity, and man now
reluctantly confesses that the stars are worlds, larger and more
glorious than his own. . . . Everywhere, then, in this immense design,
science

###### <span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

brings new life to light. . . . Reasoning, then, by evident analogy, if
not a leaf, if not a drop of water, but is, no less than yonder star, a
habitable and breathing world--nay, if even man himself, is a world to
other lives, and millions and myriads dwell in the rivers of his blood,
and inhabit man's frame, as man inhabits earth--common sense (if our
schoolmen had it) would suffice to teach that the circumfluent infinite
which you call space--the boundless impalpable which divides earth from
the moon and stars--is filled also with its correspondent and
appropriate life. Is it not a visible absurdity to suppose that being is
crowded upon every leaf, and yet absent from the immensities of space!
The law of the great system forbids the waste even of an atom; it knows
no spot where something of life does not breathe. . . . Well, then, can
you conceive that space, which is the infinite itself, is alone a waste,
is alone lifeless, is less useful to the one design of universal being .
. . than the peopled leaf, than the swarming globule? The microscope
shows you the creatures on the leaf; *no mechanical tube is yet invented
to discover the nobler and more gifted things that hover in the
illimitable air.* Yet between these last and man is a mysterious *and
terrible affinity*. . . . But first, to penetrate this barrier, the soul
with which you listen must be sharpened by intense enthusiasm, purified
from all earthly desires. . . . When thus prepared, science can be
brought to aid it; the sight itself may be rendered more subtile, the
nerves more acute, the spirit more alive and outward, and the element
itself--the air, the space--may be made, by certain secrets of the
higher chemistry, more palpable and clear. And this, too, is not *magic*
as the credulous call it; as I have so often said before, magic (a
science that violates nature) exists not; it is *but the science by
which nature can be controlled.* Now, in space there are millions of
beings, *not literally spiritual,* for they have all, like the
animalcula unseen by the naked eye, certain forms of matter, though
matter so delicate, air-drawn, and subtile, that it is, as it were, but
a film, a gossamer, that clothes the spirit. . . . Yet, in truth, these
races differ most widely . . . some of surpassing wisdom, some of
horrible malignity; some hostile as fiends to men, others gentle as
messengers between earth and heaven. . . . Amid the dwellers of the
threshold is one, too, surpassing in malignity and hatred all her tribe;
one whose eyes have paralyzed the bravest, and whose power increases
over the spirit precisely in proportion to its fear." <span
id="fr_427"></span>[\*](#fn_426)

Such is the insufficient sketch of elemental beings void of divine
spirit, given by one whom many with reason believed to know more than he
was prepared to admit in the face of an incredulous public.

###### <span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

In the following chapter we will contrive to explain some of the
esoteric speculations of the initiates of the sanctuary, as to what man
was, is, and may yet be. The doctrines they taught in the Mysteries--the
source from which sprang the Old and partially the New Testament,
belonged to the most advanced notions of morality, and religious
*revelations.* While the literal meaning was abandoned to the fanaticism
of the unreasoning lower classes of society, the higher ones, the
majority of which consisted of *Initiates,* pursued their studies in the
solemn silence of the temples, and their worship of the *one* God of
Heaven.

The speculations of Plato, in the *Banquet,* on the creation of the
primordial men, and the essay on Cosmogony in the *Timaeus,* must be
taken allegorically, if we accept them at all. It is this hidden
Pythagorean meaning in *Timaeus, Cratylus,* and *Parmenides,* and a few
other trilogies and dialogues, that the Neo-platonists ventured to
expound, as far as the theurgical vow of secrecy would allow them. The
Pythagorean doctrine that *God is the universal mind diffused through
all things,* and the dogma of the soul's immortality, are the leading
features in these apparently incongruous teachings. His piety and the
great veneration Plato felt for the **M**YSTERIES, are sufficient
warrant that he would not allow his indiscretion to get the better of
that deep sense of responsibility which is felt by every adept.
"Constantly perfecting himself in perfect **M**YSTERIES, a man in them
alone becomes truly perfect," says he in the *Phaedrus*. <span
id="fr_428"></span>[\*](#fn_427)

He took no pains to conceal his displeasure that the Mysteries had
become less secret than formerly. Instead of profaning them by putting
them within the reach of the multitude, he would have guarded them with
jealous care against all but the most earnest and worthy of his
disciples. <span id="fr_429"></span>[\*\*](#fn_428) While mentioning the
gods, on every page, his monotheism is unquestionable, for the whole
thread of his discourse indicates that by the term *gods* he means a
class of beings far lower in the scale than deities, and but one grade
higher than men. Even Josephus perceived and acknowledged this fact,
despite the natural prejudice of his race. In his famous onslaught upon
Apion, this historian says: <span id="fr_430"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_429)
"Those, however, among the Greeks who philosophized *in accordance with
truth,* were not ignorant of anything . . . nor did they fail to
perceive the chilling

###### <span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

superficialities of the mythical allegories, on which account they
justly despised them. . . . By which thing Plato, being moved, says it
is not necessary to admit any one of the other poets into 'the
Commonwealth,' and *he dismisses Homer* blandly, after having crowned
him and pouring unguent upon him, in order that indeed he should not
destroy, by *his myths*, the *orthodox belief respecting one God.*"

Those who can discern the true spirit of Plato's philosophy, will hardly
be satisfied with the estimate of the same which Jowett lays before his
readers. He tells us that the influence exercised upon posterity by the
*Timaeus* is partly due to a misunderstanding of the doctrine of its
author by the Neo-platonists. He would have us believe that the hidden
meanings which they found in this *Dialogue,* are "quite at variance
with the spirit of Plato." This is equivalent to the assumption that
Jowett understands what this spirit really was; whereas his criticism
upon this particular topic rather indicates that he did not penetrate it
at all. If, as he tells us, the Christians seem to find in his work
their trinity, the word, the church, and the creation of the world, in a
Jewish sense, it is because all this *is* there, and therefore it is but
natural that they should have found it. The outward building is the
same; but the spirit which animated the dead letter of the philosopher's
teaching has fled, and we would seek for it in vain through the arid
dogmas of Christian theology. The Sphinx is the same now, as it was four
centuries before the Christian era; but the OEdipus is no more. He is
slain because he has given to the world that which the world was not
ripe enough to receive. He was the embodiment of truth, and he had to
die, as every grand truth has to, before, like the Phoenix of old, it
revives from its own ashes. Every translator of Plato's works remarked
the strange similarity between the philosophy of the esoterists and the
Christian doctrines, and each of them has tried to interpret it in
accordance with his own religious feelings. So Cory, in his *Ancient
Fragments,* tries to prove that it is but an outward resemblance; and
does his best to lower the Pythagorean Monad in the public estimation
and exalt upon its ruins the later anthropomorphic deity. Taylor,
advocating the former, acts as unceremoniously with the Mosaic God.
Zeller boldly laughs at the pretensions of the Fathers of the Church,
who, notwithstanding history and its chronology, and whether people will
have it or not, insist that Plato and his school have robbed
Christianity of its leading features. It is as fortunate for us as it is
unfortunate for the Roman Church that such clever sleight-of-hand as
that resorted to by Eusebius is rather difficult in our century. It was
easier to pervert chronology "for the sake of making synchronisms," in
the days of the Bishop of Caesarea, than it is now, and while history
exists, no one can help people knowing that Plato lived 600 years before

###### <span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

Irenaeus took it into his head to establish a *new* doctrine from the
ruins of Plato's older Academy.

This doctrine of God being the universal mind diffused through all
things, underlies all ancient philosophies. The Buddhistic tenets which
can never be better comprehended than when studying the Pythagorean
philosophy--its faithful reflection--are derived from this source as
well as the Brahmanical religion and early Christianity. The purifying
process of transmigrations--the metempsychoses--however grossly
anthropomorphized at a later period, must only be regarded as a
supplementary doctrine, disfigured by theological sophistry with the
object of getting a firmer hold upon believers through a popular
superstition. Neither Gautama Buddha nor Pythagoras intended to teach
this purely-metaphysical allegory *literally.* Esoterically, it is
explained in the "Mystery" of the *Kounboum*, <span
id="fr_431"></span>[\*](#fn_430) and relates to the purely spiritual
peregrinations of the human soul. It is not in the dead letter of
Buddhistical sacred literature that scholars may hope to find the true
solution of its metaphysical subtilties. The latter weary the power of
thought by the inconceivable profundity of its ratiocination; and the
student is never farther from truth than when he believes himself
nearest its discovery. The mastery of every doctrine of the perplexing
Buddhist system can be attained only by proceeding strictly according to
the Pythagorean and Platonic method; from universals down to
particulars. The key to it lies in the refined and mystical tenets of
the spiritual influx of divine life. "Whoever is unacquainted with my
law," says Buddha, "and dies in that state, must return to the earth
till he becomes a perfect Samanean. To achieve this object, he must
destroy within himself the trinity of *Maya*. <span
id="fr_432"></span>[\*\*](#fn_431) He must extinguish his passions,
unite and identify himself with *the law* (the teaching of the secret
doctrine), and comprehend the religion of *annihilation.*"

Here, annihilation refers but to *matter,* that of the visible as well
as of the invisible body; for the astral soul (*perisprit*) is still
matter, however sublimated. The same book says that what Fo (Buddha)
meant to say was, that "the primitive substance is eternal and
unchangeable. Its highest revelation is the pure, luminous ether, the
boundless infinite space, not a void resulting from the absence of
forms, but, on the contrary, *the foundation of all forms,* and anterior
to them. But the very presence of *forms* denotes it to be the creation
of *Maya,* and all her works are as nothing before the *uncreated*
being, SPIRIT, in whose profound and sacred repose all motion must cease
forever."

###### <span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

Thus *annihilation* means, with the Buddhistical philosophy, only a
dispersion of matter, in whatever form or *semblance* of form it may be;
for everything that bears a shape was created, and thus must sooner or
later perish, *i.e*., change that shape; therefore, as something
temporary, though seeming to be permanent, it is but an illusion,
*Maya;* for, as eternity has neither beginning nor end, the more or less
prolonged duration of some particular form passes, as it were, like an
instantaneous flash of lightning. Before we have the time to realize
that we have seen it, it is gone and passed away for ever; hence, even
our astral bodies, pure ether, are but illusions of matter, so long as
they retain their terrestrial outline. The latter changes, says the
Buddhist, according to the merits or demerits of the person during his
lifetime, and this is metempsychosis. When the spiritual *entity* breaks
loose for ever from every particle of matter, then only it enters upon
the eternal and unchangeable Nirvana. He exists in spirit, in *nothing;*
as a form, a shape, a semblance, he is completely *annihilated,* and
thus will die no more, for spirit alone is no *Maya,* but the only
REALITY in an illusionary universe of ever-passing forms.

It is upon this Buddhist doctrine that the Pythagoreans grounded the
principal tenets of their philosophy. "Can that spirit, which gives life
and motion, and partakes of the nature of light, be reduced to
non-entity?" they ask. "Can that sensitive spirit in brutes which
exercises memory, one of the rational faculties, die, and become
nothing?" And Whitelock Bulstrode, in his able defence of Pythagoras,
expounds this doctrine by adding: "If you say, they (the brutes) breathe
their spirits into the air, and there vanish, that is all I contend for.
The air, indeed, is the proper place to receive them, being, according
to Laertius, full of souls; and, according to Epicurus, full of atoms,
the principles of all things; for even this place wherein we walk and
birds fly has so much of a spiritual nature, that it is invisible, and,
therefore, may well be the receiver of forms, since the forms of all
bodies are so; we can only see and hear its effects; the air itself is
too fine, and above the capacity of the age. What then is the ether in
the region above, and what are the influences or forms that descend from
thence?" The *spirits* of creatures, the Pythagoreans hold, who are
emanations of the most sublimated portions of ether, emanations,
BREATHS, *but not forms.* Ether is incorruptible, all philosophers agree
in that; and what is incorruptible *is so far from being annihilated*
when it gets rid of the *form,* that it lays a good claim to
IMMORTALITY. "But what is that which has no body, no *form*; which is
imponderable, invisible and indivisible; that which exists and yet *is
not?*" ask the Buddhists. "It is Nirvana," is the answer. It is NOTHING,
not a region, but rather a state. When once Nirvana is

###### <span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

reached, man is exempt from the effects of the "four truths"; for an
effect can only be produced through a certain cause, and every cause is
*annihilated* in this state.

These "four truths" are the foundation of the whole Buddhist doctrine of
Nirvana. They are, says the book of *Pradjna Paramita*, <span
id="fr_433"></span>[\*](#fn_432) 1. The existence of pain. 2. The
production of pain. 3. The annihilation of pain. 4. The way to the
annihilation of pain. What is the source of pain?--Existence. Birth
existing, decrepitude and death ensue; for wherever there is a form,
there is a *cause* for pain and suffering. *Spirit* alone has no form,
and therefore *cannot be said to exist.* Whenever man (the ethereal,
inner man) reaches that point when he becomes utterly spiritual, hence,
formless, he has reached a state of perfect bliss. **M**AN as an
objective being becomes annihilated, but the spiritual entity with its
subjective life, will live for ever, for spirit is incorruptible and
immortal.

It is by the spirit of the teachings of both Buddha and Pythagoras, that
we can so easily recognize the identity of their doctrines. The
all-pervading, universal soul, the *Anima Mundi,* is Nirvana; and
Buddha, as a generic name, is the anthropomorphized *monad* of
Pythagoras. When resting in Nirvana, the final bliss, Buddha is the
silent monad, dwelling in darkness and silence; he is also the formless
Brahm, the sublime but *unknowable* Deity, which pervades invisibly the
whole universe. Whenever it is manifested, desiring to impress itself
upon humanity in a shape intelligent to our intellect, whether we call
it an *avatar*, or a King Messiah, or a *permutation* of Divine Spirit,
*Logos,* Christos, it is all one and the same thing. In each case it is
"the Father," who is in the *Son,* and the Son in "the Father." The
immortal spirit overshadows the mortal man. It enters into him, and
pervading his whole being, makes of him a god, who descends into his
earthly tabernacle. Every man may become a Buddha, says the doctrine.
And so throughout the interminable series of ages we find now and then
men who more or less succeed in *uniting* themselves "with God," as the
expression goes, with their *own spirit,* as we ought to translate. The
Buddhists call such men *Arhat.* An Arhat is next to a Buddha, and none
is equal to him either in *infused* science, or *miraculous* powers.
Certain fakirs demonstrate the theory well in practice, as Jacolliot has
proved.

Even the so-called *fabulous* narratives of certain Buddhistical books,
when stripped of their allegorical meaning, are found to be the secret
doctrines taught by Pythagoras. In the Pali Books called the *Jutakas,*
are given the 550 incarnations or metempsychoses of Buddha. They

###### <span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

narrate how he has appeared in every form of animal life, and animated
every sentient being on earth, from infinitesimal insect to the bird,
the beast, and finally man, the microcosmic image of God on earth. Must
this be taken *literally;* is it intended as a description of the
*actual* transformations and existence of one and the same individual
immortal, divine spirit, which by turns has animated every kind of
sentient being? Ought we not rather to understand, with Buddhist
metaphysicians, that though the individual human spirits are numberless,
collectively they are one, as every drop of water drawn out of the
ocean, metaphorically speaking, may have an individual existence and
still be one with the rest of the drops going to form that ocean; for
each human spirit is a scintilla of the one all-pervading light? That
this divine spirit animates the flower, the particle of granite on the
mountain side, the lion, the man? Egyptian Hierophants, like the
Brahmans, and the Buddhists of the East, and some Greek philosophers,
maintained originally that the same spirit that animates the particle of
dust, lurking latent in it, animates man, manifesting itself in him in
its highest state of activity. The doctrine, also, of a gradual refusion
of the human *soul* into the essence of the primeval parent spirit, was
universal at one time. But this doctrine never implied annihilation of
the higher spiritual *ego--*only the dispersion of the *external forms*
of man, after his terrestrial death, as well as during his abode on
earth. Who is better fitted to impart to us the mysteries of
after-death, so erroneously thought impenetrable, than those men who
having, through self-discipline and purity of life and purpose,
succeeded in uniting themselves with their "God," were afforded *some*
glimpses, however imperfect, of the great truth. <span
id="fr_434"></span>[\*](#fn_433) And these seers tell us strange stories
about the *variety* of forms assumed by disembodied astral souls; forms
of which each one is a spiritual though concrete reflection of the
abstract state of the mind, and thoughts of the once living man.

To accuse Buddhistical philosophy of rejecting a Supreme Being--God, and
the soul's immortality, of atheism, in short, on the ground that
according to their doctrines, Nirvana means *annihilation,* and
*Svabhavat is* NOT *a person, but nothing,* is simply absurd. The En (or
Ayin) of the Jewish En-Soph, also means *nihil* or *nothing,* that which
is not (*quo ad nos*); but no one has ever ventured to twit the Jews
with atheism. In both cases the real meaning of the term *nothing*
carries with it the idea that God is *not a thing,* not a concrete or
visible Being to which a name expressive of *any* object known to us on
earth may be applied with propriety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_370"></span>[253:\*](iu007.htm#fr_371) We need not go so
far back as that to assure ourselves that many great men believed the
same. Kepler, the eminent astronomer, fully credited the idea that the
stars and all heavenly bodies, even our earth, are endowed with living
and thinking souls.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[254:\*](iu007.htm#fr_372) We are not aware
that a copy of this ancient work is embraced in the catalogue of any
European library; but it is one of the "Books of Hermes," and it is
referred to and quotations are made from it in the works of a number of
ancient and mediaeval philosophical authors. Among these authorities are
Arnoldo di Villanova's "Rosarium philosoph."; Francesco Arnolphim's
"Lucensis opus de Iapide." Hermes Trismegistus' "Tractatus de
transmutatione metallorum," "Tabula smaragdina," and above all in the
treatise of Raymond Lulli, "Ab angelis opus divinum de quinta essentia."

<span id="fn_372"></span>[254:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_373) Quicksilver.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[255:\*](iu007.htm#fr_374) "Hermes," iv. 6.
Spirit here denotes the Deity--Pneuma, ὁ Τηεος.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[256:\*](iu007.htm#fr_375)"Magia Adamica," p.
11.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[256:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_376) *The ignorance of
the ancients of the earth's sphericity is assumed without warrant*. What
proof have we of the fact? It was only the literati who exhibited such
an ignorance. Even so early as the time of Pythagoras, the Pagans taught
it, Plutarch testifies to it, and Socrates died for it. Besides, as we
have stated repeatedly, all knowledge was concentrated in the
sanctuaries of the temples from whence it very rarely spread itself
among the uninitiated. If the sages and priests of the remotest
antiquity were not aware of this astronomical truth, how is it that they
represented Kneph, the spirit of the *first hour,* with an egg placed on
his lips, the egg signifying our globe, to which he imparts life by his
breath. Moreover, if, owing to the difficulty of consulting the Chaldean
"Book of Numbers," our critics should demand the citation of other
authorities, we can refer them to Diogenes Laertius, who credits Manetho
with having taught that the earth was in the shape of a ball. Besides,
the same author, quoting most probably from the "Compendium of Natural
Philosophy," gives the following statements of the Egyptian doctrine:
"The beginning is matter αρχεν μευ ειναι τεν ὑλεν, and from it the four
elements separated. . . . The true form of God is unknown; but the world
had a beginning and is therefore perishable. . . . The moon is eclipsed
when it crosses the shadow of the earth" (Diogenes Laertius: "Prooein,"
§§ 10, 11). Besides, Pythagoras is credited with having taught that the
earth was round, that it rotated, and was but a planet like any other of
these celestial bodies. (See Fenelon's "Lives of the Philosophers.") In
the latest of Plato's translations ("The Dialogues of Plato," by
Professor Jowett), the author, in his introduction to "Timaeus,"
notwithstanding "an unfortunate doubt" which arises in consequence of
the word ιλλεσθαι capable of being translated either "circling" or
"compacted," feels inclined to credit Plato with having been familiar
with the rotation of the earth. Plato's doctrine is expressed in the
following words: "The earth which is our nurse (compacted or) *circling*
around the pole which is extended through the universe." But if we are
to believe Proclus and Simplicius, Aristotle understood this word in
"Timaeus" "to mean circling or revolving" (De Coelo), and Mr. Jowett
himself further admits that "Aristotle attributed to Plato the doctrine
of the rotation of the earth." (See vol. ii. of "Dial. of Plato."
Introduction to "Timaeus," pp. 501-2.) It would have been extraordinary,
to say the least, that Plato, who was such an admirer of Pythagoras and
who certainly must have had, as an initiate, access to the most secret
doctrines of the great Samian, should be ignorant of such an elementary
astronomical truth.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[256:\*\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_377) "Wisdom of
Solomon," xi. 17.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[257:\*](iu007.htm#fr_378) Eugenius
Philalethes: "Magia Adamica."

<span id="fn_378"></span>[258:\*](iu007.htm#fr_379) Hargrave Jennings:
"The Rosicrucians."

<span id="fn_379"></span>[258:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_380) "Timaeus."

<span id="fn_380"></span>[259:\*](iu007.htm#fr_381) "Our Place among
Infinities," p. 313.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[259:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_382) Ibid.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[259:\*\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_383) Ibid., p. 314.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[260:\*](iu007.htm#fr_384) The library of a
relative of the writer contains a copy of a French edition of this
unique work. The prophecies are given in the old French language, and
are very difficult for the student of modern French to decipher. We
give, therefore, an English version, which is said to be taken from a
book in the possession of a gentleman in Somersetshire, England.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[261:\*](iu007.htm#fr_385) See Rawlinson, vol.
xvii., pp. 30-32, Revised edition.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[261:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_386) Jowett:
Introduction to "Timaeus," "Dial. of Plato," vol. i., p. 509.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[263:\*](iu007.htm#fr_387) N. B.--He lived in
the first century B. C.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[263:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_388) Stobaeus:
"Eclogues."

<span id="fn_388"></span>[265:\*](iu007.htm#fr_389) Kieser: "Archiv.,"
vol. iv., p. 62. In fact, many of the old symbols were mere puns on
names.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[265:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_390) See "Rig-Vedas,"
the Aitareya-Brahmanan.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[265:\*\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_391) Brahma is also
called by the Hindu Brahmans Hiranyagarbha or the *unit* soul, while
*Amrita* is the supreme soul, the first cause which emanated from itself
the creative Brahma.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[265:\*\*\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_392) Marbod: "Liber
lapid. ed Beekmann."

<span id="fn_392"></span>[267:\*](iu007.htm#fr_393) "The Sun and the
Earth," Lecture by Prof. Balfour Stewart.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[268:\*](iu007.htm#fr_394) "La Loi Naturelle,"
par Volney.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[269:\*](iu007.htm#fr_395) "Diction.
Philosophique," Art. "Philosophie."

<span id="fn_395"></span>[269:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_396) "Boston Lecture,"
December, 1875.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[270:\*](iu007.htm#fr_397) Weber: "Ind. Stud.,"
i. 290.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[270:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_398) Wilson: "Rig-Veda
Sanhita," ii. 143.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[270:\*\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_399) "Duncker," vol.
ii., p. 162.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[270:\*\*\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_400) "Wultke," ii.
262.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[270:\*\*\*\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_401) Daniel vii.
9, 10.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[270:\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_402) Book of
Enoch, xiv. 7, ff.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[271:\*](iu007.htm#fr_403) This proposition,
which will be branded as *preposterous,* but which we are ready to show,
on the authority of Plato (see Jowett's Introd. to "the Timaeus"; last
page), as a Pythagorean doctrine, together with that other of the sun
being but the lens through which the light passes, is strangely
corroborated at the present day, by the observations of General
Pleasonton of Philadelphia. This experimentalist boldly comes out as a
revolutionist of modern science, and calls Newton's centripetal and
centrifugal forces, and the law of gravitation, "fallacies." He
fearlessly maintains his ground against the Tyndalls and Huxleys of the
day. We are glad to find such a learned defender of one of the oldest
(and hitherto treated as the *most absurd*) of hermetic *hallucinations*
(?) (See General Pleasonton's book, "The Influence of the Blue Ray of
the Sunlight, and of the Blue Color of the Sky, in developing Animal and
Vegetable Life," addressed to the Philadelphia Society for Promoting
Agriculture.)

<span id="fn_403"></span>[271:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_404) In no country were
the true esoteric doctrines trusted to writing. The Hindu Brahma Maia,
was passed from one generation to another by *oral* tradition. The
Kabala was never written; and Moses intrusted it orally but to his
elect. The primitive pure Oriental gnosticism was completely corrupted
and degraded by the different subsequent sects. Philo, in the "de
Sacrificiis Abeli et Caini," states that there is a mystery *not to be
revealed* to the uninitiated. Plato is silent on many things, and his
disciples refer to this fact constantly. Any one who has studied, even
superficially, these philosophers, on reading the institutes of Manu,
will clearly perceive that they all drew from the same source. "This
universe," says Manu, "existed only *in the first divine idea, yet
unexpanded, as if involved in darkness,* imperceptible, indefinable,
undiscoverable by reason, and undiscovered *by revelation,* as if it
were wholly immersed in sleep; then the sole self-existing Power himself
undiscerned, appeared with undiminished glory, <span id="page_272">p.
272</span> *expanding his idea,* or dispelling *the gloom.*" Thus speaks
the first code of Buddhism. Plato's idea is the *Will,* or Logos, the
deity which manifests itself. It is the Eternal Light from which
proceeds, as an *emanation,* the visible and *material* light.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[273:\*](iu007.htm#fr_405) It appears that in
descending from Mont Blanc, Tyndall suffered severely from the heat,
though he was knee-deep in the snow at the time. The Professor
attributed this to the burning rays of the sun, but Pleasonton maintains
that if the rays of the sun had been so intense as described, they would
have melted the snow, which they did not; he concludes that the heat
from which the Professor suffered came from his own body, and was due to
the electrical action of sunlight upon his dark woolen clothes, which
had become electrified positively by the heat of his body. The cold, dry
ether of planetary space and the upper atmosphere of the earth became
negatively electrified, and falling upon his warm body and clothes,
positively electrified, evolved an increased heat (see "The Influence of
the Blue Ray," etc., pp. 39, 40, 41, etc.).

<span id="fn_405"></span>[274:\*](iu007.htm#fr_406) The most curious of
all "curious coincidences," to our mind is, that our men of science
should put aside facts, striking enough to cause them to use such an
expression when speaking of them, instead of setting to work to give us
a philosophical explanation of the same.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[274:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_407) See Charles Elam,
M. D.: "A Physician's Problems," London, 1869, p. 159.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[276:\*](iu007.htm#fr_408) Jowett: "Timaeus."

<span id="fn_408"></span>[277:\*](iu007.htm#fr_409) Ibid.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[277:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_410) According to
General Pleasonton's theory of positive and negative electricity
underlying every psychological, physiological, and cosmic phenomena, the
abuse of alcoholic stimulants transforms a man into a woman and *vice
versa,* by changing their *electricities.* "When this change in the
condition of his electricity has occurred," says the author, "his
attributes (those of a drunkard) become *feminine;* he is irritable,
irrational, excitable . . . becomes violent, and if he meets his wife,
whose normal condition of electricity is like his present condition,
positive, they repel each other, become mutually abusive, engage in
conflict and deadly strife, and the newspapers of the next day announce
the verdict of the coroner's jury on the case. . . . Who would expect to
find the discovery of the moving cause of all these terrible crimes in
the perspiration of the criminal? and yet science has shown that the
metamorphoses of *a man into a woman,* by changing the negative
condition of his electricity into the *positive* electricity of the
woman, with all its attributes, is disclosed by the character of his
perspiration, superinduced by the use of alcoholic stimulants" ("The
Influence of the Blue Ray," p. 119).

<span id="fn_410"></span>[277:\*\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_411) Plato:
"Timaeus."

<span id="fn_411"></span>[278:\*](iu007.htm#fr_412) Littre: "Revue des
Deux Mondes."

<span id="fn_412"></span>[278:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_413) See des
Mousseaux's "Œuvres des Demons."

<span id="fn_413"></span>[279:\*](iu007.htm#fr_414) Du Potet: "Magie
Devoilee," pp. 51-147.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[279:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_415) Ibid., p. 201.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[280:\*](iu007.htm#fr_416) Baron Du Potet:
"Cours de Magnetisme," pp. 17-108.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[280:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_417) "De Occulto
Philosophia," pp. 332-358.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[280:\*\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_418) Cicero: "De
Natura Deorum," lib. i., cap. xviii.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[281:\*](iu007.htm#fr_419) Eliphas Levi.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[281:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_420) "Timaeus." Such
like expressions made Professor Jowett state in his Introduction that
Plato taught the attraction of similar bodies to similar. But such an
assertion would amount to denying the great philosopher even a
rudimentary knowledge of the laws of magnetic poles.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[282:\*](iu007.htm#fr_421) Alfred Marshall
Mayer, Ph.D.: "The Earth a Great Magnet," a lecture delivered before the
Yale Scientific Club, Feb. 14, 1872.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[282:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_422) "Strange Story."

<span id="fn_422"></span>[283:\*](iu007.htm#fr_423) See Taylor's
"Pausanias"; MS. "Treatise on Daemons," by Psellus, and the "Treatise on
the Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries."

<span id="fn_423"></span>[283:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_424) Iamblichus: "De
Vita Pythag."

<span id="fn_424"></span>[284:\*](iu007.htm#fr_425) "Anacalypsis," vol.
i., p. 807.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[284:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_426) Iamblichus: "Life
of Pythagoras," p. 297.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[286:\*](iu007.htm#fr_427) Bulwer-Lytton:
"Zanoni."

<span id="fn_427"></span>[287:\*](iu007.htm#fr_428) Cory: "Phaedrus," i.
328.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[287:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_429) This assertion is
clearly corroborated by Plato himself, who says: "You say that, in my
former discourse, I have not sufficiently explained to you the nature of
the *First. I purposely spoke enigmatically,* that in case the tablet
should have happened with any accident, either by land or sea, a person,
*without some previous knowledge of the subject, might not be able to
understand its contents*" ("Plato," Ep. ii., p. 312; Cory: "Ancient
Fragments").

<span id="fn_429"></span>[287:\*\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_430) "Josephus
against Apion," ii., p. 1079.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[289:\*](iu007.htm#fr_431) See chapter ix., p.
302.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[289:\*\*](iu007.htm#fr_432) "Illusion; matter
in its triple manifestation in the earthly, and the astral or fontal
soul, or the body, and the Platonian dual soul, the rational and the
irrational one," see next chapter.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[291:\*](iu007.htm#fr_433) "Perfection of
Wisdom."

<span id="fn_433"></span>[292:\*](iu007.htm#fr_434) Porphyry gives the
credit to Plotinus his master, of having been united with "God" six
times during his life, and complains of having attained to it but twice,
himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](iu008)
