[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Theosophy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iu000)  [Next](iu002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

### CHAPTER II

> "Pride, where wit fails, steps in to our defence  
> And fills up all the mighty void of sense. . . . "--**P**OPE.

> "But why should the operations of nature be changed? There may be a
> deeper philosophy than we dream of--a philosophy that discovers the
> secrets of nature, *but does not alter, by penetrating them, its
> course*."--**B**ULWER.

IS it enough for man to know that he exists? Is it enough to be formed a
human being to enable him to deserve the appellation of MAN? It is our
decided impression and conviction, that to become a genuine spiritual
entity, which that designation implies, man must first *create* himself
anew, so to speak--*i.e*., thoroughly eliminate from his mind and
spirit, not only the dominating influence of selfishness and other
impurity, but also the infection of superstition and prejudice. The
latter is far different from what we commonly term *antipathy* or
*sympathy.* We are at first irresistibly or unwittingly drawn within its
dark circle by that peculiar influence, that powerful current of
magnetism which emanates from ideas as well as from physical bodies. By
this we are surrounded, and finally prevented through moral
cowardice--fear of public opinion--from stepping out of it. It is rare
that men regard a thing in either its true or false light, accepting the
conclusion by the free action of their own judgment. Quite the reverse.
The conclusion is more commonly reached by blindly adopting the opinion
current at the hour among those with whom they associate. A church
member will not pay an absurdly high price for his pew any more than a
materialist will go twice to listen to Mr. Huxley's talk on evolution,
because they think that it is right to do so; but merely because Mr. and
Mrs. So-and-so have done it, and these personages are THE **S**---- AND
**S**----'s.

The same holds good with everything else. If psychology had had its
Darwin, the descent of man as regards moral qualities might have been
found inseparably linked with that of his physical form. Society in its
servile condition suggests to the intelligent observer of its mimicry a
kinship between the Simia and human beings even more striking than is
exhibited in the external marks pointed out by the great anthropologist.

###### <span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

The many varieties of the ape--"mocking presentments of
ourselves"--appear to have been evolved on purpose to supply a certain
class of expensively-dressed persons with the material for genealogical
trees.

Science is daily and rapidly moving toward the great discoveries in
chemistry and physics, organology, and anthropology. Learned men ought
to be free from preconceptions and prejudices of every kind; yet,
although thought and opinion are now free, scientists are still the same
men as of old. An Utopian dreamer is he who thinks that man ever changes
with the evolution and development of new ideas. The soil may be well
fertilized and made to yield with every year a greater and better
variety of fruit; but, dig a little deeper than the stratum required for
the crop, and the same earth will be found in the subsoil as was there
before the first furrow was turned.

Not many years ago, the person who questioned the infallibility of some
theological dogma was branded at once an iconoclast and an infidel. *Vae
victis!* . . . Science has conquered. But in its turn the victor claims
the same infallibility, though it equally fails to prove its right.
"*Tempora mutantur et nos mutamur in illis,*" the saying of the good old
Lotharius, applies to the case. Nevertheless, we feel as if we had some
right to question the high-priests of science.

For many years we have watched the development and growth of that apple
of discord--MODERN SPIRITUALISM. Familiar with its literature both in
Europe and America, we have closely and eagerly witnessed its
interminable controversies and compared its contradictory hypotheses.
Many educated men and women--heterodox spiritualists, of course--have
tried to fathom the Protean phenomena. The only result was that they
came to the following conclusion: whatever may be the reason of these
constant failures--whether such are to be laid at the door of the
investigators themselves, or of the secret Force at work--it is at least
proved that, in proportion as the psychological manifestations increase
in frequency and variety, the darkness surrounding their origin becomes
more impenetrable.

That phenomena are actually witnessed, mysterious in their
nature--*generally and perhaps wrongly termed spiritual--it is now idle
to deny.* Allowing a large discount for clever fraud, what remains is
quite serious enough to demand the careful scrutiny of science. "*E pur
se muove*," the sentence spoken ages since, has passed into the category
of household words. The courage of Galileo is not now required to fling
it into the face of the Academy. Psychological phenomena are already on
the offensive.

The position assumed by modern scientists is that even though the
occurrence of certain mysterious phenomena in the presence of the

###### <span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

mediums be a fact, there is no proof that they are not due to some
abnormal nervous condition of those individuals. The possibility that
they may be produced by returning human spirits need not be considered
until the other question is decided. Little exception can be taken to
this position. Unquestionably, the burden of proof rests upon those who
assert the agency of spirits. If the scientists would grapple with the
subject in good faith, showing an earnest desire to solve the perplexing
mystery, instead of treating it with undignified and unprofessional
contempt, they would be open to no censure. True, the great majority of
"spiritual" communications are calculated to disgust investigators of
even moderate intelligence. Even when genuine they are trivial,
commonplace, and often vulgar. During the past twenty years we have
received through various mediums messages purporting to be from
Shakespere, Byron, Franklin, Peter the Great, Napoleon and Josephine,
and even from Voltaire. The general impression made upon us was that the
French conqueror and his consort seemed to have forgotten how to spell
words correctly; Shakespere and Byron had become chronic inebriates; and
Voltaire had turned an imbecile. Who can blame men trained to habits of
exactitude, or even simply well-educated persons, for hastily concluding
that when so much palpable fraud lies upon the surface, there could
hardly be truth if they should go to the bottom? The huckstering about
of pompous names attached to idiotic communications has given the
scientific stomach such an indigestion that it cannot assimilate even
the great truth which lies on the telegraphic plateaux of this ocean of
psychological phenomena. They judge by its surface, covered with froth
and scum. But they might with equal propriety deny that there is any
clear water in the depths of the sea when an oily scum was floating upon
the surface. Therefore, if on one hand we cannot very well blame them
for stepping back at the first sight of what seems really repulsive, we
do, and have a right to censure them for their unwillingness to explore
deeper. Neither pearls nor cut diamonds are to be found lying loose on
the ground; and these persons act as unwisely as would a professional
diver, who should reject an oyster on account of its filthy and slimy
appearance, when by opening it he might find a precious pearl inside the
shell.

Even the just and severe rebukes of some of their leading men are of no
avail and the fear on the part of men of science to investigate such an
unpopular subject, seems to have now become a general panic. "*The
phenomena chase the scientists, and the scientists run away from the*
*phenomena*," very pointedly remarks M. A. N. Aksakof in an able article
on Mediumism and the St. Petersburg Scientific Committee. The attitude

###### <span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

of this body of professors toward the subject which they had pledged
themselves to investigate was throughout simply disgraceful. Their
premature and *prearranged* report was so evidently partial and
inconclusive as to call out a scornful protest even from unbelievers.

The inconsistency of the logic of our learned gentlemen against the
philosophy of spiritualism proper is admirably pointed out by Professor
John Fisk--one of their own body. In a recent philosophical work, *The*
*Unseen World,* while showing that from the very definition of the
terms, *,matter* and *spirit,* the existence of spirit cannot be
demonstrated to the senses, and that thus no theory is amenable to
*scientific test*s, he deals a severe blow at his colleagues in the
following lines:

"The testimony in such a case," he says, "must, under the conditions of
the present life, be forever inaccessible. It lies wholly outside the
range of experience. However abundant it may be, we cannot expect to
meet it. And, accordingly, our failure to produce it does not raise even
the slightest presumption against our theory. When conceived in this
way, the belief in the future life is without scientific support, but at
the same time it is placed beyond the need of scientific support and the
range of scientific criticism. It is a belief which no imaginable future
advance of physical discovery can in any way impugn. It is a belief
which is in no sense irrational, and which may be logically entertained
without in the least affecting our scientific habit of mind, or
influencing our scientific conclusions." "If now," he adds, "men of
science will accept the position that spirit is not matter, nor governed
by the laws of matter, and refrain from speculations concerning it
restricted by their knowledge of material things, they will withdraw
what is to men of religion, at present, their principal cause of
irritation."

But, they will do no such thing. They feel incensed at the brave, loyal,
and highly commendable surrender of such superior men as Wallace, and
refuse to accept even the prudent and restrictive policy of Mr. Crookes.

No other claim is advanced for a hearing of the opinions contained in
*the present work than that they are based upon many years' study of
both* *ancient magic and its modern form, Spiritualism.* The former,
even now, when phenomena of the same nature have become so familiar to
all, is commonly set down as clever jugglery. The latter, when
overwhelming evidence precludes the possibility of truthfully declaring
it charlatanry, is denominated an universal hallucination.

Many years of wandering among "heathen" and "Christian" magicians,
occultists, mesmerisers; and the *tutti quanti* of white and black art,
ought to be sufficient, we think, to give us a certain right to

###### <span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

feel competent to take a practical view of this doubted and very
complicated question. We have associated with the fakirs, the holy men
of India, and seen them when in intercourse with the *Pitris.* We have
watched the proceedings and *modus operandi* of the howling and dancing
dervishes; held friendly communications with the marabouts of European
and Asiatic Turkey; and the serpent-charmers of Damascus and Benares
have but few secrets that we have not had the fortune to study.
Therefore, when scientists who have never had an opportunity of living
among these oriental jugglers and can judge at the best but
superficially, tell us that there is naught in their performances but
mere tricks of prestidigitation, we cannot help feeling a profound
regret for such hasty conclusions. That such pretentious claims should
be made to a thorough analysis of the powers of nature, and at the same
time such unpardonable neglect displayed of questions of purely
physiological and psychological character, and astounding phenomena
rejected without either examination or appeal, is an exhibition of
inconsistency, strongly savoring of timidity, if not of moral obliquity.

If, therefore, we should ever receive from some contemporaneous Faraday
the same fling that that gentleman made years since, when, with more
sincerity than good breeding, he said that "many *dogs* have the power
of coming to much more logical conclusions than some
spiritualists," <span id="fr_58"></span>[\*](#fn_58.md) we fear we must
still persist. Abuse is not argument, least of all, proof. Because such
men as Huxley and Tyndall denominate spiritualism "a degrading belief"
and oriental magic "jugglery," they cannot thereby take from truth its
verity. Skepticism, whether it proceeds from a scientific or an ignorant
brain, is unable to overturn the immortality of our souls--if such
immortality is a fact--and plunge them into *post-mortem* annihilation.
"Reason is subject to error," says Aristotle; so is opinion; and the
personal views of the most learned philosopher are often more liable to
be proved erroneous, than the plain common sense of his own illiterate
cook. In the *Tales of the Impious Khalif,* Barrachias-Hassan-Oglu, the
Arabian sage holds a wise discourse: "Beware, O my son, of
self-incense," he says. "It is the most dangerous, on account of its
agreeable intoxication. Profit by thy own wisdom, but learn to respect
the wisdom of thy fathers likewise. And remember, O my beloved, that the
light of Allah's truth will often penetrate much easier an empty head,
than one that is so crammed with learning that many a silver ray is
crowded out for want of space; . . . such is the case with our over-wise
Kadi."

###### <span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

These representatives of modern science in both hemispheres seem never
to have exhibited more scorn, or to have felt more bitterly toward the
unsolvable mystery, than since Mr. Crookes began the investigation of
the phenomena, in London. This courageous gentleman was the first to
introduce to the public one of those alleged "materialized" sentries
that guard the forbidden gates. Following after him, several other
learned members of the scientific body had the rare integrity, combined
with a degree of courage, which, in view of the unpopularity of the
subject, may be deemed heroic, to take the phenomena in hand.

But, alas! although the spirit, indeed, was willing, the mortal flesh
proved weak. Ridicule was more than the majority of them could bear; and
so, the heaviest burden was thrown upon the shoulders of Mr. Crookes. An
account of the benefit this gentleman reaped from his disinterested
investigations, and the thanks he received from his own brother
scientists, can be found in his three pamphlets, entitled,

Researches in the Phenomena of Spiritualism.

After a while, the members appointed on the Committee of the Dialectical
Society and Mr. Crookes, who had applied to his mediums the most crucial
tests, were forced by an impatient public to report in so many plain
words what they had seen. But what could they say, except the truth?
Thus, they were compelled to acknowledge: 1st. That the phenomena which
*they,* at least, had witnessed, were genuine, and impossible to
simulate; thus showing that manifestations produced by some unknown
force, could and did happen. 2d. That, whether the phenomena were
produced by disembodied spirits or other analogous entities, they could
not tell; but that manifestations, thoroughly upsetting many
preconceived theories as to natural laws, did happen and were
undeniable. Several of these occurred in their own families. 3d. That,
notwithstanding all their combined efforts to the contrary, beyond the
indisputable fact of the reality of the phenomena, "glimpses of natural
action not yet reduced to law," <span id="fr_59"></span>[\*](#fn_59.md)
they, to borrow the expression of the Count de Gabalis, "could make
neither head nor tail on't."

Now this was precisely what a skeptical public had not bargained for.
The discomfiture of the believers in spiritualism had been impatiently
anticipated before the conclusions of Messrs. Crookes, Varley, and the
Dialectical Society were announced. Such a confession on the part of
their brother-scientists was too humiliating for the pride of even those
who had timorously abstained from investigation. It was regarded as
really too much, that such vulgar and repulsive manifestations of phe-

###### <span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

nomena which had always, by common consent of educated people, been
regarded as nursery tales, fit only to amuse hysterical servant-girls
and afford revenue to professional somnambulists--that manifestations
which had been consigned by the Academy and Institute of Paris to
oblivion, should so impertinently elude detection at the hands of
experts in physical sciences.

A tornado of indignation followed the confession. Mr. Crookes depicts it
in his pamphlet on *Psychic Force.* He heads it very pointedly with the
quotation from Galvani: "I am attacked by two very opposite sects--the
scientists and the *know-nothings,* yet I know that I have discovered
one of the greatest forces in nature. . . ." He then proceeds:

"It was taken for granted that the results of my experiments would be in
accordance with their preconceptions. What they really desired was not
*the truth,* but an additional witness in favor of their own foregone
conclusions. When they found the facts which that investigation
established could not be made to fit those opinions, why, . . . so much
the worse for the facts. They try to creep out of their own confident
recommendations of the inquiry, by declaring 'that Mr. Home is a clever
conjurer who has duped us all.' 'Mr. Crookes might, with equal
propriety, examine the performances of an Indian juggler.' 'Mr. Crookes
must get better witnesses before he can be believed.' 'The thing is too
absurd to be treated seriously.' 'It is impossible, and therefore can't
be.' . . . (I never said it was impossible, I only said it was true.)
'The observers have all been biologized, and fancy they saw things occur
which really *never* took place,' etc., etc., etc." <span
id="fr_60"></span>[\*](#fn_60.md)

After expending their energy on such puerile theories as "unconscious
cerebration," "involuntary muscular contraction," and the sublimely
ridiculous one of the "cracking knee-joints" (*le muscle craqueur*);
after meeting ignominious failures by the obstinate survival of the new
force, and finally, after every desperate effort to compass its
obliteration, these *filii diffidentiae--*as St. Paul calls their
class--thought best to give up the whole thing in disgust. Sacrificing
their courageously persevering brethren as a holocaust on the altar of
public opinion, they withdrew in dignified silence. Leaving the arena of
investigation to more fearless champions, these unlucky experimenters
are not likely to ever enter it again. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[\*\*](#fn_61.md) It is easier by far to deny the reality
of such manifestations from a secure distance, than find for them a
proper place among the classes of

###### <span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

natural phenomena accepted by exact science. And how can they, since all
such phenomena pertain to psychology, and the latter, with its occult
and mysterious powers, is a *terra incognita* for modern science. Thus,
powerless to explain that which proceeds directly from the nature of the
human soul itself--the existence of which most of them deny--unwilling
at the same time to confess their ignorance, scientists retaliate very
unjustly on those who believe in the evidence of their senses without
any pretence to science.

"A kick from thee, O Jupiter! is sweet," says the poet Tretiakowsky, in
an old Russian tragedy. Rude as those Jupiters of science may be
occasionally toward us credulous mortals, their vast learning--in less
abstruse questions, we mean--if not their manners, entitles them to
public respect. But unfortunately it is not the gods who shout the
loudest.

The eloquent Tertullian, speaking of Satan and his imps, whom he accuses
of ever mimicking the Creator's works, denominates them the "monkeys of
God." It is fortunate for the philosophicules that we have no modern
Tertullian to consign them to an immortality of contempt as the "monkeys
of science."

But to return to genuine scientists. "Phenomena of a merely objective
character," says A. N. Aksakof, "force themselves upon the
representatives of exact sciences for investigation and explanation; but
the high-priests of science, in the face of apparently such a simple
question . . . are totally disconcerted! This subject seems to have the
privilege of forcing them to betray, not only the highest code of
morality--truth, but also the supreme law of science--*experiment! .* .
. They feel that there is something too serious underlying it. The cases
of Hare, Crookes, de Morgan, Varley, Wallace, and Butleroff create a
panic! They fear that as soon as they concede one step, they will have
to yield the whole ground. Time-honored principles, the contemplative
speculations of a whole life, of a long line of generations, are all
staked on a single card!" <span id="fr_62"></span>[\*](#fn_62.md)

In the face of such experience as that of Crookes and the Dialectical
Society, of Wallace and the late Professor Hare, what can we expect from
our luminaries of erudition? Their attitude toward the undeniable
phenomena is in itself another phenomenon. It is simply
incomprehensible, unless we admit the possibility of another
psychological disease, as mysterious and contagious as hydrophobia.
Although we claim no honor for this new discovery, we nevertheless
propose to recognize it under the name of *scientific psychophobia.* 

###### <span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

They ought to have learned by this time, in the school of bitter
experience, that they can rely on the self-sufficiency of the positive
sciences only to a certain point; and that, so long as there remains one
single unexplained mystery in nature, the word "*impossible*" is a
dangerous word for them to pronounce.

In the *Researches on the Phenomena of Spiritualism,* Mr. Crookes
submits to the option of the reader eight theories "to account for the
phenomena observed."

These theories run as follows:

"*First Theory.--*The phenomena are all the result of tricks, clever
mechanical arrangements, or legerdemain; the mediums are impostors, and
the rest of the company fools.

"*Second Theory.--*The persons at a seance are the victims of a sort of
mania, or delusion, and imagine phenomena to occur which have no real
objective existence.

"*Third Theory.--*The whole is the result of conscious or unconscious
cerebral action.

"*Fourth Theory.--*The result of the spirit of the medium, perhaps in
association with the spirits of some or all of the people present.

"*Fifth Theory.--*The actions of evil spirits, or devils, personifying
whom or what they please, in order to undermine Christianity, and ruin
men's souls. (Theory of our theologians.)

"*Sixth Theory.--*The actions of a separate order of beings living on
this earth, but invisible and immaterial to us. Able, however,
occasionally to manifest their presence, known in almost all countries
and ages as demons (not necessarily bad), gnomes, fairies, kobolds,
elves, goblins, Puck, etc. (One of the claims of the kabalists.)

"*Seventh Theory.--*The actions of departed human beings. (The spiritual
theory *par excellence.*)

"*Eighth Theory*.--(The psychic force) . . . an adjunct to the fourth,
fifth, sixth, and seventh theories."

The first of these theories having been proved valid only in
exceptional, though unfortunately still too frequent cases, must be
ruled out as having no material bearing upon the phenomena themselves.
Theories the *second* and the *third* are the last crumbling
entrenchments of the guerilla of skeptics and materialists, and remain,
as lawyers say, "*Adhuc* *sub judice lis est.*" Thus, we can deal in
this work but with the four remaining ones, the last, eighth, theory
being according to Mr. Crookes's opinion, but "a necessary adjunct" of
the others.

How subject even a scientific opinion is to error, we may see, if we
only compare the several articles on spiritual phenomena from the able

###### <span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

pen of that gentleman, which appeared from 1870 to 1875. In one of the
first we read: . . . "the increased employment of scientific methods
will promote exact observations and greater love of truths among
inquirers, and will produce a race of observers *who will drive the
worthless residuum of spiritualism hence into the unknown limbo of magic
and necromancy.*" And in 1875, we read, over his own signature, minute
and most interesting descriptions of the materialized spirit--Katie
King! <span id="fr_63"></span>[\*](#fn_63.md)

It is hardly possible to suppose that Mr. Crookes could be under
electro-biological influence or hallucination for two or three
consecutive years. The "spirit" appeared in his own house, in his
library, under the most crucial tests, and was seen, felt, and heard by
hundreds of persons.

But Mr. Crookes denies that he ever took Katie King for a disembodied
spirit. What was it then? If it was not Miss Florence Cook, and his word
is our sufficient guarantee for it--then it was either the spirit of one
who had lived on earth, or one of those that come directly under the
sixth theory of the eight the eminent scientist offers to the public
choice. It must have been one of the classes named: Fairies, Kobolds,
Gnomes, Elves, Goblins, or a Puck. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[\*\*](#fn_64.md)

Yes; Katie King must have been a fairy--a Titania. For to a fairy only
could be applied with propriety the following poetic effusion which Mr.
Crookes quotes in describing this wonderful spirit:

> "Round her she made an atmosphere of life;  
> The very air seemed lighter from her eyes;  
> They were so soft and beautiful and rife  
> With all we can imagine of the skies;  
> Her overpowering presence makes you feel  
> It would *not be idolatry to kneel*!" <span
> id="fr_65"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_65.md)

And thus, after having written, in 1870, his severe sentence against
spiritualism and magic; after saying that even at that moment he
believed "the whole affair a superstition, or, at least, an unexplained
trick--a delusion of the senses;" <span
id="fr_66"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_66.md) Mr. Crookes, in 1875, closes his
letter with the following memorable words:--"To imagine, I say, the
Katie King of the last three years to be the result of imposture does
more violence to one's reason and common sense than to believe her to be
what she herself affirms." <span id="fr_67"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_67.md)
This last remark, moreover, conclusively proves that:

###### <span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

1\. Notwithstanding Mr. Crookes's full convictions that the somebody
calling herself Katie King was neither the medium nor some confederate,
but on the contrary an unknown force in nature, which--like
love--"laughs at locksmiths"; 2. That that hitherto unrecognized form of
Force, albeit it had become with him "not a matter of opinion, but of
absolute knowledge,"--the eminent investigator still did not abandon to
the last his skeptical attitude toward the question. In short, he firmly
believes in the phenomenon, but cannot accept the idea of its being the
human spirit of a departed

somebody.

It seems to us, that, as far as *public prejudice goes,* Mr. Crookes
solves one mystery by creating a still deeper one: the *obscurum per
obscurius.* In other words, rejecting "*the worthless residuum of
spiritualism,*" the courageous scientist fearlessly plunges into his own
"*unknown limbo of magic* and *necromancy!*"

The recognized laws of physical science account for but a few of the
more objective of the so-called spiritual phenomena. While proving the
reality of certain visible effects of an unknown force, they have not
thus far enabled scientists to control at will even this portion of the
phenomena. The truth is that the professors have not yet discovered the
necessary conditions of their occurrence. They must go as deeply into
the study of the triple nature of man--physiological, psychological, and
*divine*--as did their predecessors, the magicians, theurgists, and
thaumaturgists of old. Until the present moment, even those who have
investigated the phenomena as thoroughly and impartially as Mr. Crookes,
have set aside the cause as something not to be discovered now, if ever.
They have troubled themselves no more about that than about the first
cause of the cosmic phenomena of the correlation of forces, whose
endless effects they are at such pains to observe and classify. Their
course has been as unwise as that of a man who should attempt to
discover the sources of a river by exploring toward its mouth. It has so
narrowed their views of the possibilities of natural law that very
simple forms of occult phenomena have necessitated their denial that
they can occur unless miracles were possible; and this being a
scientific absurdity the result has been that physical science has
latterly been losing prestige. If scientists had studied the so-called
"miracles" instead of denying them, many secret laws of nature
comprehended by the ancients would have been again discovered.
"Conviction," says Bacon, "comes not through arguments but through
experiments."

The ancients were always distinguished--especially the Chaldean
astrologers and Magians--for their ardent love and pursuit of knowledge
in every branch of science. They tried to penetrate the secrets of
nature

###### <span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

in the same way as our modern naturalists, and by the only method by
which this object can be obtained, namely: by experimental researches
and reason. If our modern philosophers cannot apprehend the fact that
they penetrated deeper than themselves into the mysteries of the
universe, this does not constitute a valid reason why the credit of
possessing this knowledge should be denied them or the imputation of
superstition laid at their door. Nothing warrants the charge; and every
new archaeological discovery militates against the assumption. As
chemists they were unequalled, and in his famous lecture on *The Lost
Arts,* Wendell Phillips says: "The chemistry of the most ancient period
had reached a point which *we have never even approached.*" The secret
of the malleable glass, which, "if supported by one end by its own
weight, in twenty hours dwindles down to a fine line that you can curve
around your wrist," would be as difficult to rediscover in our civilized
countries as to fly to the moon.

The fabrication of a cup of glass which was brought by an exile to Rome
in the reign of Tiberius,--a cup "which he dashed upon the marble
pavement, and it was not crushed nor broken by the fall," and which, as
it got "dented some" was easily brought into shape again with a hammer,
is a historic fact. If it is doubted now it is merely because the
moderns cannot do the same. And yet, in Samarkand and some monasteries
of Thibet such cups and glass-ware may be found to this day; nay, there
are persons who claim that they can make the same by virtue of their
knowledge of the much-ridiculed and ever-doubted *alkahest--*the
universal solvent. This agent that Paracelsus and Van Helmont maintain
to be a certain fluid in nature, "capable of reducing all sublunary
bodies, as well homogeneous as mixed, into their *ens primum,* or the
original matter of which they are composed; or into an uniform, equable,
and potable liquor, that will unite with water, and the juices of all
bodies, and yet retain its own radical virtues; and, if again mixed with
itself will thereby be converted into pure elementary water": what
impossibilities prevent our crediting the statement? Why should it not
exist and why the idea be considered Utopian? Is it again because our
modern chemists are unable to produce it? But surely it may be conceived
without any great effort of imagination that all bodies must have
originally come from some first matter, and that this matter, according
to the lessons of astronomy, geology and physics, must have been a
fluid. Why should not gold--of whose genesis our scientists know so
little--have been originally a primitive or *basic matter of gold*, a
ponderous fluid which, as says Van Helmont, "from its own nature, or a
strong cohesion between its particles, acquired afterward a solid form?"

###### <span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

There seems to be very little absurdity to believe in a "universal *ens*
that resolves all bodies into their *ens genitale.*" Van Helmont calls
it "the highest and most successful of all salts; which having obtained
the supreme degree of simplicity, purity, subtilty, enjoys alone the
faculty of remaining unchanged and unimpaired by the subjects it works
upon, and of dissolving the most stubborn and untractable bodies; as
stones, gems, glass, earth, sulphur, metals, etc., into red salt, equal
in weight to the matter dissolved; and this with as much ease as hot
water melts down snow."

It is into this fluid that the makers of malleable glass claimed, and
now claim, that they immersed common glass for several hours, to acquire
the property of malleability.

We have a ready and palpable proof of such possibilities. A foreign
correspondent of the Theosophical Society, a well-known medical
practitioner, and one who has studied the occult sciences for upward of
thirty years, has succeeded in obtaining what he terms the "true oil of
gold," *i.e.*, the primal element. Chemists and physicists have seen and
examined it, and were driven to confess that they neither knew *how* it
was obtained nor could they do the same. That he desires his name to
remain unknown is not to be wondered at; ridicule and public prejudice
are more dangerous sometimes than the inquisition of old. This "Adamic
earth" is next-door neighbor to the alkahest, and one of the most
important secrets of the alchemists. No Kabalist will reveal it to the
world, for, as he expresses it in the well-known jargon: "it would
explain *the eagles* of the alchemists, and how the eagles' wings are
clipped," a secret that it took Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes)
twenty years to learn.

As the dawn of physical science broke into a glaring day-light, the
spiritual sciences merged deeper and deeper into night, and in their
turn they were denied. So, now, these greatest masters in psychology are
looked upon as "ignorant and superstitious ancestors"; as mountebanks
and jugglers, because, forsooth, the sun of modern learning shines
to-day so bright, it has become an axiom that the philosophers and men
of science of the olden time knew nothing, and lived in a night of
superstition. But their traducers forget that the sun of to-day will
seem dark by comparison with the luminary of to-morrow, whether justly
or not; and as the men of our century think their ancestors ignorant, so
will perhaps their descendants count them for *know-nothings.* The world
moves in cycles. The coming races will be but the reproductions of races
long bygone; as we, perhaps, are the images of those who lived a hundred
centuries ago. The time will come when those who now in public slander

###### <span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

the hermetists, but ponder in secret their dust-covered volumes; who
plagiarize their ideas, assimilate and give them out as their own--will
receive their dues. "Who," honestly exclaims Pfaff--"what man has ever
taken more comprehensive views of nature than Paracelsus? He was the
bold creator of chemical medicines; the founder of courageous parties;
victorious in controversy, belonging to those spirits who have created
amongst us a new mode of thinking on the natural existence of things.
What he scattered through his writings on the philosopher's stone, on
pigmies and spirits of the mines; on signs, on homunculi, and the elixir
of life, and which are employed by many to lower his estimation, cannot
extinguish our grateful remembrance of his general works, nor our
admiration of his free, bold exertions, and his noble, intellectual
life." <span id="fr_68"></span>[\*](#fn_68.md)

More than one pathologist, chemist, homoeopathist, and magnetist has
quenched his thirst for knowledge in the books of Paracelsus. Frederick
Hufeland got his theoretical doctrines on infection from this mediaeval
"quack," as Sprengel delights in calling one who was immeasurably higher
than himself. Hemman, who endeavors to vindicate this great philosopher,
and nobly tries to redress his slandered memory, speaks of him as the
"*greatest* chemist of his time." <span id="fr_69"></span>[\*\*](#fn_69.md)
So do Professor Molitor, <span id="fr_70"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_70.md) and
Dr. Ennemoser, the eminent German psychologist. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_71.md) According to their criticisms on
the labors of this Hermetist, Paracelsus is the most "wondrous intellect
of his age," a "noble genius." But our modern lights assume to know
better, and the ideas of the Rosicrucians about the elementary spirits,
the goblins and the elves, have sunk into the "limbo of magic" and fairy
tales for early childhoods. <span id="fr_72"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_72.md)

We are quite ready to concede to skeptics that one-half, and even more,
of seeming phenomena, are but more or less clever fraud. Recent
exposures, especially of "materializing" mediums, but too well prove the
fact. Unquestionably numerous others are still in store, and this will

###### <span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

continue until tests have become so perfect and spiritualists so
reasonable as no longer to furnish opportunity to mediums or weapons to
adversaries.

What should sensible spiritualists think of the character of *angel*
guides, who after monopolizing, perhaps for years, a poor medium's time,
health and means, suddenly abandon him when he most needs their help?
None but creatures *without soul or conscience* would be guilty of such
injustice. Conditions?--Mere sophistry. What sort of spirits must they
be who would not summon if necessary an army of spirit-friends (if such
there be) to snatch the innocent medium from the pit dug for his feet?
Such things happened in the olden time, such may happen now. *There were
apparitions before modern spiritualism, and phenomena like ours in every
previous age.* If modern manifestations are a reality and palpable
facts, so must have been the so-called "miracles" and thaumaturgic
exploits of old; or if the latter are but fictions of superstition so
must be the former, for they rest on no better testimony.

But, in this daily-increasing torrent of occult phenomena that rushes
from one end of the globe to the other, though two-thirds of the
manifestations are proved spurious, what of those which are proved
genuine beyond doubt or cavil? Among these may be found communications
coming through non-professional as well as professional mediums, which
are sublime and divinely grand. Often, through young children, and
simple-minded ignorant persons, we receive philosophical teachings and
precepts, poetry and inspirational orations, music and paintings that
are fully worthy of the reputations of their alleged authors. Their
prophecies are often verified and their moral disquisitions beneficent,
though the latter is of rarer occurrence. Who are those spirits, what
those powers or intelligences which are evidently *outside* of the
medium proper and entities *per se?* These *intelligences* deserve the
appellation; and they differ as widely from the generality of spooks and
goblins that hover around the cabinets for physical manifestations, as
day from night.

We must confess that the situation appears to be very grave. The control
of mediums by such unprincipled and lying "spirits" is constantly
becoming more and more general; and the pernicious effects of *seeming*
diabolism constantly multiply. Some of the best mediums are abandoning
the public rostrum and retiring from this influence; and the movement is
drifting churchward. We venture the prediction that unless spiritualists
set about the study of ancient philosophy, so as to learn to
discriminate between spirits and to guard themselves against the baser
sort, twenty-five years more will not elapse before they will have to
fly to the Romish communion to escape these "guides" and "controls" that
they have fondled so long. The signs of this catastrophe already exhibit

###### <span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

themselves. At a recent convention at Philadelphia, it was seriously
proposed to organize a sect of *Christian* Spiritualists! This is
because, having withdrawn from the church and learned nothing of the
philosophy of the phenomena, or the nature of their spirits, they are
drifting about on a sea of uncertainty like a ship without compass or
rudder. They cannot escape the dilemma; they must choose between
Porphyry and Pio Nono.

While men of genuine science, such as Wallace, Crookes, Wagner,
Butlerof, Varley, Buchanan, Hare, Reichenbach, Thury, Perty, de Morgan,
Hoffmann, Goldschmidt, W. Gregory, Flammarion, Sergeant Cox and many
others, firmly believe in the current phenomena, many of the above named
reject the theory of departed spirits. Therefore, it seems but logical
to think that if the London "Katie King," the only materialized
*something* which the public is obliged more or less to credit out of
respect to science,--is not the spirit of an ex-mortal, then it must be
the astral solidified shadow of either one of the Rosicrucian
spooks--"fantasies of superstition"--or of some as yet unexplained force
in nature. Be it however a "spirit of health or goblin damn'd" it is of
little consequence; for if it be once proved that its organism is not
solid matter, then it must be and is a "spirit," an apparition, a
*breath.* It is an intelligence which acts outside our organisms and
therefore must belong to some existing even though unseen race of
beings. But what is it? What is this something which thinks and even
speaks but yet is not human; that is impalpable and yet not a
disembodied spirit; that simulates affection, passion, remorse, fear,
joy, but yet feels neither? What is this canting creature which rejoices
in cheating the truthful inquirer and mocking at sacred human feeling?
For, if not Mr. Crookes's Katie King, other similar creatures have done
all these. Who can fathom the mystery? The true psychologist alone. And
where should he go for his text-books but to the neglected alcoves of
libraries where the works of despised hermetists and theurgists have
been gathering dust these many years.

Says Henry More, the revered English Platonist, in his answer to an
attack on the believers of spiritual and magic phenomena by a skeptic of
that age, named Webster: <span id="fr_73"></span>[\*](#fn_73.md) "As for
that other opinion, that the

###### <span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

greater part of the reformed divines hold, that it was the Devil that
appeared in Samuel's shape, it is beneath contempt; for though I do not
doubt but that in many of these necromantic apparitions, they are
*ludicrous spirits, not the souls of the deceased that appear,* yet I am
clear for the appearing of the soul of Samuel, and as clear that in
other necromancies, it may be such kinds of spirits, as Porphyrius above
describes, 'that change themselves into omnifarious forms and shapes,
and one while act the parts of daemons, another while of angels or gods,
and another while *of the souls of the departed.*' And I confess such a
spirit as this might *personate* Samuel here, for anything Webster
alleged to the contrary, for his arguments indeed are wonderfully weak
and wooden."

When such a metaphysician and philosopher as Henry More gives such
testimony as this, we may well assume our point to have been well taken.
Learned investigators, all very skeptical as to spirits in general and
"departed human spirits" in particular, during the last twenty years
have taxed their brains to invent new names for an old thing. Thus, with
Mr. Crookes and Sergeant Cox, it is the "psychic force." Professor Thury
of Geneva calls it the "psychode" or *ectenic* force; Professor Balfour
Stewart, the "electro-biological power"; Faraday, the "great master of
experimental philosophy in physics," but apparently a novice in
psychology, superciliously termed it an "unconscious muscular action,"
an "unconscious cerebration," and what not? Sir William Hamilton, a
"latent thought"; Dr. Carpenter, "the ideo-motor principle," etc., etc.
So many scientists--so many names.

Years ago the old German philosopher, Schopenhauer, disposed of this
force and matter at the same time; and since the conversion of Mr.
Wallace, the great anthropologist has evidently adopted his ideas.
Schopenhauer's doctrine is that the universe is but the manifestation of
the will. Every force in nature is also an effect of will, representing
a higher or lower degree of its objectiveness. It is the teaching of
Plato, who stated distinctly that everything visible was created or
evolved out of the invisible and eternal WILL, and after its fashion.
Our Heaven--he says--was produced according to the eternal pattern of
the "Ideal World," contained, as everything else, in the dodecahedron,
the geometrical model used by the Deity. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[\*](#fn_74.md) With Plato, the Primal Being is an
emanation of the Demiurgic Mind (*Nous*)*,* which contains from the
eternity the "*idea*" of the "to be created world" within itself, and
which idea he produces out of himself. <span
id="fr_75"></span>[\*\*](#fn_75.md) The laws of nature are the established
relations of this *idea* to the forms of its manifestations; "these

###### <span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

forms," says Schopenhauer, "are time, space, and causality. Through time
and space the idea varies in its numberless manifestations."

These ideas are far from being new, and even with Plato they were not
original. This is what we read in the *Chaldean Oracles*: <span
id="fr_76"></span>[\*](#fn_76.md) "The works of nature co-exist with the
intellectual νοεριο, spiritual Light of the Father. For it is the soul
ψυχε which adorned the great heaven, and which adorns it after the
Father."

"The incorporeal world then was already completed, having its seat in
the Divine Reason," says Philo <span id="fr_77"></span>[\*\*](#fn_77.md)
who is erroneously accused of deriving his philosophy from Plato's.

In the *Theogony* of Mochus, we find Æther first, and then the air; the
two principles from which Ulom, the *intelligible* νοετος God (the
visible universe of matter) is born. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_78.md)

In the Orphic hymns, the Eros-Phanes evolves from the Spiritual Egg,
which the Æthereal winds impregnate, Wind <span
id="fr_79"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_79.md) being "the spirit of God," who is
said to move in Æther, "brooding over the Chaos"--the Divine "Idea." In
the Hindu *Katakopanisad,* Purusha, the Divine Spirit, already stands
before the original matter, from whose union springs the great Soul of
the World, "Maha =Atma, Brahm, the Spirit of Life"; <span
id="fr_80"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_80.md) these latter appellations are
identical with the Universal Soul, or *Anima Mundi,* and the Astral
Light of the theurgists and kabalists.

Pythagoras brought his doctrines from the eastern sanctuaries, and Plato
compiled them into a form more intelligible than the mysterious numerals
of the sage--whose doctrines he had fully embraced--to the uninitiated
mind. Thus, the *Cosmos* is "the Son" with Plato, having for his father
and mother the Divine Thought and Matter. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_81.md)

"The Egyptians," says Dunlap, <span
id="fr_82"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_82.md) "distinguish between an older
and younger Horus, the former the *brother* of Osiris, the latter the
*son* of Osiris and Isis." The first is the *Idea* of the world
remaining in the Demiurgic Mind, "born in darkness before the creation
of the world." The second Horus is this "Idea" going forth from the
*Logos,* becoming clothed with matter, and assuming an actual
existence. <span id="fr_83"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_83.md)

"The mundane God, eternal, boundless, young and old, of winding form,"
 <span id="fr_84"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_84.md) say the

Chaldean Oracles.

This "winding form" is a figure to express the vibratory motion of the
Astral Light, with which the ancient priests were perfectly well

###### <span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

acquainted, though they may have differed in views of ether, with modern
scientists; for in the Æther they placed the Eternal Idea pervading the
Universe, or the *Will* which becomes *Force,* and creates or organizes

matter.

"The will," says Van Helmont, "is the first of all powers. For through
the will of the Creator all things were made and put in motion. . . .
The will is the property of all spiritual beings, and displays itself in
them the more actively the more they are freed from matter." And
Paracelsus, "the divine," as he was called, adds in the same strain:
"*Faith* must confirm the imagination, for faith establishes the *will*.
*.* . . Determined will is a beginning of all magical operations. . . .
Because men do not perfectly imagine and believe the result, is that the
arts are uncertain, while they might be perfectly certain."

The opposing power alone of unbelief and skepticism, if projected in a
current of equal force, can check the other, and sometimes completely
neutralize it. Why should spiritualists wonder that the presence of some
strong skeptics, or of those who, feeling bitterly opposed to the
phenomenon, unconsciously exercise their will-power in opposition,
hinders and often stops altogether the manifestations? If there is no
*conscious* power on earth but sometimes finds another to interfere with
or even counterbalance it, why wonder when the *unconscious,* passive
power of a medium is suddenly paralyzed in its effects by another
opposing one, though it also be as unconsciously exercised? Professors
Faraday and Tyndall boasted that their presence at a circle would stop
at once every manifestation. This fact alone ought to have proved to the
eminent scientists that there was some force in these phenomena worthy
to arrest their attention. As a scientist, Prof. Tyndall was perhaps
pre-eminent in the circle of those who were present at the seance; as a
shrewd observer, one not easily deceived by a tricking medium, he was
perhaps no better, if as clever, as others in the room, and if the
manifestations were but a fraud so ingenious as to deceive the others,
they would not have stopped, even on *his* account. What medium can ever
boast of such phenomena as were produced by Jesus, and the apostle Paul
after him? Yet even Jesus met with cases where the unconscious force of
resistance overpowered even his so well directed current of will. "And
he did not many mighty works there, because of their unbelief."

There is a reflection of every one of these views in Schopenhauer's
philosophy. Our "investigating" scientists might consult his works with
profit. They will find therein many a strange hypothesis founded on old
ideas, speculations on the "new" phenomena, which may prove as
reasonable as any, and be saved the useless trouble of inventing new

###### <span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

theories. The psychic and ectenic forces, the "ideo-motor" and
"electro-biological powers"; "latent thought" and even "unconscious
cerebration" theories, can be condensed in two words: the kabalistic
ASTRAL LIGHT.

The bold theories and opinions expressed in Schopenhauer's works differ
widely with those of the majority of our orthodox scientists. "In
reality," remarks this daring speculator, "there is neither *matter* nor
*spirit.* The tendency to gravitation in a stone is as unexplainable as
thought in human brain. . . . If matter can--no one knows why--fall to
the ground, then it can also--no one knows why--think. . . . As soon,
even in mechanics, as we trespass beyond the purely mathematical, as
soon as we reach the inscrutable, adhesion, gravitation, and so on, we
are faced by phenomena which are to our senses as mysterious as the WILL
and THOUGHT in man--we find ourselves facing the incomprehensible, for
such is every force in nature. Where is then that *matter* which you all
pretend to know so well; and from which--being so familiar with it--you
draw all your conclusions and explanations, and attribute to it all
things? . . . That, which can be fully realized by our reason and
senses, is but the superficial: they can never reach the true inner
substance of things. Such was the opinion of Kant. If you consider that
there is in a human head some sort of a *spirit,* then you are obliged
to concede the same to a stone. If your dead and utterly passive matter
can manifest a tendency toward gravitation, or, like electricity,
attract and repel, and send out sparks--then, as well as the brain, it
can also think. In short, every particle of the so-called spirit, we can
replace with an equivalent of matter, and every particle of matter
replace with spirit. . . . Thus, it is not the Cartesian division of all
things into matter and spirit that can ever be found philosophically
exact; but only if we divide them into *will* and *manifestation,* which
form of division has naught to do with the former, for it spiritualizes
every thing: all that, which is in the first instance real and
objective--body and matter--it transforms into a representation, and
every manifestation into will." <span id="fr_85"></span>[\*](#fn_85.md)

These views corroborate what we have expressed about the various names
given to the same thing. The disputants are battling about mere words.
Call the phenomena force, energy, electricity or magnetism, will, or
spirit-power, it will ever be the partial manifestation of the *soul,*
whether disembodied or imprisoned for a while in its body--of a portion
of that intelligent, omnipotent, and individual WILL, pervading all
nature, and known, through the insufficiency of human language to
express correctly psychological images, as--**GOD**.

###### <span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

The ideas of some of our schoolmen about matter are, from the kabalistic
standing-point, in many a way erroneous. Hartmann calls their views "an
*instinctual* prejudice." Furthermore, he demonstrates that no
experimenter can have anything to do with matter properly termed, but
only with the forces into which he divides it. The visible effects of
matter are but the effects of force. He concludes thereby, that that
which is now called matter is nothing but the aggregation of atomic
forces, to express which the word *matter* is used: outside of that, for
science matter is but a word void of sense. Notwithstanding many an
honest confession on the part of our specialists--physicists,
physiologists and chemists--that they know nothing whatever of
matter, <span id="fr_86"></span>[\*](#fn_86.md) *they deify it.* Every new
phenomenon which they find themselves unable to explain, is triturated,
compounded into incense, and burned on the altar of the goddess who
patronizes modern scientists.

No one can better treat his subject than does Schopenhauer in his
*Parerga.* In this work he discusses at length animal magnetism,
clairvoyance, sympathetic cures, seership, magic, omens, ghost-seeing,
and other spiritual matters. "All these manifestations," he says, "are
branches of one and the same tree, and furnish us with irrefutable
proofs of the existence of a chain of beings which is based on quite a
different order of things than that nature which has at its foundation
laws of space, time and adaptability. This other order of things is far
deeper, for it is the original and the direct one; in its presence the
common laws of nature, which are simply formal, are unavailing;
therefore, under its immediate action neither time nor space can
separate any longer the individuals, and the separation impendent on
these forms presents no more insurmountable barriers for the intercourse
of thoughts and the immediate action of the will. In this manner changes
may be wrought by quite a different course than the course of physical
causality, *i.e.*, through an action of the manifestation of the will
exhibited in a peculiar way and outside the individual himself.
Therefore the peculiar character of all the aforesaid manifestations is
the *visio in distante et actio in distante* (vision and action at a
distance) in its relation to time as well as in its relation to space.
Such an action at a distance is just what constitutes the fundamental
character of what is called *magical;* for such is the immediate action
of our will, an action liberated from the causal conditions of physical
action, viz., contact."

"Besides that," continues Schopenhauer, "these manifestations present to
us a substantial and perfectly logical contradiction to materialism, and
even to naturalism, because in the light of such manifestations,

###### <span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

that order of things in nature which both these philosophies seek to
present as absolute and the only genuine, appears before us on the
contrary purely phenomenal and superficial, and containing at the bottom
of it a substance of things *a parte* and perfectly independent of its
own laws. That is why these manifestations--at least from a purely
philosophical point of view--among all the facts which are presented to
us in the domain of experiment, are beyond any comparison the most
important. Therefore, it is the duty of every scientist to acquaint
himself with them." <span id="fr_87"></span>[\*](#fn_87.md)

To pass from the philosophical speculations of a man like Schopenhauer
to the superficial generalizations of some of the French Academicians,
would be profitless but for the fact that it enables us to estimate the
intellectual grasp of the two schools of learning. What the German makes
of profound psychological questions, we have seen. Compare with it the
best that the astronomer Babinet and the chemist Boussingault can offer
by way of explaining an important spiritualistic phenomenon. In 1854-5
these distinguished specialists presented to the Academy a *memoire,* or
monograph, whose evident object was to corroborate and at the same time
make clearer Dr. Chevreuil's too complicated theory in explanation of
the turning-tables, of the commission for the investigation of which he
was a member.

Here it is *verbatim:* "As to the movements and oscillations *alleged*
to happen with certain tables, they can have no cause other than the
*invisible* and involuntary vibrations of the experimenter's muscular
system; the extended contraction of the muscles manifesting itself at
such time by a series of vibrations, and becoming thus a *visible
tremor* which communicates to the object a circumrotary motion. This
rotation is thus enabled to manifest itself with a considerable energy,
by a gradually quickening motion, or by a strong resistance, whenever it
is required to stop. Hence the physical explanation of the phenomenon
becomes clear and does not offer the slightest difficulty." <span
id="fr_88"></span>[\*\*](#fn_88.md)

None whatever. This scientific hypothesis--or demonstration shall we
say?--is as clear as one of M. Babinet's nebulae examined on a foggy
night.

And still, clear as it may be, it lacks an important feature, *i.e.*,
common sense. We are at a loss to decide whether or not Babinet accepts
*en desespoir de cause* Hartmann's proposition that "the visible
*effects of matter* are nothing but the *effects of a force,*" and, that
in order to form a clear conception of matter, one must first form one
of force. The philosophy to the school of which belongs Hartmann, and
which is

###### <span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

partly accepted by several of the greatest German scientists, teaches
that the problem of matter can only be solved by that invisible Force,
acquaintance with which Schopenhauer terms the "magical knowledge," and
"magical effect or action of Will." Thus, we must first ascertain
whether the "involuntary vibrations of the experimenter's muscular
system," which are but "actions of matter," are influenced by a will
*within* the experimenter or *without.* In the former case Babinet makes
of him an unconscious epileptic; the latter, as we will further see, he
rejects altogether, and attributes all intelligent answers of the
tipping or rapping tables to "unconscious ventriloquism."

We know that every exertion of will results in *force,* and that,
according to the above-named German school, the manifestations of atomic
forces are individual actions of will, resulting in the unconscious
rushing of atoms into the concrete image already subjectively created by
the will. Democritus taught, after his instructor Leucippus, that the
first principles of all things contained in the universe were atoms and
a *vacuum.* In its kabalistic sense, the *vacuum* means in this instance
the *latent* Deity, or latent force, which at its first manifestation
became WILL, and thus communicated the first impulse to these
atoms--whose agglomeration, is matter. This vacuum was but another name
for chaos, and an unsatisfactory one, for, according to the Peripatetics
"nature abhors a vacuum."

That before Democritus the ancients were familiar with the idea of the
indestructibility of matter is proved by their allegories and numerous
other facts. Movers gives a definition of the Phoenician idea of the
ideal sun-light as a spiritual influence issuing from the highest God,
**I**AO, "the light conceivable only by intellect--the physical and
spiritual Principle of all things; out of which the soul emanates." It
was the male Essence, or Wisdom, while the primitive matter or *Chaos*
was the female. Thus the two first principles--co-eternal and infinite,
were already with the primitive Phoenicians, spirit and matter.
Therefore the theory is as old as the world; for Democritus was not the
first philosopher who taught it; and intuition existed in man before the
ultimate development of his reason. But it is in the denial of the
boundless and endless Entity, possessor of that invisible Will which we
for lack of a better term call **G**OD, that lies the powerlessness of
every materialistic science to explain the occult phenomena. It is in
the rejection *a priori* of everything which might force them to cross
the boundary of exact science and step into the domain of psychological,
or, if we prefer, metaphysical physiology, that we find the secret cause
of their discomfiture by the manifestations, and their absurd theories
to account for them. The ancient philosophy affirmed that it is in
consequence of the manifestation of that Will--termed by Plato *the
Divine Idea--*that everything visible and invisible

###### <span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

sprung into existence. As that Intelligent Idea, which, by directing its
sole will-power toward a centre of localized forces called objective
forms into being, so can man, the microcosm of the great Macrocosm, do
the same in proportion with the development of his will-power. The
imaginary atoms--a figure of speech employed by Democritus, and
gratefully seized upon by the materialists--are like automatic workmen
moved inwardIy by the influx of that Universal Will directed upon them,
and which, manifesting itself as force, sets them into activity. The
plan of the structure to be erected is in the brain of the Architect,
and reflects his will; abstract as yet, from the instant of the
conception it becomes concrete through these atoms which follow
faithfully every line, point and figure traced in the imagination of the
Divine Geometer.

As God creates, so man can create. Given a certain intensity of will,
and the shapes created by the mind become subjective. Hallucinations,
they are called, although to their creator they are real as any visible
object is to any one else. Given a more intense and intelligent
concentration of this will, and the form becomes concrete, visible,
objective; the man has learned the secret of secrets; he is a MAGICIAN.

The materialist should not object to this logic, for he regards thought
as matter. Conceding it to be so, the cunning mechanism contrived by the
inventor; the fairy scenes born in the poet's brain; the gorgeous
painting limned by the artist's fancy; the peerless statue chiselled in
ether by the sculptor; the palaces and castles built in air by the
architect--all these, though invisible and subjective, must exist, for
they are matter, shaped and moulded. Who shall say, then, that there are
not some men of such imperial will as to be able to drag these air-drawn
fancies into view, enveloped in the hard casing of gross substance to
make them tangible?

If the French scientists reaped no laurels in the new field of
investigation, what more was done in England, until the day when Mr.
Crookes offered himself in atonement for the sins of the learned body?
Why, Mr. Faraday, some twenty years ago, actually condescended to be
spoken to once or twice upon the subject. Faraday, whose name is
pronounced by the anti-spiritualists in every discussion upon the
phenomena, as a sort of scientific charm against the evil-eye of
Spiritualism, Faraday, who "blushed" for having published his researches
upon such a degrading belief, is now proved on good authority to have
never sat at a tipping table himself at all! We have but to open a few
stray numbers of the *Journal des Debats,* published while a noted
Scotch medium was in England, to recall the past events in all their
primitive freshness. In one of these numbers, Dr. Foucault, of Paris,
comes out as a champion for the eminent English experimenter. "Pray, do
not imagine," says he,

###### <span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

"that the grand physicist had ever himself condescended so far as to sit
prosaically at a jumping table." Whence, then, came the "blushes" which
suffused the cheeks of the "Father of Experimental Philosophy"?
Remembering this fact, we will now examine the nature of Faraday's
beautiful "Indicator," the extraordinary "Medium-Catcher," invented by
him for the detection of mediumistic fraud. That complicated machine,
the memory of which haunts like a nightmare the dreams of dishonest
mediums, is carefully described in Comte de Mirville's

Question des Esprits.

The better to prove to the experimenters the reality of their own
impulsion, Professor Faraday placed several card-board disks, united to
each other and stuck to the table by a half-soft glue, which, making the
whole adhere for a time together, would, nevertheless, yield to a
continuous pressure. Now, the table having turned--yes, actually *having
dared to turn before Mr. Faraday,* which fact is of some value, at
least--the disks were examined; and, as they were found to have
gradually displaced themselves by slipping in the same direction as the
table, it thus became an unquestionable proof that the experimenters had
*pushed* the tables themselves.

Another of the so-called scientific tests, so useful in a phenomenon
alleged to be either spiritual or psychical, consisted of a small
instrument which immediately warned the witnesses of the slightest
personal impulsion on their part, or rather, according to Mr. Faraday's
own expression, "it warned them when they changed from the passive to
the active state." This needle which betrayed the active motion proved
but one thing, viz.: the action of a force which either emanated from
the sitters or controlled them. And who has ever said that there is no
such force? Every one admits so much, whether this force passes through
the operator, as it is generally shown, or acts independently of him, as
is so often the case. "The whole mystery consisted in the disproportion
of the force employed by the operators, who pushed because they were
forced to push, with certain effects of rotation, or rather, of a really
marvellous race. In the presence of such prodigious effects, how could
any one imagine that the Lilliputian experiments of that kind could have
any value in this newly discovered Land of Giants?" <span
id="fr_89"></span>[\*](#fn_89.md)

Professor Agassiz, who occupied in America nearly the same eminent
position as a scientist which Mr. Faraday did in England, acted with a
still greater unfairness. Professor J. R. Buchanan, the distinguished
anthropologist, who has treated Spiritualism in some respects more
scientifically than any one else in America, speaks of Agassiz, in a
recent article, with

###### <span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

a very just indignation. For, of all other men, Professor Agassiz ought
to believe in a phenomenon to which he had been a subject himself. But
now that both Faraday and Agassiz are themselves *disembodied,* we can
do better by questioning the living than the dead.

Thus a force whose secret powers were thoroughly familiar to the ancient
theurgists, is denied by modern skeptics. The antediluvian children--who
perhaps played with it, using it as the boys in Bulwer-Lytton's *Coming
Race,* use the tremendous "*vril*"--called it the "Water of Phtha";
their descendants named it the *Anima Mundi,* the soul of the universe;
and still later the mediaeval hermetists termed it "sidereal light," or
the "Milk of the Celestial Virgin," the "Magnes," and many other names.
But our modern learned men will neither accept nor recognize it under
such appellations; for it pertains to *magic,* and magic is, in their
conception, a disgraceful superstition.

Apollonius and Iamblichus held that it was not "in the knowledge of
things *without,* but in the perfection of the soul *within*, that lies
the empire of man, aspiring to be more than men." <span
id="fr_90"></span>[\*](#fn_90.md) Thus they had arrived at a perfect
cognizance of their godlike souls, the powers of which they used with
all the wisdom, outgrowth of esoteric study of the hermetic lore,
inherited by them from their forefathers. But our philosophers, tightly
shutting themselves up in their shells of flesh, cannot or dare not
carry their timid gaze beyond the *comprehensible.* For them there is no
future life; there are no godlike dreams, they scorn them as
unscientific; for them the men of old are but "ignorant ancestors," as
they express it; and whenever they meet during their physiological
researches with an author who believes that this mysterious yearning
after spiritual knowledge is inherent in every human being, and cannot
have been given us utterly in vain, they regard him with contemptuous
pity.

Says a Persian proverb: "The darker the sky is, the brighter the stars
will shine." Thus, on the dark firmament of the mediaeval ages began
appearing the mysterious Brothers of the Rosie Cross. They formed no
associations, they built no colleges; for, hunted up and down like so
many wild beasts, when caught by the Christian Church, they were
unceremoniously roasted. "As religion forbids it," says Bayle, "to spill
blood," therefore, "to elude the maxim, *Ecclesia non novit sanguinem,*
they burned human beings, as burning a man does not *shed his blood!*"

Many of these mystics, by following what they were taught by some
treatises, secretly preserved from one generation to another, achieved
discoveries which would not be despised even in our modern days of exact
sciences. Roger Bacon, the friar, was laughed at as a quack, and

###### <span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

is now generally numbered among "pretenders" to magic art; but his
discoveries were nevertheless accepted, and are now used by those who
ridicule him the most. Roger Bacon belonged by right if not by fact to
that Brotherhood which includes all those who study the occult sciences.
Living in the thirteenth century, almost a contemporary, therefore, of
Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas, his discoveries--such as gunpowder
and optical glasses, and his mechanical achievements--were considered by
every one as so many miracles. He was accused of having made a compact
with the Evil One.

In the legendary history of Friar Bacon, as "well as in an old play
written by Robert Green, a dramatist in the days of Queen Elizabeth, it
is recounted, that, having been summoned before the king, the friar was
induced to show" some of his skill before her majesty the queen. So he
waved his hand (*his wand,* says the text), and "presently was heard
such excellent music, that they all said they had never heard the like."
Then there was heard a still louder music and four apparitions suddenly
presented themselves and danced until they vanished and disappeared in
the air. Then he waved his wand again, and suddenly there was such a
smell "as if all the rich perfumes in the whole world had been there
prepared in the best manner that art could set them out." Then Roger
Bacon having promised a gentleman to show him his sweetheart, he pulled
a hanging in the king's apartment aside and every one in the room saw "a
kitchen-maid with a basting-ladle in her hand." The proud gentleman,
although he recognized the maiden who disappeared as suddenly as she had
appeared, was enraged at the humiliating spectacle, and threatened the
friar with his revenge. What does the magician do? He simply answers:
"Threaten not, lest I do you more shame; and do you take heed how you
give *scholars* the lie again!"

As a commentary on this, the modern historian <span
id="fr_91"></span>[\*](#fn_91.md) remarks: "This may be taken as a sort of
exemplification of the class of exhibitions which were probably the
result of a *superior knowledge* of natural sciences." No one ever
doubted that it was the result of precisely such a knowledge, and the
hermetists, magicians, astrologers and alchemists never claimed anything
else. It certainly was not their fault that the ignorant masses, under
the influence of an unscrupulous and fanatical clergy, should have
attributed all such works to the agency of the devil. In view of the
atrocious tortures provided by the Inquisition for all suspected of
either black or white magic, it is not strange that these philosophers
neither boasted nor even acknowledged the fact of such an intercourse.
On the contrary, their own writings prove that they held that magic is
"no more than the

###### <span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

application of natural active causes to passive things or subjects; by
means thereof, many tremendously surprising but yet natural effects are
produced."

The phenomena of the mystic odors and music, exhibited by Roger Bacon,
have been often observed in our own time. To say nothing of our personal
experience, we are informed by English correspondents of the
Theosophical Society that they have heard strains of the most ravishing
music, coming from no visible instrument, and inhaled a succession of
delightful odors produced, as they believed, by spirit-agency. One
correspondent tells us that so powerful was one of these familiar
odors--that of sandal-wood--that the house would be impregnated with it
for weeks after the seance. The medium in this case was a member of a
private family, and the experiments were all made within the domestic
circle. Another describes what he calls a "*musical* rap." The potencies
that are now capable of producing these phenomena must have existed and
been equally efficacious in the days of Roger Bacon. As to the
apparitions, it suffices to say that they are evoked now in
spiritualistic circles, and guaranteed by scientists, and their
evocation by Roger Bacon is thus made more probable than ever.

Baptista Porta, in his treatise on *Natural Magic,* enumerates a whole
catalogue of secret formulae for producing extraordinary effects by
employing the occult powers of nature. Although the "magicians" believed
as firmly as our spiritualists in a world of invisible spirits, none of
them claimed to produce his effects under their control or through their
sole help. They knew too well how difficult it is to keep away the
elementary creatures when they have once found the door wide open. Even
the magic of the ancient Chaldeans was but a profound knowledge of the
powers of simples and minerals. It was only when the theurgist desired
*divine* help in spiritual and earthly matters that he sought direct
communication through religious rites, with pure spiritual beings. With
them, even, those spirits who remain invisible and communicate with
mortals through their awakened inner senses, as in clairvoyance,
clairaudience and trance, could only be evoked *subjectively* and as a
result of purity of life and prayer. But all physical phenomena were
produced simply by applying a knowledge of natural forces, although
certainly not by the method of legerdemain, practiced in our days by
conjurers.

Men possessed of such knowledge and exercising such powers patiently
toiled for something better than the vain glory of a passing fame.
Seeking it not, they became immortal, as do all who labor for the good
of the race, forgetful of mean self. Illuminated with the light of
eternal truth, these rich-poor alchemists fixed their attention upon the
things that lie beyond the common ken, recognizing nothing inscrutable
but the First

###### <span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

Cause, and finding no question unsolvable. To dare, to know, to will,
and REMAIN SILENT, was their constant rule; to be beneficent, unselfish,
and unpretending, were, with them, spontaneous impulses. Disdaining the
rewards of petty traffic, spurning wealth, luxury, pomp, and worldly
power, they aspired to knowledge as the most satisfying of all
acquisitions. They esteemed poverty, hunger, toil, and the evil report
of men, as none too great a price to pay for its achievement. They, who
might have lain on downy, velvet-covered beds, suffered themselves to
die in hospitals and by the wayside, rather than debase their souls and
allow the profane cupidity of those who tempted them to triumph over
their sacred vows. The lives of Paracelsus, Cornelius Agrippa, and
Philalethes are too well known to repeat the old, sad story.

If spiritualists are anxious to keep strictly dogmatic in their notions
of the "spirit-world," they must not set *scientists* to investigate
their phenomena in the true experimental spirit. The attempt would most
surely result in a partial re-discovery of the magic of old--that of
Moses and Paracelsus. Under the deceptive beauty of some of their
apparitions, they might find some day the sylphs and fair Undines of the
Rosicrucians playing in the currents of *psychic* and *odic* force.

Already Mr. Crookes, who fully credits the *being,* feels that under the
fair skin of Katie, covering a simulacrum of heart borrowed partially
from the medium and the circle, there is *no soul!* And the learned
authors of *The Unseen Universe,* abandoning their "electro-biological"
theory, begin to perceive in the universal ether the *possibility* that
it is a photographic album of **E**N-**S**OPH--the Boundless.

We are far from believing that all the spirits that communicate at
circles are of the classes called "Elemental," and "Elementary."
Many--especially among those who control the medium subjectively to
speak, write, and otherwise act in various ways--are human, disembodied
spirits. Whether the majority of such spirits are good or *bad,* largely
depends on the private morality of the medium, much on the circle
present, and a great deal on the intensity and object of their purpose.
If this object is merely to gratify curiosity and to pass the time, it
is useless to expect anything serious. But, in any case, human spirits
can *never* materialize themselves in *propria persona.* These can never
appear to the investigator clothed with warm, solid flesh, sweating
hands and faces, and grossly-material bodies. The most they can do is to
project their aethereal reflection on the atmospheric waves, and if the
touch of their hands and clothing can become upon rare occasions
objective to the senses of a living mortal, it will be felt as a passing
breeze gently sweeping over the touched spot, not as a human hand or
material body. It is useless to plead that the "materialized spirits"
that have exhibited themselves with

###### <span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

beating hearts and loud voices (with or without a trumpet) are *human*
spirits. The voices--if such sound can be termed a voice at all--of a
spiritual apparition once heard can hardly be forgotten. That of a pure
spirit is like the tremulous murmur of an Æolian harp echoed from a
distance; the voice of a suffering, hence impure, if not utterly bad
spirit, may be assimilated to a human voice issuing from an empty
barrel.

This is not *our* philosophy, but that of the numberless generations of
theurgists and magicians, and based upon their practical experience. The
testimony of antiquity is positive on this subject: Δαιμονιοιν φοναι
αναρθροι εισι. . . . <span id="fr_92"></span>[\*](#fn_92.md) The voices of
spirits are not articulated. The spirit-voice consists of a series of
sounds which conveys the impression of a column of compressed air
ascending from beneath upward, and spreading around the living
interlocutor. The many eye-witnesses who testified in the case of
Elizabeth Eslinger, namely: <span id="fr_93"></span>[\*\*](#fn_93.md) the
deputy-governor of the prison of Weinsberg, Mayer, Eckhart, Theurer, and
Knorr (sworn evidence), Duttenhofer, and Kapff, the mathematician,
testified that they saw the apparition *like a pillar of clouds.* For
the space of eleven weeks, Doctor Kerner and his sons, several Lutheran
ministers, the advocate Fraas, the engraver Duttenhofer, two physicians,
Siefer and Sicherer, the judge Heyd, and the Baron von Hugel, with many
others, followed this manifestation daily. During the time it lasted,
the prisoner Elizabeth prayed with a loud voice uninterruptedly;
therefore, as the "spirit" was talking at the same time, it could be no
ventriloquism; and that voice, they say, "had nothing *human* in it; no
one could imitate its sounds."

Further on we will give abundant proofs from ancient authors concerning
this neglected truism. We will now only again assert that no spirit
claimed by the spiritualists to be human was ever proved to be such on
sufficient testimony. The influence of the *disembodied* ones can be
felt, and communicated *subjectively* by them to sensitives. They can
produce *objective* manifestations, but they cannot produce *themselves*
otherwise than as described above. They can control the body of a
medium, and express their desires and ideas in various modes well known
to spiritualists; but not *materialize* what is matterless and purely
spiritual--their *divine essence.* Thus every so-called
"materialization"--when genuine--is either produced (*perhaps*) by the
will of that spirit whom the "appearance" is claimed to be but can only
personate at best, or by the elementary goblins themselves, which are
generally too stupid to deserve the honor of being called devils. Upon
rare occasions the spirits are able to subdue and control these soulless
beings, which are ever ready to

###### <span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

assume pompous names if left to themselves, in such a way that the
mischievous spirit "of the air," shaped in the real image of the *human*
spirit, will be moved by the latter like a marionette, and unable to
either act or utter other words than those imposed on him by the
"immortal soul." But this requires many conditions generally unknown to
the circles of even spiritualists most in the habit of regularly
attending seances. Not every one can attract *human* spirits who likes.
One of the most powerful attractions of our departed ones is their
strong affection for those whom they have left on earth. It draws them
irresistibly, by degrees, into the current of the Astral Light vibrating
between the person sympathetic to them and the Universal Soul. Another
very important condition is harmony, and the magnetic purity of the
persons present.

If this philosophy is wrong, if all the "materialized" forms emerging
*in darkened* rooms from still *darker* cabinets, are spirits of men who
once lived upon this earth, why such a difference between them and the
*ghosts* that appear unexpectedly--*ex abrupto--*without either cabinet
or medium? Who ever heard of the apparitions, unrestful "souls,"
hovering about the spots where they were murdered, or coming back for
some other mysterious reasons of their own, with "warm hands" feeling
*like living flesh,* and but that they are known to be dead and buried,
not distinguishable from living mortals? We have well-attested facts of
such apparitions making themselves suddenly visible, but never, until
the beginning of the era of the "materializations," did we see anything
like them. In the *Medium and Day Break,* of September 8, 1876, we read
a letter from "a lady travelling on the continent," narrating a
circumstance that happened in a haunted house. She says: ". . . A
strange sound proceeded from a darkened corner of the library . . . on
looking up she perceived a *cloud or column of luminous vapor*; . . . .
the earth-bound spirit was hovering about the spot rendered accursed by
his evil deed. . . ." As this spirit was doubtless a *genuine*
elementary apparition, which made itself visible of its own free
will--in short, an *umbra--*it was, as every respectable shadow should
be, visible but impalpable, or if palpable at all, communicating to the
feeling of touch the sensation of a mass of water suddenly clasped in
the hand, or of condensed but cold steam. It was *luminous* and
*vapory;* for aught we can tell it might have been the real personal
umbra of the "spirit," persecuted, and earth-bound, either by its own
remorse and crimes or those of another person or spirit. The mysteries
of after-death are many, and modern "materializations" only make them
cheap and ridiculous in the eyes of the indifferent.

To these assertions may be opposed a fact well known among
spiritualists: *The writer has publicly certified to having seen such
materialized forms.* We have most assuredly done so, and are ready to
repeat the

###### <span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

testimony. We have recognized such figures as the visible
representations of acquaintances, friends, and even relatives. We have,
in company with many other spectators, heard them pronounce words in
languages unfamiliar not only to the medium and to every one else in the
room, except ourselves, but, in some cases, to almost if not quite every
medium in America and Europe, for they were the tongues of Eastern
tribes and peoples. At the time, these instances were justly regarded as
conclusive proofs of the genuine mediumship of the uneducated Vermont
farmer who sat in the "cabinet." But, nevertheless, these figures were
*not* the forms of the persons they appeared to be. They were simply
their portrait statues, constructed, animated and operated by the
elementaries. If we have not previously elucidated this point, it was
because the spiritualistic public was not then ready to even listen to
the fundamental proposition that there are elemental and elementary
spirits. Since that time this subject has been broached and more or less
widely discussed. There is less hazard now in attempting to launch upon
the restless sea of criticism the hoary philosophy of the ancient sages,
for there has been some preparation of the public mind to consider it
with impartiality and deliberation. Two years of agitation have effected
a marked change for the better.

Pausanias writes that four hundred years after the battle of Marathon,
there were still heard in the place where it was fought, the *neighing
of horses* and the shouts of shadowy soldiers. Supposing that the
spectres of the slaughtered soldiers were their genuine spirits, they
looked like "shadows," not materialized men. Who, then, or what,
produced the neighing of horses? *Equine* "spirits"? And if it be
pronounced untrue that horses have spirits--which assuredly no one among
zoologists, physiologists or psychologists, or even spiritualists, can
either prove or disprove--then must we take it for granted that it was
the "immortal souls" of men which produced the neighing at Marathon to
make the historical battle scene more vivid and dramatic? The phantoms
of dogs, cats, and various other animals have been repeatedly seen, and
the world-wide testimony is as trustworthy upon this point as that with
respect to human apparitions. Who or *what* personates, if we are
allowed such an expression, the ghosts of departed animals? Is it,
again, human spirits? As the matter now stands, there is no side issue;
we have either to admit that animals have surviving spirits and souls as
well as ourselves, or hold with Porphyry that there are in the
*invisible* world a kind of tricky and malicious demons, intermediary
beings between living men and "gods," spirits that delight in appearing
under every imaginable shape, beginning with the human form, and ending
with those of multifarious animals. <span id="fr_94"></span>[\*](#fn_94.md)

###### <span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

Before venturing to decide the question whether the spectral animal
forms so frequently seen and attested are the returning spirits of dead
beasts, we must carefully consider their reported behavior. Do these
spectres act according to the habits and display the same instincts, as
the animals during life? Do the spectral beasts of prey lie in wait for
victims, and timid animals flee before the presence of man; or do the
latter show a malevolence and disposition to annoy, quite foreign to
their natures? Many victims of these obsessions--notably, the afflicted
persons of Salem and other historical witchcrafts--testify to having
seen dogs, cats, pigs, and other animals, entering their rooms, biting
them, trampling upon their sleeping bodies, and *talking* to them;
*often inciting them to suicide and other crimes.* In the well-attested
case of Elizabeth Eslinger, mentioned by Dr. Kerner, the apparition of
the ancient priest of Wimmenthal <span id="fr_95"></span>[\*](#fn_95.md)
was accompanied by a large black dog, which he called *his father,* and
which dog in the presence of numerous witnesses jumped on all the beds
of the prisoners. At another time the priest appeared with a lamb, and
sometimes with two lambs. Most of those accused at Salem were charged by
the seeresses with consulting and plotting mischief with yellow birds,
which would sit on their shoulder or on the beams overhead. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[\*\*](#fn_96.md) And unless we discredit the testimony
of thousands of witnesses, in all parts of the world, and in all ages,
and allow a monopoly of seership to modern mediums, spectre-animals do
appear and manifest all the worst traits of depraved human nature,
without themselves being human. What, then, can they be but elementals?

Descartes was one of the few who believed and dared say that to occult
medicine we shall owe discoveries "destined to extend the domain of
philosophy"; and Brierre de Boismont not only shared in these hopes but
openly avowed his sympathy with "supernaturalism," which he considered
the universal "grand creed." ". . . We think with Guizot," he says,
"that the existence of society is bound up in it. It *is in vain* that
modern reason, which, notwithstanding its *positivism,* cannot explain
the intimate cause of any phenomena, *rejects the supernatural;* it is
universal, and at the root of all hearts. The most elevated minds are
frequently its most ardent disciples." <span
id="fr_97"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_97.md)

Christopher Columbus discovered America, and Americus Vespucius reaped
the glory and usurped his dues. Theophrastus Paracelsus rediscovered the
occult properties of the magnet--"the bone of Horus" which, twelve
centuries before his time, had played such an important part in the
theurgic mysteries--and he very naturally became the founder

###### <span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

of the school of magnetism and of mediaeval magico-theurgy. But Mesmer,
who lived nearly three hundred years after him, and as a disciple of his
school brought the magnetic wonders before the public, reaped the glory
that was due to the fire-philosopher, while the great master died in a
hospital!

So goes the world: new discoveries, evolving from old sciences; new
men--the same old nature!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[43:\*](iu001.htm#fr_58.md) W. Crookes, **F.R.S**.:
"Researches in the Phenomena of Spiritualism."

<span id="fn_59"></span>[44:\*](iu001.htm#fr_59.md) W. Crookes:
"Experiments on Psychic Force," page 25.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[45:\*](iu001.htm#fr_60.md) W. Crookes:
"Spiritualism Viewed by the Light of Modern Science." See "Quarterly
Journal of Science."

<span id="fn_61"></span>[45:\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_61.md) A. Aksakof:
"Phenomena of Mediumism."

<span id="fn_62"></span>[46:\*](iu001.htm#fr_62.md) A. N. Aksakof:
"Phenomena of Mediumism."

<span id="fn_63"></span>[48:\*](iu001.htm#fr_63.md) "The Last of Katie
King," pamphlet iii., p. 119.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[48:\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_64.md) Ibid., pam. i., p. 7.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[48:\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_65.md) "The Last of Katie
King," pamp. iii., p. 112.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[48:\*\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_66.md) Ibid., p. 112.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[48:\*\*\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_67.md) "Researches in
the Phenomena of Spiritualism," p. 45.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[52:\*](iu001.htm#fr_68.md) Pfaff's "Astrology."
Berl.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[52:\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_69.md) "Medico-Surgical
Essays."

<span id="fn_70"></span>[52:\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_70.md) "The Philosophy of
Hist."

<span id="fn_71"></span>[52:\*\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_71.md) On Theoph.
Paracelsus.--Magic.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[52:\*\*\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_72.md) Kemshead says
in his "Inorganic Chemistry" that "the element *hydrogen* was first
mentioned in the sixteenth century by Paracelsus, but very little was
known of it in any way." (P. 66.) And why not be fair and confess at
once that Paracelsus was the *re*-discoverer of hydrogen as he was the
*re*-discoverer of the hidden properties of the magnet and animal
magnetism? It is easy to show that according to the strict vows of
secrecy taken and faithfully observed by every Rosicrucian (and
especially by the alchemist) he kept his knowledge secret. Perhaps it
would not prove a very difficult task for any chemist well versed in the
works of Paracelsus to demonstrate that *oxygen*, the discovery of which
is credited to Priestley, was known to the Rosicrucian alchemists as
well as hydrogen.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[54:\*](iu001.htm#fr_73.md) "Letter to J. Glanvil,
chaplain to the king and a fellow of the Royal Society." Glanvil was the
author of the celebrated work on Apparitions and Demonology entitled
"Sadducismus Triumphatus, or a full and plain evidence concerning
witches and apparitions," in two parts, "proving partly by Scripture,
and partly by a choice collection of modern relations, the real
existence of apparitions, spirits and witches."--1700.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[55:\*](iu001.htm#fr_74.md) Plato: "Timaeus
Soerius," 97.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[55:\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_75.md) See Movers'
"Explanations," 268.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[56:\*](iu001.htm#fr_76.md) Cory: "Chaldean
Oracles," 243.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[56:\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_77.md) Philo Judaeus: "On
the Creation," x.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[56:\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_78.md) Movers:
"Phoinizer," 282.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[56:\*\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_79.md) K. O. Muller,
236.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[56:\*\*\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_80.md) Weber: "Akad.
Vorles," 213, 214, etc.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[56:\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_81.md) Plutarch,
"Isis and Osiris," i., vi.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[56:\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_82.md) "Spirit
History of Man," p. 88.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[56:\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_83.md) Movers:
"Phoinizer," 268.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[56:\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_84.md) Cory:
"Fragments," 240.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[58:\*](iu001.htm#fr_85.md) "Parerga," ii., pp.
111, 112.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[59:\*](iu001.htm#fr_86.md) See Huxley: "Physical
Basis of Life."

<span id="fn_87"></span>[60:\*](iu001.htm#fr_87.md) Schopenhauer:
"Parerga." Art. on "Will in Nature."

<span id="fn_88"></span>[60:\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_88.md) "Revue des Deux
Mondes," Jan. 15, 1855, p. 108.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[63:\*](iu001.htm#fr_89.md) Comte de Mirville:
"Question des Esprits."

<span id="fn_90"></span>[64:\*](iu001.htm#fr_90.md) Bulwer-Lytton:
"Zanoni."

<span id="fn_91"></span>[65:\*](iu001.htm#fr_91.md) T. Wright: "Narratives
of Sorcery and Magic."

<span id="fn_92"></span>[68:\*](iu001.htm#fr_92.md) See Des Mousseaux's
"Dodone," and "Dieu et les dieux," p. 326.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[68:\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_93.md) "Apparitions,"
translated by C. Crowe, pp. 388, 391, 399.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[70:\*](iu001.htm#fr_94.md) "De Abstinentia," etc.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[71:\*](iu001.htm#fr_95.md) C. Crowe: "On
Apparitions," p. 398.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[71:\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_96.md) Upham: "Salem
Witchcraft."

<span id="fn_97"></span>[71:\*\*\*](iu001.htm#fr_97.md) Brierre de
Boismont: "On Hallucinations," p. 60.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](iu002.md)
