[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Theosophy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iu012)  [Next](iu014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="page_515">p. 515</span>

### CHAPTER XIV.

> "The transactions of this our city of Sais, are recorded in our sacred
> writings during a period of 8,000 years."--**P**LATO: *Timaeus*.

> "The Egyptians assert that from the reign of Heracles to that of
> Amasis, 17,000 years elapsed."--**H**ERODOTUS, lib. ii., c. 43.

> "Can the theologian derive no light from the pure, primeval faith that
> glimmers from Egyptian hieroglyphics, to illustrate the immortality of
> the soul? Will not the historian deign to notice the prior origin of
> every art and science in Egypt, a thousand years before the Pelasgians
> studded the isles and capes of the Archipelago with their forts and
> temples?"--**G**LIDDON.

HOW came Egypt by her knowledge? When broke the dawn of that
civilization whose wondrous perfection is suggested by the bits and
fragments supplied to us by the archaeologists? Alas! the lips of Memnon
are silent, and no longer utter oracles; the Sphinx has become a greater
riddle in her speechlessness than was the enigma propounded to OEdipus.

What Egypt taught to others she certainly did not acquire by the
international exchange of ideas and discoveries with her Semitic
neighbors, nor from them did she receive her stimulus. "The more we
learn of the Egyptians," observes the writer of a recent article, "the
more marvellous they seem!" From whom could she have learned her
wondrous arts, the secrets of which died with her? She sent no agents
throughout the world to learn what others knew; but to her the wise men
of neighboring nations resorted for knowledge. Proudly secluding herself
within her enchanted domain, the fair queen of the desert created
wonders as if by the sway of a magic staff. "Nothing," remarks the same
writer, whom we have elsewhere quoted, "proves that civilization and
knowledge then rise and progress with her as in the case of other
peoples, but everything seems to be referable, in the same perfection,
*to the earliest dates.* That no nation knew as much as herself, is a
fact demonstrated by history."

May we not assign as a reason for this remark the fact that until very
recently nothing was known of Old India? That these two nations, India
and Egypt, were akin? That they were the oldest in the group of nations;
and that the Eastern Ethiopians--the mighty builders--had come from
India as a matured people, bringing their civilization with

###### <span id="page_516">p. 516</span>

them, and colonizing the perhaps unoccupied Egyptian territory? But we
defer a more complete elaboration of this theme for our second
volume. <span id="fr_722"></span>[\*](#fn_721)

"Mechanism," says Eusebe Salverte, "was carried by the ancients to a
point of perfection that has never been attained in modern times. We
would inquire if their inventions have been surpassed in our age?
Certainly not; and at the present day, with all the means that the
progress of science and modern discovery have placed in the hands of the
mechanic, have we not been assailed by numerous difficulties in striving
to place on a pedestal one of those monoliths that the Egyptians forty
centuries ago erected in such numbers before their sacred edifices."

As far back as we can glance into history, to the reign of Menes, the
most ancient of the kings that we know anything about, we find proofs
that the Egyptians were far better acquainted with hydrostatics and
hydraulic engineering than ourselves. The gigantic work of turning the
course of the Nile--or rather of its three principal branches--and
bringing it to Memphis, was accomplished during the reign of that
monarch, who appears to us as distant in the abyss of time as a
far-glimmering star in the heavenly vault. Says Wilkinson: "Menes took
accurately the measure of the power which he had to oppose, and he
constructed a dyke whose lofty mounds and enormous embankments turned
the water eastward, and since that time the river is contained in its
new bed." Herodotus has left us a poetical, but still accurate
description of the lake Moeris, so called after the Pharaoh who caused
this artificial sheet of water to be formed.

The historian has described this lake as measuring 450 miles in
circumference, and 300 feet in depth. It was fed through artificial
channels by the Nile, and made to store a portion of the annual overflow
for the irrigation of the country, for many miles round. Its numerous
floodgates, dams, locks, and convenient engines were constructed with
the greatest skill. The Romans, at a far later period, got their notions
on hydraulic constructions from the Egyptians, but our latest progress
in the science of hydrostatics has demonstrated the fact of a great
deficiency on their part in some branches of that knowledge. Thus, for
instance, if they were acquainted with that which is called in
hydrostatics the great law, they seem to have been less familiar with
what our modern engineers know as water-tight joints. Their ignorance is
sufficiently proved by their conveying the water through large level
aqueducts, instead of doing it at a less expense by iron pipes beneath
the surface. But the Egyptians evidently employed a far superior method
in their channels and artificial water-works. Notwithstanding this, the
modern engineers employed by

###### <span id="page_517">p. 517</span>

Lesseps for the Suez Canal, who had learned from the ancient Romans all
their art could teach them, deriving, in their turn, their knowledge
from Egypt--scoffed at the suggestion that they should seek a remedy for
some imperfections in their work by studying the contents of the various
Egyptian museums. Nevertheless, the engineers succeeded in giving to the
banks of that "long and ugly ditch," as Professor Carpenter calls the
Suez Canal, sufficient strength to make it a navigable water-way,
instead of a mud-trap for vessels as it was at first.

The alluvial deposits of the Nile, during the past thirty centuries,
have completely altered the area of the Delta, so that it is continually
growing seaward, and adding to the territory of the Khedive. In ancient
times, the principal mouth of the river was called Pelusian; and the
canal cut by one of the kings--the canal of Necho--led from Suez to this
branch. After the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra, at Actium, it was
proposed that a portion of the fleet should pass through the canal to
the Red Sea, which shows the depth of water that those early engineers
had secured. Settlers in Colorado and Arizona have recently reclaimed
large tracts of barren land by a system of irrigation; receiving from
the journals of the day no little praise for their ingenuity. But, for a
distance of 500 miles above Cairo, there stretches a strip of land
reclaimed from the desert, and made, according to Professor Carpenter,
"the most fertile on the face of the earth." He says, "for thousands of
years these branch canals have conveyed fresh water from the Nile, to
fertilize the land of this long narrow strip, as well as of the Delta."
He describes "the net-work of canals over the Delta, which dates from an
early period of the Egyptian monarchs."

The French province of Artois has given its name to the Artesian well,
as though that form of engineering had been first applied in that
district; but, if we consult the Chinese records, we find such wells to
have been in common use ages before the Christian era.

If we now turn to architecture, we find displayed before our eyes,
wonders which baffle all description. Referring to the temples of
Philae, Abu Simbel, Dendera, Edfu, and Karnak, Professor Carpenter
remarks that "these stupendous and beautiful erections . . . these
gigantic pyramids and temples" have a "vastness and beauty" which are
"still impressive after the lapse of thousands of years." He is amazed
at "the admirable character of the workmanship; the stones in most cases
being fitted together with astonishing nicety, so that a knife could
hardly be thrust between the joints." He noticed in his amateur
archaeological pilgrimage, another of those "curious coincidences" which
his Holiness, the Pope, may feel some interest in learning. He is
speaking of the Egyptian *Book of the Dead,* sculptured on the old
monuments, and the

###### <span id="page_518">p. 518</span>

ancient belief in the immortality of the soul. "Now, it is most
remarkable," says the professor, "to see that not only this belief, but
the language in which it was expressed in the ancient Egyptian times,
anticipated that of the Christian Revelation. For, in this *Book of the
Dead,* there are used the very phrases we find in the *New Testament,*
in connection with the day of judgment"; and he admits that this
hierogram was "engraved, probably, 2,000 years before the time of
Christ."

According to Bunsen, who is considered to have made the most exact
calculations, the mass of masonry in the great Pyramid of Cheops
measures 82,111,000 feet, and would weigh 6,316,000 tons. The immense
numbers of squared stones show us the unparalleled skill of the Egyptian
quarrymen. Speaking of the great pyramid, Kenrick says: "The joints are
scarcely perceptible, not wider than the thickness of silver paper, and
the cement is so tenacious, that fragments of the casing-stones still
remain in their original position, notwithstanding the lapse of many
centuries, and the violence by which they were detached." Who, of our
modern architects and chemists, will rediscover the indestructible
cement of the oldest Egyptian buildings?

"The skill of the ancients in quarrying," says Bunsen, "is displayed the
most in the extracting of the huge blocks, out of which obelisks and
colossal statues were hewn--obelisks ninety feet high, and statues forty
feet high, made out of one stone!" There are many such. They did not
blast out the blocks for these monuments, but adopted the following
scientific method: Instead of using huge iron wedges, which would have
split the stone, they cut a small groove for the whole length of,
perhaps, 100 feet, and inserted in it, close to each other, a great
number of dry wooden wedges; after which they poured water into the
groove, and the wedges swelling and bursting simultaneously, with a
tremendous force, broke out the huge stone, as neatly as a diamond cuts
a pane of glass.

Modern geographers and geologists have demonstrated that these monoliths
were brought from a prodigious distance, and have been at a loss to
conjecture how the transport was effected. Old manuscripts say that it
was done by the help of portable rails. These rested upon inflated bags
of hide, rendered indestructible by the same process as that used for
preserving the mummies. These ingenious air-cushions prevented the rails
from sinking in the deep sand. Manetho mentions them, and remarks that
they were so well prepared that they would endure wear and tear for
centuries.

The date of the hundreds of pyramids in the Valley of the Nile is
impossible to fix by any of the rules of modern science; but Herodotus
informs us that each successive king erected one to commemorate his

###### <span id="page_519">p. 519</span>

reign, and serve as his sepulchre. But, Herodotus did not tell all,
although he knew that the *real* purpose of the pyramid was very
different from that which he assigns to it. Were it not for his
religious scruples, he might have added that, externally, it symbolized
the creative principle of nature, and illustrated also the principles of
geometry, mathematics, astrology, and astronomy. Internally, it was a
majestic fane, in whose sombre recesses were performed the Mysteries,
and whose walls had often witnessed the initiation-scenes of members of
the royal family. The porphyry sarcophagus, which Professor Piazzi
Smyth, Astronomer Royal of Scotland, degrades into a corn-bin, was the
*baptismal font,* upon emerging from which, the neophyte was "born
again," and became an

adept.

Herodotus gives us, however, a just idea of the enormous labor expended
in transporting one of these gigantic blocks of granite. It measured
thirty-two feet in length, twenty-one feet in width, and twelve feet in
height. Its weight he estimates to be rising 300 tons, and it occupied
2,000 men for three years to move it from Syene to the Delta, down the
Nile. Gliddon, in his *Ancient Egypt,* quotes from Pliny a description
of the arrangements for moving the obelisk erected at Alexandria by
Ptolemaeus Philadelphus. A canal was dug from the Nile to the place
where the obelisk lay. Two boats were floated under it; they were
weighted with stones containing one cubic foot each, and the weight of
the obelisk having been calculated by the engineers, the cargo of the
boats was exactly proportioned to it, so that they should be
sufficiently submerged to pass under the monolith as it lay across the
canal. Then, the stones were gradually removed, the boats rose, lifted
the obelisk, and it was floated down the river.

In the Egyptian section of the Dresden, or Berlin Museum, we forget
which, is a drawing which represents a workman ascending an unfinished
pyramid, with a basket of sand upon his back. This has suggested to
certain Egyptologists the idea that the blocks of the pyramids were
chemically manufactured *in loco.* Some modern engineers believe that
Portland cement, a double silicate of lime and alumina, is the
imperishable cement of the ancients. But, on the other hand, Professor
Carpenter asserts that the pyramids, with the exception of their granite
casing, is formed of what "geologists call *nummulitic* limestone. This
is newer than the old chalk, and is made of the shells of animals called
nummulites--like little pieces of money about the size of a shilling."
However this moot question may be decided, no one, from Herodotus and
Pliny down to the last wandering engineer who has gazed upon these
imperial monuments of long-crumbled dynasties, has been able to tell us
how the gigantic masses were transported and set up in place. Bunsen
concedes to

###### <span id="page_520">p. 520</span>

Egypt an antiquity of 20,000 years. But even in this matter we would be
left to conjecture if we depended upon modern authorities. They can
neither tell us for what the pyramids were constructed, under what
dynasty the first was raised, nor the material of which they are built.
All is conjecture with them.

Professor Smyth has given us by far the most accurate mathematical
description of the great pyramid to be found in literature. But after
showing the astronomical bearings of the structure, he so little
appreciates ancient Egyptian thought that he actually maintains that the
porphyry sarcophagus of the king's chamber is the unit of measure for
the two most enlightened nations of the earth--"England and America."
One of the *books* of *Hermes* describes certain of the pyramids as
standing upon the sea-shore, "the waves of which dashed in powerless
fury against its base." This implies that the geographical features of
the country have been changed, and may indicate that we must accord to
these ancient "granaries," "magico-astrological observatories," and
"royal sepulchres," an origin antedating the upheaval of the Sahara and
other deserts. This would imply rather more of an antiquity than the
poor few thousands of years, so generously accorded to them by
Egyptologists.

Dr. Rebold, a French archeologist of some renown, gives his readers a
glimpse of the culture which prevailed 5,000 (?) years B.C., by saying
that there were at that time no less than "thirty or forty colleges of
the priests who studied occult sciences and practical magic."

A writer in the *National Quarterly Review* (Vol. xxxii., No. lxiii.,
December, 1875) says that, "The recent excavations made among the ruins
of Carthage have brought to light traces of a civilization, a refinement
of art and luxury, which must even have outshone that of ancient Rome;
and when the fiat went forth, *Delenda est Carthago,* the mistress of
the world well knew that she was about to destroy a greater than
herself, for, while one empire swayed the world by force of arms alone,
the other was the last and most perfect representative of a race who
had, for centuries before Rome was dreamed of, directed the
civilization, the learning, and the intelligence of mankind." This
Carthage is the one which, according to Appian, was standing as early as
B.C. 1234, or fifty years before the taking of Troy, and not the one
popularly supposed to have been built by Dido (Elissa or Astarte) four
centuries later.

Here we have still another illustration of the truth of the doctrine of
cycles. Draper's admissions as to the astronomical erudition of the
ancient Egyptians are singularly supported by an interesting fact quoted
by Mr. J. M. Peebles, from a lecture delivered in Philadelphia, by the
late Professor O. M. Mitchell, the astronomer. Upon the coffin of a
mummy, now in the British Museum, was delineated the zodiac with the

###### <span id="page_521">p. 521</span>

exact positions of the planets at the time of the autumnal equinox, in
the year 1722 B.C. Professor Mitchell calculated the exact position of
the heavenly bodies belonging to our solar system at the time indicated.
"The result," says Mr. Peebles, "I give in his own words: 'To my
astonishment . . . it was found that on the 7th of October, 1722 B.C.,
the moon and planets had occupied the exact points in the heavens marked
upon the coffin in the British Museum.' " <span
id="fr_723"></span>[\*](#fn_722)

Professor John Fiske, in his onslaught on Dr. Draper's *History of the
Intellectual Development of Europe,* sets his pen against the doctrine
of cyclical progression, remarking that "we have never known the
beginning or the end of an historic cycle, and have no inductive warrant
for believing that we are now traversing one." <span
id="fr_724"></span>[\*\*](#fn_723) He chides the author of that eloquent
and thoughtful work for the "odd disposition exhibited throughout his
work, not only to refer the best part of Greek culture to an Egyptian
source, but uniformly to exalt the non-European civilization at the
expense of the European." We believe that this "odd disposition" might
be directly sanctioned by the confessions of great Grecian historians
themselves. Professor Fiske might, with profit, read Herodotus over
again. The "Father of History" confesses more than once that Greece owes
everything to Egypt. As to his assertion that the world has never known
the beginning or the end of an historical cycle, we have but to cast a
retrospective glance on the many glorious nations which have passed
away, *i.e*., reached the end of their great national cycle. Compare the
Egypt of that day, with its perfection of art, science, and religion,
its glorious cities and monuments, and its swarming population, with the
Egypt of to-day, peopled with strangers; its ruins the abode of bats and
snakes, and a few Copts the sole surviving heirs to all this
grandeur--and see whether the cyclical theory does not reassert itself.
Says Gliddon, who is now contradicted by Mr. Fiske: "Philologists,
astronomers, chemists, painters, architects, physicians, must return to
Egypt to learn the origin of language and writing; of the calendar and
solar motion; of the art of cutting granite with a copper chisel, and of
giving elasticity to a copper sword; of making glass with the variegated
hues of the rainbow; of moving single blocks of polished syenite, *nine
hundred tons* in weight, for any distance, by land and water; of
building arches, rounded and pointed, with masonic precision unsurpassed
at the present day, and antecedent by 2,000 years to the 'Cloaca Magna'
of Rome; of sculpturing a Doric column 1,000 years before the Dorians
are known in

###### <span id="page_522">p. 522</span>

history; of fresco painting in imperishable colors; of practical
knowledge in anatomy; and of time-defying pyramid-building."

"Every craftsman can behold, in Egyptian monuments, the progress of his
art 4,000 years ago; and whether it be a wheelwright building a chariot,
a shoemaker drawing his twine, a leather-cutter using the self-same form
of knife of old as is considered the best form now, a weaver throwing
the same hand-shuttle, a whitesmith using that identical form of
blow-pipe but lately recognized to be the most efficient, the
seal-engraver cutting, in hieroglyphics, such names as Schooho's, above
4,300 years ago--*all these,* and many more astounding evidences of
Egyptian priority, now require but a glance at the plates of
Rossellini."

"Truly," exclaims Mr. Peebles, "these Ramsean temples and tombs were as
much a marvel to the Grecian Herodotus as they are to us!" <span
id="fr_725"></span>[\*](#fn_724)

But, even then, the merciless hand of time had left its traces upon
their structures, and some of them, whose very memory would be lost were
it not for the *Books of Hermes,* had been swept away into the oblivion
of the ages. King after king, and dynasty after dynasty had passed in a
glittering pageant before the eyes of succeeding generations and their
renown had filled the habitable globe. The same pall of forgetfulness
had fallen upon them and their monuments alike, before the first of our
historical authorities, Herodotus, preserved for posterity the
remembrance of that wonder of the world, the great Labyrinth. The
long-accepted Biblical chronology has so cramped the minds of not only
the clergy, but even our scarce-unfettered scientists, that in treating
of prehistoric remains in different parts of the world, a constant fear
is manifested on their part to trespass beyond the period of 6,000
years, hitherto allowed by theology as the age of the world.

Herodotus found the Labyrinth already in ruins; but nevertheless his
admiration for the genius of its builders knew no bounds. He regarded it
as far more marvellous than the pyramids themselves, and, as an
eye-witness, minutely describes it. The French and Prussian savants, as
well as other Egyptologists, agree as to the emplacement, and identified
its noble ruins. Moreover, they confirm the account given of it by the
old historian. Herodotus says that he found therein 3,000 chambers; half
subterranean and the other half above-ground. "The upper chambers," he
says, "I myself passed through and examined in detail. In the
underground ones (which *may exist till now,* for all the archaeologists
know), the keepers of the building would not let me in, for they contain
the sepulchres of the kings who built the Labyrinth, and also those of
the sacred crocodiles. The upper chambers I saw and examined with

###### <span id="page_523">p. 523</span>

my own eyes, and found them to excel all other human productions." In
Rawlinson's translation, Herodotus is made to say: "The passages through
the houses and the varied windings of the paths across the courts,
excited in me infinite admiration as I passed from the courts into the
chambers, and from thence into colonnades, and from colonnades into
other houses, and again into courts unseen before. The roof was
throughout of stone like the walls, and both were exquisitely carved all
over with figures. Every court was surrounded with a colonnade, which
was built of white stones, sculptured most exquisitely. At the corner of
the Labyrinth stands a pyramid forty fathoms high, with large figures
engraved on it, and it is entered by a vast subterranean passage."

If such was the Labyrinth, when viewed by Herodotus, what, in such a
case, was ancient Thebes, the city destroyed far earlier than the period
of Psammeticus, who himself reigned 530 years after the destruction of
Troy? We find that in his time Memphis was the capital, while of the
glorious Thebes there remained but *ruins.* Now, if we, who are enabled
to form our estimate only by the ruins of what was already ruins so many
ages before our era--are stupefied in their contemplation, what must
have been the general aspect of Thebes in the days of its glory?
Karnak--temple, palace, ruins, or whatsoever the archaeologists may term
it--is now its only representative. But solitary and alone as it stands,
fit emblem of majestic empire, as if forgotten by time in the onward
march of the centuries, it testifies to the art and skill of the
ancients. He must be indeed devoid of the spiritual perception of
genius, who fails to feel as well as to see the intellectual grandeur of
the race that planned and built it.

Champollion, who passed almost his entire life in the exploration of
archaeological remains, gives vent to his emotions in the following
descriptions of Karnak: "The ground covered by the mass of remaining
buildings is square; and each side measures 1,800 feet. One is astounded
and *overcome by the grandeur* of the sublime remnants, the prodigality
and magnificence of workmanship to be seen everywhere." "No people of
ancient or modern times has conceived the art of architecture upon a
scale so sublime, so grandiose as it existed among the ancient
Egyptians; and the imagination, which in Europe soars far above our
porticos, arrests itself *and falls powerless* at the foot of the
hundred and forty columns of the hypostyle of Karnak! In one of its
halls, the Cathedral of Notre Dame might stand and not touch the
ceiling, but be considered as a small ornament in the centre of the
hall."

A writer in a number of an English periodical, of 1870, evidently
speaking with the authority of a traveller who describes what he has
seen, expresses himself as follows: "Courts, halls, gateways, pillars,

###### <span id="page_524">p. 524</span>

obelisks, monolithic figures, sculptures, long rows of sphinxes, are
found in such profusion at Karnak, that the sight is too much for modem
comprehension."

Says Denon, the French traveller: "It is hardly possible to believe,
after seeing it, in the reality of the existence of so many buildings
collected together on a single point, in their dimensions, in the
resolute perseverance which their construction required, and in the
incalculable expenses of so much magnificence! It is necessary that the
reader should fancy what is before him to be a dream, as he who views
the objects themselves occasionally yields to the doubt whether he be
perfectly awake. . . . There are lakes and mountains *within the
periphery of the sanctuary.* These two edifices are selected as examples
from a list *next to inexhaustible.* The whole valley and delta of the
Nile, from the cataracts to the sea, was covered with temples, palaces,
tombs, pyramids, obelisks, and pillars. The execution of the sculptures
is beyond praise. The mechanical perfection with which artists wrought
in granite, serpentine, breccia, and basalt, is wonderful, according to
all the experts . . . animals and plants look as good as natural, and
artificial objects are beautifully sculptured; battles by sea and land,
and scenes of domestic life are to be found in all their *bas-reliefs*."

"The monuments," says an English author, "which there strike the
traveller, fill his mind with great ideas. At the sight of the
colossuses and superb obelisks, which seem to surpass the limits of
human nature, he cannot help exclaiming, 'This was the work of man,' and
this sentiment seems to ennoble his existence." <span
id="fr_726"></span>[\*](#fn_725)

In his turn, Dr. Richardson, speaking of the Temple of Dendera, says:
"The female figures are so extremely well executed, that they do all but
speak; they have a mildness of feature and expression that never was
surpassed."

Every one of these stones is covered with hieroglyphics, and the more
ancient they are, the more beautifully we find them chiselled. Does not
this furnish a new proof that history got its first glimpse of the
ancients when the arts were already fast degenerating among them? The
obelisks have their inscriptions cut two inches, and sometimes more, in
depth, and they are cut with the highest degree of perfection. Some idea
may be formed of their depth, from the fact that the Arabs, for a small
fee, will climb sometimes to the very top of an obelisk, by inserting
their toes and fingers in the excavations of the hieroglyphics. That all
of these works, in which solidity rivals the beauty of their execution,
were done before the days of the Exodus, there remains no historical
doubt whatever. (All

###### <span id="page_525">p. 525</span>

the archaeologists now agree in saying that, the further back we go in
history, the better and finer become these arts.) These views clash
again with the individual opinion of Mr. Fiske, who would have us
believe that "the sculptures upon these monuments (of Egypt, Hindustan,
and Assyria), moreover, betoken a very *undeveloped* condition of the
artistic faculties." <span id="fr_727"></span>[\*](#fn_726) Nay, the
learned gentleman goes farther. Joining his voice in the opposition
against the claims of learning--which belongs by right to the sacerdotal
castes of antiquity--to that of Lewis, he contemptuously remarks that
"the extravagant theory of a profound science possessed by the Egyptian
priesthood from a remote antiquity, and imparted to itinerant Greek
philosophers, has been utterly destroyed (?) by Sir G. C. Lewis <span
id="fr_728"></span>[\*\*](#fn_727) . . . while, with regard to Egypt and
Hindustan, as well as Assyria, it may be said that the colossal
monuments which have adorned these countries since prehistoric times,
bear witness to the former prevalence of a barbaric despotism, totally
incompatible with social nobility, and, therefore, with well-sustained
progress." <span id="fr_729"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_728)

A curious argument, indeed. If the size and grandeur of public monuments
are to serve to our posterity as a standard by which to approximately
estimate the "progress of civilization" attained by their builders, it
may be prudent, perhaps, for America, so proud of her alleged progress
and freedom, to dwarf her buildings at once to one story. Otherwise,
according to Professor Fiske's theory, the archaeologists of A.D. 3877
will be applying to the "Ancient America" of 1877, the rule of
Lewis--and say the *ancient* United States "may be considered as a great
*latifundium,* or plantation, cultivated by the entire population, as
the king's (president's) slaves." Is it because the white-skinned Aryan
races were never born "builders," like the Eastern AEthiopians, or
dark-skinned Caucasians, <span id="fr_730"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_729)
and, therefore, never able to compete with the latter in such colossal
structures, that we must jump at the conclusion that these grandiose
temples and pyramids could only have been erected under the whip of a
merciless despot? Strange logic! It would really seem more prudent to
hold to the "rigorous canons of criticism" laid down by Lewis and Grote,
and honestly confess at once, that we really know little about these
ancient nations, and that, except so far as purely hypothetical
speculations go, unless we study in the same direction as the ancient
priests did, we have as little chance in the future. We only know what
they allowed the uninitiated to know, but the little we do learn of

###### <span id="page_526">p. 526</span>

them by deduction, ought to be sufficient to assure us that, even in the
nineteenth century, with all our claims to supremacy in arts and
sciences, we are totally unable, we will not say to build anything like
the monuments of Egypt, Hindustan, or Assyria, but even to rediscover
the least of the ancient "*lost* arts." Besides, Sir Gardner Wilkinson
gives forcible expression to this view of the exhumed treasures of old,
by adding that, "he can trace no *primitive mode* of life, no barbarous
customs, but a sort of stationary civilization *from the most remote
periods*." Thus far, archaeology disagrees with geology, which affirms
that the further they trace the remains of men, the more barbarous they
find them. It is doubtful if geology has even yet exhausted the field of
research afforded her in the caves, and the views of geologists, which
are based upon present experience, may be radically modified, when they
come to discover the remains of the ancestors of the people whom they
now style the cave-dwellers.

What better illustrates the theory of cycles than the following fact?
Nearly 700 years B.C., in the schools of Thales and Pythagoras was
taught the doctrine of the true motion of the earth, its form, and the
whole heliocentric system. And in 317 A.D., we find Lactantius, the
preceptor of Crispus Caesar, son of Constantine the Great, teaching his
pupil that the earth was a plane surrounded by the sky, which is
composed of fire and water, and warning him against the heretical
doctrine of the earth's globular form!

Whenever, in the pride of some new discovery, we throw a look into the
past, we find, to our dismay, certain vestiges which indicate the
possibility, if not certainty, that the alleged discovery was not
totally unknown to the ancients.

It is generally asserted that neither the early inhabitants of the
Mosaic times, nor even the more civilized nations of the Ptolemaic
period were acquainted with electricity. If we remain undisturbed in
this opinion, it is not for lack of proofs to the contrary. We may
disdain to search for a profounder meaning in some characteristic
sentences of Servius, and other writers; we cannot so obliterate them
but that, at some future day, that meaning will appear to us in all its
significant truths. "The first inhabitants of the earth," says he,
"never carried fire to their altars, but by their prayers they brought
down the heavenly fire." <span id="fr_731"></span>[\*](#fn_730)
"Prometheus discovered and revealed to man the art of bringing down
lightning; and by the method which he taught to them, they brought down
fire from the region above."

If, after pondering these words, we are still willing to attribute them
to

###### <span id="page_527">p. 527</span>

the phraseology of mythological fables, we may turn to the days of Numa,
the king-philosopher, so renowned for his esoteric learning, and find
ourselves more embarrassed to deal with his case. We can neither accuse
him of ignorance, superstition, nor credulity; for, if history can be
believed at all, he was intently bent on destroying polytheism and
idol-worship. He had so well dissuaded the Romans from idolatry that for
nearly two centuries neither statues nor images appeared in their
temples. On the other hand old historians tell us that the knowledge
which Numa possessed in natural physics was remarkable. Tradition says
that he was initiated by the priests of the Etruscan divinities, and
instructed by them in the secret of forcing Jupiter, the Thunderer, to
descend upon earth. <span id="fr_732"></span>[\*](#fn_731) Ovid shows
that Jupiter Elicius began to be worshipped by the Romans from that
time. Salverte is of the opinion that before Franklin discovered his
refined electricity, Numa had experimented with it most successfully,
and that Tullus Hostilius was the first victim of the dangerous
"heavenly guest" recorded in history. Titus Livy and Pliny narrate that
this prince, having found in the *Books of Numa,* instructions on the
secret sacrifices offered to Jupiter Elicius, made a mistake, and, in
consequence of it, "he was struck by lightning and consumed in his own
palace." <span id="fr_733"></span>[\*\*](#fn_732)

Salverte remarks that Pliny, in the exposition of Numa's scientific
secrets, "makes use of expressions which seem to indicate two distinct
processes"; the one obtained thunder (impetrare), the other forced it to
lightning (cogere). <span id="fr_734"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_733) "Guided
by Numa's book," says Lucius, quoted by Pliny, "Tullus undertook to
invoke the aid of Jupiter. . . . But having performed the rite
imperfectly, he perished, struck by thunder." <span
id="fr_735"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_734) Tracing back the knowledge of
thunder and lightning possessed by the Etruscan priests, we find that
Tarchon, the founder of the theurgism of the former, desiring to
preserve his house from lightning, surrounded it by a hedge of the white
bryony, <span id="fr_736"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_735) a climbing plant
which has the property of averting thunderbolts. Tarchon the theurgist
was much anterior to the siege of Troy. The pointed metallic
lightning-rod, for which we are seemingly indebted to Franklin, is
probably a *rediscovery* after all. There are many medals which seem to
strongly indicate that the principle was anciently known. The temple of
Juno had its roof covered with a quantity of pointed blades of
swords. <span id="fr_737"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_736)

###### <span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

If we possess but little proof of the ancients having had any clear
notions as to *all* the effects of electricity, there is very strong
evidence, at all events, of their having been perfectly acquainted with
electricity itself. "Ben David," says the author of *The Occult
Sciences,* "has asserted that Moses possessed some knowledge of the
phenomena of electricity." Professor Hirt, of Berlin, is of this
opinion. Michaelis, remarks--*firstly:* "that there is no indication
that lightning ever struck the temple of Jerusalem, during a thousand
years. *Secondly,* that according to Josephus, <span
id="fr_738"></span>[\*](#fn_737) a forest of points . . . of gold, and
very sharp, covered the roof of the temple. *Thirdly,* that this roof
communicated with the caverns in the hill upon which the temple was
situated, by means of pipes in connection with the gilding which covered
all the exterior of the building; in consequence of which the points
would act as conductors." <span id="fr_739"></span>[\*\*](#fn_738)

Ammianus Marcellinus, a famous historian of the fourth century, a writer
generally esteemed for the fairness and correctness of his statements,
tells that "The magi, preserved perpetually in their furnaces fire that
they miraculously got from heaven." <span
id="fr_740"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_739) There is a sentence in the Hindu
*Oupnek-hat,* which runs thus: "To know fire, the sun, the moon, and
lightning, is three-fourths of the science of God." <span
id="fr_741"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_740)

Finally, Salverte shows that in the days of Ktesias, "India was
acquainted with the use of conductors of lightning." This historian
plainly states that "iron placed at the bottom of a fountain . . . and
made in the form of a sword, with *the point upward,* possessed, as soon
as it was thus fixed in the ground, the property of averting storms and
lightnings." <span id="fr_742"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_741) What can be
plainer?

Some modern writers deny the fact that a great mirror was placed in the
light-house of the Alexandrian port, for the purpose of discovering
vessels at a distance at sea. But the renowned Buffon believed in it;
for he honestly confesses that "If the mirror really existed, as I
firmly believe it did, to the ancients belong the honor of the invention
*of the telescope*." <span id="fr_743"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_742)

Stevens, in his work on the East, asserts that he found railroads in
Upper Egypt whose grooves were coated with iron. Canova, Powers, and
other celebrated sculptors of our modern age deem it an honor to be
compared with Pheidias of old, and strict truth would, perhaps, hesitate
at such a flattery.

###### <span id="page_529">p. 529</span>

Professor Jowett discredits the story of the Atlantis, in the *Timaeus*;
and the records of 8,000 and 9,000 years appear to him an ancient
swindle. But Bunsen remarks: "There is nothing improbable in itself in
reminiscences and records of great events in Egypt 9,000 years B.C., for
. . . the Origines of Egypt go back to the ninth millennium before
Christ." <span id="fr_744"></span>[\*](#fn_743) Then how about the
primitive Cyclopean fortresses of ancient Greece? Can the walls of
Tiryns, about which, according to archaeological accounts, "even among
the ancients it was reported to have been the work of the
Cyclops," <span id="fr_745"></span>[\*\*](#fn_744) be deemed posterior
to the pyramids? Masses of rock, some equal to a cube of six feet, and
the smallest of which, Pausanias says, could never be moved by a yoke of
oxen, laid up in walls of solid masonry twenty-five feet thick and over
forty feet high, still believed to be the work of men of the races known
to our history!

Wilkinson's researches have brought to light the fact that many
inventions of what we term modern, and upon which we plume ourselves,
were perfected by the ancient Egyptians. The newly-discovered papyrus of
Ebers, the German archaeologist, proves that neither our modern
chignons, skin-beautifying pearl powders, nor *eaux dentifrices* were
secrets to them. More than one modern physician--even among those who
advertise themselves as having "made a speciality of nervous
disorders"--may find his advantage in consulting the *Medical Books of
Hermes,* which contain prescriptions of real therapeutic value.

The Egyptians, as we have seen, excelled in all arts. They made paper so
excellent in quality as to be time-proof. "They took out the pith of the
papyrus," says our anonymous writer, previously mentioned, "dissected
and opened the fibre, and flattening it by a process known to them, made
it as thin as our foolscap paper, but far more durable. . . . They
sometimes cut it into strips and glued it together; many of such written
documents are yet in existence." The papyrus found in the tomb of the
queen's mummy, and another one found in the sarcophagus of the "Chambre
de la Reine," at Ghizeh, present the appearance of the finest glossy
white muslin, while it possesses the durability of the best
calf-parchment. "For a long time the *savants* believed the papyrus to
have been introduced by Alexander the Great--as they erroneously
imagined a good many more things--but Lepsius found rolls of papyri in
tombs and monuments of the twelfth dynasty; sculptured pictures of
papyri were found later, on monuments of the fourth dynasty, and now it
is proved that the art of writing was known and used as early as the
days of Menes, the protomonarch"; and thus it was finally discovered

###### <span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

that the art and their system of writing were perfect and complete

from the very first.

It is to Champollion that we owe the first interpretation of their weird
writing; and, but for his life-long labor, we would till now remain
uninformed as to the meaning of all these pictured letters, and the
ancients would still be considered ignorant by the moderns whom they so
greatly excelled in some arts and sciences. "He was the first to find
out what wondrous tale the Egyptians had to tell, for one who could read
their endless manuscripts and records. They left them on every spot and
object capable of receiving characters. . . . They engraved, and
chiselled, and sculptured them on monuments; they traced them on
furniture, rocks, stones, walls, coffins, and tombs, as on the papyrus.
. . . The pictures of their daily lives, in their smallest details, are
being now unravelled before our dazzled eyes in the most wondrous way. .
. . Nothing, of what we know, seems to have been overlooked by the
ancient Egyptians. . . . The history of 'Sesostris' shows us how well he
and his people were versed in the art and practice of war. . . . The
pictures show how formidable they were when encountered in battle. They
constructed war-engines. . . . Horner says that through each of the 100
gates of Thebes issued 200 men with horses and chariots; the latter were
magnificently constructed, and very light in comparison with our modern
heavy, clumsy, and uncomfortable artillery wagons." Kenrick describes
them in the following terms: "In short, as all the essential principles
which regulate the construction and draught of carriages are exemplified
in the war-chariots of the Pharaohs, so there is nothing which modern
taste and luxury have devised for their decoration to which we do not
find a prototype in the monuments of the eighteenth dynasty."
Springs--*metallic* springs--have been found in them, and,
notwithstanding Wilkinson's superficial investigation in that direction,
and description of these in his studies, we find proofs that such were
used to prevent the jolting in the chariots in their too rapid course.
The bas-reliefs show us certain *melees* and battles in which we can
find and trace their uses and customs to the smallest details. The
heavily-armed men fought in coats of mail, the infantry had quilted
tunics and felt helmets, with metallic coverings to protect them the
better. Muratori, the modern Italian inventor who, some ten years ago,
introduced his "impenetrable cuirasse," has but followed in his
invention what he could make out of the ancient method which suggested
to him the idea. The process of rendering such objects as card-board,
felt, and other tissues, impenetrable to the cuts and thrusts of any
sharp weapon, is now numbered among the lost arts. Muratori succeeded
but imperfectly in preparing such felt cuirasses, and, notwithstanding
the boasted achievements of modern chemistry

###### <span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

he could derive from it no preparation adequate to effect his object,
and failed.

To what perfection chemistry had reached in ancient times, may be
inferred from a fact mentioned by Virey. In his dissertations, he shows
that Asclepiadotus, a general of Mithradates, reproduced chemically the
deleterious exhalations of the sacred grotto. These vapors, like those
of Curnae, threw the Pythoness into the mantic frenzy.

Egyptians used bows, double-edged swords and daggers, javelins, spears,
and pikes. The light troops were armed with darts and slings;
charioteers wielded maces and battle-axes; in siege-operations they were
perfect. "The assailants," says the anonymous writer, "advanced, forming
a narrow and long line, the point being protected by a triple-sided,
impenetrable engine pushed before them on a kind of roller, by an
invisible squad of men. They had covered underground passages with
trap-doors, scaling ladders, and the art of escalade and military
strategy was carried by them to perfection. . . . The battering ram was
familiar to them as other things; being such experts in quarrying they
knew how to set a mine to a wall and bring it down." The same writer
remarks, that it is a great deal safer for us to mention what the
Egyptians *did* than what they *did not* know, for every day brings some
new discovery of their wonderful knowledge; "and if," he adds, "we were
to find out that they used Armstrong guns, this fact would not be much
more astonishing than many of the facts brought out to light already."

The proof that they were proficient in mathematical sciences, lies in
the fact that those ancient mathematicians whom we honor as the fathers
of geometry went to Egypt to be instructed. Says Professor Smyth, as
quoted by Mr. Peebles, "the geometrical knowledge of the
pyramid-builders began where Euclid's ended." Before Greece came into
existence, the arts, with the Egyptians, were ripe and old.
Land-measuring, an art resting on geometry, the Egyptians certainly knew
well, as, according to the *Bible,* Joshua, after conquering the Holy
Land, had skill enough to divide it. And how could a people so skilled
in natural philosophy as the Egyptians were, not be proportionately
skilled in psychology and spiritual philosophy? The temple was the
nursery of the highest civilization, and it alone possessed that higher
knowledge of magic which was in itself the quintessence of natural
philosophy. The occult powers of nature were taught in the greatest
secrecy and the most wonderful cures were performed during the
performing of the Mysteries. Herodotus acknowledges <span
id="fr_746"></span>[\*](#fn_745) that the Greeks learned all they knew,
including the sacred services of the temple, from the Egyptians, and
because of that,

###### <span id="page_532">p. 532</span>

their principal temples were consecrated to Egyptian divinities.
Melampus, the famous healer and soothsayer of Argos, had to use his
medicines "after the manner of the Egyptians," from whom he had gained
his knowledge, whenever he desired his cure to be thoroughly effective.
He healed Iphiclus of his impotency and debility by *the rust of iron,*
according to the directions of Mantis, his *magnetic sleeper,* or
oracle. Sprengel gives many wonderful instances of such *magical* cures
in his *History of Medicine* (see p. 119).

Diodorus, in his work on the Egyptians (lib. i.), says that Isis has
deserved immortality, for all nations of the earth bear witness to the
power of this goddess to cure diseases by her influence. "This is
proved," he says, "not by fable as among the Greeks, but by authentic
facts." Galen records several remedial means which were preserved in the
healing wards of the temples. He mentions also a universal medicine
which in his time was called *Isis.* <span
id="fr_747"></span>[\*](#fn_746)

The doctrines of several Greek philosophers, who had been instructed in
Egypt, demonstrates their profound learning. Orpheus, who, according to
Artapanus, was a disciple of Moyses (Moses), <span
id="fr_748"></span>[\*\*](#fn_747) Pythagoras, Herodotus, and Plato owe
their philosophy to the same temples in which the wise Solon was
instructed by the priests. "Antiklides relates," says Pliny, "that the
letters were invented in Egypt by a person whose name was Menon, fifteen
years before Phoroneus the most ancient king of Greece." <span
id="fr_749"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_748) Jablonski proves that the
heliocentric system, as well as the earth's sphericity, were known by
the priests of Egypt from immemorial ages. "This theory," he adds,
"Pythagoras took from the Egyptians, who had it from the Brachmans of
India." <span id="fr_750"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_749) Fenelon, the
illustrious Archbishop of Cambray, in his *Lives of the Ancient
Philosophers,* credits Pythagoras with this knowledge, and says that
besides teaching his disciples that as the earth was round there were
antipodes, since it was inhabited everywhere, the great mathematician
was the first to discover that the morning and evening star was the
same. If we now consider that Pythagoras lived in about the 16th
Olympiad, over 700 years B.C., and taught this fact at such an early
period, we must believe that it was known by others before him. The
works of Aristotle, Laertius, and several others in which Pythagoras is
mentioned, demonstrate that he had learned from the Egyptians about the
obliquity of the ecliptic, the starry composition of the milky way, and
the borrowed light of the moon.

###### <span id="page_533">p. 533</span>

Wilkinson, corroborated later by others, says that the Egyptians divided
time, knew the true length of the year, and the precession of the
equinoxes. By recording the rising and setting of the stars, they
understood the particular influences which proceed from the positions
and conjunctions of all heavenly bodies, and therefore their priests,
prophesying as accurately as our modern astronomers, meteorological
changes, could, *en plus,* astrologize through astral motions. Though
the sober and eloquent Cicero may be partially right in his indignation
against the exaggerations of the Babylonian priests, who "assert that
they have preserved upon monuments observations extending back during an
interval of 470,000 years," <span id="fr_751"></span>[\*](#fn_750)
still, the period at which astronomy had arrived at its perfection with
the ancients is *beyond* the reach of modern calculation.

A writer in one of our scientific journals observes "that every science
in its growth passes through three stages: First, we have the stage of
observation, when facts are collected and registered by many minds in
many places. Next, we have the stage of generalization, when these
carefully verified facts are arranged methodically, generalized
systematically, and classified logically, so as to deduce and elucidate
from them the laws that regulate their rule and order. Lastly, we have
the stage of prophecy, when these laws are so applied that events can be
predicted to occur with unerring accuracy." If several thousand years
B.C., Chinese and Chaldean astronomers predicted eclipses--the latter,
whether by the cycle of Saros, or other means, matters not--the fact
remains the same. They had reached the last and highest stage of
astronomical science--they *prophesied.* If they could, in the year 1722
B.C., delineate the zodiac with the exact positions of the planets at
the time of the autumnal equinox, and so unerringly as Professor
Mitchell, the astronomer, proved, then they knew the laws that regulate
"carefully-verified facts" to perfection, and applied them with as much
certainty as our modern astronomers. Moreover, astronomy is said to be
in our century "the only science which has thoroughly reached the *last
stage* . . . other sciences are yet in various stages of growth;
electricity, in some branches, has reached the third stage, but in many
branches is still in its infantine period." <span
id="fr_752"></span>[\*\*](#fn_751) This we know, on the exasperating
confessions of men of science themselves, and we can entertain no doubt
as to this sad reality in the nineteenth century, as we belong ourselves
to it. Not so in relation to the men who lived in the days of the glory
of Chaldaea, Assyria, and Babylon. Of the stages they reached in other
sciences we know *nothing,* except that in astronomy they stood equal
with us, for they had also reached the *third* and last stage. In his
lecture on the

###### <span id="page_534">p. 534</span>

*Lost Arts,* Wendell Phillips very artistically describes the situation.
"We seem to imagine," says he, "that whether knowledge will die with us
or not, it certainly began with us. . . . We have a pitying estimate, a
tender pity for the narrowness, ignorance, and darkness of the bygone
ages." To illustrate our own idea with the closing sentence of the
favorite lecturer, we may as well confess that we undertook this
chapter, which in one sense interrupts our narrative, to inquire of our
men of science, whether they are sure that they are boasting "*on the
right line.*"

Thus we read of a people, who, according to some learned writers, <span
id="fr_753"></span>[\*](#fn_752) had just emerged from the bronze age
into the succeeding age of iron. "If Chaldea, Assyria, and Babylon
presented *stupendous and venerable antiquities reaching far back into*
the night of time, Persia was not without her wonders of a later date.
The pillared halls of Persepolis were filled with miracles of
art--carvings, sculptures, enamels, alabaster libraries, obelisks,
sphinxes, colossal bulls. Ecbatana, in Media, the cool summer retreat of
the Persian kings, was defended by seven encircling walls of hewn and
polished blocks, the interior ones in succession of increasing height,
and of different colors, in astrological accordance with the seven
planets. The palace was roofed *with silver tiles;* its beams were
plated with gold. At midnight, in its halls, the sun was rivalled by
many a row of naphtha cressets. A paradise, that luxury of the monarchs
of the East, was planted in the midst of the city. The Persian empire
was truly the garden of the world. . . . In Babylon there still remained
its walls, once more than sixty miles in compass and, after the ravages
of three centuries and three conquerors, still more than eighty feet in
height; there were still the ruins of the temple of the
cloud-encompassed Bel; on its top was planted the observatory wherein
the weird Chaldean astronomers had held nocturnal communion with the
stars; still there were vestiges of the two palaces with their hanging
gardens, in which were trees growing in mid-air, and the wreck of the
hydraulic machinery that had supplied them from the river. Into the
artificial lake, with its vast apparatus of aqueducts and sluices, the
melted snows of the Armenian mountains found their way and were confined
in their course through the city by the embankments of the Euphrates.
Most wonderful of all, perhaps, *was the tunnel under the
river-bed*." <span id="fr_754"></span>[\*\*](#fn_753)

###### <span id="page_535">p. 535</span>

In his *First Traces of Man in Europe,* Albrecht Muller proposes a name
descriptive of the age in which we live, and suggests that "the age of
paper" is perhaps as good as any that can be discussed. We do not agree
with the learned professor. Our firm opinion is, that succeeding
generations will term ours, at best, the age of *brass;* at worst, that
of albata or of oroide.

The thought of the present-day commentator and critic as to the ancient
learning, is limited to and runs round the *exoterism* of the temples;
his insight is either unwilling or unable to penetrate into the solemn
adyta of old, where the hierophant instructed the neophyte to regard the
public worship in its true light. No ancient sage would have taught that
man is the king of creation, and that the starry heaven and our mother
earth were created for his sake. He, who doubts the assertion, may turn
to the *Magical and Philosophical Precepts* of Zoroaster, and find its
corroboration in the following: <span id="fr_755"></span>[\*](#fn_754)

> "Direct not thy mind to the vast measures of the earth;  
> For the plant of truth is not upon ground.  
> Nor measure the measures of the sun, collecting rules,  
> For he is carried by the eternal will of the Father, *not for your
> sake,  
> *Dismiss the impetuous course of the moon;  
> For she runs always by work of necessity.  
> The progression of the stars *was not generated for your sake.*"

A rather strange teaching to come from those who are universally
believed to have worshipped the sun, and moon, and the starry host, as
gods. The sublime profundity of the Magian precepts being *beyond* the
reach of modern materialistic thought, the Chaldean philosophers are
accused, together with the ignorant masses, of Sabianism and
sun-worship.

There was a vast difference between the *true* worship taught to those
who showed themselves worthy, and the state religions. The magians are
accused of all kinds of superstition, but this is what a *Chaldean
Oracle* says:

> "The wide aerial flight of birds *is not true*,  
> Nor the dissections of the entrails of victims; they are all mere
> toys,  
> The *basis of mercenary fraud;* flee from these  
> If you would open the sacred paradise of piety  
> Where virtue, wisdom, and equity, are assembled." <span
> id="fr_756"></span>[\*\*](#fn_755)

Surely, it is not those who warn people against "mercenary fraud" who
can be accused of it; and if they accomplished acts which seem

###### <span id="page_536">p. 536</span>

miraculous, who can with fairness presume to deny that it was done
merely because they possessed a knowledge of natural philosophy and
psychological science to a degree unknown to our schools?

What did they not know? It is a well-demonstrated fact that the true
meridian was correctly ascertained before the first pyramid was built.
They had clocks and dials to measure time; their cubit was the
established unit of linear measure, being 1,707 feet of English measure;
according to Herodotus the unit of weight was also known; as money, they
had gold and silver rings valued by weight; they had the decimal and
duodecimal modes of calculation from the earliest times, and were
proficient in algebra. "How could they otherwise," says an unknown
author, "bring into operation such immense mechanical powers, if they
had not thoroughly understood the philosophy of what we term the
mechanical powers?"

The art of making linen and fine fabrics is also proved to have been one
of their branches of knowledge, for the *Bible* speaks of it. Joseph was
presented by Pharaoh with a vesture of fine linen, a golden chain, and
many more things. The linen of Egypt was famous throughout the world.
The mummies are all wrapped in it and the linen is beautifully
preserved. Pliny speaks of a certain garment sent 600 years B.C., by
King Amasis to Lindus, every single thread of which was composed of 360
minor threads twisted together. Herodotus gives us (book i.), in his
account of Isis and the Mysteries performed in her honor, an idea of the
beauty and "admirable softness of the linen worn by the priests." The
latter wore shoes made of papyrus and garments of *fine linen,* because
this goddess first taught the use of it; and thus, besides being called
*Isiaci,* or priests of Isis, they were also known as *Linigera,* or the
"linen-wearing." This linen was spun and dyed in those brilliant and
gorgeous colors, the secret of which is likewise now among the lost
arts. On the mummies we often find the most beautiful embroidery and
bead-work ornamenting their shirts; several of such can be seen in the
museum of Bulak (Cairo), and are unsurpassable in beauty; the designs
are exquisite, and the labor seems immense. The elaborate and so much
vaunted Gobelins tapestry, is but a gross production when compared with
some of the embroidery of the ancient Egyptians. We have but to refer to
*Exodus* to discover how skilful was the workmanship of the Israelitish
pupils of the Egyptians upon their tabernacle and sacred ark. The
sacerdotal vestments, with their decorations of "pomegranates and golden
bells," and the thummim, or jewelled breastplate of the high priest, are
described by Josephus as being of unparalleled beauty and of wonderful
workmanship; and yet we find beyond doubt that the Jews adopted their
rites and ceremonies, and even the special dress of their Levites,

###### <span id="page_537">p. 537</span>

from the Egyptians. Clemens Alexandrinus acknowledges it very
reluctantly, and so does Origen and other Fathers of the Church, some of
whom, as a matter of course, attribute the coincidence to a clever trick
of Satan in anticipation of events. Proctor, the astronomer, says in one
of his books, "The remarkable breastplate worn by the Jewish high priest
was derived directly from the Egyptians." The word *thummim* itself is
evidently of Egyptian origin, borrowed by Moses, like the rest; for
further on the same page, Mr. Proctor says that, "In the often-repeated
picture of judgment the deceased Egyptian is seen conducted by the god
Horus (?), while Anubis places on one of the balances a vase supposed to
contain his good actions, and in the other is the emblem of truth, a
representation of Thmei, the goddess of truth, which was also worn on
the judicial breastplate." Wilkinson, in his *Manners and Customs of the
Ancient Egyptians,* shows that the Hebrew *thummim* is a plural form of
the word Thmei." <span id="fr_757"></span>[\*](#fn_756)

All the ornamental arts seem to have been known to the Egyptians. Their
jewelry of gold, silver, and precious stones are beautifully wrought; so
was the cutting, polishing, and setting of them executed by their
lapidaries in the finest style. The finger-ring of an Egyptian mummy--if
we remember aright--was pronounced the most artistic piece of jewelry in
the London Exhibition of 1851. Their imitation of precious stones in
glass is far above anything done at the present day; and the emerald may
be said to have been imitated to perfection.

In Pompeii, says Wendell Phillips, they discovered a room full of glass;
there was ground-glass, window-glass, cut-glass, and colored-glass of
every variety. Catholic priests who broke into China 200 years ago, were
shown a glass, transparent and colorless, which was filled with liquor
made by the Chinese, and which appeared to be colorless like water.
"This liquor was poured into the glass, and then looking through, it
seemed to be filled with fishes. They turned it out and repeated the
experiment and again it was filled with fishes." In Rome they show a bit
of glass, a transparent glass, which they light up so as to show you
that there is nothing concealed, but in the centre of the glass is a
drop of colored glass, perhaps as large as a pea, mottled like a duck,
and which even a miniature pencil could not do more perfectly. "It is
manifest that this drop of liquid glass must have been poured, because
there is no joint. This must have been done by a greater heat than the
annealing process, because that process shows breaks." In relation to
their wonderful art of imitating precious stones, the lecturer speaks of
the "celebrated vase of the Genoa Cathedral," which was

###### <span id="page_538">p. 538</span>

considered for long centuries "a solid emerald." "The Roman Catholic
legend of it was that it was one of the treasures that the Queen of
Sheba gave to Solomon, and that it was the identical cup out of which
the Saviour drank at the Last Supper." Subsequently it was found not to
be an emerald, but an imitation; and when Napoleon brought it to Paris
and gave it to the Institute, the scientists were obliged to confess
that it *was not a stone,* and that they could not tell what it was.

Further, speaking of the skill of the ancients in metal works, the same
lecturer narrates that "when the English plundered the Summer Palace of
the Emperor of China, the European artists were surprised at seeing the
curiously-wrought metal vessels of every kind, far exceeding all the
boasted skill of the workmen of Europe." African tribes in the interior
of the country gave travellers *better razors* than they had. "George
Thompson told me," he adds, "he saw a man in Calcutta throw a handful of
floss silk into the air, and a Hindu sever it into pieces with his sabre
of native steel." He concludes by the apt remark that "the steel is the
greatest triumph of metallurgy, and metallurgy is the glory of
chemistry." So with the ancient Egyptians and Semitic races. They dug
gold and separated it with the utmost skill. Copper, lead, and iron were
found in abundance near the Red Sea.

In a lecture delivered in 1873, on the *Cave-Men of Devonshire*, Mr. W.
Pengelly, **F.R.S**., stated on the authority of some Egyptologists that
the first iron used in Egypt was *meteoric* iron, as the earliest
mention of this metal is found in an Egyptian document, in which it is
called the "stone from heaven." This would imply the idea that the only
iron which was in use in days of old was meteorite. This may have been
the case at the commencement of the period embraced in our present
geological explorations, but till we can compute with at least
approximate accuracy the age of our excavated relics, who can tell but
that we are making a blunder of possibly several hundred thousand years?
The injudiciousness of dogmatizing upon what the ancient Chaldeans and
Egyptians did *not* know about mining and metallurgy is at least
partially shown by the discoveries of Colonel Howard Vyse. Moreover,
many of such precious stones as are only found at a great depth in mines
are mentioned in Homer and the Hebrew Scriptures. Have scientists
ascertained the precise time when mining-shafts were first sunk by
mankind? According to Dr. A. C. Hamlin, in India, the arts of the
goldsmith and lapidary have been practiced from an "unknown antiquity."
That the Egyptians either knew from the remotest ages how to temper
steel, or possessed something still better and more perfect than the
implement necessary in our days for chiselling, is an alternative from
which the archeologists cannot escape. How else could they have produced
such artistic chiselling, or

###### <span id="page_539">p. 539</span>

wrought such sculpture as they did? The critics may take their choice of
either; according to them, steel tools of the most exquisite temper, or
some other means of cutting sienite, granite, and basalt; which, in the
latter case, must be added to the long catalogue of lost arts.

Professor Albrecht Muller says: "We may ascribe the introduction of
bronze manufacture into Europe to a great race immigrant from Asia some
6,000 years ago, called Aryas or Aryans. . . . Civilization of the East
preceded that of the West by many centuries. . . . There are many proofs
that a considerable degree of culture existed at its very beginning.
Bronze was yet in use, *but iron as well*. Pottery was not only shaped
on the lathe, but burned a good red. Manufactures in glass, gold, and
silver, are found for the first time. In lonely mountain places are yet
found dross, and the remains of iron-furnaces. . . . To be sure, this
dross is sometimes ascribed to volcanic action, but it is met with where
volcanoes never could have existed."

But it is in the process of preparing mummies that the skill of this
wonderful people is exemplified in the highest degree. None but those
who have made special study of the subject, can estimate the amount of
skill, patience, and knowledge exacted for the accomplishment of this
indestructible work, which occupied several months. Both chemistry and
surgery were called into requisition. The mummies, if left in the dry
climate of Egypt, seem to be practicably imperishable; and even when
removed after a repose of several thousand years, show no signs of
change. "The body," says the anonymous writer, "was filled with myrrh,
cassia, and other gums, and after that, saturated with natron. . . .
Then followed the marvellous swathing of the embalmed body, so
artistically executed, that professional modern bandagists are lost in
admiration at its excellency." Says Dr. Grandville: " . . . there is not
a single form of bandage known to modern surgery, of which *far better
and cleverer examples* are not seen in the swathings of the Egyptian
mummies. The strips of linen are found without one single joint,
extending to 1,000 *yards* in length." Rossellini, in Kenrick's *Ancient
Egypt,* gives a similar testimony to the wonderful variety and skill
with which the bandages have been applied and interlaced. There was not
a fracture in the human body that could not be repaired successfully by
the sacerdotal physician of those remote days.

Who but well remembers the excitement produced some twenty-five years
ago by the discovery of anaesthesia? The nitrous oxide gas, sulphuric
and chloric ether, chloroform, "laughing gas," besides various other
combinations of these, were welcomed as so many heavenly blessings to
the suffering portion of humanity. Poor Dr. Horace Wells, of Hartford,
in 1844, was the discoverer, and Drs. Morton and Jackson

###### <span id="page_540">p. 540</span>

reaped the honors and benefits in 1846, as is usual in such cases. The
anaesthetics were proclaimed "the greatest discovery ever made." And,
though the famous *Letheon* of Morton and Jackson (a compound of
sulphuric ether), the chloroform of Sir James Y. Simpson, and the
nitrous oxide gas, introduced by Colton, in 1843, and by Dunham and
Smith, were occasionally checked by fatal cases, it still did not
prevent these gentlemen from being considered public benefactors. The
patients successfully put to sleep sometimes awoke no more; what matters
that, so long as others were relieved? Physicians assure us that
accidents are now but rarely apprehended. Perhaps it is because the
beneficent anaesthetic agents are so parsimoniously applied as to fail
in their effects one-half of the time, leaving the sufferer paralyzed
for a few seconds in his external movements, but feeling the pain as
acutely as ever. On the whole, however, chloroform and laughing gas are
beneficent discoveries. But, are they the first anesthetics ever
discovered, strictly speaking? Dioscorides speaks of the stone of
Memphis (*lapis Memphiticus*), and describes it as a small
pebble--round, polished, and very sparkling. When ground into powder,
and applied as an ointment to that part of the body on which the surgeon
was about to operate, either with his scalpel or fire, it preserved that
part, and *only that part* from any pain of the operation. In the
meantime, it was perfectly harmless to the constitution of the patient,
who retained his consciousness throughout, in no way dangerous from its
effects, and acted so long as it was kept on the affected part. When
taken in a mixture of wine or water, all feeling of suffering was
perfectly deadened. <span id="fr_758"></span>[\*](#fn_757) Pliny gives
also a full description of it. <span id="fr_759"></span>[\*\*](#fn_758)

From time immemorial, the Brahmans have had in their possession secrets
quite as valuable. The widow, bent on the self-sacrifice of
concremation, called *Sahamaranya,* has no dread of suffering the least
pain, for the fiercest flames will consume her, without one pang of
agony being experienced by her. The holy plants which crown her brow, as
she is conducted in ceremony to the funeral pile; the sacred root culled
at the midnight hour on the spot where the Ganges and the Yumna mingle
their waters; and the process of anointing the body of the
self-appointed victim with ghee and sacred oils, after she has bathed in
all her clothes and finery, are so many *magical* anaesthetics.
Supported by those she is going to part with in body, she walks thrice
around her fiery couch, and, after bidding them farewell, is cast on the
dead body of her husband, and leaves this world without a single moment
of suffering. "The semi-fluid," says a missionary writer, an eye-witness
of several such

###### <span id="page_541">p. 541</span>

ceremonies--"the ghee, is poured upon the pile; it is instantly
inflamed, and the *drugged* widow dies quickly of *suffocation* before
the fire reaches her body." <span id="fr_760"></span>[\*](#fn_759)

No such thing, if the sacred ceremony is only conducted strictly after
the prescribed rites. The widows are never drugged in the sense we are
accustomed to understand the word. Only precautionary measures are taken
against a useless physical martyrdom--the atrocious agony of burning.
Her mind is as free and clear as ever, and even more so. Firmly
believing in the promises of a future life, her whole mind is absorbed
in the contemplation of the approaching bliss--the beatitude of
"freedom," which she is about to attain. She generally dies with the
smile of heavenly rapture on her countenance; and if some one is to
suffer at the hour of retribution, it is not the earnest devotee of her
faith, but the crafty Brahmans who know well enough that no such
ferocious rite was ever prescribed. <span
id="fr_761"></span>[\*\*](#fn_760) As to the victim, after having been
consumed, she becomes a *sati--*transcendent purity--and is canonized
after death.

Egypt is the birthplace and the cradle of chemistry. Kenrick shows the
root of the word to be *chemi* or chem, which was the name of the
country (*Psalms* cv. 27). The chemistry of colors seems to have been
thoroughly well known in that country. Facts are facts. Where among our
painters are we to search for the artist who can decorate our walls with
imperishable colors? Ages after our pigmy buildings will have crumbled
into dust, and the cities enclosing them will themselves have become
shapeless heaps of brick and mortar, with forgotten names--long after
that will the halls of Karnak and Luxor (El-Uxor) be still standing; and
the gorgeous mural paintings of the latter will doubtless be as bright
and vivid 4,000 years hence, as they were 4,000 years ago, and are
to-day. "Embalming and fresco-painting," says our author, "was not a
chance discovery with the Egyptians, but brought out from definitions
and maxims like any induction of Faraday."

Our modern Italians boast of their Etruscan vases and paintings; the

###### <span id="page_542">p. 542</span>

decorative borders found on Greek vases provoke the admiration of the
lovers of antiquity, and are ascribed to the Greeks, while in fact "they
were but copies from the Egyptian vases." Their figures can be found any
day on the walls of a tomb of the age of Amunoph I., a period at which
Greece was not even in existence.

Where, in our age, can we point to anything comparable to the
rock-temples of Ipsambul in Lower Nubia? There may be seen sitting
figures seventy feet high, carved out of the living rock. The torso of
the statue of Rameses II., at Thebes, measures sixty feet around the
shoulders, and elsewhere in proportion. Beside such titanic sculpture
our own seems that of pigmies. Iron was known to the Egyptians at least
long before the construction of the first pyramid, which is over 20,000
years ago, according to Bunsen. The proof of this had remained hidden
for many thousands of years in the pyramid of Cheops, until *Colonel
Howard Vyse found it in the shape of a piece of iron, in one of the
joints, where it had evidently been placed at the time this pyramid was
first built.* Egyptologists adduce many indications that the ancients
were perfectly well acquainted with metallurgy in prehistoric times. "To
this day we can find at Sinai large heaps of scoriae, produced by
smelting." <span id="fr_762"></span>[\*](#fn_761) Metallurgy and
chemistry, as practiced in those days, were known as *alchemy,* and were
at the bottom of prehistoric magic. Moreover, Moses proved his knowledge
of alchemical chemistry by pulverizing the golden calf, and strewing the
powder upon the water.

If now we turn to navigation, we will find ourselves able to prove, on
good authorities, that Necho II. fitted out a fleet on the Red Sea and
despatched it for exploration. The fleet was absent above two years and
instead of returning through the Straits of Babelmandeb, as was wont,
sailed back through the Straits of Gibraltar. Herodotus was not at all
swift to concede to the Egyptians a maritime achievement so vast as
this. They had, he says, been spreading the report that "returning
homewards, they had the sunrise on their right hands; a thing which to
me is incredible." "And yet," remarks the author of the
heretofore-mentioned article, "this incredible assertion is now proved
*incontestable,* as may well be understood by any one who has doubled
the Cape of Good Hope." Thus it is proved that the most ancient of these
people performed a feat which was attributed to Columbus many ages
later. They say they anchored twice on their way; sowed corn, reaped it
and, sailing away, steered in triumph through the Pillars of Hercules
and eastward along the Mediterranean. "There was a people," he adds,

###### <span id="page_543">p. 543</span>

"much more deserving of the term '*veteres*' than the Romans and Greeks.
The Greeks, young in their knowledge, sounded a trumpet before these and
called upon all the world to admire their ability. Old Egypt, grown gray
in her wisdom, was so secure of her acquirements that she did not invite
admiration and cared no more for the opinion of the flippant Greek than
we do to-day for that of a Feejee islander."

"O Solon, Solon," said the oldest Egyptian priest to that sage. "You
Greeks are ever childish, having no ancient opinion, no discipline of
any long standing!" And very much surprised, indeed, was the great
Solon, when he was told by the priests of Egypt that so many gods and
goddesses of the Grecian Pantheon were but the disguised gods of Egypt.
Truly spoke Zonaras: "All these things came to us from Chaldea to Egypt;
and from thence were derived to the Greeks."

Sir David Brewster gives a glowing description of several automata; and
the eighteenth century takes pride in that masterpiece of mechanical
art, the "flute-player of Vaucanson." The little we can glean of
positive information on that subject, from ancient writers, warrants the
belief that the learned mechanicians in the days of Archimedes, and some
of them much anterior to the great Syracusan, were in no wise more
ignorant or less ingenious than our modern inventors. Archytas, a native
of Tarentum, in Italy, the instructor of Plato, a philosopher
distinguished for his mathematical achievements and wonderful
discoveries in practical mechanics, constructed a wooden dove. It must
have been an extraordinarily ingenious mechanism, as it flew, fluttered
its wings, and sustained itself for a considerable time in the air. This
skilful man, who lived 400 years B.C., invented besides the wooden dove,
the screw, the crane, and various hydraulic machines. <span
id="fr_763"></span>[\*](#fn_762)

Egypt pressed her own grapes and made wine. Nothing remarkable in that,
so far, but she brewed her own beer, and in great quantity--our
Egyptologist goes on to say. The Ebers manuscript proves now, beyond
doubt, that the Egyptians used beer 2,000 years B.C. Their beer must
have been strong and excellent--like everything they did. Glass was
manufactured in all its varieties. In many of the Egyptian sculptures we
find scenes of glass-blowing and bottles; occasionally, during
archaeological researches, glasses and glassware are found, and very
beautiful they seem to have been. Sir Gardner Wilkinson says that the
Egyptians cut, ground, and engraved glass, and possessed the art of
introducing gold between the two surfaces of the substance. They
imitated with glass, pearls, emeralds, and all the precious stones to a
great perfection.

###### <span id="page_544">p. 544</span>

Likewise, the most ancient Egyptians cultivated the musical arts, and
understood well the effect of musical harmony and its influence on the
human spirit. We can find on the oldest sculptures and carvings scenes
in which musicians play on various instruments. Music was used in the
Healing Department of the temples for the cure of nervous disorders. We
discover on many monuments men playing in bands in concert; the leader
beating time by clapping his hands. Thus far we can prove that they
understood the laws of harmony. They had their sacred music, domestic
and military. The lyre, harp, and flute were used for the sacred
concerts; for festive occasions they had the guitar, the single and
double pipes, and castanets; for troops, and during military service,
they had trumpets, tambourines, drums, and cymbals. Various kinds of
harps were invented by them, such as the lyre, *sambuc, ashur;* some of
these had upward of twenty strings. The superiority of the Egyptian lyre
over the Grecian is an admitted fact. The material out of which were
made such instruments was often of very costly and rare wood, and they
were beautifully carved; they imported it sometimes from very distant
countries; some were painted, inlaid with mother-of-pearl, and
ornamented with colored leather. They used catgut for strings as we do.
Pythagoras learned music in Egypt and made a regular science of it in
Italy. But the Egyptians were generally considered in antiquity as the
best music-teachers in Greece. They understood thoroughly well how to
extract harmonious sounds out of an instrument by adding strings to it,
as well as the multiplication of notes by shortening the strings upon
its neck; which knowledge shows a great progress in the musical art.
Speaking of harps, in a tomb at Thebes, Bruce remarks that, "they
overturn all the accounts hitherto given of the earliest state of music
and musical instruments in the East, and are altogether, in their form,
ornaments and compass, an incontestable proof, *stronger than a thousand
Greek quotations,* that geometry, drawing, mechanics, and music were at
the greatest perfection when these instruments were made; and that the
period from which we date the invention of these arts was only *the
beginning of the era of their restoration.*"

On the walls of the palace of Amenoph II. at Thebes, the king is
represented as playing chess with the queen. This monarch reigned long
before the Trojan war. In India the game is known to have been played at
least 5,000 years ago.

As to their knowledge in medicine, now that one of the lost *Books of
Hermes* has been found and translated by Ebers, the Egyptians can speak
for themselves. That they understood about the circulation of the blood,
appears certain from the *healing manipulations* of the priests, who
knew how to draw blood downward, stop its circulation for awhile, etc. A

###### <span id="page_545">p. 545</span>

more careful study of their *bas-reliefs* representing scenes taking
place in the healing hall of various temples will easily demonstrate it.
They had their dentists and oculists, and no doctor was allowed to
practice more than one specialty; which certainly warrants the belief
that they lost fewer patients in those days than our physicians do now.
It is also asserted by some authorities that the Egyptians were the
first people in the world who introduced trial by jury; although we
doubt this ourselves.

But the Egyptians were not the only people of remote epochs whose
achievements place them in so commanding a position before the view of
posterity. Besides others whose history is at present shut in behind the
mists of antiquity--such as the prehistoric races of the two Americas,
of Crete, of the Troad, of the Lacustrians, of the submerged continent
of the fabled Atlantis, now classed with myths--the deeds of the
Phoenicians stamp them with almost the character of demi-gods.

The writer in the *National Quarterly Review,* previously quoted, says
that the Phoenicians were the earliest navigators of the world, founded
most of the colonies of the Mediterranean, and voyaged to whatever other
regions were inhabited. They visited the Arctic regions, whence they
brought accounts of eternal days without a night, which Homer has
preserved for us in the *Odyssey.* From the British Isles they imported
tin into Africa, and Spain was a favorite site for their colonies. The
description of Charybdis so completely answers to the maelstrom that, as
this writer says: "It is difficult to imagine it to have had any other
prototype." Their explorations, it seems, extended in every direction,
their sails whitening the Indian Ocean, as well as the Norwegian fiords.
Different writers have accorded to them the settlement of remote
localities; while the entire southern coast of the Mediterranean was
occupied by their cities. A large portion of the African territory is
asserted to have been peopled by the races expelled by Joshua and the
children of Israel. At the time when Procopius wrote, columns stood in
Mauritania Tingitana, which bore the inscription, in Phoenician
characters, "We are those who fled before the brigand Joshua, the son of
Nun or Nave."

Some suppose these hardy navigators of Arctic and Antarctic waters have
been the progenitors of the races which built the temples and palaces of
Palenque and Uxmal, of Copan and Arica. <span
id="fr_764"></span>[\*](#fn_763) Brasseur de Bourbourg gives us much
information about the manners and customs, architecture and arts, and
especially of the magic and magicians of the ancient Mexicans. He tells
us that Votan, their fabulous hero and the greatest

###### <span id="page_546">p. 546</span>

of their magicians, returning from a long voyage, visited King Solomon
at the time of the building of the temple. This Votan appears to be
identical with the dreaded Quetzo-Cohuatl who appears in all the Mexican
legends; and curiously enough these legends bear a striking resemblance,
insomuch as they relate to the voyages and exploits of the Hittim, with
the Hebrew Bible accounts of the Hivites, the descendants of Heth, son
of Chanaan. The record tells us that Votan "furnished to Solomon the
most valuable particulars as to the men, animals, and plants, the gold
and precious woods of the Occident," but refused point-blank to afford
any clew to the route he sailed, or the manner of reaching the
mysterious continent. Solomon himself gives an account of this interview
in his *History of the Wonders of the Universe,* the chief Votan
figuring under the allegory of the *Navigating Serpent.* Stephens,
indulging in the anticipation "that a key surer than that of the
Rosetta-stone will be discovered," by which the American hieroglyphs may
be read, <span id="fr_765"></span>[\*](#fn_764) says that the
descendants of the Caciques and the Aztec subjects are believed to
survive still in the inaccessible fastnesses of the Cordilleras
"wildernesses, which have never yet been penetrated by a white man, . .
. living as their fathers did, erecting the same buildings . . . with
ornaments of sculpture and plastered; large courts, and lofty towers
with high ranges of steps, and still carving on tablets of stone the
same mysterious hieroglyphics." He adds, "I turn to that vast and
unknown region, untraversed by a single road, wherein fancy pictures
that mysterious city seen from the topmost range of the Cordilleras of
unconquered, unvisited, and unsought aboriginal inhabitants."

Apart from the fact that this mysterious city has been seen from a great
distance by daring travellers, there is no intrinsic improbability of
its existence, for who can tell what became of the primitive people who
fled before the rapacious brigands of Cortez and Pizarro? Dr. Tschuddi,
in his work on Peru, tells us of an Indian legend that a train of 10,000
llamas, laden with gold to complete the unfortunate Inca's ransom, was
arrested in the Andes by the tidings of his death, and the enormous
treasure was so effectually concealed that not a trace of it has ever
been found. He, as well as Prescott and other writers, informs us that
the Indians to this day preserve their ancient traditions and sacerdotal
caste, and obey implicitly the orders of rulers chosen among themselves,
while at the same time nominally Catholics and actually subject to the
Peruvian authorities. Magical ceremonies practiced by their forefathers
still prevail among them, and magical phenomena occur. So persistent are
they in their loyalty to the past, that it seems impossible

###### <span id="page_547">p. 547</span>

but that they should be in relations with some central source of
authority which constantly supports and strengthens their faith, keeping
it alive. May it not be that the sources of this undying faith lie in
this mysterious city, with which they are in secret communication? Or
must we think that all of the above is again but a "curious
coincidence"?

The story of this mysterious city was told to Stephens by a Spanish
Padre, in 1838-9. The priest swore to him that he had seen it with his
own eyes, and gave Stephens the following details, which the traveller
firmly believed to be true. "The Padre of the little village near the
ruins of Santa Cruz del Quiche, had heard of the unknown city at the
village of Chajul. . . . He was then young, and climbed with much labor
to the naked summit of the topmost ridge of the sierra of the
Cordillera. When arrived at a height of ten or twelve thousand feet, he
looked over an immense plain extending to Yucatan and the Gulf of
Mexico, and saw, at a great distance, a large city spread over a great
space, and with turrets white and glittering in the sun. Tradition says
that no white man has ever reached this city; that the inhabitants speak
the Maya language, know that strangers have conquered their whole land,
and murder any white man who attempts to enter their territory. . . .
They have no coin; no horses, cattle, mules, or other domestic animals
except fowls, and the cocks they keep underground to prevent their
crowing being heard."

Nearly the same was given us personally about twenty years ago, by an
old native priest, whom we met in Peru, and with whom we happened to
have business relations. He had passed all his life vainly trying to
conceal his hatred toward the conquerors--"brigands," he termed them;
and, as he confessed, kept friends with them and the Catholic religion
for the sake of his people, but he was as truly a sun-worshipper in his
heart as ever he was. He had travelled in his capacity of a *converted*
native missionary, and had been at Santa Cruz, and, as he solemnly
affirmed, had been also to see some of his people by a "subterranean
passage" leading into the mysterious city. We believe his account; for a
man who is about to die, will rarely stop to invent idle stories; and
this one we have found corroborated in Stephen's *Travels.* Besides, we
know of two other cities utterly unknown to European travellers; not
that the inhabitants particularly desire to hide themselves; for people
from Buddhistic countries come occasionally to visit them. But their
towns are not set down on the European or Asiatic maps; and, on account
of the too zealous and enterprising Christian missionaries, and perhaps
for more mysterious reasons of their own, the few natives of other
countries who are aware of the existence of these two cities never
mention them. Nature has provided strange nooks and hiding-places for
her favorites; and

###### <span id="page_548">p. 548</span>

unfortunately it is but far away from so-called civilized countries that
man is free to worship the Deity in the way that his fathers did.

Even the erudite and sober Max Muller is somehow unable to get rid of
*coincidences.* To him they come in the shape of the most unexpected
discoveries. These Mexicans, for instance, whose obscure origin,
according to the laws of probability, has no connection with the Aryans
of India, nevertheless, like the Hindus, represent an eclipse of the
moon as "the moon being devoured by a dragon." <span
id="fr_766"></span>[\*](#fn_765) And though Professor Muller admits that
an historical intercourse between the two people was suspected by
Alexander von Humboldt, and he himself considers it possible, still the
occurrence of such a fact he adds, "need not be the result of any
historical intercourse. As we have stated above, the origin of the
aborigines of America is a very vexed question for those interested in
tracing out the affiliation and migrations of peoples." Notwithstanding
the labor of Brasseur de Bourbourg, and his elaborate translation of the
famous *Popol-Vuh,* alleged to be written by Ixtlilxochitl, after
weighing its contents, the antiquarian remains as much in the dark as
ever. We have read the *Popol-Vuh* in its original translation, and the
review of the same by Max Muller, and out of the former find shining a
light of such brightness, that it is no wonder that the matter-of-fact,
skeptical scientists should be blinded by it. But so far as an author
can be judged by his writings, Professor Max Muller is no unfair
skeptic; and, moreover, very little of importance escapes his attention.
How is it then that a man of such immense and rare erudition, accustomed
as he is to embrace at one eagle glance the traditions, religious
customs, and superstitions of a people, detecting the slightest
similarity, and taking in the smallest details, failed to give any
importance or perhaps even suspect what the humble author of the present
volume, who has neither scientific training nor erudition, to any
extent, apprehended at first view? Fallacious and unwarranted as to many
may seem this remark, it appears to us that science loses more than she
gains by neglecting the ancient and even mediaeval esoteric literature,
or rather what remains of it. To one who devotes himself to such study
many a coincidence is transformed into a natural result of demonstrable
antecedent causes. We think we can see how it is that Professor Muller
confesses that "now and then . . . one imagines one sees certain periods
and landmarks, but in the next page all is chaos again." <span
id="fr_767"></span>[\*\*](#fn_766) May it not be barely possible that
this chaos is intensified by the fact that most of the scientists,
directing the whole of their attention to history, skip that which they
treat as "vague, contradictory,

###### <span id="page_549">p. 549</span>

miraculous, absurd." Notwithstanding the feeling that there was "a
groundwork of noble conceptions which has been covered and distorted by
an aftergrowth of fantastic nonsense," Professor Muller cannot help
comparing this nonsense to the tales of the

Arabian Nights.

Far be from us the ridiculous pretension of criticising a scientist so
worthy of admiration for his learning as Max Muller. But we cannot help
saying that even among the fantastic nonsense of the *Arabian Nights*'
*Entertainments* anything would be worthy of attention, if it should
help toward the evolving of some historical truth. Homer's *Odyssey*
surpasses in fantastic nonsense all the tales of the *Arabian Nights*
combined; and notwithstanding that, many of his myths are now proved to
be something else besides the creation of the old poet's fancy. The
Laestrygonians, who devoured the companions of Ulysses, are traced to
the huge cannibal <span id="fr_768"></span>[\*](#fn_767) race, said in
primitive days to inhabit the caves of Norway. Geology verified through
her discoveries some of the assertions of Homer, supposed for so many
ages to have been but poetical hallucinations. The perpetual daylight
enjoyed by this race of Laestrygonians indicates that they were
inhabitants of the North Cape, where, during the whole summer, there is
perpetual daylight. The Norwegian fiords are perfectly described by
Homer in his *Odyssey*, x*.* 110; and the gigantic stature of the
Laestrygonians is demonstrated by human bones of unusual size found in
caves situated near this region, and which the geologists suppose to
have belonged to a race extinct long before the Aryan immigration.
Charybdis, as we have seen, has been recognized in the maelstrom; and
the Wandering Rocks <span id="fr_769"></span>[\*\*](#fn_768) in the
enormous icebergs of the Arctic seas.

If the consecutive attempts at the creation of man described in the
*Quiche Cosmogony* suggests no comparison with some Apocrypha, with the
Jewish sacred books, and the kabalistic theories of creation, it is
indeed strange. Even the *Book of Jasher,* condemned as a gross forgery
of the twelfth century, may furnish more than one clew to trace a
relation between the population of Ur of the Kasdeans, where Magism
flourished before the days of Abraham, and those of Central and North
America. The divine beings, "brought down to the level of human nature,"
performed no feats or tricks more strange or incredible than the
miraculous performances of Moses and of Pharaoh's magicians, while many
of these are exactly similar in their nature. And when, moreover, in
addition to this latter fact, we find so great a resemblance between
certain kabalistic terms common to both hemispheres, there must be
something else than mere accident to account for the circumstance. Many

###### <span id="page_550">p. 550</span>

of such feats have clearly a common parentage. The story of the two
brothers of Central America, who, before starting on their journey to
Xibalba, "plant each a cane in the middle of their grandmother's house,
that she may know by its flourishing or withering whether they are alive
or dead," <span id="fr_770"></span>[\*](#fn_769) finds its analogy in
the beliefs of many other countries. In the *Popular Tales and
Traditions,* by Sacharoff (Russia), one can find a similar narrative,
and trace this belief in various other legends. And yet these fairy
tales were current in Russia many centuries before America was
discovered.

In recognizing in the gods of Stonehenge the divinities of Delphos and
Babylon, one need feel little surprised. Bel and the Dragon, Apollo and
Python, Osiris and Typhon, are all one under many names, and have
travelled far and wide. The Both-al of Ireland points directly to its
first parent, the Batylos of the Greeks and the Beth-el of Chanaan.
"History," says H. de la Villemarque, "which took no notes at those
distant ages, can plead ignorance, but the science of languages affirms.
Philology, with a daily-increasing probability, has again linked
together the chain hardly broken between the Orient and the
Occident." <span id="fr_771"></span>[\*\*](#fn_770)

No more remarkable is the discovery of a like resemblance between the
Oriental myths and ancient Russian tales and traditions, for it is
entirely natural to look for a similarity between the beliefs of the
Semitic and Aryan families. But when we discover an almost perfect
identity between the character of Zarevna Militrissa, with a *moon* in
her forehead, who is in constant danger of being devoured by *Zmey
Gorenetch* (the Serpent or Dragon), who plays such a prominent part in
all popular Russian tales, and similar characters in the Mexican
legends--extending to the minutest details--we may well pause and ask
ourselves whether there be not here more than a simple coincidence.

This tradition of the Dragon and the Sun--occasionally replaced by the
Moon--has awakened echoes in the remotest parts of the world. It may be
accounted for with perfect readiness by the once universal heliolatrous
religion. There was a time when Asia, Europe, Africa, and America were
covered with the temples sacred to the sun and the dragons. The priests
assumed the names of their deities, and thus the tradition of these
spread like a net-work all over the globe: "Bel and the Dragon being
uniformly coupled together, and the priest of the Ophite religion as
uniformly assuming the name of his god." <span
id="fr_772"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_771) But still,

###### <span id="page_551">p. 551</span>

"if the original conception is natural and intelligible . . . and its
occurrence need not be the result of any historical intercourse," as
Professor Muller tells us, the details are so strikingly similar that we
cannot feel satisfied that the riddle is entirely solved. The origin of
this universal symbolical worship being concealed in the night of time,
we would have far more chance to arrive at the truth by tracing these
traditions to their very source. And where is this source? Kircher
places the origin of the Ophite and heliolatrous worship, the shape of
conical monuments and the obelisks, with the Egyptian Hermes
Trismegistus. <span id="fr_773"></span>[\*](#fn_772) Where, then, except
in Hermetic books, are we to seek for the desired information? Is it
likely that modern authors can know more, or as much, of ancient myths
and cults as the men who taught them to their contemporaries? Clearly
two things are necessary: first, to find the missing books of Hermes;
and second, the key by which to *understand* them, for reading is not
sufficient. Failing in this, our savants are abandoned to unfruitful
speculations, as for a like reason geographers waste their energies in a
vain quest of the sources of the Nile. Truly the land of Egypt is
another abode of mystery!

Without stopping to discuss whether Hermes was the "Prince of
post-diluvian magic," as des Mousseaux calls him, or the antediluvian,
which is much more likely, one thing is certain: The authenticity,
reliability, and usefulness of the *Books of Hermes--*or rather of what
remains of the thirty-six works attributed to the Egyptian magician--are
fully recognized by Champollion, junior, and corroborated by
Champollion-Figeac, who mentions it. Now, if by carefully looking over
the kabalistical works, which are all derived from that universal
storehouse of esoteric knowledge, we find the fac-similes of many
so-called miracles wrought by magical art, equally reproduced by the
Quiches; and if even in the fragments left of the original *Popol-Vuh,*
there is sufficient evidence that the religious customs of the Mexicans,
Peruvians, and other American races are nearly identical with those of
the ancient Phoenicians, Babylonians, and Egyptians; and if, moreover,
we discover that many of their religious terms have etymologically the
same origin; how are we to avoid believing that they are the descendants
of those whose forefathers "fled before the brigand, Joshua, the son of
Nun?" "Nunez de la Vega says that Nin, or Imos, of the Tzendales, was
the Ninus of the Babylonians." <span id="fr_774"></span>[\*\*](#fn_773)

It is possible that, so far, it may be a coincidence; as the
identification of one with the other rests but upon a poor argument.
"But it is known," adds de Bourbourg, "that this prince, and according
to

###### <span id="page_552">p. 552</span>

others, his father, Bel, or Baal, received, like the Nin of the
Tzendales the homages of his subjects under the shape of a serpent." The
latter assertion, besides being fantastic, is nowhere corroborated in
the Babylonian records. It is very true that the Phoenicians represented
the sun under the image of a dragon; but so did all the other people who
symbolized their sun-gods. Belus, the first king of the Assyrian dynasty
was, according to Castor, and Eusebius who quotes him, deified, *i.e*.,
he was ranked among the gods "after his death" only. Thus, neither
himself nor his son, Ninus, or Nin, could have received their subjects
under the shape of a serpent, whatever the Tzendales did. Bel, according
to Christians, is Baal; and Baal is the Devil, since the Bible prophets
began so designating every deity of their neighbors; therefore Belus,
Ninus, and the Mexican Nin are serpents and devils; and, as the Devil,
or father of evil, is one under many forms, therefore, under whatever
name the serpent appears, it is the Devil. Strange logic! Why not say
that Ninus the Assyrian, represented as husband and victim of the
ambitious Semiramis, was high priest as well as king of his country?
That as such he wore on his tiara the sacred emblems of the dragon and
the sun? Moreover, as the priest generally assumed the name of his god,
Ninus was said to receive his subject as the representative of this
serpent-god. The idea is preeminently Roman Catholic and amounts to very
little, as all their inventions do. If Nunez de la Vega was so anxious
to establish an affiliation between the Mexicans and the biblical sun-
and serpent-worshippers, why did he not show another and a better
similarity between them without tracing in the Ninevites and the
Tzendales the hoof and horn of the Christian Devil?

And to begin with, he might have pointed to the *Chronicles* of Fuentes,
of the kingdom of Guatemala, and to the *Manuscript* of Don Juan Torres,
the grandson of the last king of the Quiches. This document, which is
said to have been in the possession of the lieutenant-general appointed
by Pedro de Alvarado, states that the Toltecas themselves descended from
the house of Israel, who were released by Moses, and who, after crossing
the Red Sea, fell into idolatry. After that, having separated themselves
from their companions, and under the guidance of a chief named Tanub,
they set out wandering, and from one continent to another they came to a
place named the Seven Caverns, in the Kingdom of Mexico, where they
founded the famous town of Tula, etc. <span
id="fr_775"></span>[\*](#fn_774)

If this statement has never obtained more credit than it has, it is
simply due to the fact that it passed through the hands of Father
Francis Vasques, historian of the Order of San Francis, and this
circumstance,

###### <span id="page_553">p. 553</span>

to use the expression employed by des Mousseaux in connection with the
work of the poor, unfrocked Abbe Huc, "is not calculated to strengthen
our confidence." But there is another point as important, if not more
so, as it seems to have escaped falsification by the zealous Catholic
padres, and rests chiefly on Indian tradition. A famous Toltecan king,
whose name is mixed up in the weird legends of Utatlan, the ruined
capital of the great Indian kingdom, bore the biblical appellation of
Balam Acan; the first name being preeminently Chaldean, and reminding
one immediately of Balaam and his human-voiced ass. Besides the
statement of Lord Kingsborough, who found such a striking similarity
between the language of the Aztecs (the mother tongue) and the Hebrew,
many of the figures on the *bas-reliefs* of Palenque and idols in *terra
cotta,* exhumed in Santa Cruz del Quiche, have on their heads bandelets
with a square protuberance on them, in front of the forehead, very
similar to the phylacteries worn by the Hebrew Pharisees of old, while
at prayers, and even by devotees of the present day, particularly the
Jews of Poland and Russia. But as this may be but a fancy of ours, after
all, we will not insist on the details.

Upon the testimony of the ancients, corroborated by modern discoveries,
we know that there were numerous catacombs in Egypt and Chaldea, some of
them of a very vast extent. The most renowned of them were the
subterranean crypts of Thebes and Memphis. The former, beginning on the
western side of the Nile, extended toward the Libyan desert, and were
known as the *Serpent*'*s* catacombs, or passages. It was there that
were performed the sacred mysteries of the *kuklos anagkes*, the
"Unavoidable Cycle," more generally known as the "circle of necessity";
the inexorable doom imposed upon every soul after the bodily death, and
when it had been judged in the Amenthian region.

In de Bourbourg's book, Votan, the Mexican demi-god, in narrating his
expedition, describes a subterranean passage, which ran underground, and
terminated at the root of the heavens, adding that this passage was a
snake's hole, "*un agujero de culebra*"; and that he was admitted to it
because he was himself "a son of the snakes," or a serpent. <span
id="fr_776"></span>[\*](#fn_775)

This is, indeed, very suggestive; for his description of the *snake*'*s
hole* is that of the ancient Egyptian crypt, as above mentioned. The
hierophants, moreover, of Egypt, as of Babylon, generally styled
themselves the "Sons of the Serpent-god," or "Sons of the Dragon"; not
because--as des Mousseaux would have his readers believe--they were the
progeny of Satan-incubus, the old serpent of Eden, but because, in the
Mysteries, the serpent was the symbol of WISDOM and immortality.

###### <span id="page_554">p. 554</span>

"The Assyrian priest bore always the name of his god," says
Movers. <span id="fr_777"></span>[\*](#fn_776) The Druids of the
Celto-Britannic regions also called themselves snakes. "I am a Serpent,
I am a Druid!" they exclaimed. The Egyptian Karnak is twin-brother to
the Carnac of Bretagne, the latter Carnac meaning the serpent's mount.
The Dracontia once covered the surface of the globe, and these temples
were sacred to the dragon, only because it was the symbol of the sun,
which, in its turn, was the symbol of the highest god--the Phoenician
Elon or Elion, whom Abraham recognized as El Elion. <span
id="fr_778"></span>[\*\*](#fn_777) Besides the surname of serpents, they
were called the "builders," the "architects"; for the immense grandeur
of their temples and monuments was such, that even now the pulverized
remains of them "frighten the mathematical calculations of our modern
engineers," says Taliesin. <span id="fr_779"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_778)

De Bourbourg hints that the chiefs of the name of Votan, the
Quetzo-Cohuatl, or serpent deity of the Mexicans, are the descendants of
Ham and Canaan. "I am Hivim," they say. "Being a Hivim, I am of the
great race of the Dragon (snake). I am a snake myself, for I am a
Hivim." <span id="fr_780"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_779) And des Mousseaux,
rejoicing because he believes himself fairly on the serpent's, or
rather, devil's trail, hurries to explain: "According to the most
learned commentators of our sacred books, the Chivim or Hivim, or
*Hevites,* descend from Heth, son of Canaan, son of Ham . . . *the
accursed*!" <span id="fr_781"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_780)

But modern research has demonstrated, on unimpeachable evidence, that
the whole genealogical table of the tenth chapter of *Genesis* refers to
imaginary heroes, and that the closing verses of the ninth are little
better than a bit of Chaldean allegory of Sisuthrus and the mythical
flood, compiled and arranged to fit the Noachian frame. But, suppose the
descendants of these Canaanites, "the accursed," were to resent for once
the unmerited outrage? It would be an easy matter for them to reverse
the tables, and answer to this fling, based on a *fable,* by a *fact*
proved by archaeologists and symbologists--namely, that Seth, Adam's
third son, and the forefather of all Israel, the ancestor of Noah, and
the progenitor of the "chosen people," is but Hermes, the god of wisdom,
called also Thoth, Tat, Seth, Set, and *Sat-an;* and that he was,
furthermore, when viewed under his bad aspect, Typhon, the Egyptian
Satan, who was also *Set.* For the Jewish people, whose well-educated
men, no more than Philo, or Josephus, the historian, regard their Mosaic
books

###### <span id="page_555">p. 555</span>

as otherwise than an allegory, such a discovery amounts to but little.
But for Christians, who, like des Mousseaux, very unwisely accept the
*Bible* narratives as literal history, the case stands very different.

As far as affiliation goes, we agree with this pious writer; and we feel
every day as certain that some of the peoples of Central America will be
traced back to the Phoenicians and the Mosaic Israelites, as we do that
the latter will be proved to have as persistently stuck to the same
idolatry--if idolatry there is--of the sun and serpent-worship, as the
Mexicans. There is evidence--biblical evidence--that two of Jacob's
sons, Levi and Dan, as well as Judah, married Canaanite women, and
followed the worship of their wives. Of course, every Christian will
protest, but the proof may be found even in the translated *Bible*,
pruned as it now stands. The dying Jacob thus describes his sons: "Dan,"
says he, "shall be a *serpent* by the way, an *adder* in the path, that
biteth the horse-heels, so that his rider shall fall backward. . . . I
have waited for thy salvation, 0 Lord!" Of Simeon and Levi, the
patriarch (or Israel) remarks that they ". . *. are* brethren;
instruments of *cruelty* are in their habitations. O my soul, come not
thou into *their secret*; unto *their assembly*." <span
id="fr_782"></span>[\*](#fn_781) Now, in the original, the words "their
secret," read--their **S**OD. <span id="fr_783"></span>[\*\*](#fn_782)
And Sod was the name for the great Mysteries of Baal, Adonis, and
Bacchus who were all sun-gods and had serpents for symbols. The
kabalists explain the allegory of the fiery serpents by saying, that
this was the name given to the tribe of Levi, to all the *Levites* in
short, and that Moses was the chief of the *Sodales*. <span
id="fr_784"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_783) And here is the moment to prove our
statements.

Moses is mentioned by several old historians as an Egyptian priest;
Manetho says he was a hierophant of Hieropolis, and a priest of the
sun-god Osiris, and that his name was Osarsiph. Those moderns, who
accept it as a fact that he "was learned in *all* the wisdom" of the
Egyptians, must also submit to the right interpretation of the word
wisdom, which was throughout the world known as a synonym of

initiation

###### <span id="page_556">p. 556</span>

into the secret mysteries of the *Magi.* Did the idea never strike the
reader of the *Bible,* that an alien born and brought up in a foreign
country *could not* and *would not* possibly have been admitted--we will
not say to the final initiation, the grandest mystery of all, but even
to share the knowledge of the minor priesthood, those who belonged to
the *lesser* mysteries? In *Genesis xliii.* 32, we read, that no
Egyptian could seat himself to eat bread with the brothers of Joseph,
"for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians." But that the Egyptians
ate "with *him* (Joseph) by themselves." The above proves two things: 1,
that Joseph, whatever he was in his heart, had, in appearance at least,
changed his religion, married the daughter of a priest of the
"idolatrous" nation, and become himself an Egyptian; otherwise, the
natives would not have eaten bread with him. And 2, that subsequently
Moses, if not an Egyptian by birth, became one through being admitted
into the priesthood, and thus was a **S**ODALE. As an induction, the
narrative of the "brazen serpent" (the Caduceus of Mercury or Asclepios,
the son of the sun-god Apollo-Python) becomes logical and natural. We
must bear in mind that Pharaoh's daughter, who saved Moses and adopted
him, is called by Josephus *Thermuthis;* and the latter, according to
Wilkinson, is the name of the *asp* sacred to Isis; <span
id="fr_785"></span>[\*](#fn_784) moreover, Moses is said to descend from
the tribe of *Levi.* We will explain the kabalistic ideas as to the
books of Moses and the great prophet himself more fully in Volume II.

If Brasseur de Bourbourg and the Chevalier des Mousseaux, had so much at
heart to trace the identity of the Mexicans with the Canaanites, they
might have found far better and weightier proofs than by showing both
the "accursed" descendants of Ham. For instance, they might have pointed
to the Nargal, the Chaldean and Assyrian chief of the Magi (Rab-Mag) and
the Nagal, the chief sorcerer of the Mexican Indians. Both derive their
names from Nergal-Sarezer, the Assyrian god, and both have the same
faculties, or powers to have an attendant *daemon* with whom they
identify themselves completely. The Chaldean and Assyrian Nargal kept
his daemon, in the shape of some animal considered sacred, inside the
temple; the Indian Nagal keeps his wherever he can--in the neighboring
lake, or wood, or in the house, under the shape of a house-hold
animal. <span id="fr_786"></span>[\*\*](#fn_785)

We find the *Catholic World,* newspaper, in a recent number, bitterly
complaining that the old Pagan element of the aboriginal inhabitants of
America does not seem to be utterly dead in the United States. Even

###### <span id="page_557">p. 557</span>

where tribes have been for long years under the care of Christian
teachers, heathen rites are practiced in secret, and crypto-paganism, or
*nagualism,* flourishes now, as in the days of Montezuma. It says:
"Nagualism and voodoo-worship"--as it calls these two strange
sects--"are direct *devil-worship.* A report addressed to the Cortes in
1812, by Don Pedro Baptista Pino, says: 'All the pueblos have their
*artufas--*so the natives call subterranean rooms with only a single
door, where they assemble to perform their feasts, and hold meetings.
These are impenetrable temples . . . and the doors are always closed on
the Spaniards.

" 'All these pueblos, in spite of the sway which religion has had over
them, cannot forget a part of the beliefs which have been transmitted to
them, and which they are careful to transmit to their descendants. Hence
come the adoration they render the sun and moon, and other heavenly
bodies, the respect they entertain for fire, etc.

" 'The pueblo chiefs seem to be at the same time priests; they perform
various simple rites, by which the power of the sun and of Montezuma is
recognized, as well as the power (according to some accounts) of the
Great Snake, to whom, by order of Montezuma, they are to look for life.
They also officiate in certain ceremonies with which they pray for rain.
There are painted representations of the Great Snake, together with that
of a misshapen, red-haired man, declared to stand for Montezuma. Of this
last there was also, in the year 1845, in the pueblo of Laguna, a rude
effigy or idol, intended, apparently, to represent only the head of the
deity.' " <span id="fr_787"></span>[\*](#fn_786)

The perfect identity of the rites, ceremonies, traditions, and even the
names of the deities, among the Mexicans and ancient Babylonians and
Egyptians, are a sufficient proof of South America being peopled by a
colony which mysteriously found its way across the Atlantic. When? at
what period? History is silent on that point; but those who consider
that there is no tradition, sanctified by ages, without a certain
sediment of truth at the bottom of it, believe in the *Atlantis*-legend.
There are, scattered throughout the world, a handful of thoughtful and
solitary students, who pass their lives in obscurity, far from the
rumors of the world, studying the great problems of the physical and
spiritual universes. They have their secret records in which are
preserved the fruits of the scholastic labors of the long line of
recluses whose successors they are. The knowledge of their early
ancestors, the sages of India, Babylonia, Nineveh, and the imperial
Thebes; the legends and traditions commented upon by the masters of
Solon, Pythagoras, and Plato, in the

###### <span id="page_558">p. 558</span>

marble halls of Heliopolis and Sais; traditions which, in their days,
already seemed to hardly glimmer from behind the foggy curtain of the
past;--all this, and much more, is recorded on indestructible parchment,
and passed with jealous care from one adept to another. These men
believe the story of the Atlantis to be no fable, but maintain that at
different epochs of the past huge islands, and even continents, existed
where now there is but a wild waste of waters. In those submerged
temples and libraries the archaeologist would find, could he but explore
them, the materials for filling all the gaps that now exist in what we
imagine is *history.* They say that at a remote epoch a traveller could
traverse what is now the Atlantic Ocean, almost the entire distance by
land, crossing in boats from one island to another, where narrow straits
then existed.

Our suspicion as to the relationship of the cis-Atlantic and
trans-Atlantic races is strengthened upon reading about the wonders
wrought by Quetzo-Cohuatl, the Mexican magician. His wand must be
closely-related to the traditional sapphire-stick of Moses, the stick
which bloomed in the garden of Raguel-Jethro, his father-in-law, and
upon which was engraved the ineffable name. The "four men" described as
the real four ancestors of the human race, "who were neither begotten by
the gods, nor born of woman," but whose "creation was a wonder wrought
by the Creator," and who were made after three attempts at manufacturing
men had failed, equally present some striking points of similarity with
the esoteric explanations of the Hermetists; <span
id="fr_788"></span>[\*](#fn_787) they also undeniably recall the four
sons of God of the Egyptian theogony. Moreover, as any one may infer,
the resemblance of this myth to the narrative related in *Genesis,* will
be apparent to even a superficial observer. These four ancestors "could
reason and speak, their sight was unlimited, and they knew all things at
once." <span id="fr_789"></span>[\*\*](#fn_788) When "they had rendered
thanks to their Creator for their existence, *the gods were frightened,*
and they breathed a cloud over the eyes of men that they might see a
certain distance only, and not be *like the gods themselves.*" This
bears directly upon the sentence in *Genesis,* "Behold, *the man is
become as one of us,* to know good and evil; and now, lest he put forth
his hand, and take also of the tree of life," etc. Then, again, "While
*they were asleep* God gave them wives," etc.

###### <span id="page_559">p. 559</span>

We disclaim the least intention to disrespectfully suggest ideas to
those who are so wise as to need no hint. But we must bear in mind that
authentic treatises upon ancient magic of the Chaldean and Egyptian lore
are not scattered about in public libraries, and at auction sales. That
such exist is nevertheless a fact for many students of the arcane
philosophy. Is it not of the greatest importance for every antiquarian
to be acquainted at least superficially with their contents? "The four
ancestors of the race," adds Max Muller, "seem to have had a long life,
and when at last they came to die, they disappeared in a mysterious
manner, and left to their sons what is called the *hidden majesty,*
which was never to be opened by human hands. What it was we do not
know."

If there is no relationship between this hidden majesty and the hidden
glory of the Chaldean *Kabala,* which we are told was left behind him by
Enoch when he was translated in such a mysterious way, then we must
discredit all circumstantial evidence. But is it not barely possible
that these "four ancestors" of the Quiche race typify in their esoteric
sense the four successive progenitors of men, mentioned in *Genesis* i.,
ii., and vi.? In the first chapter, the first man is bi-sexual--"male
and female created he them"--and answers to the hermaphrodite deities of
the subsequent mythologies; the second, Adam, made out of "the dust of
the ground" and uni-sexual and answering to the "sons of God" of chapter
vi.; the third, the giants, or *nephilim,* who are only hinted at in the
*Bible,* but fully explained elsewhere; the fourth, the parents of men
"whose daughters were fair."

Taking the admitted facts that the Mexicans had their magicians from the
remote periods; that the same remark applies to all the ancient
religions of the world; that a strong resemblance prevails not only in
the forms of their ceremonial worship, but also in the very names used
to designate certain magical implements; and finally that all other
clews, in accordance with scientific deductions, have failed (some
because swallowed up in the bottomless pit of coincidences), why should
we not turn to the great authorities upon magic, and see whether, under
this "aftergrowth of fantastic nonsense," there may not be a deep
substratum of truth? Here we are not willing to be misunderstood. We do
not send the scientists to the *Kabala* and the Hermetic books to study
magic, but to the authorities on magic to discover materials for history
and science. We have no idea of incurring the wrathful denunciations of
the Academicians, by an indiscretion like that of poor des Mousseaux,
when he tried to force them to read his demonological Memoire and
investigate the Devil.

The *History of Bernal Diaz de Castilla,* a follower of Cortez, gives us
some idea of the extraordinary refinement and intelligence of the

###### <span id="page_560">p. 560</span>

people whom they conquered; but the descriptions are too long to be
inserted here. Suffice it to say, that the Aztecs appeared in more than
one way to have resembled the ancient Egyptians in civilization and
refinement. Among both peoples magic or the arcane natural philosophy
was cultivated to the highest degree. Add to this that Greece, the
"later cradle of the arts and sciences," and India, cradle of religions,
were and are still devoted to its study and practice--and who shall
venture to discredit its dignity as a study, and its profundity as a
science?

There never was, nor can there be more than one universal religion; for
there can be but one truth concerning God. Like an immense chain whose
upper end, the alpha, remains invisibly emanating from a Deity--*in
statu abscondito* with every primitive theology--it encircles our globe
in every direction; it leaves not even the darkest corner unvisited,
before the other end, the omega, turns back on its way to be again
received where it first emanated. On this divine chain was strung the
exoteric symbology of every people. Their variety of form is powerless
to affect their substance, and under their diverse ideal types of the
universe of matter, symbolizing its vivifying principles, the
uncorrupted immaterial image of the spirit of being guiding them is the
same.

So far as human intellect can go in the ideal interpretation of the
spiritual universe, its laws and powers, the last word was pronounced
ages since; and, if the *ideas* of Plato can be simplified for the sake
of easier comprehension, the spirit of their substance can neither be
altered, nor removed without material damage to the truth. Let human
brains submit themselves to torture for thousands of years to come; let
theology perplex faith and mime it with the enforcing of
incomprehensible dogmas in metaphysics; and science strengthen
skepticism, by pulling down the tottering remains of spiritual intuition
in mankind, with her demonstrations of its fallibility, eternal truth
can never be destroyed. We find its last possible expression in our
human language in the Persian Logos, the *Honover,* or the living
*manifested* Word of God. The Zoroastrian *Enoch-Verihe* is identical
with the Jewish "*I am*"; and the "Great Spirit" of the poor, untutored
Indian, is the manifested Brahma of the Hindu philosopher. One of the
latter, Tcharaka, a Hindu physician, who is said to have lived 5,000
years B.C., in his treatise on the origin of things, called *Usa,* thus
beautifully expresses himself: "Our Earth is, like all the luminous
bodies that surround us, one of the atoms of the immense Whole of which
we show a slight conception by terming it--the Infinite."

"There is but one light, and there is but one darkness," says a Siamese
proverb. *Daemon est Deus inversus,* the Devil is the shadow of God,
states the universal kabalistic axiom. Could light exist but for

###### <span id="page_561">p. 561</span>

primeval darkness? And did not the brilliant, sunny universe first
stretch its infant arms from the swaddling bands of dark and dreary
chaos? If the Christian "*fulness of Him that filleth all in all*" is a
revelation, then we must admit that, if there is a devil, he must be
included in this *fulness,* and be a part of that which "filleth all in
all." From time immemorial the justification of the Deity, and His
separation from the existing evil was attempted, and the object was
reached by the old Oriental philosophy in the foundation of the
*theodike;* but their metaphysical views on the *fallen spirit,* have
never been disfigured by the creation of an anthropomorphic personality
of the Devil as was done subsequently by the leading lights of Christian
theology. A personal fiend, who opposes the Deity, and impedes progress
on its way to perfection, is to be sought only on earth amid humanity,
not in heaven.

Thus is it that all the religious monuments of old, in whatever land or
under whatever climate, are the expression of the same identical
thoughts, the key to which is in the esoteric doctrine. It would be
vain, without studying the latter, to seek to unriddle the mysteries
enshrouded for centuries in the temples and ruins of Egypt and Assyria,
or those of Central America, British Columbia, and the Nagkon-Wat of
Cambodia. If each of these was built by a different nation; and neither
nation had had intercourse with the others for ages, it is also certain
that all were planned and built under the direct supervision of the
priests. And the clergy of every nation, though practicing rites and
ceremonies which may have differed externally, had evidently been
initiated into the same traditional mysteries which were taught all over
the world.

In order to institute a better comparison between the specimens of
prehistoric architecture to be found at the most opposite points of the
globe, we have but to point to the grandiose Hindu ruins of Ellora in
the Dekkan, the Mexican Chichen-Itza, in Yucatan, and the still grander
ruins of Copan, in Guatemala. They present such features of resemblance
that it seems impossible to escape the conviction that they were built
by peoples moved by the same religious ideas, and that had reached an
equal level of highest civilization in arts and sciences.

There is not, perhaps, on the face of the whole globe, a more imposing
mass of ruins than Nagkon-Wat, the wonder and puzzle of European
archeologists who venture into Siam. And when we say ruins, the
expression is hardly correct; for nowhere are there buildings of such
tremendous antiquity to be found in a better state of preservation than
Nagkon-Wat, and the ruins of Angkorthom, the great temple.

Hidden far away in the province of Siamrap--eastern Siam--in the midst
of a most luxuriant tropical vegetation, surrounded by almost
impenetrable forests of palms, cocoa-trees, and betel-nut, "the general
appearance

###### <span id="page_562">p. 562</span>

of the wonderful temple is beautiful and romantic, as well as impressive
and grand," says Mr. Vincent, a recent traveller. <span
id="fr_790"></span>[\*](#fn_789) "We whose good fortune it is to live in
the nineteenth century, are accustomed to boast of the perfection and
preeminence of our modern civilization; of the grandeur of our
attainments in science, art, literature, and what not, as compared with
those whom we call ancients; but still we are compelled to admit that
they have far excelled our recent endeavors in many things, and notably
in the fine arts of painting, architecture, and sculpture. We were but
just looking upon a most wonderful example of the two latter, for in
style and beauty of architecture, solidity of construction, and
magnificent and elaborate carving and sculpture, the Great Nagkon-Wat
has no superior, certainly no rival standing at the present day. The
first view of the ruins is overwhelming."

Thus the opinion of another traveller is added to that of many preceding
ones, including archeologists and other competent critics, who have
believed that the ruins of the past Egyptian splendor deserve no higher
eulogium than Nagkon-Wat.

According to our plan, we will allow more impartial critics than
ourselves to describe the place, since, in a work professedly devoted to
a vindication of the ancients, the testimony of so enthusiastic an
advocate as the present writer may be questioned. We have, nevertheless,
seen Nagkon-Wat under exceptionally favorable circumstances, and can,
therefore, certify to the general correctness of Mr. Vincent's
description. He says:

"We entered upon an immense causeway, the stairs of which were flanked
with six huge griffins, each carved from a single block of stone. The
causeway is . . . 725 feet in length, and is paved with stones each of
which measures four feet in length by two in breadth. On either side of
it are artificial lakes fed by springs, and each covering about five
acres of ground. . . . The outer wall of Nagkon-Wat (the city of
monasteries) is half a mile square, with gateways . . . which are
handsomely carved with figures of gods and dragons. The foundations are
ten feet in height. . . . The entire edifice, including the roof, is of
stone, *but without cement, and so closely fitting are the joints as
even now to be scarcely discernible*. . . . The shape of the building is
oblong, being 796 feet in length, and 588 in width, while the highest
central pagoda rises some 250 odd feet above the ground, and four
others, at the angles of the court, are each about 150 feet in height."

The above underscored lines are suggestive to travellers who have
remarked and admired the same wonderful mason-work in the Egyptian

###### <span id="page_563">p. 563</span>

remains. If the same workmen did not lay the courses in both countries
we must at least think that the secret of this matchless wall-building
was equally known to the architects of every land.

"Passing, we ascend a platform . . . and enter the temple itself through
a columned portico, the *facade* of which is beautifully carved in
*basso-relievo* with ancient mythological subjects. From this doorway,
on either side, runs a corridor with a double row of columns, cut--base
and capital--from single blocks, with a double, oval-shaped roof,
covered with carving and consecutive sculptures upon the outer wall.
This gallery of sculptures, which forms the exterior of the temple,
consists of over half a mile of continuous pictures, cut in
*basso-relievo* upon sandstone slabs six feet in width, and represents
subjects taken from Hindu mythology, from the *Ramayana--*the Sanscrit
epic poem of India, with its 25,000 verses describing the exploits of
the god Rama, and the son of the King of Oudh. The contests of the King
of Ceylon, and Hanouma, <span id="fr_791"></span>[\*](#fn_790) the
monkey-god, are graphically represented. There is *no keystone* used in
the arch of this corridor. On the walls are sculptured the immense
number of 100,000 separate figures. One picture from the *Ramayana* . .
. occupies 240 feet of the wall. . . . In the *Nagkon-Wat* as many as
1,532 solid columns have been counted, and among the entire ruins of
Angkor . . . the immense number of 6,000, almost all of them hewn from
single blocks and artistically carved. . . .

"But who built *Nagkon-Wat?* and when was it built? Learned men have
attempted to form opinions from studies of its construction, and
especially ornamentation," and have failed. "Native Cambodian
historians,"

###### <span id="page_564">p. 564</span>

adds Vincent, "reckon 2,400 from the building of the temple. . . . I
asked one of them how long *Nagkon-Wat* had been built. . . . 'None can
tell when. . . . I do not know; it must have either sprung up from the
ground or been built by giants, or perhaps by the angels' . . . was the
answer."

When Stephens asked the native Indians "Who built Copan? . . . what
nation traced the hieroglyphic designs, sculptured these elegant figures
and carvings, these emblematical designs?" the dull answer he received
was "*Quien sabe?*"--who knows! "All is mystery; dark, impenetrable
mystery," writes Stephens. "In Egypt, the colossal skeletons of gigantic
temples stand in all the nakedness of desolation. Here, an immense
forest shrouded the ruins, hiding them from sight." <span
id="fr_792"></span>[\*](#fn_791)

But there are perhaps many circumstances, trifling for archaeologists
unacquainted with the "idle and fanciful" legends of old, hence
overlooked; otherwise the discovery might have sent them on a new train
of thought. One is the invariable presence in the Egyptian, Mexican, and
Siamese ruined temples, of the monkey. The Egyptian cynocephalus assumes
the same postures as the Hindu and Siamese Hanouma; and among the
sculptured fragments of Copan, Stephens found the remains of colossal
apes or baboons, "strongly resembling in outline and appearance the four
monstrous animals which once stood in front, attached to the base of the
obelisk of Luxor, now in Paris, <span id="fr_793"></span>[\*\*](#fn_792)
and which, under the name of the cynocephali, were worshipped at
Thebes." In almost every Buddhist temple there are idols of huge monkeys
kept, and some people have in their houses white monkeys on purpose "to
keep *bad* spirits away."

"Was civilization," writes Louis de Carne, <span
id="fr_794"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_793) "in the complex meaning we give
that word, in keeping among the ancient Cambodians with what such
prodigies of architecture seem to indicate? The age of Pheidias was that
of Sophocles, Socrates, and Plato; Michael Angelo and Raphael succeeded
Dante. There are luminous epochs during which the human mind, developing
itself in every direction, triumphs in all, and creates masterpieces
*which spring from the same inspiration.*" "Nagkon-Wat," concludes
Vincent, "must be ascribed to other than ancient Cambodians. But to
whom? . . . There exist *no credible* traditions; *all is absurd fable
or legend.*"

The latter sentence has become of late a sort of cant phrase in the
mouths of travellers and archaeologists. When they have found that

###### <span id="page_565">p. 565</span>

no clew is attainable unless it can be found in popular legends, they
turn away discouraged, and a final verdict is withheld. At the same time
Vincent quotes a writer who remarks that these ruins "are as imposing as
the ruins of Thebes, or Memphis, but more mysterious." Mouhot thinks
they were erected "by some ancient Michael Angelo," and adds that
Nagkon-Wat "is grander than anything left to us by Greece or Rome."
Furthermore Mouhot ascribes the building again to some of *the lost
tribes of Israel,* and is corroborated in that opinion by Miche, the
French Bishop of Cambodia, who confesses that he is struck "by the
Hebrew character of the faces of many of the savage Stiens." Henri
Mouhot believes that, "without exaggeration, the oldest parts of Angkor
may be fixed at more than 2,000 years ago." This, then, in comparison
with the pyramids, would make them quite modern; the date is the more
incredible, because the pictures on the walls may be proved to belong to
those archaic ages when Poseidon and the Kabeiri were worshipped
throughout the continent. Had Nagkon-Wat been built, as Dr. Adolf
Bastian <span id="fr_795"></span>[\*](#fn_794) will have it, "for the
reception of the learned patriarch, Buddhagosa, who brought the holy
books of the *Trai-Pidok* from Ceylon; or, as Bishop Pallegoix, who
"refers the erection of this edifice to the reign of Phra Pathum
Suriving," when "the sacred books of the Buddhists were brought from
Ceylon, and Buddhism became the religion of the Cambodians," how is it
possible to account for the following?

"We see in this same temple carved images of Buddha, four, and even
thirty-two-armed, and two and sixteen-headed gods, the Indian Vishnu,
gods *with wings,* Burmese heads, Hindu figures, and Ceylon mythology. .
. . You see warriors riding upon elephants and in chariots, foot
soldiers with shield and spear, boats, tigers, griffins . . . serpents,
fishes, crocodiles, bullocks . . . soldiers of immense physical
development, with helmets, and some people with beards--probably Moors.
The figures," adds Mr. Vincent, "stand somewhat like those on the great
Egyptian monuments, the side partly turned toward the front . . . and I
noticed, besides, five horsemen, armed with spear and sword, riding
abreast, like those seen upon the Assyrian tablets in the British
Museum." <span id="fr_796"></span>[\*\*](#fn_795)

For our part, we may add, that there are on the walls several
repetitions of Dagon, the man-fish of the Babylonians, and of the
Kabeirian gods of Samothrace. This may have escaped the notice of the
few archaeologists who examined the place; but upon stricter inspection
they will be found there, as well as the reputed father of the
Kabeiri--Vulcan, with his bolts and implements, having near him a king
with a sceptre in

###### <span id="page_566">p. 566</span>

his hand, which is the counterpart of that of Cheronaea, or the "sceptre
of Agamemnon," so-called, said to have been presented to him by the lame
god of Lemnos. In another place we find Vulcan, recognizable by his
hammer and pincers, but under the shape of a monkey, as usually
represented by the Egyptians.

Now, if Nagkon-Wat is essentially a Buddhist temple, how comes it to
have on its walls *basso-relievos* of completely an Assyrian character;
and Kabeirian gods which, though universally worshipped as the most
ancient of the Asiatic mystery-gods, had already been abandoned 200
years B.C., and the Samothracian mysteries themselves completely
altered? Whence the popular tradition concerning the Prince of Roma
among the Cambodians, a personage mentioned by all the native
historians, who attribute to him the foundation of the temple? Is it not
barely possible that even the *Ramayana,* itself, the famous epic poem,
is but the original of Homer's *Iliad,* as it was suggested some years
ago? The beautiful Paris, carrying off Helen, looks very much like
Ravana, king of the giants, eloping with Sita, Rama's wife? The Trojan
war is a counterpart of the *Ramayana* war; moreover, Herodotus assures
us that the Trojan heroes and gods date in Greece only from the days of
the *Iliad.* In such a case even Hanouma, the monkey-god, would be but
Vulcan in disguise; the more so that the Cambodian tradition makes the
founder of Angkor come from *Roma*, which they place at the western end
of the world, and that the Hindu Roma also apportions the west to the
descendants of Hanouma.

Hypothetical as the suggestion may now seem, it is worthy of
consideration, if even for the sake of being refuted. The Abbe Jaquenet,
a Catholic missionary in Cochin China, ever ready to connect the least
glimmer of historical light with that of Christian revelation, writes,
"Whether we consider the commercial relations of the Jews . . . when, in
the height of their power, the combined fleets of Hiram and Solomon went
to seek the treasures of Ophir, or whether we come lower down, to the
dispersion of the ten tribes who, instead of returning from captivity,
set out from the banks of the Euphrates, and reached the shores of the
ocean . . . the shining of the light of revelation in the far East is
not the less incontestable."

It looks certainly "incontestable" enough if we reverse the position and
admit that all the light that ever shone on the Israelites came to them
from this "far East," passing first through the Chaldeans and Egyptians.
The first thing to settle, is to find out who were the Israelites
themselves; and that is the most vital question. Many historians seem to
claim, with good reason, that the Jews were similar or identical with
the ancient Phoenicians, but the Phoenicians were beyond any doubt an

###### <span id="page_567">p. 567</span>

Æthiopian race; moreover, the present race of Punjaub are hybridized
with the Asiatic Æthiopians. Herodotus traces the Hebrews to the Persian
Gulf; and south of that place were the Himyarites (the Arabians);
beyond, the early Chaldeans and Susinians, the great builders. This
seems to establish pretty well their AEthiopian affinity. Megasthenes
says that the Jews were an Indian sect called *Kalani,* and their
theology resembled that of the Indians. Other authors also suspect that
the colonized Jews or the Judeans were the Yadus from Afghanistan--the
old India. <span id="fr_797"></span>[\*](#fn_796) Eusebius tells us that
"the AEthiopians came from the river Indus and settled near Egypt." More
research may show that the Tamil Hindus, who are accused by the
missionaries of worshipping the Devil--Kutti-Sattan--only honor, after
all, Seth or Satan, worshipped by the biblical Hittites.

But if the Jews were in the twilight of history the Phoenicians, the
latter may be traced themselves to the nations who used the old Sanscrit
language. Carthage was a Phoenician city, hence its name; for Tyre was
equally *Kartha.* In the *Bible* the words *Kir, Kirjath* are frequently
found. Their tutelar god was styled *Mel-Kartha* (Mel, Baal), or tutelar
lord of the city. In Sanscrit a city or communal was a *cul* and its
lord was *Heri.* <span id="fr_798"></span>[\*\*](#fn_797) Her-culeus is
therefore the translation of Melkarth and Sanscrit in origin. Moreover
all the Cyclopean races were Phoenicians. In the *Odyssey* the Kuklopes
(Cyclops) are the Libyan shepherds; and Herodotus describes them as
miners and great builders. They are the ancient Titans or giants, who in
Hesiod forge bolts for Zeus. They are the biblical *Zamzummim* from the
land of the giants, the Anakim.

Now it is easy to see that the excavators of Ellora, the builders of the
old Pagodas, the architects of Copan and of the ruins of Central
America, those of Nagkon-Wat, and those of the Egyptian remains were, if
not of the same race, at least of the same religion--the one taught in
the oldest Mysteries. Besides, the figures on the walls of Angkor are
purely archaic, and have nothing to do with the images and idols of
Buddha, who may be of a far later origin. "What gives a peculiar
interest to this section," says Dr. Bastian, "is the fact that the
artist has represented the different nationalities in all their
distinctive characteristic features, from the flat-nosed savage in the
tasselled garb of the Pnom and the short-haired Lao, to the
straight-nosed Rajaput, with sword and shield, and

the bearded

###### <span id="page_568">p. 568</span>

Moor, giving a catalogue of nationalities, like another *column of
Trajan,* in the predominant physical conformation of each race. On the
whole, there is such a prevalence of *Hellenic* cast in features and
profiles, as well as in the elegant attitude of the horsemen, that one
might suppose Xenocrates of old, after finishing his labors in Bombay,
had made an excursion to the East."

Therefore, if we allow the tribes of Israel to have had a hand in the
building of Nagkon-Wat, it cannot be as the tribes numbered and sent
from the wilderness of Paran in search of the land of Canaan, but as
their earlier ancestors, which amounts to the rejection of such tribes,
as the casting of a reflection of the *Mosaic* revelation. And where is
the outside *historical* evidence that such tribes were ever heard of at
all, before the compilation of the *Old Testament* by Ezra? There are
archaeologists who strongly regard the twelve tribes as utterly
mythical, <span id="fr_799"></span>[\*](#fn_798) for there never was a
tribe of Simeon, and that of Levi was a *caste.* There still remains the
same problem to solve--whether the Judaeans had ever been in Palestine
before Cyrus. From the sons of Jacob, who had all married Canaanites,
except Joseph, whose wife was the daughter of an Egyptian Priest of the
Sun, down to the legendary *Book of Judges* there was an acknowledged
general intermarrying between the said tribes and the idolatrous races:
"And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites, and
Amorites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites; and they took
their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to their
sons, and served their gods," says the third chapter of *Judges,* " . .
. and the children of Israel forgat their God and served Baalim, and the
groves." This Baal was Moloch, M'lch Karta, or Hercules. He was
worshipped wherever the Phoenicians went. How could the Israelites
possibly keep together as tribes, while, on the authority of the *Bible*
itself, whole populations were from year to year uprooted violently by
Assyrian and other conquerors? "So was Israel carried away out of their
own land to Assyria unto this day. And the king of Assyria brought men
from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from
Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria *instead* of the
children of Israel" (2 *Kings,* xvii. 23, 24).

If the language of Palestine became in time Semitic, it is because of
Assyrian influence; for Phoenicia had become a dependency as early as
the days of Hiram, and the Phoenicians evidently changed their language
from Hamitic to Semitic. Assyria was "the land of Nimrod" (from *Nimr,*
spotted), and Nimrod was Bacchus, with his spotted leopard-skin. This
leopard-skin is a sacred appendage of the "Mysteries"; it was used

###### <span id="page_569">p. 569</span>

in the Eleusinian as well as in the Egyptian Mysteries; it is found
sculptured on the *basso-relievos* of Central American ruins, covering
the backs of the sacrificers; it is mentioned in the earliest
speculations of the Brahmans on the meaning of their sacrificial
prayers, the *Aytareya Brahmanam. <span
id="fr_800"></span>[\*](#fn_799)* It is used in the *Agnishtoma*, the
*initiation rites* of the Soma Mystery. When the neophyte is "to be born
again," he is covered with a leopard-skin, out of which he emerges as
from his mother's womb. The Kabeiri were also Assyrian gods. They had
different names; in the common language they were known as Jupiter and
Bacchus, and sometimes as Achiochersus, Aschieros, Achiochersa, and
Cadmillus; and even the true number of these deities was uncertain with
the people. They had other names in the "sacred language," known but to
the hierophants and priests; and "it was not lawful to mention them."
How is it then that we find them reproduced in their Samothracian
"postures" on the walls of Nagkon-Wat? How is it again that we find them
pronounced--albeit slightly disfigured--as known in that same sacred
language, by the populations of Siam, Thibet, and India?

The name Kabeiri may be a derivation from <span
id="img_iu1-569a"></span> ![](img/iu1-569a.jpg)*Abir*, great; <span
id="img_iu1-569b"></span> ![](img/iu1-569b.jpg), *Ebir,* an astrologer,
or <span id="img_iu1-569c"></span> ![](img/iu1-569c.jpg), *Chabir,* an
associate; and they were worshipped at Hebron, the city of the
*Anakes--*the giants. The name Abraham, according to Dr. Wilder, has "a
very Kabeirian look." The word *Heber*, or *Gheber* may be the
etymological root of the Hebrews, as applied to Nimrod and the
Bible-giants of the sixth chapter of *Genesis,* but we must seek for
their origin far earlier than the days of Moses. The name *Phoenician*
affords its own proof. They are called Φοινικες by Manetho, or *Ph*'
*Anakes,* which shows that the Anakes or *Anakim* of Canaan, with whom
the people of Israel, if not identical in race, had, by intermarriage,
become entirely absorbed, were the Phoenicians, or the problematical
Hyk-sos, as Manetho has it, and whom Josephus once declared were the
direct ancestors of the Israelites. Therefore, it is in this jumble of
contradictory opinions, authorities, and historical *olla podrida* that
we must look for a solution of the mystery. So long as the origin of the
Hyk-sos is not positively settled we can know nothing certain of the
Israelitish people who, either wittingly or otherwise, have mixed up
their chronology and origin in such an inextricable tangle. But if the
Hyk-sos can be proved to have been the Pali-Shepherds of the Indus, who
partially removed to the East, and came over from the nomadic Aryan
tribes of India, then, perhaps, it would account for the biblical myths
being so mixed up with the Aryan and Asiatic Mystery-gods. As Dunlap
says: "The Hebrews came out of Egypt among

###### <span id="page_570">p. 570</span>

the Canaanites; they need not be traced beyond the *Exodus. That is
their historical beginning.* It was very easy to cover up this remote
event by the recital of mythical traditions, and to prefix to it an
account of their origin in which the gods (patriarchs) should figure as
their ancestors." But it is not *their historical beginning* which is
the most vital question for the world of science and theology. It is
their *religious* beginning. And if we can trace it through the
Hyk-sos--Phoenicians, the AEthiopian builders and the Chaldeans--whether
it is to the Hindus that the latter owe their learning, or the Brahmans
who owe it to the Chaldeans, we have the means in hand to trace every
so-called *revealed* dogmatical assertion in the *Bible* to its origin,
which we have to search for in the twilight of history, and before the
separation of the Aryan and Semitic families. And how can we do it
better or more surely than through means afforded us by archaeology?
Picture-writing can be destroyed, but if it survives it cannot lie; and,
if we find the same myths, ideas, and secret symbols on monuments all
over the world; and if, moreover, these monuments can be shown to
antedate the twelve "chosen" tribes, then we can unerringly show that
instead of being a direct divine *revelation*, it was but an incomplete
recollection or tradition among a tribe which had been identified and
mixed up for centuries before the apparition of Abraham, with all the
three great world-families; namely, the Aryan, Semitic, and Turanian
nations, if so they must be called.

The *Teraphim* of Abram's father, *Terah,* the "maker of images," were
the Kabeiri gods, and we see them worshipped by Micah, by the Danites,
and others. <span id="fr_801"></span>[\*](#fn_800) Teraphim were
identical with the seraphim, and these were serpent-images, the origin
of which is in the Sanscrit *sarpa* (the serpent), a symbol sacred to
all the deities as a symbol of immortality. Kiyun, or the god Kivan,
worshipped by the Hebrews in the wilderness, is Siva, the Hindu, <span
id="fr_802"></span>[\*\*](#fn_801) as well as Saturn. <span
id="fr_803"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_802) The Greek story shows that
Dardanus, the Arcadian, having received them as a dowry, carried them to
Samothrace, and from thence to Troy; and they were worshipped far before
the days of glory of Tyre or Sidon, though the former had been built
2760 B.C. From where did Dardanus derive them?

It is an easy matter to assign an age to ruins on merely the external
evidence of probabilities; it is more difficult to prove it. Meanwhile
the rock-works of Ruad, Perytus, Marathos, resemble those of Petra,
Baalbek,

###### <span id="page_571">p. 571</span>

and other AEthiopian works, even externally. On the other hand the
assertions of certain archaeologists who find no resemblance between the
temples of Central America and those of Egypt and Siam, leave the
symbologist, acquainted with the secret language of picture-writing,
perfectly unconcerned. He sees the landmarks of one and the same
doctrine on all of these monuments, and reads their history and
affiliation in signs imperceptible to the uninitiated scientist. There
are traditions also; and one of these speaks of the last of the
king-initiates--(who were but rarely admitted to the higher orders of
the Eastern Brotherhoods), who reigned in 1670. This king of Siam was
the one so ridiculed by the French ambassador, de la Loubere, as a
lunatic who had been searching all his life for the philosopher's stone.

One of such mysterious landmarks is found in the peculiar structure of
certain arches in the temples. The author of the *Land of the White
Elephant* remarks as curious, "the absence of the keystone in the arches
of the building, and the undecipherable inscriptions." In the ruins of
Santa Cruz del Quiche an arched corridor was found by Stephens, equally
without a keystone. Describing the desolate ruins of Palenque, and
remarking that the arches of the corridors were all built on this model,
and the ceilings in this form, he supposes that "the builders were
evidently ignorant of the principles of the arch, and the support was
made by stones lapping over as they rose; as at Ocosingo, and among
Cyclopean remains in Greece and Italy." <span
id="fr_804"></span>[\*](#fn_803) In other buildings, though they belong
to the same group, the traveller found the missing keystone, which is a
sufficient proof that its omission elsewhere was

premeditated.

May we not look for the solution of the mystery in the Masonic manual?
The keystone has an esoteric meaning which ought to be, if it is not,
well appreciated by high Masons. The most important subterranean
building mentioned in the description of the origin of Freemasonry, is
the one built by Enoch. The patriarch is led by the Deity, whom he sees
in a vision, into the *nine* vaults. After that, with the assistance of
his son, Methuselah, he constructs in the land of Canaan, "in the bowels
of the mountain," nine apartments on the models that were shown to him
in the vision. Each was roofed with an arch, and the apex of each
*formed a keystone,* having inscribed on it the mirific characters. Each
of the latter, furthermore, represented one of the nine names, traced in
characters emblematical of the attributes by which the Deity was,
according to ancient Freemasonry, known to the antediluvian brethren.
Then Enoch constructed two deltas of the purest gold, and tracing two of
the mysterious characters on each, he placed one of them in the deepest
arch, and

###### <span id="page_572">p. 572</span>

the other entrusted to Methuselah, communicating to him, at the same
time, other important secrets

now lost to Freemasonry.

And so, among these arcane secrets, now lost to their modern successors,
may be found also the fact that the keystones were used in the arches
only in certain portions of the temples devoted to special purposes.
Another similarity presented by the architectural remains of the
religious monuments of every country can be found in the identity of
parts, courses, and measurements. All these buildings belong to the age
of Hermes Trismegistus, and however comparatively modern or ancient the
temple may seem, their mathematical proportions are found to correspond
with the Egyptian religious edifices. There is a similar disposition of
court-yards, adyta, passages, and steps; hence, despite any
dissimilarity in architectural style, it is a warrantable inference that
like religious rites were celebrated in all. Says Dr. Stukely,
concerning Stonehenge: "This structure was not erected upon any Roman
measure, and this is demonstrated by the great number of fractions which
the measurement of each part, according to European scales, gives. On
the contrary the figures become even, as soon as we apply to it the
measurement of the ancient cubit, which was common to the Hebrew
children of Shem, as well as to the Phoenicians and Egyptians, children
of Ham (?), and imitators of the monuments of unhewn and oracular
stones."

The presence of the artificial lakes, and their peculiar disposition on
the consecrated grounds, is also a fact of great importance. The lakes
inside the precincts of Karnak, and those enclosed in the grounds of
Nagkon-Wat, and around the temples in the Mexican Copan and Santa Cruz
del Quiche, will be found to present the same peculiarities. Besides
possessing other significances the whole area was laid out with
reference to cyclic calculations. In the Druidical structures the same
sacred and mysterious numbers will be found. The circle of stones
generally consists of either twelve, or twenty-one, or thirty-six. In
these circles the centre place belongs to Assar, Azon, or the god in the
circle, by whatever other name he might have been known. The thirteen
Mexican serpent-gods bear a distant relationship to the thirteen stones
of the Druidical ruins. The <span id="img_sd1-5e"></span>
![](img/sd1-5e.jpg)(Tau), and the astronomical cross of Egypt <span
id="img_sd1-5a"></span> ![](img/sd1-5a.jpg)are conspicuous in several
apertures of the remains of Palenque. In one of the *basso-relievos* of
the Palace of Palenque, on the west side, sculptured on a hieroglyphic,
right under the seated figure, is a *Tau.* The standing figure, which
leans over the first one, is in the act of covering its head with the
left hand with the veil of initiation; while it extends its right with
the index and middle finger pointing to heaven. The position is
precisely that of a Christian bishop giving his blessing, or the one in
which Jesus is often represented while at the Last Supper. Even the
Hindu

elephant-headed god of wisdom (or magic learning), Ganesha, may be found
among the stucco figures of the Mexican ruins.

What explanation can the archaeologists, philologists--in short, the
chosen host of Academicians--give us? None whatever. At best they have
but hypotheses, every one of which is likely to be pulled down by its
successor--a pseudo-truth, perhaps, like the first. The keys to the
biblical miracles of old, and to the phenomena of modern days; the
problems of psychology, physiology, and the many "missing links" which
have so perplexed scientists of late, are all in the hands of secret
fraternities. This mystery *must be* unveiled some day. But till then
dark skepticism will constantly interpose its threatening, ugly shadow
between God's truths and the spiritual vision of mankind; and many are
those who, infected by the mortal epidemic of our century--hopeless
materialism--will remain in doubt and mortal agony as to whether, when
man dies, he will live again, although the question has been solved by
long bygone generations of sages. The answers are there. They may be
found on the time-worn granite pages of cave-temples, on sphinxes,
propylons, and obelisks. They have stood there for untold ages, and
neither the rude assault of time, nor the still ruder assault of
Christian hands, have succeeded in obliterating their records. All
covered with the problems which were solved--who can tell? perhaps by
the archaic forefathers of their builders--the solution follows each
question; and this the Christian could not appropriate, for, except the
initiates, no one has understood the mystic writing. The key was in the
keeping of those who knew how to commune with the invisible Presence,
and who had received, from the lips of mother Nature herself, her grand
truths. And so stand these monuments like mute forgotten sentinels on
the threshold of that *unseen* world, whose gates are thrown open but to
a few elect.

Defying the hand of Time, the vain inquiry of profane science, the
insults of the revealed religions, they will disclose their riddles to
none but the legatees of those by whom they were entrusted with the
MYSTERY. The cold, stony lips of the once vocal Memnon, and of these
hardy sphinxes, keep their secrets well. Who will unseal them? Who of
our modern, materialistic dwarfs and unbelieving Sadducees will dare to
lift the **V**EIL OF **I**SIS?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_721"></span>[516:\*](iu013.htm#fr_722) See vol. ii., chap.
8.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[521:\*](iu013.htm#fr_723) J. M. Peebles:
"Around the World."

<span id="fn_723"></span>[521:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_724) John Fiske: "The
North American Review," art. The Laws of History, July, 1869.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[522:\*](iu013.htm#fr_725) M. Peebles: "Around
the World."

<span id="fn_725"></span>[524:\*](iu013.htm#fr_726) Savary: "Letters on
Egypt," vol. ii., p. 67. London, 1786.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[525:\*](iu013.htm#fr_727) John Fiske: "North
American Review," art. The Laws of History, July, 1869.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[525:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_728) Sir G. C. Lewis:
"Astronomy of the Ancients."

<span id="fn_728"></span>[525:\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_729) J. Fiske: "North
American Review," art. The Laws of History.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[525:\*\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_730) We shall
attempt to demonstrate in Vol. II., chapter viii., that the ancient
AEthiopians were never a Hamitic race.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[526:\*](iu013.htm#fr_731) Servius: "Virgil,"
Eclog. vi., v. 42.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[527:\*](iu013.htm#fr_732) Ovid: "Fast.," lib.
iii., v. 285-346.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[527:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_733) "Titus Livius,"
lib. i., cap. xxxi.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[527:\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_734) Pliny: "Hist.
Nat.," lib. ii., cap. liii.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[527:\*\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_735) Lucius:
"Piso"; Pliny: "Hist. Nat.," lib. xxviii., c. ii.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[527:\*\*\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_736) "Columella,"
lib. x., vers. 346, etc.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[527:\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_737) See
"Notice sur les Travaux de l'Academie du Gard," part i., pp. 304-314, by
la Boissiere.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[528:\*](iu013.htm#fr_738) "Bell. Jud. adv.
Roman," lib. v., cap. xiv.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[528:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_739) "Magasin
Scientifique de Goethingen," 3me. annie, 5me. cahier.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[528:\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_740) "Ammian.
Marcel.," lib. xxiii., cap. vi.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[528:\*\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_741) "Oupnek-hat,"
Brahman xi.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[528:\*\*\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_742) "Ktesias, in
India ap. Photum.," Bibl. Cod. lxxii.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[528:\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_743) Buffon:
"Histoire Naturelle des Mineraux," 6me Mem., art. ii.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[529:\*](iu013.htm#fr_744) "Egypt's Place in
Universal History," vol. iv., p. 462.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[529:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_745) "Archaeologia,"
vol. xv., p. 320.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[531:\*](iu013.htm#fr_746) Lib. ii., c. 50.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[532:\*](iu013.htm#fr_747) Galen: "De Composit.
Medec.," lib. v.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[532:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_748) "Ancient
Fragments": see chapter on the Early Kings of Egypt.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[532:\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_749) "Pliny," lib.
vii., c. 56.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[532:\*\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_750) Jablonski:
"Pantheon Ægypti.," ii., Proleg. 10.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[533:\*](iu013.htm#fr_751) Cicero: "De
Divinatione."

<span id="fn_751"></span>[533:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_752) "Telegraphic
Journal," art. Scientific Prophecy.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[534:\*](iu013.htm#fr_753) Professor Albrecht
Muller: "The First Traces of Man in Europe." Says the author: "And this
bronze age reaches to *and overlaps* the beginning of the historic
period in some countries, and so includes the great epochs of the
Assyrian and Egyptian Empires, **B.C.** *circa* 1500, and the earlier
eras of the next succeeding age of iron."

<span id="fn_753"></span>[534:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_754) "Conflict between
Religion and Science," chap. i.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[535:\*](iu013.htm#fr_755) Psellus: "Chaldean
Oracles," 4, cxliv.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[535:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_756) Psellus: "Zoroast.
Oracles," 4.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[537:\*](iu013.htm#fr_757) Proctor: "Saturn and
the Sabbath of the Jews," p. 309.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[540:\*](iu013.htm#fr_758) Dioscorides: "Περι
ὑλες Ιατρικες" lib. v., cap. clviii.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[540:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_759) Pliny: "Histoire
Naturelle," lib. xxxviii., cap. vii.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[541:\*](iu013.htm#fr_760) Le P. Paulin de St.
Barthelemi: "Voyage aux Indes Orientales," vol. i., p. 358.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[541:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_761) Max Muller,
Professor Wilson, and H. J. Bushby, with several other Sanscrit
students, prove that "Oriental scholars, both native and European, have
shown that the rite of widow-burning was not only unsanctionable but
imperatively forbidden by the earliest and most authoritative Hindu
Scriptures" ("Widow-burning," p. 21). See Max Muller's "Comparative
Mythology." "Professor Wilson," says Max Muller, "was the first to point
out the falsification of the text and the change of '*yonim agre*' into
'*yonim agne*' (womb of fire). . . . According to the hymns of the
'Rig-Veda,' and the Vaidic ceremonial contained in the 'Grihya-Sutras,'
the wife accompanies the corpse of the husband to the funeral pile, but
she is there addressed with a verse taken from the 'Rig-Veda,' and
ordered to leave her husband, and to return to the world of the living"
("Comparative Mythology," p. 35).

<span id="fn_761"></span>[542:\*](iu013.htm#fr_762) Hence the story that
Moses fabricated there the serpent or seraph of brass which the
Israelites worshipped till the reign of Hezekiah.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[543:\*](iu013.htm#fr_763) A. Gell: "Noet.
Attic.," lib. x., cap. xiii.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[545:\*](iu013.htm#fr_764) Such is *not* our
opinion. They were probably built by the Atlanteans.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[546:\*](iu013.htm#fr_765) "Incidents of Travel
in Central America, Chiapas, and Yucatan," vol. ii., p. 457.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[548:\*](iu013.htm#fr_766) Max Muller: "Chips
from a German Workshop," vol. ii., p. 269.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[548:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_767) Max Muller:
"Popol-Vuh," p. 327.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[549:\*](iu013.htm#fr_768) Why not to the
sacrifices of men in ancient worship?

<span id="fn_768"></span>[549:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_769) "Odyssey," xii.
71.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[550:\*](iu013.htm#fr_770) "Chips from a German
Workshop," p. 268.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[550:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_771) Villemarque,
Member of the Institute. Vol. lx.; "Collect et Nouvelle Serie," 24, p.
570, 1863; "Poesie des Cloitres Celtiques."

<span id="fn_771"></span>[550:\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_772) "Archaeol.,"
vol. xxv., p. 220. London.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[551:\*](iu013.htm#fr_773) "Archaeol.," vol.
xxv., p. 292. London.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[551:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_774) Brasseur de
Bourbourg: "Cartas," p. 52.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[552:\*](iu013.htm#fr_775) See Stephens:
"Travels in Central America," etc.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[553:\*](iu013.htm#fr_776) "Cartas," 53, 7-62.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[554:\*](iu013.htm#fr_777) "Die Phonizier," 70.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[554:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_778) See Sanchoniaton
in "Eusebius," Pr. Ev. 36; Genesis xiv.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[554:\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_779) "Archaeological
Society of the Antiquaries of London," vol. xxv., p. 220.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[554:\*\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_780) "Cartas," 51.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[554:\*\*\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_781) "Hauts
Phenomenes de la Magie," 50.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[555:\*](iu013.htm#fr_782) Genesis xlix.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[555:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_783) Dunlap, in his
introduction to "**S**OD, the Mysteries of Adonis," explains the word
"Sod," as Arcanum; religious mystery on the authority of Shindler's
"Penteglott" (1201). "The SECRET of the Lord is with them that fear
Him," says Psalm xxv, 14. This is a mistranslation of the Christians,
for it ought to read "*Sod* Ihoh (the mysteries of Iohoh) are for *those
who fear Him*" (Dunlap: "Mysteries of Adonis," xi.). "Al (El) is
terrible in the great Sod of the *Kedeshim* (the priests, the holy, the
*Initiated*), Psalm lxxxix. 7" (*Ibid*.).

<span id="fn_783"></span>[555:\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_784) "The members of
the *priest-colleges* were called *Sodales,*" says Freund's "Latin
Lexicon" (iv. 448). "**S**ODALITIES were constituted in the Idaean
Mysteries of the MIGHTY MOTHER," writes Cicero ("De Senectute," 13);
Dunlap: "Mysteries of Adonis."

<span id="fn_784"></span>[556:\*](iu013.htm#fr_785) See Wilkinson:
"Ancient Egyptians," vol. v., p. 65.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[556:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_786) Brasseur de
Bourbourg: "Mexique," pp. 135-574.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[557:\*](iu013.htm#fr_787) "Catholic World," N.
Y., January, 1877: Article Nagualism, Voodooism, etc.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[558:\*](iu013.htm#fr_788) In "Hesiod," Zeus
creates his *third* race of men out of ash-trees. In "Popol-Vuh," we are
told the *third* race of men is created out of the tree "tzite," and
women are made from the marrow of a reed which was called "sibac." This
also is a strange coincidence.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[558:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_789) "Popol-Vuh,"
reviewed by Max Muller.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[562:\*](iu013.htm#fr_790) Frank Vincent, Jun.:
"The Land of the White Elephant," p. 209.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[563:\*](iu013.htm#fr_791) The Hanouma is over
three feet tall, and black as a coal. The *Ramayana,* giving the
biography of this sacred monkey, relates that Hanouma was formerly a
powerful chieftain, who being the greatest friend of Rama, helped him to
find his wife, Sitha, who had been carried off to Ceylon by Ravana, the
mighty king of the giants. After numerous adventures Hanouma was caught
by the latter, while visiting the city of the giant as Rama's spy. For
this crime Ravana had the poor Hanouma's tail oiled and set on fire, and
it was in extinguishing it that the monkey-god became so black in the
face that neither himself nor his posterity could ever get rid of the
color. If we have to believe Hindu legends this same Hanouma was the
*progenitor* of the Europeans; a tradition which, though strictly
Darwinian, hence, scientific, is by no means flattering to us. The
legend states that for services rendered, Rama, the hero and demi-god,
gave in marriage to the monkey-warriors of his army the daughters of the
giants of Ceylon--the Rakshasas--and granted them, moreover, as a dowry,
all western parts of the world. Repairing thence, the monkeys and their
giant-wives lived happily and had a number of descendants. The latter
are the present Europeans. Dravidian words are found in Western Europe,
indicating that there was an original unity of race and language between
the populations. May it not be a hint that the traditions are akin, of
elfin and kobold races in Europe, and monkeys, actually cognate with
them in Hindustan?

<span id="fn_791"></span>[564:\*](iu013.htm#fr_792) "Incidents of
Travels in Central America, etc.," vol. i., p. 105.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[564:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_793) They stand no
more, for the obelisk alone was removed to Paris.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[564:\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_794) See "The Land of
the White Elephant," p. 221.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[565:\*](iu013.htm#fr_795) The President of the
Royal Geographical Society of Berlin.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[565:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_796) "The Land of the
White Elephant," p. 215.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[567:\*](iu013.htm#fr_797) The Phoenician Dido
is the feminine of David <span id="img_iu1-567"></span>
![](img/iu1-567.jpg). Under the name of Astarte, she led the Phoenician
colonies, and her image was on the prow of their ships. But David and
Saul are names belonging to Afghanistan also.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[567:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_798) (Prof. A. Wilder.)
This archaeologist says: "I regard the AEthiopian, Cushite and Hamitic
races as the building and artistic race who worshipped Baal (Siva), or
Bel--made temples, grottos, pyramids, and used a language of peculiar
type. Rawlinson derives that language from the *Turanians* in
Hindustan."

<span id="fn_798"></span>[568:\*](iu013.htm#fr_799) Prof. A. Wilder
among others.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[569:\*](iu013.htm#fr_800) See Martin Haug's
translation: "The Aytareya Brahmanam."

<span id="fn_800"></span>[570:\*](iu013.htm#fr_801) Judges xvii-xviii.,
etc.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[570:\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_802) The Zendic *H* is
*S* in India. Thus Hapta is Sapta; *Hindu* is *Sindhaya.* (A. Wilder.) "
. . . the *S* continually softens to *H* from Greece to Calcutta, from
the Caucasus to Egypt," says Dunlap. Therefore the letters *K, H,* and
*S* are interchangeable.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[570:\*\*\*](iu013.htm#fr_803) Guignant: "Op.
cit.," vol. i., p. 167.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[571:\*](iu013.htm#fr_804) "Incidents of Travel
in Central America, etc."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](iu014)
