[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Theosophy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iu009)  [Next](iu011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

### CHAPTER XI.

> "Strange condition of the human mind, which seems to require that it
> should long exercise itself in **E**RROR, before it dare approach the
> **T**RUTH."--**M**AGENDIE.

> "La verite que je defends est empreinte sur tous les monuments du
> passe Pour comprendre l'histoire, il faut etudier les symboles
> anciens, les signes sacres du sacerdoce, et l'art de guerir dans les
> temps primitifs, art oublie aujourd'hui."--**B**ARON DU **P**OTET.

> "It is a truth perpetually, that accumulated facts, lying in disorder,
> begin to assume some order if an hypothesis is thrown among
> them."--**H**ERBERT **S**PENCER.

AND now we must search Magical History for cases similar to those given
in the preceding chapter. This insensibility of the human body to the
impact of heavy blows, and resistance to penetration by sharp points and
musket-bullets, is a phenomenon sufficiently familiar in the experience
of all times and all countries. While science is entirely unable to give
any reasonable explanation of the mystery, the question appears to offer
no difficulty to mesmerists, who have well studied the properties of the
fluid. The man, who by a few passes over a limb can produce a local
paralysis so as to render it utterly insensible to burns, cuts, and the
prickings of needles, need be but very little astonished at the
phenomena of the Jansenists. As to the adepts of magic, especially in
Siam and the East Indies, they are too familiar with the properties of
the *akasa,* the mysterious life-fluid, to even regard the insensibility
of the Convulsionnaires as a very great phenomenon. The astral fluid can
be compressed about a person so as to form an elastic shell, absolutely
nonpenetrable by any physical object, however great the velocity with
which it travels. In a word, this fluid can be made to equal and even
excel in resisting-power, water and air.

In India, Malabar, and some places of Central Africa, the conjurers will
freely permit any traveller to fire his musket or revolver at them,
without touching the weapon themselves or selecting the balls. In
Laing's *Travels among Timanni, the Kourankos, and the Soulimas*, occurs
a description by an English traveller, the first white man to visit the
tribe of the Soulimas, near the sources of the Dialliba, of a very
curious scene. A body of picked soldiers fired upon a chief who had
nothing to defend himself with but certain talismans. Although their
muskets were properly loaded and aimed, not a ball could strike him.
Salverte gives a similar case in his *Philosophy of Occult Sciences:*
"In 1568, the Prince of Orange condemned a Spanish prisoner to be shot
at Juliers; the soldiers tied

###### <span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

him to a tree and fired, but he was invulnerable. They at last stripped
him to see what armor he wore, but found only an *amulet.* When this was
taken from him, *he fell dead at the first shot*."

This is a very different affair from the dexterous trickery resorted to
by Houdin in Algeria. He prepared balls himself of tallow, blackened
with soot, and by sleight of hand exchanged them for the real bullets,
which the Arab sheiks supposed they were placing in the pistols. The
simple-minded natives, knowing nothing but real magic, which they had
inherited from their ancestors, and which consists in each case of some
one thing that they can do without knowing why or how, and seeing
Houdin, as they thought, accomplish the same results in a more
impressive manner, fancied that he was a greater magician than
themselves. Many travellers, the writer included, have witnessed
instances of this invulnerability where deception was impossible. A few
years ago, there lived in an African village, an Abyssinian who passed
for a sorcerer. Upon one occasion a party of Europeans, going to Soudan,
amused themselves for an hour or two in firing at him with their own
pistols and muskets, a privilege which he gave them for a trifling fee.
As many as five shots were fired simultaneously, by a Frenchman named
Langlois, and the muzzles of the pieces were not above two yards distant
from the sorcerer's breast. In each case, simultaneously with the flash,
the bullet would appear just beyond the muzzle, quivering in the air,
and then, after describing a short parabola, fall harmlessly to the
ground. A German of the party, who was going in search of ostrich
feathers, offered the magician a five-franc piece if he would allow him
to fire his gun with the muzzle touching his body. The man at first
refused; but, finally, after appearing to hold conversation with
somebody inside the ground, consented. The experimenter carefully
loaded, and pressing the muzzle of the weapon against the sorcerer's
body, after a moment's hesitation, fired . . . the barrel burst into
fragments as far down as the stock, and the man walked off unhurt.

This quality of invulnerability can be imparted to persons both by
living adepts and by spirits. In our own time several well-known mediums
have frequently, in the presence of the most respectable witnesses, not
only handled blazing coals and actually placed their face upon a fire
without singeing a hair, but even laid flaming coals upon the heads and
hands of bystanders, as in the case of Lord Lindsay and Lord Adair. The
well-known story of the Indian chief, who confessed to Washington that
at Braddock's defeat he had fired his rifle at him seventeen times at
short range without being able to touch him, will recur to the reader in
this connection. In fact, many great commanders have been believed by
their soldiers to bear what is called "a charmed life"; and Prince

###### <span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

Emile von Sayn-Wittgenstein, a general of the Russian army, is said to
be one of these.

This same power which enables one to compress the astral fluid so as to
form an impenetrable shell around one, can be used to direct, so to
speak, a bolt of the fluid against a given object, with fatal force.
Many a dark revenge has been taken in that way; and in such cases the
coroner's inquest will never disclose anything but sudden death,
apparently resulting from heart-disease, an apoplectic fit, or some
other natural, but still not veritable cause. Many persons firmly
believe that certain individuals possess the power of the evil eye. The
*mal'occhio*, or *jettatura* is a belief which is prevalent throughout
Italy and Southern Europe. The Pope is held to be possessed--perchance
unconsciously--of that disagreeable gift. There are persons who can kill
toads by merely looking at them, and can even slay individuals. The
malignance of their desire brings evil forces to a focus, and the
death-dealing bolt is projected, as though it were a bullet from a
rifle.

In 1864, in the French province of Le Var, near the little village of
Brignoles, lived a peasant named Jacques Pelissier, who made a living by
killing birds by simple *will-power.* His case is reported by the
well-known Dr. d'Alger, at whose request the singular hunter gave
exhibitions to several scientific men, of his method of proceeding. The
story is told as follows: "At about fifteen or twenty paces from us, I
saw a charming little meadow-lark which I showed to Jacques. 'Watch him
well, monsieur,' said he, 'he is mine.' Instantly stretching his right
hand toward the bird, he approached him gently. The meadow-lark stops,
raises and lowers his pretty head, spreads his wings, but cannot fly; at
last he cannot make a step further and suffers himself to be taken, only
moving his wings with a feeble fluttering. I examine the bird, his eyes
are tightly closed and his body has a corpse-like stiffness, although
the pulsations of the heart are very distinct; it is a true cataleptic
sleep, and all the phenomena incontestably prove a magnetic action.
Fourteen little birds were taken in this way, within the space of an
hour; none could resist the power of Master Jacques, and all presented
the same cataleptic sleep; a sleep which, moreover, terminates at the
will of the hunter, whose humble slaves these little birds have become.

"A hundred times, perhaps, I asked Jacques to restore life and movement
to his prisoners, to charm them only half way, so that they might hop
along the ground, and then again bring them completely under the charm.
All my requests were exactly complied with, and not one single failure
was made by this remarkable Nimrod, who finally said to me: 'If you wish
it, I will kill those which you designate without touching them.' I
pointed out two for the experiment, and, at twenty-five or

###### <span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

thirty paces distance, he accomplished in less than five minutes what he
had promised." <span id="fr_561"></span>[\*](#fn_560.md)

A most curious feature of the above case is, that Jacques had complete
power only over sparrows, robins, goldfinches, and meadow-larks; he
could sometimes charm skylarks, but, as he says, "they often escape me."

This same power is exercised with greater force by persons known as wild
beast tamers. On the banks of the Nile, some of the natives can charm
the crocodiles out of the water, with a peculiarly melodious, low
whistle, and handle them with impunity; while others possess such powers
over the most deadly snakes. Travellers tell of seeing the charmers
surrounded by multitudes of the reptiles which they dispatch at their
leisure.

Bruce, Hasselquist, and Lempriere, <span
id="fr_562"></span>[\*\*](#fn_561.md) testify to the fact that they have
seen in Egypt, Morocco, Arabia, and especially in the Senaar, some
natives utterly disregarding the bites of the most poisonous vipers, as
well as the stings of scorpions. They handle and play with them, and
throw them at will into a state of stupor. "In vain do the Latin and
Greek writers," says Salverte, "assure us that the gift of charming
venomous reptiles was hereditary in certain families from time
immemorial, that in Africa the same gift was enjoyed by the Psylli; that
the Marses in Italy, and the Ophiozenes in Cyprus possessed it." The
skeptics forget that, in Italy, even at the commencement of the
sixteenth century, men, claiming to be descended from the family of
Saint Paul, braved, like the Marses, the bites of serpents." <span
id="fr_563"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_562.md)

"Doubts upon this subject," he goes on to say, "were removed forever at
the time of the expedition of the French into Egypt, and the following
relation is attested by thousands of eye-witnesses. The Psylli, who
pretended, as Bruce had related, to possess that faculty . . . went from
house to house to destroy serpents of every kind. . . . A wonderful
instinct drew them at first toward the place in which the serpents were
hidden; furious, howling, and foaming, they seized and tore them asunder
with their nails and teeth."

"Let us place," says Salverte, inveterate skeptic himself, "to the
account of charlatanism, the howling and the fury; still, the instinct
which warned the Psylli of the presence of the serpents, has in it some-

###### <span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

thing more real." In the Antilles, the negroes discover, by its odor, a
serpent which they do not see. <span id="fr_564"></span>[\*](#fn_563.md)
"In Egypt, the same tact, formerly possessed, is still enjoyed by men
brought up to it from infancy, and born as with an assumed hereditary
gift to hunt serpents, and to discover them even at a distance too great
for the effluvia to be perceptible to the dull organs of a European. The
principal fact above all others, the faculty or rendering dangerous
animals powerless, merely by touching them, remains well verified, and
we shall, perhaps, never understand better the nature of this secret,
celebrated in antiquity, and preserved to our time by the most ignorant
of men." <span id="fr_565"></span>[\*\*](#fn_564.md)

Music is delightful to every person. Low whistling, a melodious chant,
or the sounds of a flute will invariably attract reptiles in countries
where they are found. We have witnessed and verified the fact
repeatedly. In Upper Egypt, whenever our caravan stopped, a young
traveller, who believed he excelled on the flute, amused the company by
playing. The camel-drivers and other Arabs invariably checked him,
having been several times annoyed by the unexpected appearance of
various families of the reptile tribe, which generally shirk an
encounter with men. Finally, our caravan met with a party, among whom
were professional serpent-charmers, and the virtuoso was then invited,
for experiment's sake, to display his skill. No sooner had he commenced,
than a slight rustling was heard, and the musician was horrified at
suddenly seeing a large snake appear in dangerous proximity with his
legs. The serpent, with uplifted head and eyes fixed on him, slowly,
and, as if unconsciously, crawled, softly undulating its body, and
following his every movement. Then appeared at a distance another one,
then a third, and a fourth, which were speedily followed by others,
until we found ourselves quite in a select company. Several of the
travellers made for the backs of their camels, while others sought
refuge in the *cantinier's* tent. But it was a vain alarm. The charmers,
three in number, began their chants and incantations, and, attracting
the reptiles, were very soon covered with them from head to foot. As
soon as the serpents approached the men, they exhibited signs of torpor,
and were soon plunged in a deep catalepsy. Their eyes were half closed
and glazed, and their heads drooping. There remained but one
recalcitrant, a large and glossy black fellow, with a spotted skin. This
*meloman* of the desert went on gracefully nodding and leaping, as if it
had danced on its tail all its life, and keeping time to the notes of
the flute. This snake would not be enticed by the "charming" of the
Arabs, but kept slowly moving in the direction

###### <span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

of the flute-player, who at last took to his heels. The modern Psyllian
then took out of his bag a half-withered plant, which he kept waving in
the direction of the serpent. It had a strong smell of mint, and as soon
as the reptile caught its odor, it followed the Arab, still erect upon
its tail, but now approaching the plant. A few more seconds, and the
"traditional enemy" of man was seen entwined around the arm of his
charmer, became torpid in its turn, and the whole lot were then thrown
together in a pool, after having their heads cut off.

Many believe that all such snakes are prepared and trained for the
purpose, and that they are either deprived of their fangs, or have their
mouths sewed up. There may be, doubtless, some inferior jugglers, whose
trickery has given rise to such an idea. But the *genuine*
serpent-charmer has too well established his claims in the East, to
resort to any such cheap fraud. They have the testimony on this subject
of too many trustworthy travellers, including some scientists, to be
accused of any such charlatanism. That the snakes, which are charmed to
dance and to become harmless, are still poisonous, is verified by
Forbes. "On the music stopping too suddenly," says he, "or from some
other cause, the serpent, who had been dancing within a circle of
country-people, darted among the spectators, and inflicted a wound in
the throat of a young woman, who died in agony, in half an hour
afterward." <span id="fr_566"></span>[\*](#fn_565.md)

According to the accounts of many travellers the negro women of Dutch
Guiana, the Obeah women, excel in taming very large snakes called
*amodites*, or papa; they make them descend from the trees, follow, and
obey them by merely speaking to them. <span
id="fr_567"></span>[\*\*](#fn_566.md)

We have seen in India a small brotherhood of fakirs settled round a
little lake, or rather a deep pool of water, the bottom of which was
literally carpeted with enormous alligators. These amphibious monsters
crawl out, and warm themselves in the sun, a few feet from the fakirs,
some of whom may be motionless, lost in prayer and contemplation. So
long as one of these holy beggars remains in view, the crocodiles are as
harmless as kittens. But we would never advise a foreigner to risk
himself alone within a few yards of these monsters. The poor Frenchman
Pradin found an untimely grave in one of these terrible Saurians,
commonly called by the Hindus *Moudela*. <span
id="fr_568"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_567.md) (This word should be *nihang* or
*ghariyal*.)

When Iamblichus, Herodotus, Pliny, or some other ancient writer tells us
of priests who caused asps to come forth from the altar of Isis, or of
thaumaturgists taming with a glance the most ferocious animals, they

###### <span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

are considered liars and ignorant imbeciles. When modern travellers tell
us of the same wonders performed in the East, they are set down as
enthusiastic jabberers, or *untrustworthy* writers.

But, despite materialistic skepticism, man does possess such a power, as
we see manifested in the above instances. When psychology and physiology
become worthy of the name of sciences, Europeans will be convinced of
the weird and formidable potency existing in the human will and
imagination, whether exercised consciously or otherwise. And yet, how
easy to realize such power in *spirit,* if we only think of that grand
truism in nature that every most insignificant atom in it is moved by
*spirit,* which is *one* in its essence, for the least particle of it
represents the *whole;* and that matter is but the concrete copy of the
abstract idea, after all. In this connection, let us cite a few
instances of the imperial power of even the *unconscious* will, to
create according to the imagination or rather the faculty of discerning
images in the astral light.

We have but to recall the very familiar phenomenon of *stigmata*, or
birth-marks, where effects are produced by the involuntary agency of the
maternal imagination under a state of excitement. The fact that the
mother can control the appearance of her unborn child was so well known
among the ancients, that it was the custom among wealthy Greeks to place
fine statues near the bed, so that she might have a perfect model
constantly before her eyes. The cunning trick by which the Hebrew
patriarch Jacob caused ring-streaked and speckled calves to be dropped,
is an illustration of the law among animals; and Aricante tells "of four
successive litters of puppies, born of healthy parents, some of which,
in each litter, were well formed, whilst the remainder were without
anterior extremities and had harelip." The works of Geoffroi St.
Hilaire, Burdach, and Elam, contain accounts of great numbers of such
cases, and in Dr. Prosper Lucas's important volume, *Sur l'Heredite
Naturelle,* there are many. Elam quotes from Prichard an instance where
the child of a negro and white was marked with black and white color
upon separate parts of the body. He adds, with laudable sincerity,
"These are singularities of which, in the present state of science, no
explanation can be given." <span id="fr_569"></span>[\*](#fn_568.md) It is
a pity that his example was not more generally imitated. Among the
ancients Empedocles, Aristotle, Pliny, Hippocrates, Galen, Marcus
Damascenus, and others give us accounts quite as wonderful as our
contemporary authors.

In a work published in London, in 1659, <span
id="fr_570"></span>[\*\*](#fn_569.md) a powerful argument is

###### <span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

made in refutation of the materialists by showing the potency of the
human mind upon the subtile forces of nature. The author, Dr. More,
views the foetus as if it were a plastic substance, which can be
fashioned by the mother to an agreeable or disagreeable shape, to
resemble some person or in part several persons, and to be stamped with
the effigies, or as we might more properly call it, *astrograph,* of
some object vividly presented to her imagination. These effects may be
produced by her voluntarily or involuntarily, consciously or
unconsciously, feebly or forcibly, as the case may be. It depends upon
her ignorance or knowledge of the profound mysteries of nature. Taking
women in the mass, the marking of the embryo may be considered more
accidental than the result of design; and as each person's atmosphere in
the astral light is peopled with the images of his or her immediate
family, the sensitive surface of the foetus, which may almost be likened
to the collodionized plate of a photograph, is as likely as not to be
stamped with the image of a near or remote ancestor, whom the mother
never saw, but which, at some critical moment, came as it were into the
focus of nature's camera. Says Dr. Elam, "Near me is seated a visitor
from a distant continent, where she was born and educated. The portrait
of a remote ancestress, far back in the last century, hangs upon the
wall. In every feature, one is an accurate presentment of the other,
although the one never left England, and the other was an American by
birth and half parentage."

The power of the imagination upon our physical condition, even after we
arrive at maturity, is evinced in many familiar ways. In medicine, the
intelligent physician does not hesitate to accord to it a curative or
morbific potency greater than his pills and potions. He calls it the
*vis medicatrix naturae,* and his first endeavor is to gain the
confidence of his patient so completely, that he can cause nature to
extirpate the disease. Fear often kills; and grief has such a power over
the subtile fluids of the body as not only to derange the internal
organs but even to turn the hair white. Ficinus mentions the *signature*
of the foetus with the marks of cherries and various fruits, colors,
hairs, and excrescences, and acknowledges that the imagination of the
mother may transform it into a resemblance of an ape, pig, or dog, or
any such animal. Marcus Damascenus tells of a girl covered with hair
and, like our modern Julia Pastrana, furnished with a full beard;
Gulielmus Paradinus, of a child whose skin and nails resembled those of
a bear; Balduinus Ronsaeus of one born with a turkey's wattles; Pareus,
of one with a head like a frog; and Avicenna, of chickens with hawks'
heads. In this latter case, which perfectly exemplifies the power of the
same imagination in animals, the embryo must have been stamped at the
instant of conception when the hen's imagination saw a hawk either in
fact or in fancy. This is evident,

###### <span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

for Dr. More, who quotes this case on the authority of Avicenna, remarks
very appropriately that, as the egg in question might have been hatched
a hundred miles distant from the hen, the microscopic picture of the
hawk impressed upon the embryo must have enlarged and perfected itself
with the growth of the chicken quite independently of any subsequent
influence from the hen.

Cornelius Gemma tells of a child that was born with his forehead wounded
and running with blood, the result of his father's threats toward his
mother " . . . with a drawn sword which he directed toward her
forehead"; Sennertius records the case of a pregnant woman who, seeing a
butcher divide a swine's head with his cleaver, brought forth her child
with his face cloven in the upper jaw, the palate, and upper lip to the
very nose. In Van Helmont's *De Injectis Materialibus,* some very
astonishing cases are reported: The wife of a tailor at Mechlin was
standing at her door and saw a soldier's hand cut off in a quarrel,
which so impressed her as to bring on premature labor, and her child was
born with only one hand, the other arm bleeding. In 1602, the wife of
Marcus Devogeler, a merchant of Antwerp, seeing a soldier who had just
lost his arm, was taken in labor and brought forth a daughter with one
arm struck off and bleeding as in the first case. Van Helmont gives a
third example of another woman who witnessed the beheading of thirteen
men by order of the Duc d'Alva. The horror of the spectacle was so
overpowering that she "suddainly fell into labour and brought forth a
perfectly-formed infant, only the head was wanting, but the neck bloody
as their bodies she beheld that had their heads cut off. And that which
does still advance the wonder is, that the *hand, arme*, and *head* of
these infants were none of them to be found." <span
id="fr_571"></span>[\*](#fn_570.md)

If it was possible to conceive of such a thing as a miracle in nature,
the above cases of the sudden disappearance of portions of the unborn
human body might be designated. We have looked in vain through the
latest authorities upon human physiology for any sufficient theory to
account for the least remarkable of foetal signatures. The most they can
do is to record instances of what they call "spontaneous varieties of
type," and then fall back either upon Mr. Proctor's "curious
coincidences" or upon such candid confessions of ignorance as are to be
found in authors not entirely satisfied with the sum of human knowledge.
Magendie acknowledges that, despite scientific researches, comparatively
little is known of foetal life. At page 518 of the American edition of
his *Precis Elementaire de Physiologie* he instances "a case where the
umbilical cord was ruptured and perfectly cicatrized"; and asks "How was
the

###### <span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

circulation carried on in this organ?" On the next page, he says:
"Nothing is at present known respecting the use of digestion in the
foetus"; and respecting its nutrition, propounds this query: "What,
then, can we say of the nutrition of the foetus? Physiological works
contain only *vague conjectures* on this point." On page 520, the
following language occurs: "In consequence of some *unknown cause,* the
different parts of the foetus sometimes develop themselves in a
preternatural manner." With singular inconsistency with his previous
admissions of the ignorance of science upon all these points which we
have quoted, he adds: "*There is no reason for believing that the
imagination of the mother can have any influence in the formation of
these monsters;* besides, productions of this kind are daily observed in
the offspring of other animals and even in plants." How perfect an
illustration is this of the methods of scientific men!--the moment they
pass beyond their circle of observed facts, their judgment seems to
become entirely perverted. Their deductions from their own researches
are often greatly inferior to those made by others who have to take the
facts at second hand.

The literature of science is constantly furnishing examples of this
truth; and when we consider the reasoning of materialistic observers
upon psychological phenomena, the rule is strikingly manifest. Those who
are *soul-blind* are as constitutionally incapable of distinguishing
psychological causes from material effects as the color-blind are to
select scarlet from black.

Elam, without being in the least a spiritualist, nay, though an enemy to
it, represents the belief of honest scientists in the following
expressions: "it is certainly inexplicable how matter and mind can act
and react one upon the other; the mystery is acknowledged by all to be
insoluble, and will probably ever remain so."

The great English authority upon the subject of malformation is *The
Science and Practice of Medicine,* by Wm. Aitken, M. D., Edinburgh, and
Professor of Pathology in the Army Medical School; the American edition
of which, by Professor Meredith Clymer, M. D., of the University of
Pennsylvania, has equal weight in the United States. At page 233 of vol.
i. we find the subject treated at length. The author says, "The
superstition, absurd notions, and strange causes assigned to the
occurrence of such malformations, are now fast disappearing before the
lucid expositions of those famous anatomists who have made the
development and growth of the ovum a subject of special study. It is
sufficient to mention here the names, J. Muller, Ratlike, Bischoff, St.
Hilaire, Burdach, Allen Thompson, G. & W. Vrolick, Wolff, Meckel,
Simpson, Rokitansky, and Von Ammon as sufficient evidence that the
truths of science will in time dispel the mists of ignorance and
superstition." One would

###### <span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

think, from the complacent tone adopted by this eminent writer that we
were in possession if not of the means of readily solving this intricate
problem at least of a clew to guide us through the maze of our
difficulties. But, in 1872, after profiting by all the labors and
ingenuity of the illustrious pathologists above enumerated, we find him
making the same confession of ignorance as that expressed by Magendie in
1838. "Nevertheless," says he, "much mystery still enshrouds the origin
of malformation; the origin of them may be considered in two main
issues, namely: 1, are they due to original malformation of the germ? 2,
or, are they due to subsequent deformities of the embryo by causes
operating on its development? With regard to the first issue, it is
believed that the germ may be originally malformed, or defective, owing
to *some influence proceeding either from the female, or from the male,*
as in case of repeated procreation of the same kind of malformation by
the same parents, deformities on either side being transmitted as an
inheritance."

Being unsupplied with any philosophy of their own to account for the
lesions, the pathologists, true to professional instinct, resort to
negation. "That such deformity may be produced by mental impressions on
pregnant women there is an absence of positive proof," they say. "Moles,
mothers' marks, and cutaneous spots as ascribed to morbid states of the
coats of the ovum. . . . A very generally-recognized cause of
malformation consists in impeded development of the foetus, *the cause
of which is not always obvious, but is for the most part concealed*. . .
. *Transient forms of the human foetus are comparable to persistent
forms of many lower animals*." Can the learned professor explain why?
"*Hence malformations resulting from arrest of development often acquire
an animal-like appearance*."

Exactly; but why do not pathologists inform us why it is so? Any
anatomist who has made the development and growth of the embryo and
foetus "a subject of special study," can tell, without much brain-work,
what daily experience and the evidence of his own eyes show him, viz.:
that up to a certain period, the human embryo is a fac-simile of a young
batrachian in its first remove from the spawn--a tadpole. But no
physiologist or anatomist seems to have had the idea of applying to the
development of the human being--from the first instant of its physical
appearance as a germ to its ultimate formation and birth--the
Pythagorean esoteric doctrine of metempsychosis, so erroneously
interpreted by critics. The meaning of the kabalistic axiom: "A stone
becomes a plant; a plant a beast; a beast a man, etc.," was mentioned in
another place in relation to the spiritual and physical evolution of man
on this earth. We will now add a few words more to make the idea
clearer.

What is the primitive shape of the future man? A grain, a corpuscle,

###### <span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

say some physiologists; a molecule, an ovum of the ovum, say others. If
it could be analyzed--by the spectroscope or otherwise--of what ought we
to expect to find it composed? Analogically, we should say, of a nucleus
of inorganic matter, deposited from the circulation at the germinating
point, and united with a deposit of organic matter. In other words, this
infinitesimal nucleus of the future man is composed of the same elements
as a stone--of the same elements as the earth, which the man is destined
to inhabit. Moses is cited by the kabalists as authority for the remark,
that it required earth and water to make a living being, and thus it may
be said that man first appears as a stone.

At the end of three or four weeks the ovum has assumed a plant-like
appearance, one extremity having become spheroidal and the other
tapering, like a carrot. Upon dissection it is found to be composed,
like an onion, of very delicate laminae or coats, enclosing a liquid.
The laminae approach each other at the lower end, and the embryo hangs
from the root of the umbilicus almost like a fruit from the bough. The
stone has now become changed, by metempsychosis, into a plant. Then the
embryonic creature begins to shoot out, from the inside outward, its
limbs, and develops its features. The eyes are visible as two black
dots; the ears, nose, and mouth form depressions, like the points of a
pineapple, before they begin to project. The embryo develops into an
animal-like foetus--the shape of a tadpole--and like an amphibious
reptile lives in water, and develops from it. Its monad has not yet
become either human or immortal, for the kabalists tell us that that
only comes at the "fourth hour." One by one the foetus assumes the
characteristics of the human being, the first flutter of the immortal
breath passes through his being; he moves; nature opens the way for him;
ushers him into the world; and the divine essence settles in the infant
frame, which it will inhabit until the moment of physical death, when
man becomes a spirit.

This mysterious process of a nine-months formation the kabalists call
the completion of the "individual cycle of evolution." As the foetus
develops from the *liquor amnii* in the womb, so the earths germinate
from the universal ether, or astral fluid, in the womb of the universe.
These cosmic children, like their pigmy inhabitants, are first nuclei;
then ovules; then gradually mature; and becoming mothers in their turn,
develop mineral, vegetable, animal, and human forms. From centre to
circumference, from the imperceptible vesicle to the uttermost
conceivable bounds of the cosmos, these glorious thinkers, the
kabalists, trace cycle merging into cycle, containing and contained in
an endless series. The embryo evolving in its pre-natal sphere, the
individual in his family, the family in the state, the state in mankind,
the earth in our system,

###### <span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

that system in its central universe, the universe in the cosmos, and the
cosmos in the First Cause:--the Boundless and Endless. So runs their
philosophy of evolution:

> "All are but parts of one stupendous whole,  
> Whose body Nature is; and God the Soul."

> "Worlds without number  
> Lie in this bosom like children."

While unanimously agreeing that physical causes, such as blows,
accidents, and bad quality of food for the mother, affect the foetus in
a way which endangers its life; and while admitting again that moral
causes, such as fear, sudden terror, violent grief, or even extreme joy,
may retard the growth of the foetus or even kill it, many physiologists
agree with Magendie in saying, "there is no reason for believing that
the imagination of the mother can have any influence in the formation of
monsters"; and only because "productions of this kind are daily observed
in the production of other animals and even in plants."

In this opinion he is supported by the leading teratologists of our day.
Although Geoffroi St. Hilaire gave its name to the new science, its
facts are based upon the exhaustive experiments of Bichat, who, in 1802,
was recognized as the founder of analytical and philosophical anatomy.
One of the most important contributions to teratological literature is
the monograph of G. J. Fisher, M.D., of Sing Sing, N. Y., entitled
*Diploteratology; an Essay on Compound Human Monsters.* This writer
classifies monstrous foetal growths into their genera and species,
accompanying the cases with reflections suggested by their
peculiarities. Following St. Hilaire, he divides the history of the
subject into the fabulous, the positive, and the scientific periods.

It suffices for our purpose to say that in the present state of
scientific opinion two points are considered as established: 1, that the
maternal, mental condition has no influence in the production of
monstrosities; 2, that most varieties of monstrosity may be accounted
for on the theory of *arrest* and *retardation* of development. Says
Fisher, "By a careful study of the laws of development and the order in
which the various organs are evolved in the embryo, it has been observed
that monsters by defect or arrest of development, are, to a certain
extent, permanent embryos. The abnormal organs merely represent the
primitive condition of formation as it existed in an early stage of
embryonic or foetal life." <span id="fr_572"></span>[\*](#fn_571.md) With
physiology in so confessedly chaotic a state as it is at present,

###### <span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

it seems a little like hardihood in any teratologist, however great his
achievements in anatomy, histology, or embryology, to take so dangerous
a position as that the mother has no influence upon her offspring. While
the microscopes of Haller and Prolik, Dareste and Laraboulet have
disclosed to us many interesting facts concerning the single or double
primitive traces on the vitelline membrane, what remains undiscovered
about embryology by modern science appears greater still. If we grant
that monstrosities are the result of an arrest of development--nay, if
we go farther, and concede that the foetal future may be prognosticated
from the vitelline tracings, where will the teratologists take us to
learn the *antecedent* psychological cause of either? Dr. Fisher may
have carefully studied some hundreds of cases, and feel himself
authorized to construct a new classification of their genera and
species; but facts are facts, and outside the field of his observation
it appears, even if we judge but by our own personal experience, in
various countries, that there are abundant attainable proofs that the
violent maternal emotions are often reflected in tangible, visible, and
permanent disfigurements of the child. And the cases in question seem,
moreover, to contradict Dr. Fisher's assertion that monstrous growths
are due to causes traceable to "the early stages of embryonic or foetal
life." One case was that of a Judge of an Imperial Court at Saratow,
Russia, who always wore a bandage to cover a mouse-mark on the left side
of his face. It was a perfectly-formed mouse, whose body was represented
in high relief upon the cheek, and the tail ran upward across the temple
and was lost in his hair. The body seemed glossy, gray, and quite
natural. According to his own account, his mother had an unconquerable
repugnance to mice, and her labor was prematurely brought on by seeing a
mouse jump out from her workbox.

In another instance, of which the writer was a witness, a pregnant lady,
within two or three weeks of her accouchement, saw a bowl of
raspberries, and was seized with an irresistible longing for some, but
denied. She excitedly clasped her right hand to her neck in a somewhat
theatrical manner, and exclaimed that she *must* have them. The child
born under our eyes, three weeks later, had a perfectly-defined
raspberry on the right side of his neck; to this day, when that fruit
ripens, his birth-mark becomes of a deep crimson, while, during the
winter, it is quite pale.

Such cases as these, which are familiar to many mothers of families,
either in their personal experience or that of friends, carry
conviction, despite the theories of all the teratologists of Europe and
America. Because, forsooth, animals and plants are observed to produce
malformations of their species as well as human beings, Magendie and his
school infer that the human malformations of an identical character are

###### <span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

not at all due to maternal imagination, *since the former are not*. If
physical causes produce physical effects in the subordinate kingdoms,
the inference is that the same rule must hold with ourselves.

But an entirely original theory was broached by Professor Armor, of the
Long Island Medical College, in the course of a discussion recently held
in the Detroit Academy of Medicine. In opposition to the orthodox views
which Dr. Fisher represents, Professor Armor says that malformations
result from either one of two causes--1, a deficiency or abnormal
condition in the generative matter from which the foetus is developed,
or 2, morbid influences acting on the *foetus in utero.* He maintains
that the generative matter represents in its composition every tissue,
structure, and form, and that there may be such a transmission of
*acquired* structural peculiarities as would make the generative matter
incapable of producing a healthy and equally-developed offspring. On the
other hand, the generative matter may be perfect in itself, but being
subjected to morbid influences during the process of gestation, the
offspring will, of necessity, be monstrous.

To be consistent, this theory must account for diploteratological cases
(double-headed or double-membered monsters), which seems difficult. We
might, perhaps, admit that in defective generative matter, the head of
the embryo might not be represented, or any other part of the body be
deficient; but, it hardly seems as if there could be two, three, or more
representatives of a single member. Again, if the generative matter have
hereditary taint, it seems as if *all* the resulting progeny should be
equally monstrous; whereas the fact is that in many cases the mother has
given birth to a number of healthy children before the monster made its
appearance, all being the progeny of one father. Numerous cases of this
kind are quoted by Dr. Fisher; among others he cites the case of
Catherine Corcoran, <span id="fr_573"></span>[\*](#fn_572.md) a "very
healthy woman, thirty years of age and who, previously to giving birth
to this monster had born five well-formed children, no two of which were
twins . . . it had a head at either extremity, two chests, with arms
complete, two abdominal and two pelvic cavities united end to end, with
four legs placed two at either side, where the union between the two
occurred." Certain parts of the body, however, were not duplicated, and
therefore this cannot be claimed as a case of the growing together of
twins.

Another instance is that of Maria Teresa Parodi. <span
id="fr_574"></span>[\*\*](#fn_573.md) This woman, who had previously given
birth to eight well-formed children, was delivered of a female infant
the upper part of which only was double. Instances in

###### <span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

which *before* and *after* the production of a monster the children were
perfectly healthy are numerous, and if, on the other hand, the fact that
monstrosities are as common with animals as they are with mankind is a
generally-accepted argument against the popular theory that these
malformations are due to the imagination of the mother; and that other
fact--that there is no difference between the ovarian cell of a mammifer
and man, be admitted, what becomes of Professor Armor's theory? In such
a case an instance of an animal-malformation is as good as that of a
human monster; and this is what we read in Dr. Samuel L. Mitchell's
paper *On two-headed Serpents:* "A female snake was killed, together
with her whole brood of young ones, amounting to 120, of these *three
were monsters.* One with two distinct heads; one with a double head and
only three eyes; and one with a double skull, furnished with three eyes,
and a single lower jaw; this last had two bodies." <span
id="fr_575"></span>[\*](#fn_574.md) Surely the *generative matter* which
produced these *three monsters* was identical with that which produced
the other 117? Thus the *Armor* theory is as imperfect as all the rest.

The trouble proceeds from the defective method of reasoning usually
adopted--*Induction;* a method which claims to collect by *experiment*
and observation all the facts *within* its reach, the former being
rather that of collecting and examining experiments and drawing
conclusions therefrom; and, according to the author of *Philosophical
Inquiry,* "as this conclusion cannot be extended beyond what is
warranted by the experiments, the Induction is an instrument of proof
and *limitation*." Notwithstanding this limitation is to be found in
every scientific inquiry, it is rarely confessed, but hypotheses are
constructed for us as though the experimenters had found them to be
mathematically-proved theorems, while they are, to say the most, simple
approximations.

For a student of occult philosophy, who rejects in his turn the method
of induction on account of these perpetual limitations, and fully adopts
the Platonic division of causes--namely, the Efficient, the Formal, the
Material, and the Final, as well as the Eleatic method of examining any
given proposition, it is but natural to reason from the following
stand-point of the Neo-platonic school: 1. The subject either is as it
is supposed or *is not.* Therefore we will inquire: Does the universal
ether, known by the kabalists as the "astral light," contain electricity
and magnetism, or does it not? The answer must be in the affirmative,
for "exact science" herself teaches us that these two convertible agents
saturating both the air and the earth, there is a constant interchange
of electricity and magnetism between them. The question No. 1 being

###### <span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

settled, we will have now to examine *what happens--*1st. To it with
respect to *itself.* 2d. To *it* with respect to *all other* things. 3d.
With all *other things,* with respect *to it.* 4th. To all *other
things* with respect

to themselves.

ANSWERS: 1st. With respect to *itself.* That inherent properties
previously latent in electricity, become active under favoring
conditions; and that at one time the form of magnetic force is assumed
by the subtile, all-pervading agent; at another, the form of electric
force is assumed.

2d. With respect to all other things. By all other things for which it
has an affinity, it is attracted, by all others repelled.

3d. With all other things with respect to it. It happens that whenever
they come in contact with electricity, they receive its impress in
proportion to their conductivity.

4th. To all other things with respect to themselves. That under the
impulse received from the electric force, and in proportion to its
intensity, their molecules change their relations with each other; that
either they are wrenched asunder, so as to destroy the object--organic
or inorganic--which they formed, or, if previously disturbed, are
brought into equilibrium (as in cases of disease); or the disturbance
may be but superficial, and the object may be stamped with the image of
some other object encountered by the fluid before reaching them.

To apply the above propositions to the case in point: There are several
well-recognized principles of science, as, for instance, that a pregnant
woman is physically and mentally in a highly impressible state.
Physiology tells us that her intellectual faculties are weakened, and
that she is affected to an unusual degree by the most trifling events.
Her pores are opened, and she exudes a peculiar cutaneous perspiration;
she seems to be in a receptive condition for all the influences in
nature. Reichenbach's disciples assert that her *odic* condition is very
intense. Du Potet warns against incautiously mesmerizing her, for fear
of affecting the offspring. Her diseases are imparted to it, and often
it absorbs them entirely to itself; her pains and pleasures react upon
its temperament as well as its health; great men proverbially have great
mothers, and *vice versa. "It is true that her imagination has an
influence upon the foetus*," admits Magendie, thus contradicting what he
asserts in another place; and he adds that "sudden terror may cause the
death of the foetus, *or retard its growth*." <span
id="fr_576"></span>[\*](#fn_575.md)

In the case recently reported in the American papers, of a boy who was
killed by a stroke of lightning, upon stripping the body, there was
found imprinted upon his breast the faithful picture of a tree which
grew

###### <span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

near the window which he was facing at the time of the catastrophe, and
which was also felled by the lightning. Now, this electrical
photography, which was accomplished by the blind forces of nature,
furnishes an analogy by which we may understand how the mental images of
the mother are transmitted to the unborn child. Her *pores* are opened;
she exudes an odic emanation which is but another form of the *akasa,*
the electricity, or life-principle, and which, according to Reichenbach,
produces mesmeric sleep, and consequently is *magnetism.* Magnetic
currents develop themselves into electricity upon their exit from the
body. An object making a violent impression on the mother's mind, its
image is instantly projected into the astral light, or the universal
ether, which Jevons and Babbage, as well as the authors of the *Unseen
Universe,* tell us is the repository of the *spiritual* images of all
forms, and even human thoughts. Her magnetic emanations attract and
unite themselves with the descending current which already bears the
image upon it. It rebounds, and re-percussing more or less violently,
impresses itself upon the foetus, according to the very formula of
physiology which shows how every maternal feeling reacts on the
offspring. Is this kabalistic theory more *hypothetical* or
incomprehensible than the teratological doctrine taught by the disciples
of Geoffroi St. Hilaire? The doctrine, of which Magendie so justly
observes, "is found convenient and easy from its *vagueness* and
obscurity," and which "pretends to nothing less than the creation of a
new science, the theory of which reposes on certain laws not very
intelligible, as that of *arresting,* that of *retarding,* that of
*similar* or *eccentric* position, especially the *great law,* as it is
called, of *self for self*." <span id="fr_577"></span>[\*](#fn_576.md)

Eliphas Levi, who is certainly one of the best authorities on certain
points among kabalists, says: "Pregnant women are, more than others,
under the influence of the astral light, which assists in the formation
of their child, and constantly presents to them the reminiscences of
forms with which it is filled. It is thus that very virtuous women
deceive the malignity of observers by equivocal resemblances. They often
impress upon the fruit of their marriage an image which has struck them
in a dream, and thus are the same physiognomies perpetuated from age to
age.

"The kabalistic use of the pentagram can therefore determine the
countenance of unborn infants, and an initiated woman might give to her
son the features of Nereus or Achilles, as well as those of Louis
**XV**. or Napoleon." <span id="fr_578"></span>[\*\*](#fn_577.md)

If it should confirm another theory than that of Dr. Fisher, he should
be the last to complain, for as he himself makes the confession, which

###### <span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

his own example verifies: <span id="fr_579"></span>[\*](#fn_578.md) "One of
the most formidable obstacles to the advancement of science . . . has
ever been a *blind submission to authority*. . . . To untrammel the mind
from the influence of mere authority, that it may have free scope in the
investigation of facts and laws which exist and are established in
nature, is the grand antecedent necessary to scientific discovery and
permanent progress."

If the maternal imagination can stunt the growth or destroy the life of
the foetus, why cannot it influence its physical appearance? There are
some surgeons who have devoted their lives and fortunes to find the
cause for these malformations, but have only reached the opinion that
they are mere "coincidences." It would be also highly unphilosophical to
say that animals are not endowed with imagination; and, while it might
be considered the acme of metaphysical speculation to even formulate the
idea that members of the vegetable kingdom--say the *mimosas* and the
group of insect-catchers--have an instinct and even rudimentary
imagination of their own, yet the idea is not without its advocates. If
great physicists like Tyndall are forced to confess that even in the
case of intelligent and speaking man they are unable to bridge the chasm
between mind and matter, and define the powers of the imagination, how
much greater must be the mystery about what takes place in the brain of
a dumb animal.

What is imagination? *Psychologists tell us that it is the plastic or
creative power of the soul;* but materialists confound it with fancy.
The radical difference between the two, was however, so thoroughly
indicated by Wordsworth, in the preface to his *Lyrical Ballads,* that
it is no longer excusable to interchange the words. Imagination,
Pythagoras maintained to be the remembrance of precedent spiritual,
mental, and physical states, while fancy is the disorderly production of
the material brain.

From whatever aspect we view and question matter, the world-old
philosophy that it was vivified and fructified by the eternal idea, or
imagination--the abstract outlining and preparing the model for the
concrete form--is unavoidable. If we reject this doctrine, the theory of
a cosmos evolving gradually out of its chaotic disorder becomes an
absurdity; for it is highly unphilosophical to imagine inert matter,
solely moved by blind force, and directed by intelligence, forming
itself spontaneously into a universe of such admirable harmony. If the
soul of man is really an outcome of the essence of this universal soul,
an infinitesimal fragment of this first creative principle, it must of
necessity partake in degree of all the attributes of the demiurgic
power. As the creator, breaking up the chaotic mass of dead, inactive
matter, shaped it into

###### <span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

form, so man, if he knew his powers, could, to a degree, do the same. As
Pheidias, gathering together the loose particles of clay and moistening
them with water, could give plastic shape to the sublime idea evoked by
his creative faculty, so the mother who knows her power can fashion the
coming child into whatever form she likes. Ignorant of his powers, the
sculptor produces only an inanimate though ravishing figure of inert
matter; while the soul of the mother, violently affected by her
imagination, blindly projects into the astral light an image of the
object which impressed it, and, by re-percussion, that is stamped upon
the foetus. Science tells us that the law of gravitation assures us that
any displacement which takes place in the very heart of the earth will
be felt throughout the universe, "and we may even imagine that the same
thing will hold true of those molecular motions which accompany
thought." <span id="fr_580"></span>[\*](#fn_579.md) Speaking of the
transmission of energy throughout the universal ether or astral light,
the same authority says: "Continual photographs of all occurrences are
thus produced and retained. A large portion of the energy of the
universe may thus be said to be invested in such pictures."

Dr. Fournie, of the National Deaf and Dumb Institute of France, in
chapter ii. of his work, <span id="fr_581"></span>[\*\*](#fn_580.md). in
discussing the question of the foetus, says that the most powerful
microscope is unable to show us the slightest difference between the
ovarian cell of a mammifer and a man; and, respecting the first or last
movement of the ovule, asks: "What is it? has it particular characters
which distinguish it from every other ovule?" and justly answers thus:
"Until now, science has not replied to these questions, and, without
being a pessimist, I do not think *that she ever will reply;* from the
day when her methods of investigation will permit her to surprise the
hidden mechanism of the conflict of the principle of life with matter,
she will know life itself, and be able to produce it." If our author had
read the sermon of Pere Felix, how appropriately he might utter his
Amen! to the priest's exclamation--**M**YSTERY! **M**YSTERY!

Let us consider the assertion of Magendie in the light of recorded
instances of the power of imagination in producing monstrous
deformities, where the question does not involve pregnant women. He
admits that these occur daily in the offspring of the lower animals; how
does he account for the hatching of chickens with hawk-heads, except
upon the theory that the appearance of the hereditary enemy acted upon
the hen's imagination, which, in its turn, imparted to the matter
composing the germ a certain motion which, before expanding itself,
produced the monstrous chicks? We know of an analogous case, where a
tame dove,

###### <span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

belonging to a lady of our acquaintance, was frightened daily by a
parrot, and in her next brood of young there were two squabs with
parrots' heads, the resemblance even extending to the color of the
feathers. We might also cite Columella, Youatt, and other authorities,
together with the experience of all animal breeders, to show that by
exciting the imagination of the mother, the external appearance of the
offspring can be largely controlled. These instances in no degree affect
the question of heredity, for they are simply special variations of type
artificially caused.

Catherine Crowe discusses at considerable length the question of the
power of the mind over matter, and relates, in illustration, many
well-authenticated instances of the same. <span
id="fr_582"></span>[\*](#fn_581.md) Among others, that most curious
phenomenon called the *stigmata* have a decided bearing upon this point.
These marks come upon the bodies of persons of all ages, and always as
the result of exalted imagination. In the cases of the Tyrolese
ecstatic, Catherine Emmerich, and many others, the wounds of the
crucifixion are said to be as perfect as nature. A certain Mme. B. von
N. dreamed one night that a person offered her a red and a white rose,
and that she chose the latter. On awaking, she felt a burning pain in
her arm, and by degrees there appeared the figure of a rose, perfect in
form and color; it was rather raised above the skin. The mark increased
in intensity till the eighth day, after which it faded away, and by the
fourteenth, was no longer perceptible. Two young ladies, in Poland, were
standing by an open window during a storm; a flash of lightning fell
near them, and the gold necklace on the neck of one of them was melted.
A perfect image of it was impressed upon the skin, and remained
throughout life. The other girl, appalled by the accident to her
companion, stood transfixed with horror for several minutes, and then
fainted away. Little by little the same mark of a necklace as had been
instantaneously imprinted upon her friend's body, appeared upon her own,
and remained there for several years, when it gradually disappeared.

Dr. Justinus Kerner, the distinguished German author, relates a still
more extraordinary case. "At the time of the French invasion, a Cossack
having pursued a Frenchman into a *cul-de-sac,* an alley without an
outlet, there ensued a terrible conflict between them, in which the
latter was severely wounded. A person who had taken refuge in this
close, and could not get away, was so dreadfully frightened, that when
he reached home there broke out on his body the very same wounds that
the Cossack had inflicted on his enemy!"

In this case, as in those where organic disorders, and even physical

###### <span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

death result from a sudden excitement of the mind reacting upon the
body, Magendie would find it difficult to attribute the effect to any
other cause than the imagination; and if he were an occultist, like
Paracelsus, or Van Helmont, the question would be stripped of its
mystery. He would understand the power of the human will and
imagination--the former conscious, the latter involuntary--on the
universal agent to inflict injury, physical and mental, not only upon
chosen victims, but also, by reflex action, upon one's self and
unconsciously. It is one of the fundamental principles of magic, that if
a current of this subtile fluid is not impelled with sufficient force to
reach the objective point, it will react upon the individual sending it,
as an India-rubber ball rebounds to the thrower's hand from the wall
against which it strikes without being able to penetrate it. There are
many cases instanced where *would-be sorcerers* fell victims themselves.
Van Helmont says: "The imaginative power of a woman vividly excited
produces an idea, which is the connecting medium between the body and
spirit. This transfers itself to the being with whom the woman stands in
the most immediate relation, and impresses upon it that image which the
most agitated herself."

Deleuze has collected, in his *Bibliotheque du Magnetisme Animal*, a
number of remarkable facts taken from Van Helmont, among which we will
content ourselves with quoting the following as pendants to the case of
the bird-hunter, Jacques Pelissier. He says that "men by looking
steadfastly at animals *oculis intentis* for a quarter of an hour may
cause their death; which Rousseau confirms from his own experience in
Egypt and the East, as having killed several toads in this manner. But
when he at last tried this at Lyons, the toad, finding it could not
escape from his eye, turned round, blew itself up, and stared at him so
fiercely, without moveing its eyes, that a weakness came over him even
to fainting, and he was for some time thought to be dead."

But to return to the question of teratology. Wierus tells, in his *De
Praestigiis Demonum,* of a child born of a woman who not long before its
birth was threatened by her husband, he saying that she had the devil in
her and that he would kill him. The mother's fright was such that her
offspring appeared "well-shaped from the middle downward, but upward
spotted with blackened red spots, with eyes in his forehead, a mouth
like a Satyr, ears like a dog, and bended horns on its head like a
goat." In a demonological work by Peramatus, there is a story of a
monster born at St. Lawrence, in the West Indies, in the year 1573, the
genuineness of which is certified to by the Duke of Medina-Sidonia. The
child, "besides the horrible deformity of its mouth, ears, and nose, had
two horns on the head, like those of young goats, long hair on his body,
a fleshy girdle about his middle, double, from whence hung a piece

###### <span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

of flesh like a purse, and a bell of flesh in his left hand like those
the Indians use when they dance, white boots of flesh on his legs,
doubled down. In brief, the whole shape was horrid and diabolical, and
conceived to proceed from some fright the mother had taken from the
antic dances of the Indians." <span id="fr_583"></span>[\*](#fn_582.md) Dr.
Fisher rejects all such instances as unauthenticated and fabulous.

But we will not weary the reader with further selections from the
multitude of teratological cases to be found recorded in the works of
standard authors; the above suffice to show that there is reason to
attribute these aberrations of physiological type to the mutual reaction
of the maternal mind and the universal ether upon each other. Lest some
should question the authority of Van Helmont, as a man of science, we
will refer them to the work of Fournie, the well-known physiologist,
where (at page 717) the following estimate of his character will be
found: "Van Helmont was a highly distinguished chemist; he had
particularly studied aeriform fluids, and gave them the name of *gaz;*
at the same time he pushed his piety to mysticism, abandoning himself
exclusively to a contemplation of the divinity. . . . Van Helmont is
distinguished above all his predecessors by connecting *the principle of
life,* directly and in some sort experimentally, as he tells us, with
the most minute movements of the body. It is the incessant action of
this entity, in no way associated by him with the material elements, but
forming a distinct individuality, that we cannot understand.
Nevertheless, it is upon this entity that a famous school has laid its
principal foundation."

Van Helmont's "principle of life," or *archaeus,* is neither more nor
less than the astral light of all the kabalists, and the universal ether
of modern science. If the more unimportant signatures of the foetus are
not due to the imagination of the mother, to what other cause would
Magendie attribute the formation of horny scales, the horns of goats and
the hairy coats of animals, which we have seen in the above instances
marking monstrous progeny? Surely there were no latent germs of these
distinguishing features of the animal kingdom capable of being developed
under a sudden impulse of the maternal fancy. In short, the only
possible explanation is the one offered by the adepts in the occult
sciences.

Before leaving the subject, we wish to say a few words more respecting
the cases where the head, arm, and hand were instantly dissolved, though
it was evident that in each instance the entire body of the child had
been perfectly formed. Of what is a child's body composed at its birth?
The chemists will tell us that it comprises a dozen pounds of solidified
gas, and a few ounces of ashy residuum, some water, oxygen,

###### <span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

hydrogen, nitrogen, carbonic acid, a little lime, magnesia, phosphorus,
and a few other minerals; that is all! Whence came they? How were they
gathered together? How were these particles which Mr. Proctor tells us
are drawn in from "the depths of space surrounding us on all sides,"
formed and fashioned into the human being? We have seen that it is
useless to ask the dominant school of which Magendie is an illustrious
representative; for he confesses that they know nothing of the
nutrition, digestion, or circulation of the foetus; and physiology
teaches us that while the ovule is enclosed in the Graafian vesicle it
participates--forms an integral part of the general structure of the
mother. Upon the rupture of the vesicle, it becomes almost as
independent of her for what is to build up the body of the future being
as the germ in a bird's egg after the mother has dropped it in the nest.
There certainly is very little in the demonstrated facts of science to
contradict the idea that the relation of the embryonic child to the
mother is much different from that of the tenant to the house, upon
whose shelter he depends for health, warmth, and comfort.

According to Demokritus, the soul <span id="fr_584"></span>[\*](#fn_583.md)
results from the aggregation of atoms, and Plutarch describes his
philosophy as follows: "That there are substances infinite in number,
indivisible, undisturbed, which are without differences, without
qualities, and which move in space, where they are disseminated; that
when they approach each other, they unite, interlock, and form by their
aggregation water, fire, a plant, or a man. That all these substances,
which he calls *atoms* by reason of their solidity, can experience
neither change nor alteration. But," adds Plutarch, "we cannot make a
color of that which is colorless, nor a substance or soul of that which
is without soul and without quality." Professor Balfour Stewart says
that this doctrine, in the hands of John Dalton, "has enabled the human
mind to lay hold of the laws which regulate chemical changes, as well as
to picture to itself what is there taking place." After quoting, with
approbation, Bacon's idea that men are perpetually investigating the
extreme limits of nature, he then erects a standard which he and his
brother philosophers would do well to measure their behavior by. "Surely
we ought," says he, "to be very cautious before we dismiss any branch of
knowledge or train of thought as essentially unprofitable." <span
id="fr_585"></span>[\*\*](#fn_584.md)

Brave words, these. But how many are the men of science who put them
into practice?

###### <span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

Demokritus of Abdera shows us space crammed with atoms, and our
contemporary astronomers allow us to see how these atoms form into
worlds, and afterward into the races, our own included, which people
them. Since we have indicated the existence of a power in the human
will, which, by concentrating currents of those atoms upon an objective
point, can create a child corresponding to the mother's fancy, why is it
not perfectly credible that this same power put forth by the mother,
can, by an intense, albeit unconscious reversal of those currents,
dissipate and obliterate any portion or even the whole of the body of
her unborn child? And here comes in the question of false pregnancies,
which have so often completely puzzled both physician and patient. If
the head, arm, and hand of the three children mentioned by Van Helmont
could disappear, as a result of the emotion of horror, why might not the
same or some other emotion, excited in a like degree, cause the entire
extinction of the foetus in so-called false pregnancy? Such cases are
rare, but they do occur, and moreover baffle science completely. There
certainly is no chemical solvent in the mother's circulation powerful
enough to dissolve her child, without destroying herself. We commend the
subject to the medical profession, hoping that as a class they will not
adopt the conclusion of Fournie, who says: "In this succession of
phenomena we must confine ourselves *to the office of historian,* as we
have not even tried to explain the whys and wherefores of these things,
for there lie the inscrutable mysteries of life, and in proportion as we
advance in our exposition, we will be obliged to recognize that this is
to us *forbidden ground*." <span id="fr_586"></span>[\*](#fn_585.md)

Within the limits of his intellectual capabilities the true philosopher
knows no forbidden ground, and should be content to accept no mystery of
nature as inscrutable or inviolable.

No student of Hermetic philosophy, nor any spiritualist, will object to
the abstract principle laid down by Hume that a *miracle* is impossible;
for to suppose such a possibility would make the universe governed
through special instead of general laws. This is one of the fundamental
contradictions between science and theology. The former, reasoning upon
universal experience, maintains that there is a general uniformity of
the course of nature, while the latter assumes that the Governing Mind
can be invoked to suspend general law to suit special emergencies. Says
John Stuart Mill, <span id="fr_587"></span>[\*\*](#fn_586.md) "If we do not
already believe in supernatural agencies, no miracle can prove to us
their existence. The miracle itself, considered merely as an
extraordinary fact, may be satisfactorily certified by our senses or by
testimony; but nothing can ever prove that it is a miracle.

###### <span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

There is still another possible hypothesis, that of its being the result
of some unknown natural cause; and this possibility cannot be so
completely shut out as to leave no alternative but that of admitting the
existence and intervention of a being superior to nature."

This is the very point which we have sought to bring home to our
logicians and physicists. As Mr. Mill himself says, "We cannot admit a
proposition as a law of nature, and yet believe a fact in real
contradiction to it. We must disbelieve the alleged fact, or believe
that we were mistaken in admitting the supposed law." Mr. Hume cites the
"firm and *unalterable* experience" of mankind, as establishing the laws
whose operation *ipso facto* makes miracles impossible. The difficulty
lies in his use of the adjective which is Italicized, for this is an
assumption that our experience will never change, and that, as a
consequence, we will always have the same experiments and observations
upon which to base our judgment. It also assumes that all philosophers
will have the same facts to reflect upon. It also entirely ignores such
collected accounts of philosophical experiment and scientific discovery
as we may have been temporarily deprived of. Thus, by the burning of the
Alexandrian Library and the destruction of Nineveh, the world has been
for many centuries without the necessary data upon which to estimate the
real knowledge, esoteric and exoteric, of the ancients. But, within the
past few years, the discovery of the Rosetta stone, the Ebers,
d'Aubigney, Anastasi, and other *papyri,* and the exhumation of the
tile-libraries, have opened a field of archaeological research which is
likely to lead to radical changes in this "firm and unalterable
experience." The author of *Supernatural Religion* justly observes that
"a person who believes anything contradictory to a complete induction,
merely on the strength of an assumption which is incapable of proof, is
simply credulous; but such an assumption cannot affect the real evidence
for that thing."

In a lecture delivered by Mr. Hiram Corson, Professor of Anglo-Saxon
Literature at the Cornell University, Ithaca, N. Y., before the alumni
of St. John's College, Annapolis, in July, 1875, the lecturer thus
deservedly rebukes science:

"There are things," he says, "which Science can never do, and which it
is arrogant in attempting to do. There was a time when Religion and the
Church went beyond their legitimate domain, and invaded and harried that
of Science, and imposed a burdensome tribute upon the latter; but it
would seem that their former relations to each other are undergoing an
entire change, and Science has crossed its frontiers and is invading the
domain of Religion and the Church, and instead of a Religious Papacy, we
are in danger of being brought under a Scientific Papacy--we are in fact
already brought under such a Papacy; and as in the sixteenth century

###### <span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

a protest was made, in the interests of intellectual freedom, against a
religious and ecclesiastical despotism, so, in this nineteenth century,
the spiritual and eternal interests of man demand that a protest should
be made against a rapidly-developing scientific despotism, and that
Scientists should not only keep within their legitimate domain of the
phenomenal and the conditioned, but should 'reexamine their stock in
trade, so that we may make sure how far the stock of bullion in the
cellar--on the faith of whose existence so much paper has been
circulating--is really the solid gold of Truth.'

"If this is not done in science as well as in ordinary business,
scientists are apt to put their capital at too high a figure, and
accordingly carry on a dangerously-inflated business. Even since Prof.
Tyndall delivered his Belfast Address, it has been shown, by the many
replies it has elicited, that the capital of the Evolution-School of
Philosophy to which he belongs, is not nearly so great as it was before
vaguely supposed to be by many of the non-scientific but intelligent
portion of the world. It is quite surprising to a non-scientific person
to be made aware of the large purely hypothetical domain which surrounds
that of established science, and of which scientists often boast, as a
part of their settled and available conquests."

Exactly; and at the same time denying the same privilege to others. They
protest against the "miracles" of the Church, and repudiate, with as
much logic, modern phenomena. In view of the admission of such
scientific authorities as Dr. Youmans and others that modern science is
passing through a transitional period, it would seem that it is time
that people should cease to consider certain things incredible only
because they are marvellous, and because they seem to oppose themselves
to what we are accustomed to consider universal laws. There are not a
few well-meaning men in the present century who, desiring to avenge the
memory of such martyrs of science as Agrippa, Palissy, and Cardan,
nevertheless fail, through lack of means, to understand their ideas
rightly. They erroneously believe that the Neo-platonists gave more
attention to transcendental philosophy than to exact science.

"The failures that Aristotle himself so often exhibits," remarks
Professor Draper, "are no proof of the unreliability of his method, but
rather of its trustworthiness. They are failures arising from want of a
sufficiency of facts." <span id="fr_588"></span>[\*](#fn_587.md)

What facts? we might inquire. A man of science cannot be expected to
admit that these facts can be furnished by occult science, since he does
not believe in the latter. Nevertheless, the future may demonstrate

###### <span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

this verity. Aristotle has bequeathed his inductive method to our
scientists; but until they supplement it with "the universals of Plato,"
they will experience still more "failures" than the great tutor of
Alexander. The universals are a matter of faith only so long as they
cannot be demonstrated by reason and based on uninterrupted experience.
Who of our present-day philosophers can prove by this same inductive
method that the ancients did *not* possess such demonstrations as a
consequence of their esoteric studies? Their own negations, unsupported
as they are by proof, sufficiently attest that they do not always pursue
the inductive method they so much boast of. Obliged as they are to base
their theories, *nolens volens,* on the groundwork of the ancient
philosophers, their modern discoveries are but the shoots put forth by
the germs planted by the former. And yet even these discoveries are
generally incomplete, if not abortive. Their cause is involved in
obscurity and their ultimate effect unforeseen. "We are not," says
Professor Youmans, "to regard past theories as mere exploded errors, nor
present theories as final. The living and growing body of truth has only
mantled its old integuments in the progress to a higher and more
vigorous state." <span id="fr_589"></span>[\*](#fn_588.md) This language,
applied to modern chemistry by one of the first philosophical chemists
and most enthusiastic scientific writers of the day, shows the
transitional state in which we find modern science; but what is true of
chemistry is true of all its sister sciences.

Since the advent of spiritualism, physicians and pathologists are more
ready than ever to treat great philosophers like Paracelsus and Van
Helmont as superstitious quacks and charlatans, and to ridicule their
notions about the *archaeus*, or *anima mundi,* as well as the
importance they gave to a knowledge of the machinery of the stars. And
yet, how much of substantial progress has medicine effected since the
days when Lord Bacon classed it among the *conjectural* sciences?

Such philosophers as Demokritus, Aristotle, Euripides, Epicurus, or
rather his biographer, Lucretius, AEschylus, and other ancient writers,
whom the materialists so willingly quote as authoritative opponents of
the dreamy Platonists, were only theorists, not adepts. The latter, when
they did write, either had their works burned by Christian mobs or they
worded them in a way to be intelligible only to the initiated. Who of
their modern detractors can warrant that he knows all about what they
knew? Diocletian alone burned whole libraries of works upon the "secret
arts"; not a manuscript treating on the art of making gold and silver
escaped the wrath of this unpolished tyrant. Arts and civilization had
attained such a development at what is now termed the archaic ages that
we learn,

###### <span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

through Champollion, that Athothi, the *second* king of the *first*
dynasty, wrote a work on anatomy, and the king Necho on astrology and
astronomy. Blantasus and Cynchrus were two learned geographers of those
pre-Mosaic days. AElian speaks of the Egyptian Iachus, whose memory was
venerated for centuries for his wonderful achievements in medicine. He
stopped the progress of several epidemics, merely with certain
*fumigations.* A work of Apollonides, surnamed Orapios, is mentioned by
Theophilus, patriarch of Antioch, entitled the *Divine Book,* and giving
the secret biography and origin of all the gods of Egypt; and Ammianus
Marcellinus speaks of a secret work in which was noted the *precise age
of the bull Apis--*a key to many a mystery and cyclic calculation. What
has become of all these books, and who knows the treasures of learning
they may have contained? We know but one thing for a certainty, and that
is, that Pagan and Christian Vandals destroyed such literary treasures
*wherever they could find them;* and that the emperor Alexander Severus
went all over Egypt to collect the sacred books on mysticism and
mythology, pillaging every temple; and that the Ethiopians--old as were
the Egyptians in arts and sciences--claimed a priority of antiquity as
well as of learning over them; as well they might, for they were known
in India at the earliest dawn of history. We also know that Plato
learned more secrets in Egypt than he was allowed to mention; and that,
according to Champollion, all that is really good and scientific in
Aristotle's works--so prized in our day by our modern inductionists--is
due to his *divine* Master; and that, as a logical sequence, Plato
having imparted the profound secrets he had learned from the priests of
Egypt to his initiated disciples orally--who in their turn passed it
from one generation to another of adepts--the latter *know more* of the
occult powers of nature than our philosophers of the present day.

And here we may as well mention the works of Hermes Trismegistus. Who,
or how many have had the opportunity to read them as they were in the
Egyptian sanctuaries? In his *Egyptian Mysteries,* Iamblichus attributes
to Hermes 1,100 books, and Seleucus reckons no less than 20,000 of his
works before the period of Menes. Eusebius saw but forty-two of these
"in his time," he says, and the last of the six books on medicine
treated on that art as practiced in the darkest ages; <span
id="fr_590"></span>[\*](#fn_589.md) and

###### <span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

Diodorus says that it was the oldest of the legislators Mnevis, the
third successor of *Menes,* who received them from Hermes.

Of such manuscripts as have descended to us, most are but Latin
retranslations of Greek translations, made principally by the
Neo-platonists from the original books preserved by some adepts.
Marcilius Ficinus, who was the first to publish them in Venice, in 1488,
has given us mere extracts, and the most important portions seemed to
have been either overlooked, or purposely omitted as too dangerous to
publish in those days of *Auto da fe.* And so it happens now, that when
a kabalist who has devoted his whole life to studying occultism, and has
conquered the great secret, ventures to remark that the *Kabala* alone
leads to the knowledge of the Absolute in the Infinite, and the
Indefinite in the Finite, he is laughed at by those who because they
know the impossibility of squaring the circle as a physical problem,
deny the possibility of its being done in the metaphysical sense.

Psychology, according to the greatest authorities on the subject, is a
department of science hitherto almost unknown. Physiology, according to
Fournie, one of its French authorities, is in so bad a condition as to
warrant his saying in the preface to his erudite work *Physiologie du
Systeme Nerveux,* that "we perceive at last that not only is the
physiology of the brain not worked out, but also that *no physiology
whatever of the nervous system exists*." Chemistry has been entirely
remodelled within the past few years; therefore, like all new sciences,
the infant cannot be considered as very firm on its legs. Geology has
not yet been able to tell anthropology how long man has existed.
Astronomy, the most *exact* of sciences, is still speculating and
bewildered about cosmic energy, and many other things as important. In
anthropology, Mr. Wallace tells us, there exists a wide difference of
opinion on some of the most vital questions respecting the nature and
origin of man. Medicine has been pronounced by various eminent
physicians to be nothing better than scientific guess-work. Everywhere
incompleteness, nowhere perfection. When we look at these earnest men
groping around in the dark to find the missing links of their broken
chains, they seem to us like persons starting from a common, fathomless
abyss by divergent paths. Each of these ends at the brink of a chasm
which they cannot explore. On the

###### <span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

one hand they lack the means to descend into its hidden depths, and on
the other they are repulsed at each attempt by jealous sentries, who
will not let them pass. And so they go on watching the lower forces of
nature and from time to time initiating the public into their *great*
discoveries. Did they not actually pounce upon vital force and catch her
playing in her game of correlation with chemical and physical forces?
Indeed they did. But if we ask them whence this vital force? How is it
that they who had so firmly believed, but a short time since, that
matter was destructible and passed out of existence, and now have
learned to believe as firmly that it does not, are unable to tell us
more about it? Why are they forced in this case as in many others to
return to a doctrine taught by Demokritus twenty-four centuries
ago? <span id="fr_591"></span>[\*](#fn_590.md) Ask them, and they will
answer: "Creation or destruction of matter, increase or diminution of
matter, lies *beyond the domain of science* . . . her domain is confined
entirely to the changes of matter . . . the domain of science lies
within the limits of these changes--creation and annihilation lie
outside of her domain." <span id="fr_592"></span>[\*\*](#fn_591.md) Ah! no,
they lie only outside the grasp of materialistic *scientists.* But why
affirm the same of science? And if they say that "force is incapable of
destruction, except by the same power which created it," then they
tacitly admit the existence of such a *power,* and have therefore *no
right* to throw obstacles in the way of those who, bolder than
themselves, try to penetrate *beyond,* and find that they can only do so
by

lifting the Veil of Isis.

But, surely among all these inchoate branches of science, there must be
some one at least complete! It seems to us that we heard a great clamor
of applause, "as the voice of many waters," over the discovery of
protoplasm. But, alas! when we turned to read Mr. Huxley, the learned
parent of the new-born infant is found saying: "In perfect strictness,
it is true that chemical investigation can tell us *little* or
*nothing,* directly, of the composition of living matter, and . . . it
is also in strictness, true, that WE KNOW NOTHING about the composition
of any body whatever, as it is!"

This is a sad confession, indeed. It appears, then, that the
Aristotelian method of induction is a failure in some cases, after all.
This also seems to account for the fact that this model philosopher,
with all his careful study of particulars before rising to universals,
taught that the earth was *in the centre* of the universe; while Plato,
who lost himself in

###### <span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

the maze of Pythagorean "vagaries," and started from general principles,
was perfectly versed in the heliocentric system. We can easily prove the
fact, by availing ourselves of the said inductive method for Plato's
benefit. We know that the *Sodalian* oath of the initiate into the
Mysteries prevented his imparting his knowledge to the world in so many
plain words. "It was the dream of his life," says Champollion, "to write
a work and record in it in full the doctrines taught by the Egyptian
hierophants; he often talked of it, but found himself compelled to
abstain on account of the 'solemn oath.' "

And now, judging our modern-day philosophers on the *vice versa*
method--namely, arguing from *universals* to *particulars,* and laying
aside scientists as individuals to merely give our opinion of them,
viewed as a whole--we are forced to suspect this highly respectable
association of extremely petty feelings toward their elder, ancient, and
archaic brothers. It really seems as if they bore always in mind the
adage, "Put out the *sun,* and the *stars* will shine."

We have heard a French Academician, a man of profound learning, remark,
that he would gladly sacrifice his own reputation to have the record of
the many ridiculous mistakes and failures of his colleagues obliterated
from the public memory. But these failures cannot be recalled *too*
often in considering our claims and the subject we advocate. The time
will come when the children of men of science, unless they inherit the
soul-blindness of their skeptical parents, will be ashamed of the
degrading materialism and narrow-mindedness of their fathers. To use an
expression of the venerable William Howitt, "They hate new truths as the
owl and the thief hate the sun. . . . Mere intellectual enlightenment
cannot recognize the spiritual. As the sun puts out a fire, so spirit
puts out the eyes of mere intellect."

It is an old, old story. From the days when the preacher wrote, "the eye
is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing,"
scientists have deported themselves as if the saying were written to
describe their own mental condition. How faithfully Lecky, himself a
rationalist, unconsciously depicts this propensity in men of science to
deride all new things, in his description of the manner in which
"educated men" receive an account of a miracle having taken place! "They
receive it," says he, "with an absolute and even derisive incredulity,
which dispenses with all examination of the evidences!" Moreover, so
saturated do they become with the fashionable skepticism after once
having fought their way into the Academy, that they turn about and enact
the role of persecutors in their turn. "It is a curiosity of science,"
says Howitt, "that Benjamin Franklin, who had himself experienced the
ridicule of his countrymen for his attempts to identify lightning and
electricity,

###### <span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

should have been one of the Committee of Savants, in Paris, in 1778, who
examined the claims of mesmerism, and condemned it as absolute
quackery!" <span id="fr_593"></span>[\*](#fn_592.md)

If men of science would confine themselves to the discrediting of new
discoveries, there might be some little excuse for them on the score of
their tendency to a conservatism begotten of long habits of patient
scrutiny; but they not only set up claims to originality not warranted
by fact, but contemptuously dismiss all allegations that the people of
ancient times knew as much and even more than themselves. Pity that in
each of their laboratories there is not suspended this text from
*Ecclesiastes:* "Is there anything whereof it may be said, See, this
*is* new? it hath been already of old time, which was before us." <span
id="fr_594"></span>[\*\*](#fn_593.md) In the verse which follows the one
here quoted, the wise man says, "There is no remembrance of former
things"; so that this utterance may account for every new denial. Mr.
Meldrum may exact praise for his meteorological observation of Cyclones
in the Mauritius, and Mr. Baxendell, of Manchester, talk learnedly of
the convection-currents of the earth, and Dr. Carpenter and Commander
Maury map out for us the equatorial current, and Professor Henry show us
how the moist wind deposits its burden to form rivulets and rivers, only
to be again rescued from the ocean and returned to the hill-tops--but
hear what Koheleth says: "The wind goeth toward the south, and *turneth
about* unto the north; it *whirleth about* continually, and the wind
returneth again according to his circuits." <span
id="fr_595"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_594.md)

"All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not full: unto the
place from whence the rivers come, *thither they return again.*" <span
id="fr_596"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_595.md)

The philosophy of the distribution of heat and moisture by means of
ascending and descending currents between the equator and the poles, has
a very recent origin; but here has the hint been lying unnoticed in our
most familiar book, for nearly three thousand years. And even now, in
quoting it, we are obliged to recall the fact that Solomon was a
kabalist, and in the above texts, simply repeats what was written
thousands of years before his time.

Cut off as they are from the accumulation of facts in one-half of the
universe, and that the most important, modern scholars are naturally
unable to construct a system of philosophy which will satisfy
themselves, let alone others. They are like men in a coal mine, who work
all day and emerge only at night, being thereby unable to appreciate or
understand the beauty and glory of the sunshine. Life to them measures
the term of human activity, and the future presents to their
intellectual perception

###### <span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

only an abyss of darkness. No hope of an eternity of research,
achievement, and consequent pleasure, softens the asperities of present
existence; and no reward is offered for exertion but the bread-earning
of to-day, and the shadowy and profitless fancy that their names may not
be forgotten for some years after the grave has closed over their
remains. Death to them means extinction of the flame of life, and the
dispersion of the fragments of the lamp over boundless space. Said
Berzelius, the great chemist, at his last hour, as he burst into tears:
"Do not wonder that I weep. You will not believe me a weak man, nor
think I am alarmed by what the doctor has to announce to me. I am
prepared for all. But I have *to bid farewell to science;* and you ought
not to wonder that it costs me dear." <span
id="fr_597"></span>[\*](#fn_596.md)

How bitter must be the reflections of such a great student of nature as
this, to find himself forcibly interrupted midway toward the
accomplishment of some great study, the construction of some great
system, the discovery of some mystery which had baffled mankind for
ages, but which the dying philosopher had dared hope that he might
solve! Look at the world of science to-day, and see the atomic
theorists, patching the tattered robes which expose the imperfections of
their separate specialties! See them mending the pedestals upon which to
set up again the idols which had fallen from the places where they had
been worshipped before this revolutionary theory had been exhumed from
the tomb of Demokritus by John Dalton! In the ocean of material science
they cast their nets, only to have the meshes broken when some
unexpected and monstrous problem comes their way. Its water is like the
Dead Sea--bitter to the taste; so dense, that they can scarcely immerse
themselves in it, much less dive to its bottom, having no outlet, and no
life beneath its waves, or along its margin. It is a dark, forbidding,
trackless waste; yielding nothing worth the having, because what it
yields is without life and without soul.

There was a period of time when the learned Academics made themselves
particularly merry at the simple enunciation of some marvels which the
ancients gave as having occurred under their own observations. What poor
dolts--perhaps liars, these appeared in the eyes of an enlightened
century! Did not they actually describe horses and other animals, the
feet of which presented some resemblance to the hands and feet of men?
And in A.D. 1876, we hear Mr. Huxley giving learned lectures in which
the *protohippus,* rejoicing in a quasi-human fore-arm, and the
*orohippus* with his four toes and Eocene origin, and the hypothetical
*pedactyl equus,* maternal grand-uncle of the present horse, play

###### <span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

the most important part. The marvel is corroborated! Materialistic
Pyrrhonists of the nineteenth century avenge the assertions of
superstitious Platonists; the antediluvian *gobe-mouches.* And before
Mr. Huxley, Geoffroi St. Hilaire has shown an instance of a horse which
positively had fingers separated by membranes. <span
id="fr_598"></span>[\*](#fn_597.md) When the ancients spoke of a pigmy race
in Africa, they were taxed with falsehood. And yet, pigmies like these
were seen and examined by a French scientist during his voyage in the
Tenda Maia, on the banks of the Rio Grande in 1840; <span
id="fr_599"></span>[\*\*](#fn_598.md) by Bayard Taylor at Cairo, in 1874;
and by M. Bond, of the Indian Trigonometrical Survey, who discovered a
wild dwarfish race, living in the hill-jungles of the western Galitz, to
the southwest of the Palini Hills, a race, though often heard of, no
trace of which had previously been found by the survey. "This is a new
pigmy race, resembling the African Obongos of du Chaillu, the Akkas of
Schweinfurth, and the Dokos of Dr. Krapf, in their size, appearance, and
habits." <span id="fr_600"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_599.md)

Herodotus was regarded as a lunatic for speaking of a people *who he was
told* slept during a night which lasted six months. If we explain the
word "slept" by an easy misunderstanding it will be more than easy to
account for the rest as an allusion to the night of the Polar
Regions. <span id="fr_601"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_600.md) Pliny has an
abundance of facts in his work, which until very recently, were rejected
as fables. Among others, he mentions a race of small animals, the
*males* of which *suckle their young ones.* This assertion afforded much
merriment among our *savants.* In his *Report of the Geological Survey
of the Territories,* for 1872, Mr. C. H. Merriam describes a rare and
wonderful species of rabbit *(Lepus Bairdi)* inhabiting the pine-regions
about the head-waters of the Wind and Yellowstone Rivers, in
Wyoming. <span id="fr_602"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_601.md) Mr. Merriam
secured five specimens of this animal, "which . . . are *the first
individuals of the species that have been brought before the scientific
world.* One very curious fact is that *all the males have teats, and
take part in suckling their young!* . . . Adult males had large teats
full of milk, and the hair around the nipple of one was wet, and stuck
to it, showing that, when taken, he had been engaged in nursing his
young." In the Carthaginian account of the early voyages of Hanno, <span
id="fr_603"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_602.md) was found a long description
of "savage people . . . whose bodies were hairy and whom the
interpreters called *gorillae*"; ανθροπον αγριον as the text reads,
clearly implying thereby that

###### <span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

these wild men were monkeys. Until our present century, the statement
was considered an idle story, and Dodwell rejected altogether the
authenticity of the manuscript and its contents. <span
id="fr_604"></span>[\*](#fn_603.md) The celebrated *Atlantis* is attributed
by the latest modern commentator and translator of Plato's works to one
of Plato's "noble lies." <span id="fr_605"></span>[\*\*](#fn_604.md) Even
the frank admission of the philosopher, in the *Timaeus*, that "*they
say,* that in their time . . . the inhabitants of this island (Poseidon)
preserved *a tradition* handed down by their ancestors concerning the
existence of the Atlantic island of a prodigious magnitude . . .
etc." <span id="fr_606"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_605.md) does not save the great
teacher from the imputation of falsehood, by the "infallible modern
school."

Among the great mass of peoples plunged deep in the superstitious
ignorance of the mediaeval ages, there were but a few students of the
Hermetic philosophy of old, who, profiting by what it had taught them,
were enabled to forecast discoveries which are the boast of our present
age; while at the same time the ancestors of our modern high-priests of
the temple of the Holy Molecule, were yet discovering the hoof-tracks of
Satan in the simplest natural phenomenon. Says Professor A. Wilder:
"Roger Bacon (thirteenth century), in his treatise on the *Admirable
Force of Art and Nature,* devotes the first part of his work to natural
facts. He gives us hints of gunpowder and predicts the use of steam as a
propelling power. The hydraulic press, the diving bell and kaleidoscope
are all described." <span id="fr_607"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_606.md)

The ancients speak of waters metamorphosed *into blood;* of blood-rain,
of snow-storms during which the earth was covered to the extent of many
miles with snow *of blood.* This fall of crimson particles has been
proved, like everything else, to be but a natural phenomenon. It has
occurred at different epochs, but the cause of it remains a puzzle until
the present day.

De Candolle, one of the most distinguished botanists of this century,
sought to prove in 1825, at the time when the waters of the lake of
Morat had apparently turned into a thick blood, that the phenomenon
could be easily accounted for. He attributed it to the development of
myriads of those half-vegetable, half-infusory animals which he terms
*Oscellatoria rubescens,* and which form the link between animal and
vegetable organisms. <span id="fr_608"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_607.md)
Elsewhere we give an account of the red snow

###### <span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

which Captain Ross observed in the Arctic regions. Many memoirs have
been written on the subject by the most eminent naturalists, but no two
of them agree in their hypotheses. Some call it "pollen powder of a
species of pine"; others, small insects; and Professor Agardt confesses
very frankly that he is at a loss to either account for the cause of
such phenomena, or to explain the nature of the red substance. <span
id="fr_609"></span>[\*](#fn_608.md)

The unanimous testimony of mankind is said to be an irrefutable proof of
truth; and about what was ever testimony more unanimous than that for
thousands of ages among civilized people as among the most barbarous,
there has existed a firm and unwavering belief in magic? The latter
implies a contravention of the laws of nature only in the minds of the
ignorant; and if such ignorance is to be deplored in the ancient
uneducated nations, why do not our civilized and *highly*-educated
classes of fervent Christians, deplore it also in themselves? The
mysteries of the Christian religion have been no more able to stand a
crucial test than biblical miracles. Magic alone, in the true sense of
the word, affords a clew to the wonders of Aaron's rod, and the feats of
the magi of Pharaoh, who opposed Moses; and it does that without either
impairing the general truthfulness of the authors of the *Exodus,* or
claiming more for the prophet of Israel than for others, or allowing the
possibility of a single instance in which a "miracle" can happen in
contravention of the laws of nature. Out of many "miracles," we may
select for our illustration that of the "river turned into blood." The
text says: "Take thy *rod* and stretch out thine hand (with the *rod* in
it) upon the waters, streams, etc. . . . that they may become blood."

We do not hesitate to say that we have seen the same thing repeatedly
done on a small scale, the experiment not having been applied to a river
in these cases. From the time of Van Helmont, who, in the seventeenth
century, despite the ridicule to which he exposed himself, was willing
to give the true directions for the so-called production of eels, frogs,
and infusoria of various kinds, down to the champions of spontaneous
generation of our own century, it has been known that such a quickening
of germs is possible without calling in the aid of miracle to contravene
natural law. The experiments of Pasteur and Spallanzani, and the
controversy of the panspermists with the heterogenists--disciples of
Buffon, among them Needham--have too long occupied public attention to
permit us to doubt that beings may be called into existence whenever
there is air and favorable conditions of moisture and temperature. The
records of the official meetings of the Academy of Sciences of
Paris <span id="fr_610"></span>[\*\*](#fn_609.md)

###### <span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

contain accounts of frequent appearances of such showers of blood-red
snow and water. These blood-spots were called *lepra vestuum,* and were
but these lichen-infusoria. They were first observed in 786 and 959, in
both of which years occurred great plagues. Whether these *zoocarps*
were plants or animals is undetermined to this day, and no naturalist
would risk stating as a certainty to what division of the organic
kingdom of nature they belong. No more can modern chemists deny that
such germs can be quickened, in a congenial element, in an incredibly
short space of time. Now, if chemistry has, on the one hand, found means
of depriving the air of its floating germs, and under opposite
conditions can develop, or allow these organisms to develop, why could
not the magicians of Egypt do so "with their *enchantments*"? It is far
easier to imagine that Moses, who, on the authority of Manetho, had been
an Egyptian priest, and had learned all the secrets of the land of
*Chemia,* produced "miracles" according to natural laws, than that God
Himself violated the established order of His universe. We repeat that
we have seen this sanguification of water produced by Eastern adepts. It
can be done in either of two ways: In one case the experimenter employed
a magnetic *rod* strongly electrified, which he passed over a quantity
of water in a metallic basin, following a prescribed process, which we
have no right to describe more fully at present; the water threw up in
about ten hours a sort of reddish froth, which after two hours more
became a kind of lichen, like the *lepraria kermasina* of Baron Wrangel.
It then changed into a blood-red jelly, which made of the water a
crimson liquid that, twenty-four hours later, swarmed with living
organisms. The second experiment consisted in thickly strowing the
surface of a sluggish brook, having a muddy bottom, with the powder of a
plant that had been dried in the sun and subsequently pulverized.
Although this powder was seemingly carried off by the stream, some of it
must have settled to the bottom, for on the following morning the water
thickened at the surface and appeared covered with what de Candolle
describes as *Oscellatoria rubescens,* of a crimson-red color, and which
he believes to be the connecting link between vegetable and animal life.

Taking the above into consideration, we do not see why the learned
alchemists and physicists--*physicists,* we say--of the Mosaic period
should not also have possessed the natural secret of developing in a few
hours myriads of a kind of these bacteria, whose spores are found in the
air, the water, and most vegetable and animal tissues. The *rod* plays
as important a part in the hands of Aaron and Moses as it did in all
so-called "magic mummeries" of kabalist-magicians in the middle ages,
that are now considered superstitious foolery and charlatanism. The rod
of Paracelsus (his kabalistic trident) and the famous wands of Albertus
Magnus,

###### <span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

Roger Bacon, and Henry Kunrath, are no more to be ridiculed than the
graduating-rod of our electro-magnetic physicians. Things which appeared
preposterous and impossible to the ignorant quacks and even learned
scientists of the last century, now begin to assume the shadowy outlines
of probability, and in many cases are accomplished facts. Nay, some
learned quacks and ignorant scientists even begin to admit this truth.

In a fragment preserved by Eusebius, Porphyry, in his *Letter to Anebo,*
appeals to Choeremon, the "hierogrammatist," to prove that the doctrine
of the magic arts, whose adepts "could terrify even the gods," was
really countenanced by Egyptian sages. <span
id="fr_611"></span>[\*](#fn_610.md) Now, bearing in mind the rule of
historical evidence propounded by Mr. Huxley, in his Nashville address,
two conclusions present themselves with irresistible force: First,
Porphyry, being in such unquestioned repute as a highly moral and
honorable man, not given to exaggeration in his statements, was
incapable of telling a lie about this matter, and *did not* lie; and
second, that being so learned in every department of human knowledge
about which he treats, <span id="fr_612"></span>[\*\*](#fn_611.md) it was
most unlikely that he should be imposed upon as regards the magic
"arts," and he was *not* imposed upon. Therefore, the doctrine of
chances supporting the theory of Professor Huxley, compels us to
believe, 1, That there was really such a thing as magic "arts"; and, 2,
That they were known and practiced by the Egyptian magicians and
priests, whom even Sir David Brewster concedes to have been men of
profound scientific attainments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_560"></span>[381:\*](iu010.htm#fr_561.md) Villecroze: "Le
Docteur H. d'Alger," 19 Mars, 1861. Pierrart: vol. iv., pp. 254-257.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[381:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_562.md) Bruce: "Travels to
Discover the Sources of the Nile," vol. x., pp. 402-447; Hasselquist:
"Voyage in the Levant," vol. i., pp. 92-100; Lempriere: "Voyage dans
l'Empire de Maroc, etc., en 1790," pp. 42-43.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[381:\*\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_563.md) Salverte: "La
Philosophie de la Magie. De l'Influence sur les Animaux," vol. i.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[382:\*](iu010.htm#fr_564.md) Thibaut de
Chanvallon: "Voyage a la Martinique."

<span id="fn_564"></span>[382:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_565.md) Salverte:
"Philosophy of Magic."

<span id="fn_565"></span>[383:\*](iu010.htm#fr_566.md) Forbes: "Oriental
Memoirs," vol. i., p. 44; vol ii., p. 387.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[383:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_567.md) Stedmann: "Voyage
in Surinam," vol. iii., pp. 64, 65.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[383:\*\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_568.md) See "Edinburgh
Review," vol. lxxx., p. 428, etc.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[384:\*](iu010.htm#fr_569.md) Elam: "A Physician's
Problems," p. 25.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[384:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_570.md) The "Immortality
of the Soul," by Henry More. Fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[386:\*](iu010.htm#fr_571.md) Dr. H. More:
"Immortality of the Soul," p. 393.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[390:\*](iu010.htm#fr_572.md) "Transactions of the
Medical Society of N. Y.," 1865-6-7.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[392:\*](iu010.htm#fr_573.md) "Dublin Quarterly
Journal of Medical Science," vol. xv., p. 263, 1853.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[392:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_574.md) "Recherches
d'Anatomie transcendante et Pathologique, etc.," Paris, 1832.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[393:\*](iu010.htm#fr_575.md) "Silliman's Journal
of Science and Art," vol. x., p. 48.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[394:\*](iu010.htm#fr_576.md) "Precis Elementaire
de Physiologie," p. 520.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[395:\*](iu010.htm#fr_577.md) Ibid., p. 521.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[395:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_578.md) "Dogme et Rituel
de la Haute Magie," p. 175.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[396:\*](iu010.htm#fr_579.md) "Transactions of
Medical Society, etc.," p. 246.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[397:\*](iu010.htm#fr_580.md) Fournie:
"Physiologie du Systeme Nerveux, Cerebro-spinal," Paris, 1872.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[397:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_581.md) Ibid.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[398:\*](iu010.htm#fr_582.md) "Night-Side of
Nature," by Catherine Crowe, p. 434, *et seq*.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[400:\*](iu010.htm#fr_583.md) Henry More:
"Immortality of the Soul," p. 399.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[401:\*](iu010.htm#fr_584.md) By the word *soul,*
neither Demokritus nor the other philosophers understood the *nous* or
*pneuma*, the divine *immaterial* soul, but the *psyche,* or astral
body; that which Plato always terms the second *mortal* soul.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[401:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_585.md) Balfour Stewart,
**LL.D**., **F.R.S**.: "The Conservation of Energy," p. 133.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[402:\*](iu010.htm#fr_586.md) Fournie:
"Physiologie du Systeme Nerveux," p. 16.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[402:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_587.md) "A System of
Logic." Eighth ed., 1872, vol. ii., p. 165.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[404:\*](iu010.htm#fr_588.md) Draper: "Conflict
between Religion and Science," p. 22.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[405:\*](iu010.htm#fr_589.md) Edward L. Youmans,
**M.D**.: "A Class-book of Chemistry," p. 4.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[406:\*](iu010.htm#fr_590.md) Sprengel, in his
"History of Medicine," makes Van Helmont appear as if disgusted with the
charlatanry and ignorant presumption of Paracelsus. "The works of this
latter," says Sprengel, "which he (Van Helmont) had attentively read,
aroused in him the spirit of reformation; but they alone did not suffice
for him, because his erudition and judgment were infinitely superior to
those of that author, and he *despised* this *mad egoist,* this ignorant
and ridiculous vagabond, who often seemed to have fallen into insanity."
This assertion is perfectly false. We have the writings of Helmont <span
id="page_407">p. 407</span> himself to refute it. In the well-known
dispute between two writers, Goclenius, a professor in Marburg, who
supported the great efficacy of the sympathetic salve discovered by
Paracelsus, for the cure of every wound, and Father Robert, a Jesuit,
who condemned all these cures, as he attributed them to the Devil, Van
Helmont undertook to settle the dispute. The reason he gave for
interfering was that all such disputes "affected Paracelsus as their
discoverer and *himself as his disciple*" (see "De Magnetica Vulner.,"
and l. c., p. 705).

<span id="fn_590"></span>[408:\*](iu010.htm#fr_591.md) Demokritus said
that, as from nothing, nothing could be produced, so there was not
anything that could ever be reduced *to nothing*.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[408:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_592.md) J. Le Conte:
"Correlation of Vital with Chemical and Physical Forces," appendix.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[410:\*](iu010.htm#fr_593.md) The date is
incorrect; it should be 1784.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[410:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_594.md) Ecclesiastes i.
10.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[410:\*\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_595.md) Ibid., i. 6.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[410:\*\*\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_596.md) Ibid., i. 7.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[411:\*](iu010.htm#fr_597.md) Siljestrom:
"Minnesfest ofver Berzelius," p. 79.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[412:\*](iu010.htm#fr_598.md) "Seance de
l'Academie de Paris," 13 Aout, 1807.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[412:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_599.md) Mollien: "Voyage
dans l'interieur de l'Afrique," tome ii., p. 210.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[412:\*\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_600.md) "The Popular
Science Monthly," May, 1876, p. 110.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[412:\*\*\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_601.md) Malte-Brun,
pp. 372, 373; Herodotus.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[412:\*\*\*\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_602.md) "The Popular
Science Monthly," Dec., 1874, p. 252, New York.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[412:\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_603.md) The
"Periplus of Hanno."

<span id="fn_603"></span>[413:\*](iu010.htm#fr_604.md) The original was
suspended in the temple of Saturn, at Carthage. Falconer gave two
dissertations on it, and agrees with Bougainville in referring it to the
sixth century before the Christian era. See Cory's "Ancient Fragments."

<span id="fn_604"></span>[413:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_605.md) Professor Jowett.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[413:\*\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_606.md) "On the Atlantic
Island (from Marcellus) Ethiopic History."

<span id="fn_606"></span>[413:\*\*\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_607.md) "Alchemy, or
the Hermetic Philosophy."

<span id="fn_607"></span>[413:\*\*\*\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_608.md) See "Revue
Encyclopedique," vol. xxxiii., p. 676.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[414:\*](iu010.htm#fr_609.md) "Bulletin de la Soc.
Geograph.," vol. vi., pp. 209-220.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[414:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_610.md) See "Revue
Encyclopedique," vols. xxxiii. and xxxiv., pp. 676-395.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[416:\*](iu010.htm#fr_611.md) Porphyry: "Epistola
ad Anebo., ap. Euseb. Praep. Evangel," v. 10; Iamblichus: "De Mysteriis
Ægypt."; Porphyrii: "Epistola ad Anebonem Ægyptium."

<span id="fn_611"></span>[416:\*\*](iu010.htm#fr_612.md) "Porphyry," says
the "Classical Dictionary" of Lempriere, "was a man of universal
information, and, according to the testimony of the ancients, he
excelled his contemporaries in the knowledge of history, mathematics,
music, and *philosophy*."

<span id="DDE_LINK2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](iu011.md)
