[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Theosophy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iu110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="page_587">p. 587</span>

### CHAPTER XII.

> "My vast and noble capital, my Daitu, my splendidly-adorned;  
> And thou, my cool and delicious summer-seat, my Shangtu-Keibung.  
> . . . . . . . . . . .  
> Alas, for my illustrious name as the Sovereign of the World!  
> Alas, for my Daitu, seat of sanctity, glorious work of the immortal
> Kublai!  
> All, all is rent from me!"--**C**OL. **Y**ULE, in
>
> Marco Polo.

> "As for what thou hearest others say, who persuade the many that the
> soul, when once freed from the body, neither suffers . . . evil nor is
> conscious, I know that thou art better grounded in the doctrines
> received by us from our ancestors, and in the sacred orgies of
> Dionysus, than to believe them; *for the mystic symbols are well*
> *known to us who belong to the* '*Brotherhood.*' "*--***P**LUTARCH.

> "The problem of life is *man*. **M**AGIC, or rather Wisdom, is the
> evolved knowledge of the potencies of man's interior being; which
> forces are Divine emanations, as intuition is the perception of their
> origin, and initiation our induction into that knowledge. . . . We
> begin with instinct; the end is OMNISCIENCE."--**A**. **W**ILDER.

> "Power belongs to him WHO KNOWS."--
>
> Brahmanical Book of Evocation.

IT would argue small discernment on our part were we to suppose that we
had been followed thus far through this work by any but metaphysicians,
or mystics of some sort. Were it otherwise, we should certainly advise
such to spare themselves the trouble of reading this chapter; for,
although nothing is said that is not strictly true, they would not fail
to regard the least wonderful of the narratives as absolutely false,
however substantiated.

To comprehend the principles of natural law involved in the several
phenomena hereinafter described, the reader must keep in mind the
fundamental propositions of the Oriental philosophy which we have
successively elucidated. Let us recapitulate very briefly:

1st. There is no miracle. Everything that happens is the result of
law--eternal, immutable, ever active. Apparent miracle is but the
operation of forces antagonistic to what Dr. W. B. Carpenter, F. R.
S.--a man of great learning but little knowledge--calls "the
well-ascertained laws of nature." Like many of his class, Dr. Carpenter
ignores the fact that there may be laws once "known," now unknown to
science.

2d. Nature is triune: there is a visible, objective nature; an
invisible, indwelling, energizing nature, the exact model of the other,
and its vital principle; and, above these two, *spirit,* source of all
forces, alone eternal,

###### <span id="page_588">p. 588</span>

and indestructible. The lower two constantly change; the higher third
does not.

3d. Man is also triune: he has his objective, physical body; his
vitalizing astral body (or soul), the real man; and these two are
brooded over and illuminated by the third--the sovereign, the immortal
spirit. When the real man succeeds in merging himself with the latter,
he becomes an immortal entity.

4th. Magic, as a science, is the knowledge of these principles, and of
the way by which the omniscience and omnipotence of the spirit and its
control over nature's forces may be acquired by the individual while
still in the body. Magic, as an art, is the application of this
knowledge in practice.

5th. Arcane knowledge misapplied, is sorcery; beneficently used, true
magic or WISDOM.

6th. Mediumship is the opposite of adeptship; the medium is the passive
instrument of foreign influences, the adept actively controls himself
and all inferior potencies.

7th. All things that ever were, that are, or that will be, having their
record upon the astral light, or tablet of the unseen universe, the
initiated adept, by using the vision of his own spirit, can know all
that has been known or can be known.

8th. Races of men differ in spiritual gifts as in color, stature, or any
other external quality; among some peoples seership naturally prevails,
among others mediumship. Some are addicted to sorcery, and transmit its
secret rules of practice from generation to generation, with a range of
psychical phenomena, more or less wide, as the result.

9th. One phase of magical skill is the voluntary and conscious
withdrawal of the inner man (astral form) from the outer man (physical
body). In the cases of some mediums withdrawal occurs, but it is
unconscious and involuntary. With the latter the body is more or less
cataleptic at such times; but with the adept the absence of the astral
form would not be noticed, for the physical senses are alert, and the
individual appears only as though in a fit of abstraction--"a brown
study," as some call it.

To the movements of the wandering astral form neither time nor space
offer obstacles. The thaumaturgist, thoroughly skilled in occult
science, can cause himself (that is, his physical body) to *seem* to
disappear, or to apparently take on any shape that he may choose. He may
make his astral form visible, or he may give it protean appearances. In
both cases these results will be achieved by a mesmeric hallucination of
the senses of all witnesses, simultaneously brought on. This
hallucination is so perfect that the subject of it would stake his life
that he saw a

###### <span id="page_589">p. 589</span>

reality, when it is but a picture in his own mind, impressed upon his
consciousness by the irresistible will of the mesmerizer.

But, while the astral form can go anywhere, penetrate any obstacle, and
be seen at any distance from the physical body, the latter is dependent
upon ordinary methods of transportation. It may be levitated under
prescribed magnetic conditions, but not pass from one locality to
another except in the usual way. Hence we discredit all stories of the
aerial flight of mediums in body, for such would be miracle, and miracle
we repudiate. Inert matter may be, in certain cases and under certain
conditions, disintegrated, passed through walls, and recombined, but
living animal organisms cannot.

Swedenborgians believe and arcane science teaches that the abandonment
of the living body by the soul frequently occurs, and that we encounter
every day, in every condition of life, such living corpses. Various
causes, among them overpowering fright, grief, despair, a violent attack
of sickness, or excessive sensuality may bring this about. The vacant
carcass may be entered and inhabited by the astral form of an adept
sorcerer, or an elementary (an earth-bound disembodied human soul), or,
very rarely, an elemental. Of course, an adept of white magic has the
same power, but unless some very exceptional and great object is to be
accomplished, he will never consent to pollute himself by occupying the
body of an impure person. In insanity, the patient's astral being is
either semi-paralyzed, bewildered, and subject to the influence of every
passing spirit of any sort, or it has departed forever, and the body is
taken possession of by some vampirish entity near its own
disintegration, and clinging desperately to earth, whose sensual
pleasures it may enjoy for a brief season longer by this expedient.

10th. The corner-stone of MAGIC is an intimate practical knowledge of
magnetism and electricity, their qualities, correlations, and potencies.
Especially necessary is a familiarity with their effects in and upon the
animal kingdom and man. There are occult properties in many other
minerals, equally strange with that in the lodestone, which all
practitioners of magic *must* know, and of which so-called exact science
is wholly ignorant. Plants also have like mystical properties in a most
wonderful degree, and the secrets of the herbs of dreams and
enchantments are only lost to European science, and useless to say, too,
are unknown to it, except in a few marked instances, such as opium and
hashish. Yet, the psychical effects of even these few upon the human
system are regarded as evidences of a temporary mental disorder. The
women of Thessaly and Epirus, the female hierophants of the rites of
Sabazius, did not carry their secrets away with the downfall of their
sanctuaries.

###### <span id="page_590">p. 590</span>

They are still preserved, and those who are aware of the nature of Soma,
know the properties of other plants as well.

To sum up all in a few words, MAGIC is spiritual WISDOM; nature, the
material ally, pupil and servant of the magician. One common vital
principle pervades all things, and this is controllable by the perfected
human will. The adept can stimulate the movements of the natural forces
in plants and animals in a preternatural degree. Such experiments are
not obstructions of nature, but quickenings; the conditions of intenser
vital action are given.

The adept can control the sensations and alter the conditions of the
physical and astral bodies of other persons not adepts; he can also
govern and employ, as he chooses, the spirits of the elements. He cannot
control the immortal spirit of any human being, living or dead, for all
such spirits are alike sparks of the Divine Essence, and not subject to
any foreign domination.

There are two kinds of seership--that of the soul and that of the
spirit. The seership of the ancient Pythoness, or of the modern
mesmerized subject, vary but in the artificial modes adopted to induce
the state of clairvoyance. But, as the visions of both depend upon the
greater or less acuteness of the senses of the astral body, they differ
very widely from the perfect, omniscient spiritual state; for, at best,
the subject can get but glimpses of truth, through the veil which
physical nature interposes. The astral principle, or mind, called by the
Hindu Yogin *fav-atma,* is the sentient soul, inseparable from our
physical brain, which it holds in subjection, and is in its turn equally
trammelled by it. This is the *ego,* the intellectual life-principle of
man, his conscious entity. While it is yet *within* the material body,
the clearness and correctness of its spiritual visions depend on its
more or less intimate relation with its higher Principle. When this
relation is such as to allow the most ethereal portions of the
soul-essence to act independently of its grosser particles and of the
brain, it can unerringly comprehend what it sees; then only is it the
pure, rational, *super*sentient soul. That state is known in India as
the *Samaddi*; it is the highest condition of spirituality possible to
man on earth. Fakirs try to obtain such a condition by holding their
breath for hours together during their religious exercises, and call
this practice *dam-sadhna.* The Hindu terms *Pranayama, Pratyahara,* and
*Dharana,* all relate to different psychological states, and show how
much more the Sanscrit, and even the modern Hindu language are adapted
to the clear elucidation of the phenomena that are encountered by those
who study this branch of psychological science, than the tongues of
modern peoples, whose experiences have not yet necessitated the
invention of such descriptive terms.

###### <span id="page_591">p. 591</span>

When the body is in the state of *dharana--*a total catalepsy of the
physical frame--the soul of the clairvoyant may liberate itself, and
perceive things subjectively. And yet, as the sentient principle of the
brain is alive and active, these pictures of the past, present, and
future will be tinctured with the terrestrial perceptions of the
objective world; the physical *memory* and *fancy* will be in the way of
clear vision. But the seer-adept knows how to suspend the mechanical
action of the brain. His visions will be as clear as truth itself,
uncolored and undistorted, whereas, the clairvoyant, unable to control
the vibrations of the astral waves, will perceive but more or less
broken images through the medium of the brain. The seer can never take
flickering shadows for realities, for his memory being as completely
subjected to his will as the rest of the body, he receives impressions
directly from his spirit. Between his subjective and objective selves
there are no obstructive mediums. This is the real spiritual seership,
in which, according to an expression of Plato, soul is raised above all
inferior good. When we reach "that which is supreme, which is *simple,
pure, and unchangeable, without form, color, or human qualities:* the
God--*our Nous.*"

This is the state which such seers as Plotinus and Apollonius termed the
"Union to the Deity"; which the ancient Yogins called *Isvara*, <span
id="fr_1129"></span>[\*](#fn_1128) and the modern call "Samaddi"; but
this state is as far above modern clairvoyance as the stars above
glow-worms. Plotinus, as is well known, was a clairvoyant-seer during
his whole and daily life; and yet, *he had been united to his God* but
six times during the sixty-six years of his existence, as he himself
confessed to Porphyry.

Ammonius Sakkas, the "God-taught," asserts that the only power which is
directly opposed to soothsaying and looking into futurity is *memory*;
and Olympiodorus calls it *phantasy.* "The phantasy," he says (in
*Platonis Phaed.*)*,* "is an impediment to our intellectual conceptions;
and hence, when we are agitated by the inspiring influence of the
Divinity, if the phantasy intervenes, the enthusiastic energy ceases;
for enthusiasm and the ecstasy are contrary to each other. Should it be
asked whether the soul is able to energize without the phantasy, we
reply, that its perception of universals proves that it is able. It has
perceptions,

###### <span id="page_592">p. 592</span>

therefore, independent of the phantasy; at the same time, however, the
phantasy attends it in its energies, just as a storm pursues him who
sails on the sea."

A medium, moreover, needs either a foreign intelligence--whether it be
spirit or living mesmerizer--to overpower his physical and mental parts,
or some factitious means to induce trance. An adept, and even a simple
fakir requires but a few minutes of "self-contemplation." The brazen
columns of Solomon's temple; the golden bells and pomegranates of Aaron;
the Jupiter Capitolinus of Augustus, hung around with harmonious
bells; <span id="fr_1130"></span>[\*](#fn_1129) and the brazen bowls of
the Mysteries when the Kora was called, <span
id="fr_1131"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1130) were all intended for such
artificial helps. <span id="fr_1132"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_1131) So were
the brazen bowls of Solomon hung round with a double row of 200
pomegranates, which served as clappers within the hollow columns. The
priestesses of Northern Germany, under the guidance of hierophants,
could never prophesy but amidst the roar of the tumultuous waters.
Regarding fixedly the eddies formed on the rapid course of the river
they *hypnotized* themselves. So we read of Joseph, Jacob's son, who
sought for divine inspiration with his silver divining-cup, which must
have had a very bright bottom to it. The priestesses of Dodona placed
themselves under the ancient oak of Zeus (the Pelasgian, not the
Olympian god), and listened intently to the rustling of the sacred
leaves, while others concentrated their attention on the soft murmur of
the cold spring gushing from underneath its roots. <span
id="fr_1133"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_1132) But the adept has no need of
any such extraneous aids--the simple exertion of his *will*-power is
all-sufficient.

The *Atharva-Veda* teaches that the exercise of such will-power is the
highest form of prayer and its instantaneous response. To desire is to
realize in proportion to the intensity of the aspiration; and that, in
its turn, is measured by inward purity.

Some of these nobler Vedantic precepts on the soul and man's mystic
powers, have recently been contributed to an English periodical by a
Hindu scholar. "The *Sankhya,*" he writes, "inculcates that the soul
(*i. e*., astral body) has the following powers: shrinking into a minute
bulk to which everything is pervious; enlarging to a gigantic body;
assuming levity (rising along a sunbeam to the solar orb); possessing an
unlimited reach of organs, as touching the moon with the tip of a
finger; irresistible will (for instance, sinking into the earth as
easily as in water); dominion over all things, animate or inanimate;
faculty of changing the course of nature; ability to accomplish every
desire." Further, he gives their various appellations:

###### <span id="page_593">p. 593</span>

"The powers are called: 1, *Anima*; 2, *Mahima*; 3, *Laghima*; 4,
*Garima*; 5, *Prapti*; 6, *Prakamya*; 7, *Vasitwa*; 8, *Isitwa,* or
divine power. The fifth, predicting future events, understanding unknown
languages, curing diseases, divining unexpressed thoughts, understanding
the language of the heart. The sixth is the power of converting old age
into youth. The seventh is the power of mesmerizing human beings and
beasts, and making them obedient; it is the power of restraining
passions and emotions. The eighth power is the spiritual state, and
presupposes the absence of the above seven powers, as in this state the
Yogi is full of God."

"No writings," he adds, "revealed or sacred, were allowed to be so
authoritative and final *as the teaching of the soul.* Some of the
Rishis appear to have laid the greatest stress on this supersensuous
source of knowledge." <span id="fr_1134"></span>[\*](#fn_1133)

From the remotest antiquity *mankind* as a whole *have always been
convinced of the existence of a personal spiritual entity within the
personal physical man.* This inner entity was more or less divine,
according to its proximity to the *crown--*Chrestos. The closer the
union the more serene man's destiny, the less dangerous the external
conditions. This belief is neither bigotry nor superstition, only an
ever-present, instinctive feeling of the proximity of another spiritual
and invisible world, which, though it be subjective to the senses of the
outward man, is perfectly objective to the inner ego. Furthermore, they
believed that *there are external and internal conditions which affect
the determination of our will upon our actions.* They rejected fatalism,
for fatalism implies a blind course of some still blinder power. But
they believed in *destiny,* which from birth to death every man is
weaving thread by thread around himself, as a spider does his cobweb;
and this destiny is guided either by that presence termed by some the
guardian angel, or our more intimate astral inner man, who is but too
often the evil genius of the man of flesh. Both these lead on the
outward man, but one of them must prevail; and from the very beginning
of the invisible affray the stern and implacable *law of compensation*
steps in and takes its course, following faithfully the fluctuations.
When the last strand is woven, and man is seemingly enwrapped in the
net-work of his own doing, then he finds himself completely under the
empire of this *self-made* destiny. It then either fixes him like the
inert shell against the immovable rock, or like a feather carries him
away in a whirlwind raised by his own actions.

The greatest philosophers of antiquity found it neither unreasonable

###### <span id="page_594">p. 594</span>

nor strange that "souls should come to souls, and impart to them
conceptions of future things, occasionally by letters, or by a mere
touch, or by a glance reveal to them past events or announce future
ones," as Ammonius tells us. Moreover, Lamprias and others held that if
the *unembodied* spirits or souls could descend on earth and become
guardians of mortal men, "we should not seek to deprive *those souls
which are still in the body* of that power by which the former know
future events and are able to announce them. It is not probable," adds
Lamprias, "that the soul gains a new power of prophecy after separation
from the body, and which before it did not possess. We may rather
conclude *that it possessed all these powers during its union with the
body, although in a lesser perfection*. . . . For as the sun does not
shine only when it passes from among the clouds, but has always been
radiant and has only appeared dim and obscured by vapors, the soul does
not only receive the power of looking into futurity when it passes from
the body as from a cloud, but *has possessed it always,* though dimmed
by connection with the earthly."

A familiar example of one phase of the power of the soul or astral body
to manifest itself, is the phenomenon of the so-called spirit-hand. In
the presence of certain mediums these seemingly detached members will
gradually develop from a luminous nebula, pick up a pencil, write
messages, and then dissolve before the eyes of the witnesses. Many such
cases are recorded by perfectly competent and trustworthy persons. These
phenomena are real, and require serious consideration. But false
"phantom-hands" have sometimes been taken for the genuine. At Dresden we
once saw a hand and arm, made for the purpose of deception, with an
ingenious arrangement of springs that would cause the machine to imitate
to perfection the movements of the natural member; while exteriorly it
would require close inspection to detect its artificial character. In
using this, the dishonest medium slips his natural arm out of his
sleeve, and replaces it with the mechanical substitute; both hands may
then be made to seem resting upon the table, while in fact one is
touching the sitters, showing itself, knocking the furniture, and making
other phenomena.

The mediums for real manifestations are least able, as a rule, to
comprehend or explain them. Among those who have written most
intelligently upon the subject of these luminous hands, may be reckoned
Dr. Francis Gerry Fairfield, author of *Ten Years among the Mediums,* an
article from whose pen appears in the *Library Table* for July 19, 1877.
A medium himself, he is yet a strong opponent of the spiritualistic
theory. Discussing the subject of the "phantom-hand," he testifies that
"this the writer has personally witnessed, under conditions of test
provided by himself, in his own room, in full daylight, with the medium
seated upon a

###### <span id="page_595">p. 595</span>

sofa from six to eight feet from the table hovering upon which the
apparition (the hand) appeared. The application of the poles of a
horse-shoe magnet to the hand caused it to waver perceptibly, and threw
the medium into violent convulsions--pretty positive evidence that *the
force concerned in the phenomenon was generated in his own nervous
system.*"

Dr. Fairfield's deduction that the fluttering phantom-hand is an
emanation from the medium is logical, and it is correct. The test of the
horse-shoe magnet proves in a scientific way what every kabalist would
affirm upon the authority of experience, no less than philosophy. The
"force concerned in the phenomenon" is the will of the medium, exercised
unconsciously to the outer man, which for the time is semi-paralyzed and
cataleptic; the phantom-hand an extrusion of the man's inner or astral
member. This is that real self whose limbs the surgeon cannot amputate,
but remain behind after the outer casing is cut off, and (all theories
of exposed or compressed nerve termini to the contrary, notwithstanding)
have all the sensations the physical parts formerly experienced. This is
that spiritual (astral) body which "is raised in incorruption." It is
useless to argue that these are *spirit*-hands; for, admitting even that
at every seance human spirits of many kinds are attracted to the medium,
and that they do guide and produce some manifestations, yet to make
hands or faces objective they are compelled to use either the astral
limbs of the medium, or the materials furnished them by the elementals,
or yet the combined aural emanations of all persons present. *Pure*
spirits will not and *cannot* show themselves objectively; those that do
are not pure spirits, but elementary and impure. Woe to the medium who
falls a prey to such!

The same principle involved in the unconscious extrusion of a phantom
limb by the cataleptic medium, applies to the projection of his entire
"double" or astral body. This may be withdrawn by the will of the
medium's own inner self, without his retaining in his physical brain any
recollection of such an intent--that is one phase of man's dual
capacity. It may also be effected by elementary and elemental spirits,
to whom he may stand in the relation of mesmeric subject. Dr. Fairfield
is right in one position taken in his book, viz.: mediums are usually
diseased, and in many if not most cases the children or near connections
of mediums. But he is wholly wrong in attributing all psychical
phenomena to morbid physiological conditions. The adepts of Eastern
magic are uniformly in perfect mental and bodily health, and in fact the
voluntary and independent production of phenomena is impossible to any
others. We have known many, and never a sick man among them. The adept
retains perfect consciousness; shows no change of bodily temperature, or
other sign of morbidity; requires no "conditions," but will do his feats
anywhere

###### <span id="page_596">p. 596</span>

and everywhere; and instead of being passive and in subjection to a
foreign influence, rules the forces with iron will. But we have
elsewhere shown that the medium and the adept are as opposed as the
poles. We will only add here that the body, soul, and spirit of the
adept are all conscious and working in harmony, and the body of the
medium is an inert clod, and even his soul may be away in a dream while
its habitation is occupied by another.

An adept can not only project and make visible a hand, a foot, or any
other portion of his body, but the whole of it. We have seen one do
this, in full day, while his hands and feet were being held by a
skeptical friend whom he wished to surprise. <span
id="fr_1135"></span>[\*](#fn_1134) Little by little the whole astral
body oozed out like a vapory cloud, until before us stood two forms, of
which the second was an exact duplicate of the first, only slightly more
shadowy.

The medium need not exercise any *will-power.* It suffices that she or
he shall know what is expected by the investigators. The medium's
"spiritual" entity, when not obsessed by other spirits, will act outside
the will or consciousness of the physical being, as surely as it acts
when within the body during a fit of somnambulism. Its perceptions,
external and internal, will be acuter and far more developed, precisely
as they are in the sleep-walker. And this is why "the materialized form
sometimes knows more than the medium," <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1135) for the intellectual perception of
the astral entity is proportionately as much higher than the corporeal
intelligence of the medium in its normal state, as the spirit entity is
finer than itself. Generally the medium will be found cold, the pulse
will have visibly changed, and a state of nervous prostration succeeds
the phenomena, bunglingly and without discrimination attributed to
disembodied spirits; whereas, but one-third of them may be produced by
the latter, another third by elementals, and the rest by the astral
double of the medium himself.

###### <span id="page_597">p. 597</span>

But, while it is our firm belief that most of the physical
manifestations, *i.e*., those which neither need nor show intelligence
nor great discrimination, are produced mechanically by the *scin-lecca*
(double) of the medium, as a person in sound sleep will when apparently
awake do things of which he will retain no remembrance. The purely
subjective phenomena are but in a very small proportion of cases due to
the action of the personal astral body. They are mostly, and according
to the moral, intellectual, and physical purity of the medium, the work
of either the elementary, or sometimes very pure human spirits.
Elementals have naught to do with subjective manifestations. In rare
cases it is the *divine* spirit of the medium himself that guides and
produces them.

As Baboo Peary Chand Mittra says, in a letter <span
id="fr_1137"></span>[\*](#fn_1136) to the President of the National
Association of Spiritualists, Mr. Alexander Calder, <span
id="fr_1138"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1137) "a spirit is an essence or power,
and has no form. . . . The very idea of form implies 'materialism.' The
spirits \[astral souls, we should say\] . . . can assume forms for a
time, but form is not their permanent state. The more material is our
soul, the more material is our conception of spirits."

Epimenides, the Orphikos, was renowned for his "sacred and marvellous
nature," and for the faculty his soul possessed of quitting its body "
*as long and as often as it pleased.*" The ancient philosophers who have
testified to this ability may be reckoned by dozens. Apollonius left his
body at a moment's notice, but it must be remembered Apollonius was an
adept--a "magician." Had he been simply a medium, he could not have
performed such feats *at will*. Empedocles of Agrigentum, the
Pythagorean thaumaturgist, required no *conditions* to arrest a
waterspout which had broken over the city. Neither did he need any to
recall a woman to life, as he did. Apollonius used no *darkened* room in
which to perform his aethrobatic feats. Vanishing suddenly in the air
before the eyes of Domitian and a whole crowd of witnesses (many
thousands), he appeared an hour after in the grotto of Puteoli. But
investigation would have shown that his physical body having become
invisible by the concentration of akasa about it, he could walk off
unperceived to some secure retreat in the neighborhood, and an hour
after his astral form appear at Puteoli to his friends, and seem to be
the man himself.

No more did Simon Magus wait to be entranced to fly off in the air
before the apostles and crowds of witnesses. "It requires no conjuration
and ceremonies; circle-making and incensing are mere nonsense and
juggling," says Paracelsus. The human spirit "is so great a thing that
no man can express it; as God Himself is eternal and unchangeable, so
also

###### <span id="page_598">p. 598</span>

is the mind of man. If we rightly understood its powers, nothing would
be impossible to us on earth. The imagination is strengthened and
developed through *faith in our will.* Faith must confirm the
imagination, for faith establishes the will."

A singular account of the personal interview of an English ambassador in
1783, with a reincarnated Buddha--barely mentioned in volume i.--an
infant of eighteen months old at that time, is given in the *Asiatic
Journal* from the narrative of an eye-witness himself, Mr. Turner, the
author of *The Embassy to Thibet.* The cautious phraseology of a skeptic
dreading public ridicule ill conceals the amazement of the witness, who,
at the same time, desires to give facts as truthfully as possible. The
infant lama received the ambassador and his suite with a dignity and
decorum so natural and unconstrained that they remained in a perfect
maze of wonder. The behavior of this infant, says the author, was that
of an old philosopher, grave and sedate and exceedingly courteous. He
contrived to make the young pontiff understand the inconsolable grief
into which the Governor-General of Galagata (Calcutta) the City of
Palaces and the people of India were plunged when he died, and the
general rapture when they found that he had resurrected in a young and
fresh body again; at which compliment the young lama regarded him and
his suite with looks of singular complacency, and courteously treated
them to confectionery from a golden cup. "The ambassador continued to
express the Governor-General's hope that the lama might long continue to
illumine the world with his presence, and that the friendship which had
heretofore subsisted between them might be yet more strongly cemented,
for the benefit and advantage of the intelligent votaries of the lama .
. . all which made the little creature look steadfastly at the speaker,
and graciously bow and nod--and bow and nod--as *if he* understood and
approved of every word that was uttered." <span
id="fr_1139"></span>[\*](#fn_1138)

As *if* he understood! *If* the infant behaved in the most natural and
dignified way during the reception, and "when their cups were empty of
tea became uneasy and throwing back his head and contracting the skin of
his brow, continued making a noise till they were filled again," why
could he not understand as well what was said to him?

Years ago, a small party of travellers were painfully journeying from
Kashmir to Leh, a city of Ladahk (Central Thibet). Among our guides we
had a Tartar Shaman, a very mysterious personage, who spoke Russian a
little and English not at all, and yet who managed, nevertheless, to
converse with us, and proved of great service. Having learned that some
of our party were Russians, he had imagined that our protection

###### <span id="page_599">p. 599</span>

was all-powerful, and might enable him to safely find his way back to
his Siberian home, from which, for reasons unknown, some twenty years
before, he had fled, as he told us, via Kiachta and the great Gobi
Desert, to the land of the Tcha-gars. <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[\*](#fn_1139) With such an interested object in
view, we believed ourselves safe under his guard. To explain the
situation briefly: Our companions had formed the unwise plan of
penetrating into Thibet under various disguises, none of them speaking
the language, although one, a Mr. K----, had picked up some Kasan
Tartar, and thought he did. As we mention this only incidentally, we may
as well say at once that two of them, the brothers N----, were very
politely brought back to the frontier before they had walked sixteen
miles into the weird land of Eastern Bod; and Mr. K----, an ex-Lutheran
minister, could not even attempt to leave his miserable village near
Leh, as from the first days he found himself prostrated with fever, and
had to return to Lahore via Kashmere. But one sight seen by him was as
good as if he had witnessed the reincarnation of Buddha itself. Having
heard of this "miracle" from some old Russian missionary in whom he
thought he could have more faith than in Abbe Huc, it had been for years
his desire to expose the "great heathen" jugglery, as he expressed it.
K---- was a positivist, and rather prided himself on this
anti-philosophical neologism. But his positivism was doomed to receive a
death-blow.

About four days journey from Islamabad, at an insignificant mud village,
whose only redeeming feature was its magnificent lake, we stopped for a
few days' rest. Our companions had temporarily separated from us, and
the village was to be our place of meeting. It was there that we were
apprised by our Shaman that a large party of Lamaic "Saints," on
pilgrimage to various shrines, had taken up their abode in an old
cave-temple and established a temporary Vihara therein. He added that,
as the "Three Honorable Ones" <span id="fr_1141"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1140)
were said to travel along with them, the holy Bikshu (monks) were
capable of producing the greatest miracles. Mr. K-----, fired with the
prospect of exposing this humbug of the ages, proceeded at once to pay
them a visit, and from that moment the most friendly relations were
established between the two camps.

The Vihar was in a secluded and most romantic spot secured against all
intrusion. Despite the effusive attentions, presents, and protestations
of Mr. K----, the Chief, who was Pase-Budhu (an ascetic of great

###### <span id="page_600">p. 600</span>

sanctity), declined to exhibit the phenomenon of the "incarnation" until
a certain talisman in possession of the writer was exhibited. <span
id="fr_1142"></span>[\*](#fn_1141) Upon seeing this, however,
preparations were at once made, and an infant of three or four months
was procured from its mother, a poor woman of the neighborhood. An oath
was first of all exacted of Mr. K----, that he would not divulge what he
might see or hear, for the space of seven years. The talisman is a
simple agate or carnelian known among the Thibetans and others as
*A-yu*, and naturally possessed, or had been endowed with very
mysterious properties. It has a triangle engraved upon it, within which
are contained a few mystical words. <span
id="fr_1143"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1142)

Several days passed before everything was ready; nothing of a mysterious
character occurring, meanwhile, except that, at the bidding of a Bikshu,
ghastly faces were made to peep at us out of the glassy bosom of the
lake, as we sat at the door of the Vihar, upon its bank. One of these
was the countenance of Mr. K----'s sister, whom he had left well and
happy at home, but who, as we subsequently learned, had died some

###### <span id="page_601">p. 601</span>

time before he had set out on the present journey. The sight affected
him at first, but he called his skepticism to his aid, and quieted
himself with theories of cloud-shadows, reflections of tree-branches,
etc., such as people of his kind fall back upon.

On the appointed afternoon, the baby being brought to the Vihara, was
left in the vestibule or reception-room, as K---- could go no further
into the temporary sanctuary. The child was then placed on a bit of
carpet in the middle of the floor, and every one not belonging to the
party being sent away, two "mendicants" were placed at the entrance to
keep out intruders. Then all the lamas seated themselves on the floor,
with their backs against the granite walls, so that each was separated
from the child by a space, at least, of ten feet. The chief, having had
a square piece of leather spread for him by the *desservant,* seated
himself at the farthest corner. Alone, Mr. K---- placed himself close by
the infant, and watched every movement with intense interest. The only
condition exacted of us was that we should preserve a strict silence,
and patiently await further developments. A bright sunlight streamed
through the open door. Gradually the "Superior" fell into what seemed a
state of profound meditation, while the others, after a *sotto voce*
short invocation, became suddenly silent, and looked as if they had been
completely petrified. It was oppressively still, and the crowing of the
child was the only sound to be heard. After we had sat there a few
moments, the movements of the infant's limbs suddenly ceased, and his
body appeared to become rigid. K---- watched intently every motion, and
both of us, by a rapid glance, became satisfied that all present were
sitting motionless. The superior, with his gaze fixed upon the ground,
did not even look at the infant; but, pale and motionless, he seemed
rather like a bronze statue of a Talapoin in meditation than a living
being. Suddenly, to our great consternation, we saw the child, not raise
itself, but, as it were, violently jerked into a sitting posture! A few
more jerks, and then, like an automaton set in motion by concealed
wires, the four months' baby stood upon his feet! Fancy our
consternation, and, in Mr. K----'s case, horror. Not a hand had been
outstretched, not a motion made, nor a word spoken; and yet, here was a
baby-in-arms standing erect and firm as a man!

The rest of the story we will quote from a copy of notes written on this
subject by Mr. K----, the same evening, and given to us, in case it
should not reach its place of destination, or the writer fail to see
anything more.

"After a minute or two of hesitation," writes K----, "the baby turned
his head and looked at me with an expression of intelligence that was
simply awful! It sent a chill through me. I pinched my hands and

###### <span id="page_602">p. 602</span>

bit my lips till the blood almost came, to make sure that I did not
dream. But this was only the beginning. The miraculous creature, making,
*as I fancied,* two steps toward me, resumed his sitting posture, and,
without removing his eyes from mine, repeated, sentence by sentence, in
what I supposed to be Thibetan language, the very words, which I had
been told in advance, are commonly spoken at the incarnations of Buddha,
beginning with 'I am Buddha; I am the old Lama; I am his spirit in a new
body,' etc. I felt a real terror; my hair rose upon my head, and my
blood ran cold. For my life I could not have spoken a word. There was no
trickery here, no ventriloquism. The infant lips moved, and the eyes
seemed to search my very soul with an expression that *made me think it
was the face of the Superior himself,* his eyes, his very look that I
was gazing upon. It was *as if his spirit had entered the little body,
and was looking at me through the transparent mask of the baby's face.*
I felt my brain growing dizzy. The infant reached toward me, and laid
his little hand upon mine. I started as if I had been touched by a hot
coal; and, unable to bear the scene any longer, covered my face with my
hands. It was but for an instant; but when I removed them, the little
actor had become a crowing baby again, and a moment after, lying upon
his back, set up a fretful cry. The superior had resumed his normal
condition, and conversation ensued.

"It was only after a series of similar experiments, extending over ten
days, that I realized the fact that I had seen the incredible,
astounding phenomenon described by certain travellers, but always by me
denounced as an imposture. Among a multitude of questions unanswered,
despite my cross-examination, the Superior let drop one piece of
information, which must be regarded as highly significant. 'What would
have happened,' I inquired, through the shaman, 'if, while the infant
was speaking, in a moment of insane fright, at the thought of its being
the "Devil," I had killed it?' He replied that, if the blow had not been
instantly fatal, the child *alone* would have been killed.' 'But,' I
continued, 'suppose that it had been as swift as a lightning-flash?' 'In
such case,' was the answer, '*you would have killed me also.*' "

In Japan and Siam there are two orders of priests, of which one are
public, and deal with the people, the other strictly private. The latter
are never seen; their existence is known but to very few natives, never
to foreigners. Their powers are never displayed in public, nor ever at
all except on rare occasions of the utmost importance, at which times
the ceremonies are performed in subterranean or otherwise inaccessible
temples, and in the presence of a chosen few whose heads answer for
their secrecy. Among such occasions are deaths in the Royal family, or
those of high dignitaries affiliated with the Order. One of the most

###### <span id="page_603">p. 603</span>

weird and impressive exhibitions of the power of these magicians is that
of the withdrawal of the astral soul from the cremated remains of human
beings, a ceremony practiced likewise in some of the most important
lamaseries of Thibet and Mongolia.

In Siam, Japan, and Great Tartary, it is the custom to make medallions,
statuettes, and idols out of the ashes of cremated persons; <span
id="fr_1144"></span>[\*](#fn_1143) they are mixed with water into a
paste, and after being moulded into the desired shape, are baked and
then gilded. The Lamasery of Ou-Tay, in the province of Chan-Si,
Mongolia, is the most famous for that work, and rich persons send the
bones of their defunct relatives to be ground and fashioned there. When
the adept in magic proposes to facilitate the withdrawal of the astral
soul of the deceased, which otherwise they think might remain stupefied
for an indefinite period *within* the ashes, the following process is
resorted to: The sacred dust is placed in a heap, upon a metallic plate,
strongly magnetized, of the size of a man's body. The adept then slowly
and gently fans it with the *Talapat Nang, <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1144)* a fan of a peculiar shape and
inscribed with certain signs, muttering, at the same time, a form of
invocation. The ashes soon become, as it were, imbued with life, and
gently spread themselves out into a thin layer which assumes the outline
of the body before cremation. Then there gradually arises a sort of
whitish vapor which after a time forms into an erect column, and
compacting itself, is finally transformed into the "double," or
ethereal, astral counterpart of the dead, which in its turn dissolves
away into thin air, and disappears from mortal sight. <span
id="fr_1146"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_1145)

The "Magicians" of Kashmir, Thibet, Mongolia, and Great Tartary are too
well known to need comments. If *jugglers* they be, we invite the most
expert jugglers of Europe and America to match them if they can.

If our scientists are unable to imitate the mummy-embalming of the
Egyptians, how much greater would be their surprise to see, as we have,
dead bodies preserved by alchemical art, so that after the lapse of
centuries, they seem as though the individuals were but sleeping. The
complexions were as fresh, the skin as elastic, the eyes as natural and
sparkling as though they were in the full flush of health, and the
wheels of life had been stopped but the instant before. The bodies of
certain very eminent personages are laid upon catafalques, in rich
mausoleums,

###### <span id="page_604">p. 604</span>

sometimes overlaid with gilding or even with plates of real gold; their
favorite arms, trinkets, and articles of daily use gathered about them,
and a suite of attendants, blooming young boys and girls, but still
corpses, preserved like their masters, stand as if ready to serve when
called. In the convent of Great Kouren, and in one situated upon the
Holy Mountain (Bohte Oula) there are said to be several such sepulchres,
which have been respected by all the conquering hordes that have swept
through those countries. Abbe Huc heard that such exist, but did not see
one, strangers of all kinds being excluded, and missionaries and
European travellers not furnished with the requisite protection, being
the last of all persons who would be permitted to approach the sacred
places. Huc's statement that the tombs of Tartar sovereigns are
surrounded with children "who were compelled to swallow mercury until
they were suffocated," by which means "the color and freshness of the
victims is preserved so well that they appear alive," is one of these
idle missionary fables which impose only upon the most ignorant who
accept on hearsay. Buddhists have never immolated victims, whether human
or animal. It is utterly against the principles of their religion, and
no Lamaist was ever accused of it. When a rich man desired to be
interred in *company,* messengers were sent throughout the country with
the Lama-embalmers, and children just dead in the natural way were
selected for the purpose. Poor parents were but too glad to preserve
their departed children in this poetic way, instead of abandoning them
to decay and wild beasts.

At the time when Abbe Huc was living in Paris, after his return from
Thibet, he related, among other unpublished wonders, to a Mr. Arsenieff,
a Russian gentleman, the following curious fact that he had witnessed
during his long sojourn at the lamasery of Kounboum. One day while
conversing with one of the lamas, the latter suddenly stopped speaking,
and assumed the attentive attitude of one who is listening to a message
being delivered to him, although he (Huc) heard never a word. "Then, I
must go"; suddenly broke forth the lama, as if in response to the
message.

"Go where?" inquired the astonished "lama of Jehovah" (Huc). "And with
whom are you talking?"

"To the lamasery of \*\*\*\*\*\*" was the quiet answer. "The Shaberon
wants me; it was he who summoned me."

Now this lamasery was many days' journey from that of Kounboum, in which
the conversation was taking place. But what seemed to astonish Huc the
most was, that, instead of setting off on his journey, the lama simply
walked to a sort of cupola-room on the roof of the house in which they
lived, and another lama, after exchanging a few words, followed

###### <span id="page_605">p. 605</span>

them to the terrace by means of the ladder, and passing between them,
locked and barred his companion in. Then turning to Huc after a few
seconds of meditation, he smiled and informed the guest that "he had
gone."

"But how could he? Why you have locked him in, and the room has no
issue?" insisted the missionary.

"And what good would a door be to him?" answered the custodian. "*It is
he himself who went away*; *his body is not needed, and so he left it in
my charge.*"

Notwithstanding the wonders which Huc had witnessed during his perilous
journey, his opinion was that both of the lamas had mystified him. But
three days later, not having seen his habitual friend and entertainer,
he inquired after him, and was informed that he would be back in the
evening. At sunset, and just as the "other lamas" were preparing to
retire, Huc heard his absent friend's voice calling as if from the
clouds, to his companion to open the door for him. Looking upward, he
perceived the "traveller's" outline behind the lattice of the room where
he had been locked in. When he descended he went straight to the Grand
Lama of Kounboum, and delivered to him certain messages and "orders,"
from the place which he "pretended" he had just left. Huc could get no
more information from him as to his *aerial* voyage. But he always
thought, he said, that this "farce" had something to do with the
immediate and extraordinary preparations for the polite expulsion of
both the missionaries, himself and Father Gabet, to Chogor-tan, a place
belonging to the Kounboum. The suspicion of the daring missionary may
have been correct, in view of his impudent inquisitiveness and
indiscretion.

If the Abbe had been versed in Eastern philosophy, he would have found
no great difficulty in comprehending both the flight of the lama's
astral body to the distant lamasery while his physical frame remained
behind, or the carrying on of a conversation with the Shaberon that was
inaudible to himself. The recent experiments with the telephone in
America, to which allusion was made in Chapter V. of our first volume,
but which have been greatly perfected since those pages went to press,
prove that the human voice and the sounds of instrumental music may be
conveyed along a telegraphic wire to a great distance. The Hermetic
philosophers taught, as we have seen, that the disappearance from sight
of a flame does not imply its actual extinction. It has only passed from
the visible to the invisible world, and may be perceived by the inner
sense of vision, which is adapted to the things of that other and more
real universe. The same rule applies to sound. As the physical ear
discerns the vibrations of the atmosphere up to a certain point, not yet

###### <span id="page_606">p. 606</span>

definitely fixed, but varying with the individual, so the adept whose
interior hearing has been developed, can take the sound at this
vanishing-point, and hear its vibrations in the astral light
indefinitely. He needs no wires, helices, or sounding-boards; his
will-power is all-sufficient. Hearing with the spirit, time and distance
offer no impediments, and so he may converse with another adept at the
antipodes with as great ease as though they were in the same room.

Fortunately, we can produce numerous witnesses to corroborate our
statement, who, without being adepts at all, have, nevertheless, heard
the sound of aerial music and of the human voice, when neither
instrument nor speaker were within thousands of miles of the place where
we sat. In their case they actually heard interiorly, though they
supposed their physical organs of hearing alone were employed. The adept
had, by a simple effort of will-power, given them for the brief moment
the same perception of the spirit of sound as he himself constantly
enjoys.

If our men of science could only be induced to test instead of deriding
the ancient philosophy of the trinity of all the natural forces, they
would go by leaps toward the dazzling truth, instead of creeping,
snail-like, as at present. Prof. Tyndall's experiments off the South
Foreland, at Dover, in 1875, fairly upset all previous theories of the
transmission of sound, and those he has made with sensitive flames <span
id="fr_1147"></span>[\*](#fn_1146) bring him to the very threshold of
arcane science. One step further, and he would comprehend how adepts can
converse at great distances. But that step will *not* be taken. Of his
sensitive--in truth, magical--flame, he says: "The slightest tap on a
distant anvil causes it to fall to seven inches. When a bunch of keys is
shaken, the flame is violently agitated, and emits a loud roar. The
dropping of a sixpence into a hand already containing coin, knocks the
flame down. The creaking of boots sets it in violent commotion. The
crumpling or tearing of a bit of paper, or the rustle of a silk dress
does the same. Responsive to every tick of a watch held near it, it
falls and explodes. The winding up of a watch produces tumult. From a
distance of thirty yards we may chirrup to this flame, and cause it to
fall and roar. Repeating a passage from the *Faerie Queene,* the flame
sifts and selects the manifold sounds of my voice, noticing some by a
slight nod, others by a deeper bow, while to others it responds by
violent agitation."

Such are the wonders of modern physical science; but at what cost of
apparatus, and carbonic acid and coal gas; of American and Canadian
whistles, trumpets, gongs, and bells! The poor heathen have none such
*impedimenta,* but*--*will European science believe it--nevertheless,

###### <span id="page_607">p. 607</span>

produce the very same phenomena. Upon one occasion, when, in a case of
exceptional importance, an "oracle" was required, we saw the possibility
of what we had previously vehemently denied--namely, a simple mendicant
cause a sensitive flame to give responsive flashes without a particle of
apparatus. A fire was kindled of branches of the *Beal-*tree, and some
sacrificial herbs were sprinkled upon it. The mendicant sat near by,
motionless, absorbed in contemplation. During the intervals between the
questions the fire burned low and seemed ready to go out, but when the
interrogatories were propounded, the flames leaped, roaring, skyward,
flickered, bowed, and sent fiery tongues flaring toward the east, west,
north, or south; each motion having its distinct meaning in a code of
signals well understood. Between whiles it would sink to the ground, and
the tongues of flame would lick the sod in every direction, and suddenly
disappear, leaving only a bed of glowing embers. When the interview with
the flame-spirits was at an end, the Bikshu (mendicant) turned toward
the jungle where he abode, keeping up a wailing, monotonous chant, to
the rhythm of which the sensitive flame kept time, not merely like Prof.
Tyndall's, when he read the *Faerie Queene,* by simple motions, but by a
marvellous modulation of hissing and roaring until he was out of sight.
Then, as if its very life were extinguished, it vanished, and left a bed
of ashes before the astonished spectators.

Both in Western and Eastern Thibet, as in every other place where
Buddhism predominates, there are two distinct religions, the same as it
is in Brahmanism--the secret philosophy and the popular religion. The
former is that of the followers of the doctrine of the sect of the
Sutrantika. <span id="fr_1148"></span>[\*](#fn_1147) They closely adhere
to the spirit of Buddha's original teachings which show the necessity of
*intuitional* perception, and all deductions therefrom. These do not
proclaim their views, nor allow them to be made public.

"All *compounds* are perishable," were the last words uttered by the
lips of the dying Gautama, when preparing under the Sal-tree to enter
into Nirvana. "Spirit is the sole, elementary, and primordial unity, and
each of its rays is immortal, infinite, and indestructible. Beware of
the illusions of matter." Buddhism was spread far and wide over Asia,
and even farther, by Dharm-Asoka. He was the grandson of the
miracle-worker Chandragupta, the illustrious king who rescued the Punjab
from the Macedonians--if they ever were at Punjab at all--and received
Megasthenes at his court in Pataliputra. Dharm-Asoka was the greatest
King of the Maurya dynasty. From a reckless profligate and atheist,

###### <span id="page_608">p. 608</span>

he had become Pryadasi, the "beloved of the gods," and never was the
purity of his philanthropic views surpassed by any earthly ruler. His
memory has lived for ages in the hearts of the Buddhists, and has been
perpetuated in the humane edicts engraved in several popular dialects on
the columns and rocks of Allahabad, Delhi, Guzerat, Peshawur, Orissa,
and other places. <span id="fr_1149"></span>[\*](#fn_1148) His famous
grandfather had united all India under his powerful sceptre. When the
Nagas, or serpent-worshippers of Kashmere had been converted through the
efforts of the apostles sent out by the Sthaviras of the third councils,
the religion of Gautama spread like wild-fire. Gandhara, Cabul, and even
many of the Satrapies of Alexander the Great, accepted the new
philosophy. The Buddhism of Nepal being the one which may be said to
have diverged less than any other from the primeval ancient faith, the
Lamaism of Tartary, Mongolia, and Thibet, which is a direct offshoot of
this country, may be thus shown to be the purest Buddhism; for we say it
again, Lamaism properly is but an external form of rites.

The Upasakas and Upasakis, or male and female semi-monastics and
semi-laymen, have equally with the lama-monks themselves, to strictly
abstain from violating any of Buddha's rules, and must study *Meipo* and
every psychological phenomenon as much. Those who become guilty of any
of the "five sins" lose all right to congregate with the pious
community. The most important of these is *not to curse upon any
consideration, for the curse returns upon the one that utters it, and
often upon his innocent relatives who breathe the same atmosphere with
him.* To love each other, and even our bitterest enemies; to offer our
lives even for animals, to the extent of abstaining from defensive arms;
to gain the greatest of victories by conquering one's self; to avoid all
vices; to practice all virtues, especially humility and mildness; to be
obedient to superiors, to cherish and respect parents, old age,
learning, virtuous and holy men; to provide food, shelter, and comfort
for men and animals; to plant trees on the roads and dig wells for the
comfort of travellers; such are the moral duties of Buddhists. Every Ani
or Bikshuni (nun) is subjected to these laws.

Numerous are the Buddhist and Lamaic saints who have been renowned for
the unsurpassed sanctity of their lives and their "miracles." So Tissu,
the Emperor's spiritual teacher, who consecrated Kublai-Khan, the Nadir
Shah, was known far and wide as much for the extreme holiness of his
life as for the many wonders he wrought. But

###### <span id="page_609">p. 609</span>

he did not stop at fruitless miracles, but did better than that. Tissu
purified completely his religion; and from one single province of
Southern Mongolia is said to have forced Kublai to expel from convents
500,000 monkish impostors, who made a pretext of their profession, to
live in vice and idleness. Then the Lamaists had their great reformer,
the Shaberon Son-Ka-po, who is claimed to have been immaculately
conceived by his mother, a virgin from Koko-nor (fourteenth century),
who is another wonder-worker. The sacred tree of Kounboum, the tree of
the 10,000 images, which, in consequence of the degeneration of the true
faith had ceased budding for several centuries, now shot forth new
sprouts and bloomed more vigorously than ever from the hair of this
avatar of Buddha, says the legend. The same tradition makes him
(Son-Ka-po) ascend to heaven in 1419. Contrary to the prevailing idea,
few of these saints are *Khubilhans,* or Shaberons--reincarnations.

Many of the lamaseries contain schools of magic, but the most celebrated
is the collegiate monastery of the Shu-tukt, where there are over 30,000
monks attached to it, the lamasery forming quite a little city. Some of
the female nuns possess marvellous psychological powers. We have met
some of these women on their way from Lha-Ssa to Candi, the Rome of
Buddhism, with its miraculous shrines and Gautama's relics. To avoid
encounters with Mussulmans and other sects they travel by night alone,
unarmed, and without the least fear of wild animals, *for* *these will
not touch them.* At the first glimpses of dawn, they take refuge in
caves and viharas prepared for them by their co-religionists at
calculated distances; for notwithstanding the fact that Buddhism has
taken refuge in Ceylon, and nominally there are but few of the
denomination in British India, yet the secret Byauds (Brotherhoods) and
Buddhist viharas are numerous, and every Jain feels himself obliged to
help, indiscriminately, Buddhist or Lamaist.

Ever on the lookout for occult phenomena, hungering after sights, one of
the most interesting that we have seen was produced by one of these poor
travelling Bikshu. It was years ago, and at a time when all such
manifestations were new to the writer. We were taken to visit the
pilgrims by a Buddhist friend, a mystical gentleman born at Kashmir, of
Katchi parents, but a Buddha-Lamaist by conversion, and who generally
resides at Lha-Ssa.

"Why carry about this bunch of dead plants?" inquired one of the
Bikshuni, an emaciated, tall and elderly woman, pointing to a large
nosegay of beautiful, fresh, and fragrant flowers in the writer's hands.

"Dead?" we asked, inquiringly. "Why they just have been gathered in the
garden?"

"And yet, they are dead," she gravely answered. "To be born in

###### <span id="page_610">p. 610</span>

this world, is this not death? See, how these herbs look when alive in
the world of eternal light, in the gardens of our blessed Foh?"

Without moving from the place where she was sitting on the ground, the
Ani took a flower from the bunch, laid it in her lap, and began to draw
together, by large handfuls as it were, invisible material from the
surrounding atmosphere. Presently a very, very faint nodule of vapor was
seen, and this slowly took shape and color, until, poised in mid-air,
appeared a copy of the bloom we had given her. Faithful to the last tint
and the last petal it was, and lying on its side like the original, but
a thousand-fold more gorgeous in hue and exquisite in beauty, as the
glorified human spirit is more beauteous than its physical capsule.
Flower after flower to the minutest herb was thus reproduced and made to
vanish, reappearing at our desire, nay, at our simple thought. Having
selected a full-blown rose we held it at arm's length, and in a few
minutes our arm, hand, and the flower, perfect in every detail, appeared
reflected in the vacant space, about two yards from where we sat. But
while the flower seemed immeasurably beautified and as ethereal as the
other spirit flowers, the arm and hand appeared like a mere reflection
in a looking-glass, even to a large spot on the fore arm, left on it by
a piece of damp earth which had stuck to one of the roots. Later we
learned the reason why.

A great truth was uttered some fifty years ago by Dr. Francis Victor
Broussais, when he said: "If magnetism were true, medicine would be an
absurdity." Magnetism *is* true, and so we shall not contradict the
learned Frenchman as to the rest. Magnetism, as we have shown, is the
alphabet of magic. It is idle for any one to attempt to understand
either the theory or the practice of the latter until the fundamental
principle of magnetic attractions and repulsions throughout nature is
recognized.

Many so-called popular superstitions are but evidences of an instinctive
perception of this law. An untutored people are taught by the experience
of many generations that certain phenomena occur under fixed conditions;
they give these conditions and obtain the expected results. Ignorant of
the laws, they explain the fact by supernaturalism, for experience has
been their sole teacher.

In India, as well as in Russia and some other countries, there is an
instinctive repugnance to stepping across a man's shadow, especially if
he have red hair; and in the former country, natives are extremely
reluctant to shake hands with persons of another race. These are not
idle fancies. Every person emits a magnetic exhalation or aura, and a
man may be in perfect physical health, but at the same time his
exhalation may have a morbific character for others, sensitive to such
subtile influences. Dr. Esdaile and other mesmerists long since taught
us that Oriental people,

###### <span id="page_611">p. 611</span>

especially Hindus, are more susceptible than the white-skinned races.
Baron Reichenbach's experiments--and, in fact, the world's entire
experience--prove that these magnetic exhalations are most intense from
the extremities. Therapeutic manipulations show this; hand-shaking is,
therefore, most calculated to communicate antipathetic magnetic
conditions, and the Hindus do wisely in keeping their ancient
"superstition"--derived from Manu--constantly in mind.

The magnetism of a red-haired man, we have found, in almost every
nation, is instinctively dreaded. We might quote proverbs from the
Russian, Persian, Georgian, Hindustani, French, Turkish, and even
German, to show that treachery and other vices are popularly supposed to
accompany the rufous complexion. When a man stands exposed to the sun,
the magnetism of that luminary causes his emanations to be projected
toward the shadow, and the increased molecular action develops more
electricity. Hence, an individual to whom he is antipathetic--though
neither might be sensible of the fact--would act prudently in not
passing through the shadow. Careful physicians wash their hands upon
leaving each patient; why, then, should they not be charged with
superstition, as well as the Hindus? The sporules of disease are
invisible, but no less real, as European experience demonstrates. Well,

Oriental experience for a hundred centuries has shown that the germs of
moral contagion linger about localities, and impure magnetism can be
communicated by the touch.

Another prevalent belief in some parts of Russia, particularly Georgia
(Caucasus), and in India, is that in case the body of a drowned person
cannot be otherwise found, if a garment of his be thrown into the water
it will float until directly over the spot, and then sink. We have even
seen the experiment successfully tried with the sacred cord of a
Brahman. It floated hither and thither, circling about as though in
search of something, until suddenly darting in a straight line for about
fifty yards, it sank, and at that exact spot the divers brought up the
body. We find this "superstition" even in America. A Pittsburg paper, of
very recent date, describes the finding of the body of a young boy,
named Reed, in the Monongahela, by a like method. All other means having
failed, it says, "a curious superstition was employed. One of the boy's
shirts was thrown into the river where he had gone down, and, it is
said, floated on the surface for a time, and finally settled to the
bottom at a certain place, which proved to be the resting-place of the
body, and which was then drawn out. The belief that the shirt of a
drowned person when thrown into the water will follow the body is
well-spread, absurd as it appears."

This phenomenon is explained by the law of the powerful attraction
existing between the human body and objects that have been long worn

###### <span id="page_612">p. 612</span>

upon it. The oldest garment is most effective for the experiment; a new
one is useless.

From time immemorial, in Russia, in the month of May, on Trinity Day,
maidens from city and village have been in the habit of casting upon the
river wreaths of green leaves--which each girl has to form for
herself--and consulting their oracles. If the wreath sinks, it is a sign
that the girl will die unmarried within a short time; if it floats, she
will be married, the time depending upon the number of verses she can
repeat during the experiment. We positively affirm that we have personal
knowledge of several cases, two of them our intimate friends, where the
augury of death proved true, and the girls *died* within twelve months.
Tried on any other day than Trinity, the result would doubtless be the
same. The sinking of the wreath is attributable to its being impregnated
with the unhealthy magnetism of a system which contains the germs of
early death; such magnetisms having an attraction for the earth at the
bottom of the stream. As for the rest, we are willing to abandon it to
the friends of coincidence.

The same general remark as to superstition having a scientific basis
applies to the phenomena produced by fakirs and jugglers, which skeptics
heap into the common category of trickery. And yet, to a close observer,
even to the uninitiated, an enormous difference is presented between the
*kimiya* (phenomenon) of a fakir, and the *batte-bazi* (jugglery) of a
trickster, and the necromancy of a *jadugar*, or *sahir,* so dreaded and
despised by the natives. This difference, imperceptible--nay
incomprehensible--to the skeptical European, is instinctively
appreciated by every Hindu, whether of high or low caste, educated or
ignorant. The *kangalin,* or witch, who uses her terrible *abhi-char*
(mesmeric powers) with intent to injure, may expect death at any moment,
for every Hindu finds it lawful to kill her; a *bukka-baz,* or juggler,
serves to amuse. A serpent-charmer, with his *ba-ini* full of venomous
snakes, is less dreaded, for his powers of fascination extend but to
animals and reptiles; he is unable to charm human beings, to perform
that which is called by the natives *mantar phunkna,* to throw spells on
men by magic. But with the yogi, the sannyasi, the holy men who acquire
enormous psychological powers by mental and physical training, the
question is totally different. Some of these men are regarded by the
Hindus as demi-gods. Europeans cannot judge of these powers but in rare
and exceptional cases.

The British resident who has encountered in the *maidans* and public
places what he regards as frightful and loathsome human beings, sitting
motionless in the self-inflicted torture of the *urddwa bahu,* with arms
raised above the head for months, and even years, need not suppose they
are the wonder-working fakirs. The phenomenon of the latter are visible
only through the friendly protection of a Brahman, or under peculiarly

###### <span id="page_613">p. 613</span>

fortuitous circumstances. Such men are as little accessible as the real
Nautch girls, of whom every traveller talks, but very few have actually
seen, since they belong exclusively to the pagodas.

It is surpassingly strange, that with the thousands of travellers and
the millions of European residents who have been in India, and have
traversed it in every direction, so little is yet known of that country
and the lands which surround it. It may be that some readers will feel
inclined not merely to doubt the correctness but even openly contradict
our statement? Doubtless, we will be answered that all that it is
desirable to know about India is already known? In fact this very reply
was once made to us personally. That resident Anglo-Indians should not
busy themselves with inquiries is not strange; for, as a British officer
remarked to us upon one occasion, "society does not consider it
well-bred to care about Hindus or their affairs, or even show
astonishment or desire information upon anything they may see
extraordinary in that country." But it really surprises us that at least
travellers should not have explored more than they have this interesting
realm. Hardly fifty years ago, in penetrating the jungles of the Blue or
Neilgherry Hills in Southern Hindustan, a strange race, perfectly
distinct in appearance and language from any other Hindu people, was
discovered by two courageous British officers who were tiger-hunting.
Many surmises, more or less absurd, were set on foot, and the
missionaries, always on the watch to connect every mortal thing with the
*Bible,* even went so far as to suggest that this people was one of the
lost tribes of Israel, supporting their ridiculous hypothesis upon their
very fair complexions and "strongly-marked Jewish features." The latter
is perfectly erroneous, the Todas, as they are called, not bearing the
remotest likeness to the Jewish type; either in feature, form, action,
or language. They closely resemble each other, and, as a friend of ours
expresses himself, the handsomest of the Todas resemble the statue of
the Grecian Zeus in majesty and beauty of form more than anything he had
yet seen among men.

Fifty years have passed since the discovery; but though since that time
towns have been built on these hills and the country has been invaded by
Europeans, no more has been learned of the Todas than at the first.
Among the foolish rumors current about this people, the most erroneous
are those in relation to their numbers and to their practicing
polyandry. The general opinion about them is that on account of the
latter custom their number has dwindled to a few hundred families, and
the race is fast dying out. We had the best means of learning much about
them, and therefore state most positively that the Todas neither
practice polyandry nor are they as few in number as supposed. We are

###### <span id="page_614">p. 614</span>

ready to show that no one has ever seen children belonging to them.
Those that may have been seen in their company have belonged to the
Badagas, a Hindu tribe totally distinct from the Todas, in race, color,
and language, and which includes the most direct "worshippers" of this
extraordinary people. We say *worshippers,* for the Badagas clothe,
feed, serve, and positively look upon every Toda as a divinity. They are
giants in stature, white as Europeans, with tremendously long and
generally brown, wavy hair and beard, which no razor ever touched from
birth. Handsome as a statue of Pheidias or Praxiteles, the Toda sits the
whole day inactive, as some travellers who have had a glance at them
affirm. From the many conflicting opinions and statements we have heard
from the very residents of Ootakamund and other little new places of
civilization scattered about the Neilgherry Hills, we cull the
following:

"They never use water; they are wonderfully handsome and noble looking,
but extremely unclean; unlike all other natives they despise jewelry,
and never wear anything but a large black drapery or blanket of some
woollen stuff, with a colored stripe at the bottom; they never drink
anything but pure milk; they have herds of cattle but neither eat their
flesh, nor do they make their beasts of labor plough or work; they
neither sell nor buy; the Badagas feed and clothe them; they never use
nor carry weapons, not even a simple stick; the Todas can't read and
won't learn. They are the despair of the missionaries and apparently
have no sort of religion, beyond the worship of themselves as the Lords
of Creation." <span id="fr_1150"></span>[\*](#fn_1149)

We will try to correct a few of these opinions, as far as we have
learned from a very holy personage, a Brahmanam-guru, who has our great
respect.

Nobody has ever seen more than five or six of them at one time; they
will not talk with foreigners, nor was any traveller ever inside their
peculiar long and flat huts, which apparently are without either windows
or chimney and have but one door; nobody ever saw the funeral of a Toda,
nor very old men among them; nor are they taken sick with cholera, while
thousands die around them during such periodical epidemics; finally,
though the country all around swarms with tigers and other wild beasts,
neither tiger, serpent, nor any other animal so ferocious in those
parts, was ever known to touch either a Toda or one of their cattle,
though, as said above, they never use even a stick.

Furthermore the Todas do not marry at all. They seem few in number, for
no one has or ever will have a chance of numbering them; as soon as
their solitude was profaned by the avalanche of civilization--

###### <span id="page_615">p. 615</span>

which was, perchance, due to their own carelessness--the Todas began
moving away to other parts as unknown and more inaccessible than the
Neilgherry hills had formerly been; they are not born of Toda mothers,
nor of Toda parentage; they are the children of a certain very select
sect, and are set apart from their infancy for special religious
purposes. Recognized by a peculiarity of complexion, and certain other
signs, such a child is known as what is vulgarly termed a Toda, from
birth. Every third year, each of them must repair to a certain place for
a certain period of time, where each of them must meet; their "dirt" is
but a mask, such as a sannyasi puts on in public in obedience to his
vow; their cattle are, for the most part, devoted to sacred uses; and,
though their places of worship have never been trodden by a profane
foot, they nevertheless exist, and perhaps rival the most splendid
pagodas--*goparams--*known to Europeans. The Badagas are their special
vassals, and--as has been truly remarked--worship them as half-deities;
for their birth and mysterious powers entitle them to such a
distinction.

The reader may rest assured that any statements concerning them, that
clash with the little that is above given, are false. No missionary will
ever catch one with his bait, nor any Badaga betray them, though he were
cut to pieces. They are a people who fulfill a certain high purpose, and
whose secrets are inviolable.

Furthermore, the Todas are not the only such mysterious tribe in India.
We have named several in a preceding chapter, but how many are there
besides these, that will remain unnamed, unrecognized, and yet ever
present!

What is now generally known of Shamanism is very little; and that has
been perverted, like the rest of the non-Christian religions. It is
called the "heathenism" of Mongolia, and wholly without reason, for it
is one of the oldest religions of India. It is spirit-worship, or belief
in the immortality of the souls, and that the latter are still the same
men they were on earth, though their bodies have lost their objective
form, and man has exchanged his physical for a spiritual nature. In its
present shape, it is an offshoot of primitive theurgy, and a practical
blending of the visible with the invisible world. Whenever a denizen of
earth desires to enter into communication with his invisible brethren,
he has to assimilate himself to their nature, *i.e*., he meets these
beings half-way, and, furnished by them with a supply of spiritual
essence, endows them, in his turn, with a portion of his physical
nature, thus enabling them sometimes to appear in a semi-objective form.
It is a temporary exchange of natures, called theurgy. Shamans are
called sorcerers, because they are said to evoke the "spirits" of the
dead for purposes of necromancy. The true Shamanism--striking features
of which prevailed in India in the days

###### <span id="page_616">p. 616</span>

of Megasthenes (300 B.C.)--can no more be judged by its degenerated
scions among the Shamans of Siberia, than the religion of Gautama-Buddha
can be interpreted by the fetishism of some of his followers in Siam and
Burmah. It is in the chief lamaseries of Mongolia and Thibet that it has
taken refuge; and there Shamanism, if so we must call it, is practiced
to the utmost limits of intercourse allowed between man and "spirit."
The religion of the lamas has faithfully preserved the primitive science
of *magic,* and produces as great feats now as it did in the days of
Kublai-Khan and his barons. The ancient mystic formula of the King
Srong-ch-Tsans-Gampo, the "Aum mani padme houm," <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[\*](#fn_1150) effects its wonders now as well as in
the seventh century. Avalokitesvara, highest of the three Boddhisattvas,
and patron saint of Thibet, projects his shadow, full in the view of the
faithful, at the lamasery of Dga-G'Dan, founded by him; and the luminous
form of Son-Ka-pa, under the shape of a fiery cloudlet, that separates
itself from the dancing beams of the sunlight, holds converse with a
great congregation of lamas, numbering thousands; the voice descending
from above, like the whisper of the breeze through foliage. Anon, say
the Thibetans, the beautiful appearance vanishes in the shadows of the
sacred trees in the park of the lamasery.

At Garma-Khian (the mother-cloister) it is rumored that bad and
unprogressed spirits are made to appear on certain days, and *forced* to
give an account of their evil deeds; they are compelled by the lamaic
adepts to redress the wrongs done by them to mortals. This is what Huc
naively terms "personating evil spirits," *i.e*., devils. Were the
skeptics of various European countries permitted to consult the accounts
printed daily <span id="fr_1152"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1151) at Moru, and in
the "City of Spirits," of the business-like intercourse which takes
place between the lamas and the invisible world, they would certainly
feel more interest in the phenomena described so triumphantly in the
spiritualistic journals. At Buddha-Ila, or rather Foht-lla (Buddha's
Mount), in the most important of the many thousand lamaseries of that
country, the sceptre of the Boddhisgat is seen floating, unsupported, in
the air, and its motions regulate the actions of the community. Whenever
a lama is called to account in the presence of the Superior of

###### <span id="page_617">p. 617</span>

the monastery, he knows beforehand it is useless for him to tell an
untruth; the "regulator of justice" (the sceptre) is there, and its
waving motion, either approbatory or otherwise, decides instantaneously
and unerringly the question of his guilt. We do not pretend to have
witnessed all this personally--we wish to make no pretensions of any
kind. Suffice it, with respect to any of these phenomena, that what we
have not seen with our own eyes has been so substantiated to us that we
indorse its genuineness.

A number of lamas in Sikkin produce *meipo--*"miracle"--by magical
powers. The late Patriarch of Mongolia, Gegen Chutuktu, who resided at
Urga, a veritable paradise, was the sixteenth incarnation of Gautama,
therefore a Boddhisattva. He had the reputation of possessing powers
that were phenomenal, even among the thaumaturgists of the land of
miracles *par excellence.* Let no one suppose that these powers are
developed without cost. The lives of most of these holy men, miscalled
idle vagrants, cheating beggars, who are supposed to pass their
existence in preying upon the easy credulity of their victims, are
miracles in themselves. Miracles, because they show what a determined
will and perfect purity of life and purpose are able to accomplish, and
to what degree of preternatural ascetism a human body can be subjected
and yet live and reach a ripe old age. No Christian hermit has ever
dreamed of such refinement of monastic discipline; and the aerial
habitation of a Simon Stylite would appear child's play before the
fakir's and the Buddhist's inventions of will-tests. But the theoretical
study of magic is one thing; the possibility of practicing it quite
another. At *Bras-ss-Pungs,* the Mongolian college where over three
hundred magicians (*sorciers,* as the French missionaries call them)
teach about twice as many pupils from twelve to twenty, the latter have
many years to wait for their final initiation. Not one in a hundred
reaches the highest goal; and out of the many thousand lamas occupying
nearly an entire city of detached buildings clustering around it, not
more than two per cent. become wonder-workers. One may learn by heart
every line of the 108 volumes of *Kadjur, <span
id="fr_1153"></span>[\*](#fn_1152)* and still make but a poor practical
magician. There is but one thing which leads surely to it, and this
particular study is hinted at by more than one Hermetic writer. One, the
Arabian alchemist Abipili, speaks thus: "I admonish thee, whosoever thou
art that desirest to dive into the inmost parts of nature; if that thou
seekest thou findest not *within thee,* thou wilt *never find it without
thee.* If thou knowest not the excellency of thine own house, why dost
thou seek after the ex-

###### <span id="page_618">p. 618</span>

cellency of other things? . . . **O** **M**AN, **K**NOW **T**HYSELF! IN
THEE IS HID THE TREASURE OF TREASURES."

In another alchemic tract, *De manna Benedicto,* the author expresses
his ideas of the philosopher's stone, in the following terms: "My intent
is for certain reasons not to prate too much of the matter, which yet is
but one only thing, already too plainly described; for it shows and sets
down such magical and natural uses of it \[the stone\] as many that have
had it never knew nor heard of; and such as, when I beheld them, *made
my knees to tremble and my heart to shake, and I to stand amazed at the
sight of them!*"

Every neophyte has experienced more or less such a feeling; but once
that it is overcome, the man is an ADEPT.

Within the cloisters of Dshashi-Lumbo and Si-Dzang, these powers,
inherent in every man, called out by so few, are cultivated to their
utmost perfection. Who, in India, has not heard of the Banda-Chan
Ramboutchi, the *Houtouktou* of the capital of Higher Thibet? His
brotherhood of Khe-lan was famous throughout the land; and one of the
most famous "brothers" was a *Peh-ling* (an Englishman) who had arrived
one day during the early part of this century, from the West, a thorough
Buddhist, and after a month's preparation was admitted among the
Khe-lans. He spoke every language, including the Thibetan, and knew
every art and science, says the tradition. His sanctity and the
phenomena produced by him caused him to be proclaimed a shaberon after a
residence of but a few years. His memory lives to the present day among
the Thibetans, but his real name is a secret with the shaberons alone.

The greatest of the *meipo--*said to be the object of the ambition of
every Buddhist devotee--was, and yet is, the faculty of walking in the
air. The famous King of Siam, Pia Metak, the Chinese, was noted for his
devotion and learning. But he attained this "supernatural gift" only
after having placed himself under the direct tuition of a priest of
Gautama-Buddha. Crawfurd and Finlayson, during their residence at Siam,
followed with great interest the endeavors of some Siamese nobles to
acquire this faculty. <span id="fr_1154"></span>[\*](#fn_1153)

Numerous and varied are the sects in China, Siam, Tartary, Thibet,
Kashmir, and British India, which devote their lives to the cultivation
of "supernatural powers," so called. Discussing one of such sects, the
*Taosse,* Semedo says: "They pretend that by means of certain exercises
and meditations one shall regain his youth, and others will attain to be
*Shien-sien, i.e.,* 'Terrestrial Beati,' in whose state every desire is
gratified, whilst they have the power to transport themselves from one
place to

###### <span id="page_619">p. 619</span>

another, *however distant,* with speed and facility." <span
id="fr_1155"></span>[\*](#fn_1154) This faculty relates but to the
*projection* of the *astral entity,* in a more or less corporealized
form, and certainly not to bodily transportation. This phenomenon is no
more a miracle than one's reflection in a looking-glass. No one can
detect in such an image a particle of matter, and still there stands our
double, faithfully representing, even to each single hair on our heads.
If, by this simple law of reflection, our double can be seen in a
mirror, how much more striking a proof of its existence is afforded in
the art of photography! *It is no reason, because our physicists have
not yet found the means of taking photographs, except at a short
distance, that the acquirement should be impossible to those who have
found these means in the power of the human will itself, freed from
terrestrial concern. <span id="fr_1156"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1155)* Our
thoughts are *matter,* says science; every energy produces more or less
of a disturbance in the atmospheric waves. Therefore, as every man--in
common with every other living, and even inert object--has an *aura* of
his own emanations surrounding him; and, moreover, is enabled, by a
trifling effort, to transport himself in *imagination* wherever he
likes, why is it scientifically impossible that his thought, regulated,
intensified, and guided by that powerful magician, the educated WILL,
may become corporealized for the time being, and appear to whom it
likes, a faithful double of the original? Is the proposition, in the
present state of science, any more unthinkable than the photograph or
telegraph were less than forty years ago, or the telephone less than
fourteen months ago?

If the sensitized plate can so accurately seize upon the *shadow* of our
faces, then this shadow or reflection, although we are unable to
perceive it, must be something substantial. And, if we can, with the
help of

###### <span id="page_620">p. 620</span>

optical instruments, project our *semblances* upon a white wall, at
several hundred feet distance, sometimes, then there is no reason why
the adepts, the alchemists, the savants of the secret art, should not
have already found out that which scientists deny to-day, but may
discover true tomorrow, *i.e*., how to project electrically their astral
bodies, in an instant, through thousands of miles of space, leaving
their material shells with a certain amount of animal vital principle to
keep the physical life going, and acting within their spiritual,
ethereal bodies as safely and intelligently as when clothed with the
covering of flesh? There is a higher form of electricity than the
physical one known to experimenters; a thousand correlations of the
latter are as yet veiled to the eye of the modern physicist, and none
can tell where end its possibilities.

Schott explains that by *Sian* or *Shin-Sian* are understood in the old
Chinese conception, and particularly in that of the Tao-Kiao (Taosse)
sect, "persons who withdraw to the hills to lead the life of anchorites,
and who have attained, either through their ascetic observances or by
the power of charms and elixirs, to the possession of miraculous gifts
and of terrestrial *immortality.*" <span
id="fr_1157"></span>[\*](#fn_1156) (?) This is exaggerated if not
altogether erroneous. What they claim, is merely their ability to
prolong human life; and they can do so, if we have to believe human
testimony. What Marco Polo testifies to in the thirteenth century is
corroborated in our own days. "There are another class of people called
*Chughi*" (Yogi), he says, "who are indeed properly called *Abraiamans*
(Brahmans?) who are extremely long-lived, every man of them living to
150 or 200 years. They eat very little, rice and milk chiefly. And these
people make use of a very strange beverage, a potion of sulphur and
quicksilver mixed together, and this they drink twice every month. . . .
This, they say, gives them long life; and it is a potion they are used
to take from their childhood." <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1157) Bernier shows, says Colonel Yule,
the Yogis very skilful in preparing mercury "so admirably that one or
two grains taken every morning restored the body to perfect health"; and
adds that the *mercurius vitae* of Paracelsus was a compound in which
entered antimony and quicksilver. <span
id="fr_1159"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_1158) This is a very careless
statement, to say the least, and we will explain what we know of it.

The longevity of some lamas and Talapoins is proverbial; and it is
generally known that they use some compound which "renews the old
blood," as they call it. And it was equally a recognized fact with
alchemists that a judicious administration, "of *aura of silver* does
restore

###### <span id="page_621">p. 621</span>

health and prolongs life itself to a wonderful extent." But we are fully
prepared to oppose the statements of both Bernier and Col. Yule who
quotes him, that it is *mercury* or quicksilver which the Yogis and the
alchemists used. The Yogis, in the days of Marco Polo, as well as in our
modern times, *do use that which may appear to be quicksilver, but is
not.* Paracelsus, the alchemists, and other mystics, meant by *mercurius
vitae,* the living spirit of silver, the *aura* of silver, not the
*argent vive*; and this *aura* is certainly not the mercury known to our
physicians and druggists. There can be no doubt that the imputation that
Paracelsus introduced mercury into medical practice is utterly
incorrect. No mercury, whether prepared by a mediaeval fire-philosopher
or a modern self-styled physician, can or ever did restore the body to
perfect health. Only an unmitigated charlatan ever will use such a drug.
And it is the opinion of many that it is just with the wicked intention
of presenting Paracelsus in the eyes of posterity as a *quack,* that his
enemies have invented such a preposterous lie.

The Yogis of the olden times, as well as modern lamas and Talapoins, use
a certain ingredient with a minimum of sulphur, and a milky juice which
they extract from a medicinal plant. They must certainly be possessed of
some wonderful secrets, as we have seen them healing the most rebellious
wounds in a few days; restoring broken bones to good use in as many
hours as it would take days to do by means of common surgery. A fearful
fever contracted by the writer near Rangoon, after a flood of the
Irrawaddy River, was cured in a few hours by the juice of a plant
called, if we mistake not, *Kukushan,* though there may be thousands of
natives ignorant of its virtues who are left to die of fever. This was
in return for a trifling kindness we had done to a *simple mendicant*; a
service which can interest the reader but little.

We have heard of a certain water, also, called *ab-i-hayat,* which the
popular superstition thinks hidden from every mortal eye, except that of
the holy sannyasi; the fountain itself being known as the ab-i-haiwan-i.
It is more than probable though, that the Talapoins will decline to
deliver up their secrets, even to academicians and missionaries; as
these remedies must be used for the benefit of humanity, never for
money. <span id="fr_1160"></span>[\*](#fn_1159)

<span id="page_622">p. 622</span>

At the great festivals of Hindu pagodas, at the marriage feasts of rich
high-castes, everywhere where large crowds are gathered, Europeans find
guni--or serpent-charmers, fakirs-mesmerizers, thaum-working sannyasi,
and so-called "jugglers." To deride is easy--to explain, rather more
troublesome--to science impossible. The British residents of India and
the travellers prefer the first expedient. But let any one ask one of
these Thomases how the following results--which they cannot and do not
deny--are produced? When crowds of guni and fakirs appear with their
bodies encircled with cobras-de-capello, their arms ornamented with
bracelets of *corallilos--*diminutive snakes inflicting certain death in
a few seconds--and their shoulders with necklaces of trigonocephali, the
most terrible enemy of naked Hindu feet, whose bite kills like a flash
of lightning, the sceptic witness smiles and gravely proceeds to explain
how these reptiles, having been thrown in cataleptic torpor, were all
deprived by the guni of their fangs. "They are harmless and it is
ridiculous to fear them." "Will the Saeb caress one of my nag?" asked
once a guni approaching our interlocutor, who had been thus humbling his
listeners with his herpetological achievements for a full half hour.
Rapidly jumping back--the brave warrior's feet proving no less nimble
than his tongue--Captain B----'s angry answer could hardly be
immortalized by us in print. Only the guni's terrible body-guard saved
him from an unceremonious thrashing. Besides, say a word, and for a
half-roupee any professional serpent-charmer will begin creeping about
and summon around in a few moments numbers of untamed serpents of the
most poisonous species, and will handle them and encircle his body with
them. On two occasions in the neighborhood of Trinkemal a serpent was
ready to strike at the writer, who had once nearly sat on its tail, but
both times, at a rapid whistle of the guni whom we had hired to
accompany us, it stopped--hardly a few inches from our body, as if
arrested by lightning and slowly sinking its menacing head to the
ground, remained stiff and motionless as a dead branch, under the charm
of the *kilna.* <span id="fr_1161"></span>[\*](#fn_1160)

Will any European juggler, tamer, or even mesmerizer, risk repeating
just once an experiment that may be daily witnessed in India, if you
know where to go to see it? There is nothing in the world more ferocious
than a royal Bengal tiger. Once the whole population of a small village,
not far from Dakka, situated on the confines of a jungle, was

###### <span id="page_623">p. 623</span>

thrown into a panic at the appearance of an enormous tigress, at the
dawn of the day. These wild beasts never leave their dens but at night,
when they go searching for prey and for water. But this unusual
circumstance was due to the fact that the beast was a mother, and she
had been deprived of her two cubs, which had been carried away by a
daring hunter, and she was in search of them. Two men and a child had
already become her victims, when an aged fakir, bent on his daily round,
emerging from the gate of the pagoda, saw the situation and understood
it at a glance. Chanting a mantram he went straight to the beast, which
with flaming eye and foaming mouth crouched near a tree ready for a new
victim. When at about ten feet from the tigress, without interrupting
his modulated prayer, the words of which no layman comprehends, he began
a regular process of mesmerization, as we understood it; he made
*passes.* A terrific howl which struck a chill into the heart of every
human being in the place, was then heard. This long, ferocious, drawling
howl gradually subsided into a series of plaintive broken sobs, as if
the bereaved mother was uttering her complaints, and then, to the terror
of the crowd which had taken refuge on trees and in the houses, the
beast made a tremendous leap--on the holy man as they thought. They were
mistaken, she was at his feet, rolling in the dust, and writhing. A few
moments more and she remained motionless, with her enormous head laid on
her fore-paws, and her bloodshot but now mild eye riveted on the face of
the fakir. Then the holy man of prayers sat beside the tigress and
tenderly smoothed her striped skin, and patted her back, until her
groans became fainter and fainter, and half an hour later all the
village was standing around this group; the fakir's head lying on the
tigress's back as on a pillow, his right hand on her head, and his left
thrown on the sod under the terrible mouth, from which the long red
protruding tongue was gently licking it.

This is the way the fakirs tame the wildest beasts in India. Can
European tamers, with their white-hot iron rods, do as much? Of course
every fakir is not endowed with such a power; comparatively very few
are. And yet the actual number is large. How they are *trained* to these
requirements in the pagodas will remain an eternal secret, to all except
the Brahmans and the adepts in occult mysteries. The stories, hitherto
considered fables, of Christna and Orpheus charming the wild beasts,
thus receives its corroboration in our day. There is one fact which
remains undeniable. *There is not a single European* in India who could
have, or has ever boasted of having, penetrated into the enclosed
sanctuary *within* the pagodas. Neither authority nor money has ever
induced a Brahman to allow an uninitiated foreigner to pass the
threshold of the reserved precinct. To use authority in such a case
would be equivalent

###### <span id="page_624">p. 624</span>

to throwing a lighted taper into a powder magazine. The Hindus, mild,
patient, long-suffering, whose very apathy saved the British from being
driven out of the country in 1857, would raise their hundred millions of
devotees as one man, at such a profanation; regardless of sects or
castes, they would exterminate every Christian. The East India Company
knew this well and built her stronghold on the friendship of the
Brahmans, and by paying subsidy to the pagodas; and the British
Government is as prudent as its predecessor. It is the castes, and
non-interference with the prevailing religions, that secure its
comparative authority in India. But we must once more recur to
Shamanism, that strange and most despised of all surviving
religions--"Spirit-worship."

Its followers have neither altars nor idols, and it is upon the
authority of a Shaman priest that we state that their true rites, which
they are bound to perform only once a year, on the shortest day of
winter, cannot take place before any stranger to their faith. Therefore,
we are confident that all descriptions hitherto given in the *Asiatic
Journal* and other European works, are but guess-work. The Russians,
who, from constant intercourse with the Shamans in Siberia and Tartary,
would be the most competent of all persons to judge of their religion,
have learned nothing except of the personal proficiency of these men in
what they are half inclined to believe clever jugglery. Many Russian
residents, though, in Siberia, are firmly convinced of the
"supernatural" powers of the Shamans. Whenever they assemble to worship,
it is always in an open space, or a high hill, or in the hidden depths
of a forest--in this reminding us of the old Druidical rites. Their
ceremonies upon the occasions of births, deaths, and marriages are but
trifling parts of their worship. They comprise offerings, the sprinkling
of the fire with spirits and milk, and weird hymns, or rather, magical
incantations, intoned by the officiating Shaman, and concluding with a
chorus of the persons present.

The numerous small bells of brass and iron worn by them on the priestly
robe of deerskin, <span id="fr_1162"></span>[\*](#fn_1161) or the pelt
of some other animal reputed magnetic, are used to drive away the
malevolent spirits of the air, a *superstition* 

###### <span id="page_625">p. 625</span>

shared by all the nations of old, including Romans, and even the Jews,
whose golden bells tell the story. They have iron staves also covered
with bells, for the same reason. When, after certain ceremonies, the
desired crisis is reached, and "the spirit has spoken," and the priest
(who may be either male or female) feels its overpowering influence, the
hand of the Shaman is drawn by some occult power toward the top of the
staff, which is commonly covered with hieroglyphics. With his palm
pressing upon it, he is then raised to a considerable height in the air,
where he remains for some time. Sometimes he leaps to an extraordinary
height, and, according to the control--for he is often but an
irresponsible medium--pours out prophecies and describes future events.
Thus, it was that, in 1847, a Shaman in a distant part of Siberia
prophesied and accurately detailed the issue of the Crimean war. The
particulars of the prognostication being carefully noted by those
present at the time, were all verified six years after this occurrence.
Although usually ignorant of even the name of astronomy, let alone
having studied this science, they often prophesy eclipses and other
astronomical phenomena. When consulted about thefts and murders, they
invariably point out the guilty parties.

The Shamans of Siberia are all ignorant and illiterate. Those of Tartary
and Thibet--few in number--are mostly learned men in their own way, and
will not allow themselves to fall under the control of spirits of any
kind. The former are *mediums* in the full sense of the word; the
latter, "magicians." It is not surprising that pious and superstitious
persons, after seeing one of such crises, should declare the Shaman to
be under demoniacal possession. As in the instances of Corybantic and
Bacchantic fury among the ancient Greeks, the "spiritual" crisis of the
Shaman exhibits itself in violent dancing and wild gestures. Little by
little the lookers-on feel the spirit of imitation aroused in them;
seized with an irresistible impulse, they dance, and become, in their
turn, ecstatics; and he who begins by joining the chorus, gradually and
unconsciously takes part in the gesticulations, until he sinks to the
ground exhausted, and often dying.

"O, young girl, a god possesses thee! it is either Pan, or Hekate, or,
the venerable Corybantes, or Cybele that agitates thee!" the chorus
says, addressing Phaedra, in Euripides. This form of psychological
epidemic has been too well known from the time of the middle ages to
cite instances from it. The *Choroea sancti Viti* is an historical fact,
and spread throughout Germany. Paracelsus cured quite a number of
persons possessed of such a spirit of imitation. But he was a kabalist,
and therefore accused, by his enemies, of having cast out the devils by
the power of a stronger demon, which he was believed to carry about with

###### <span id="page_626">p. 626</span>

him in the hilt of his sword. The Christian judges of those days of
horror found a better and a surer remedy. Voltaire states that, in the
district of Jura, between 1598 and 1600, over 600 Lycanthropes were put
to death by a pious judge.

But, while the illiterate Shaman is a victim, and during his crisis
sometimes sees the persons present, under the shape of various animals,
and often makes them share his hallucination, his brother Shaman,
learned in the mysteries of the priestly colleges of Thibet, *expels*
the elementary creature, which can produce the hallucination as well as
a living mesmerizer, not through the help of a stronger demon, but
simply through his knowledge of the nature of the invisible enemy. Where
academicians have failed, as in the cases of the Cevennois, a Shaman or
a lama would have soon put an end to the epidemic.

We have mentioned a kind of carnelian stone in our possession, which had
such an unexpected and favorable effect upon the Shaman's decision.
Every Shaman has such a talisman, which he wears attached to a string,
and carries under his left arm.

"Of what use is it to you, and what are its virtues?" was the question
we often offered to our guide. To this he never answered directly, but
evaded all explanation, promising that as soon as an opportunity was
offered, and we were alone, he would ask the stone *to answer for
himself.* With this very indefinite hope, we were left to the resources
of our own imagination.

But the day on which the stone "spoke" came very soon. It was during the
most critical hours of our life; at a time when the vagabond nature of a
traveller had carried the writer to far-off lands, where neither
civilization is known, nor security can be guaranteed for one hour. One
afternoon, as every man and woman had left the *yourta* (Tartar tent),
that had been our home for over two months, to witness the ceremony of
the Lamaic exorcism of a Tshoutgour, <span
id="fr_1163"></span>[\*](#fn_1162) accused of breaking and spiriting
away every bit of the poor furniture and earthenware of a family living
about two miles distant, the Shaman, who had become our only protector
in those dreary deserts, was reminded of his promise. He sighed and
hesitated; but, after a short silence, left his place on the sheepskin,
and, going outside, placed a dried-up goat's head with its prominent
horns over a wooden peg, and then dropping down the felt curtain of the
tent, remarked that now no living person would venture in, for the
goat's head was a sign that he was "at work."

After that, placing his hand in his bosom, he drew out the little stone,
about the size of a walnut, and, carefully unwrapping it, proceeded, as
it

###### <span id="page_627">p. 627</span>

appeared, to swallow it. In a few moments his limbs stiffened, his body
became rigid, and he fell, cold and motionless as a corpse. But for a
slight twitching of his lips at every question asked, the scene would
have been embarrassing, nay--dreadful. The sun was setting, and were it
not that dying embers flickered at the centre of the tent, complete
darkness would have been added to the oppressive silence which reigned.
We have lived in the prairies of the West, and in the boundless steppes
of Southern Russia; but nothing can be compared with the silence at
sunset on the sandy deserts of Mongolia; not even the barren solitudes
of the deserts of Africa, though the former are partially inhabited, and
the latter utterly void of life. Yet, there was the writer alone with
what looked no better than a corpse lying on the ground. Fortunately,
this state did not last long.

"Mahandu!" uttered a voice, which seemed to come from the bowels of the
earth, on which the Shaman was prostrated. "Peace be with you . . . what
would you have me do for you?"

Startling as the fact seemed, we were quite prepared for it, for we had
seen other Shamans pass through similar performances. "Whoever you are,"
we pronounced mentally, "go to K----, and try to bring that person's
*thought* here. See what that other party does, and tell \*\*\*\*\*\*
what we are doing and how situated."

"I am there"; answered the same voice. "The old lady (kokona) <span
id="fr_1164"></span>[\*](#fn_1163) is sitting in the garden . . . she is
putting on her spectacles and reading a letter."

"The contents of it, and hasten," was the hurried order while preparing
note-book and pencil. The contents were given slowly, as if, while
dictating, the invisible presence desired to afford us time to put down
the words phonetically, for we recognized the Valachian language of
which we know nothing beyond the ability to recognize it. In such a way
a whole page was filled.

"Look west . . . toward the third pole of the yourta," pronounced the
Tartar in his natural voice, though it sounded hollow, and as if coming
from afar. "Her *thought* is here."

Then with a convulsive jerk, the upper portion of the Shaman's body
seemed raised, and his head fell heavily on the writer's feet, which he
clutched with both his hands. The position was becoming less and less
attractive, but curiosity proved a good ally to courage. In the west
corner was standing, life-like but flickering, unsteady and mist-like,
the form of a dear old friend, a Roumanian lady of Valachia, a mystic by
disposition, but a thorough disbeliever in this kind of occult
phenomena.

###### <span id="page_628">p. 628</span>

"Her thought is here, but her body is lying unconscious. We could not
bring her here otherwise," said the voice.

We addressed and supplicated the apparition to answer, but all in vain.
The features moved, and the form gesticulated as if in fear and agony,
but no sound broke forth from the shadowy lips; only we
imagined--perchance it was a fancy--hearing as if from a long distance
the Roumanian words, "*Non se pote*" (it cannot be done).

For over two hours, the most substantial, unequivocal proofs that the
Shaman's astral soul was travelling at the bidding of our unspoken wish,
were given us. Ten months later, we received a letter from our Valachian
friend in response to ours, in which we had enclosed the page from the
note-book, inquiring of her what she had been doing on that day, and
describing the scene in full. She was sitting--she wrote--in the garden
on that morning <span id="fr_1165"></span>[\*](#fn_1164) prosaically
occupied in boiling some conserves; the letter sent to her was word for
word the copy of the one received by her from her brother; all at
once--in consequence of the heat, she thought--she fainted, and
remembered distinctly *dreaming* she saw the writer in a desert place
which she accurately described, and sitting under a "gypsy's tent," as
she expressed it. "Henceforth," she added, "I can doubt no longer!"

But our experiment was proved still better. We had directed the Shaman's
inner *ego* to the same friend heretofore mentioned in this chapter, the
Kutchi of Lha-Ssa, who travels constantly to British India and back. *We
know* that he was apprised of our critical situation in the desert; for
a few hours later came help, and we were rescued by a party of
twenty-five horsemen who had been directed by their chief to find us at
the place where we were, which no living man endowed with common powers
could have known. The chief of this escort was a Shaberon, an "adept"
whom we had never seen before, nor did we after that, for he never left
his *soumay* (lamasery), and we could have no access to it. But

he was a personal friend of the Kutchi.

The above will of course provoke naught but incredulity in the general
reader. But we write for those who will believe; who, like the writer,
understand and know the illimitable powers and possibilities of the
human astral soul. In this case we willingly believe, nay, we know, that
the "spiritual double" of the Shaman did not act alone, for he was no
adept, but simply a medium. According to a favorite expression of his,
as soon as he placed the stone in his mouth, his "father appeared,
dragged him out of his skin, and took him wherever he wanted," and at
his bidding.

###### <span id="page_629">p. 629</span>

one who has only witnessed the chemical, optical, mechanical, and
sleight-of-hand performances of European prestidigitateurs, is not
prepared to see, without amazement, the open-air and off-hand
exhibitions of Hindu jugglers, to say nothing of fakirs. Of the mere
displays of deceptive dexterity we make no account, for Houdin and
others far excel them in that respect; or do we dwell upon feats that
permit of confederacy, whether resorted to or not. It is unquestionably
true that non-expert travellers, especially if of an imaginative turn of
mind, exaggerate inordinately. But our remark is based upon a class of
phenomena not to be accounted for upon any of the familiar hypotheses.
"I have seen," says a gentleman who resided in India, "a man throw up
into the air a number of balls numbered in succession from one upwards.
As each went up--and there was no deception about their going up--the
ball was seen clearly in the air, getting smaller and smaller, till it
disappeared altogether out of sight. When they were all up, twenty or
more, the operator would politely ask which ball you wanted to see, and
then would shout out, 'No. 1,' 'No. 15,' and so on, as instructed by the
spectators, when the ball demanded would bound to his feet violently
from some remote distance. . . . These fellows have very scanty
clothing, and apparently no apparatus whatever. Then, I have seen them
swallow three different colored powders, and then, throwing back the
head, wash them down with water, drunk, in the native fashion, in a
continuous stream from a *lotah,* or brass-pot, held at arm's length
from the lips, and keep on drinking till the swollen body could not hold
another drop, and water overflowed from the lips. Then, these fellows,
after squirting out the water in their mouths, have spat out the three
powders on a clean piece of paper, dry and unmixed." <span
id="fr_1166"></span>[\*](#fn_1165)

In the eastern portion of Turkey and Persia, have dwelt, from time
immemorial, the warlike tribes of the Koordistan. This people of purely
Indo-European origin, and without a drop of Semitic blood in them
(though some ethnologists seem to think otherwise), notwithstanding
their brigand-like disposition, unite in themselves the mysticism of the
Hindu and the practices of the Assyrio-Chaldean magians, vast portions
of whose territory they have helped themselves to, and will not give up,
to please either Turkey or even all Europe. <span
id="fr_1167"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1166) Nominally, Mahometans of the sect
of Omar, their rites and doctrines are purely magical and magian. Even
those who are Christian Nestorians, are Christians but in name. The
Kaldany, numbering nearly 100,000 men,

###### <span id="page_630">p. 630</span>

and with their two Patriarchs, are undeniably rather Manicheans than
Nestorians. Many of them are Yezids.

One of these tribes is noted for its fire-worshipping predilections. At
sunrise and sunset, the horsemen alight and, turning towards the sun,
mutter a prayer; while at every new moon they perform mysterious rites
throughout the whole night. They have a tent set apart for the purpose,
and its thick, black, woolen fabric is decorated with weird signs,
worked in bright red and yellow. In the centre is placed a kind of
altar, encircled by three brass bands, to which are suspended numerous
rings by ropes of camel's hair, which every worshipper holds with his
right hand during the ceremony. On the altar burns a curious,
old-fashioned silver lamp, a relic found possibly among the ruins of
Persepolis. <span id="fr_1168"></span>[\*](#fn_1167) This lamp, with
three wicks, is an oblong cup with a handle to it, and is evidently of
the class of Egyptian sepulchral lamps, once found in such profusion in
the subterranean caves of Memphis, if we may believe Kircher. <span
id="fr_1169"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1168) It widened from its end toward the
middle, and its upper part was of the shape of a heart; the apertures
for the wicks forming a triangle, and its centre being covered by an
inverted heliotrope attached to a gracefully-curved stalk proceeding
from the handle of the lamp. This ornament clearly bespoke its origin.
It was one of the sacred vessels used in sun-worship. The Greeks gave
the *heliotrope* its name from its strange propensity to ever incline
towards the sun. The ancient Magi used it in their worship; and who
knows but Darius had performed the mysterious rites with its triple
light illuminating the face of the king-hierophant!

If we mention the lamp at all, it is because there happened to be a
strange story in connection with it. What the Koords do, during their
nocturnal rites of lunar-worship, we know but from hearsay; for they
conceal it carefully, and no stranger could be admitted to witness the
ceremony. But every tribe has one old man, sometimes several, regarded
as "holy beings," who know the past, and can divulge the secrets of the
future. These are greatly honored, and generally resorted to for
information in cases of theft, murders, or danger.

Travelling from one tribe to the other, we passed some time in company
with these Koords. As our object is not autobiographical, we omit all
details that have no immediate bearing upon some occult fact, and even
of these, have room but for a few. We will then simply state

###### <span id="page_631">p. 631</span>

that a very expensive saddle, a carpet, and two Circassian daggers,
richly mounted and chiselled in gold, had been stolen from the tent, and
that the Koords, with the chief of the tribe at the head, had come,
taking Allah for their witness that the culprit could not belong to
their tribe. We believed it, for it would have been unprecedented among
these nomadic tribes of Asia, as famed for the sacredness in which they
hold their guests, as for the ease with which they plunder and
occasionally murder them, when once they have passed the boundaries of
their

aoul.

A suggestion was then made by a Georgian belonging to our caravan to
have resort to the light of the *koodian* (sorcerer) of their tribe.
This was arranged in great secrecy and solemnity, and the interview
appointed to take place at midnight, when the moon would be at its full.
At the stated hour we were conducted to the above-described tent.

A large hole, or square aperture, was managed in the arched roof of the
tent, and through it poured in vertically the radiant moonbeams,
mingling with the vacillating triple flame of the little lamp. After
several minutes of incantations, addressed, as it seemed to us, to the
moon, the conjurer, an old man of tremendous stature, whose pyramidal
turban touched the top of the tent, produced a round looking-glass, of
the kind known as "Persian mirrors." Having unscrewed its cover, he then
proceeded to breathe on it, for over ten minutes, and wipe off the
moisture from the surface with a package of herbs, muttering
incantations the while *sotto voce.* After every wiping the glass became
more and more brilliant, till its crystal seemed to radiate refulgent
phosphoric rays in every direction. At last the operation was ended; the
old man, with the mirror in his hand, remained as motionless as if he
had been a statue. "Look, Hanoum . . . look steadily," he whispered,
hardly moving his lips. Shadows and dark spots began gathering, where
one moment before nothing was reflected but the radiant face of the full
moon. A few more seconds, and there appeared the well-known saddle,
carpet, and daggers, which seemed to be rising as from a deep, clear
water, and becoming with every instant more definitely outlined. Then a
still darker shadow appeared hovering over these objects, which
gradually condensed itself, and then came out, as visibly as at the
small end of a telescope, the full figure of a man crouching over them.

"I know him!" exclaimed the writer. "It is the Tartar who came to us
last night, offering to sell his mule!"

The image disappeared, as if by enchantment. The old man nodded assent,
but remained motionless. Then he muttered again some strange words, and
suddenly began a song. The tune was slow and monotonous, but after he
had sung a few stanzas in the same unknown tongue, without

###### <span id="page_632">p. 632</span>

changing either rhythm or tune, he pronounced, *recitative-*like*,* the
following words, in his broken Russian:

"Now, Hanoum, look well, whether we will catch him--the fate of the
robber--we will learn this night," etc.

The same shadows began gathering, and then, almost without transition,
we saw the man lying on his back, in a pool of blood, across the saddle,
and two other men galloping off at a distance. Horror-stricken, and sick
at the sight of this picture, we desired to see no more. The old man,
leaving the tent, called some of the Koords standing outside, and seemed
to give them instructions. Two minutes later, a dozen of horsemen were
galloping off at full speed down the side of the mountain on which we
were encamped.

Early in the morning they returned with the lost objects. The saddle was
all covered with coagulated blood, and of course abandoned to them. The
story they told was, that upon coming in sight of the fugitive, they saw
disappearing over the crest of a distant hill two horsemen, and upon
riding up, the Tartar thief was found dead upon the stolen property,
exactly as we had seen him in the magical glass. He had been murdered by
the two banditti, whose evident design to rob him was interrupted by the
sudden appearance of the party sent by the old Koodian.

The most remarkable results are produced by the Eastern "wise men," by
the simple act of breathing upon a person, whether with good or evil
intent. This is pure mesmerism; and among the Persian dervishes who
practice it the animal magnetism is often reinforced by that of the
elements. If a person happens to stand facing a certain wind, there is
always danger, they think; and many of the "learned ones" in occult
matters can never be prevailed upon to go at sunset in a certain
direction from whence blows the wind. We have known an old Persian from
Baku, <span id="fr_1170"></span>[\*](#fn_1169) on the Caspian Sea, who
had the most unenviable reputation for *throwing spells* through the
timely help of this wind, which blows but too often at that town, as its
Persian name itself shows. <span id="fr_1171"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1170) If
a victim, against whom the wrath of the old fiend was kindled, happened
to be

###### <span id="page_633">p. 633</span>

facing this wind, he would appear, as if by enchantment, cross the road
rapidly, and breathe in his face. From that moment, the latter would
find himself afflicted with every evil--he was under the spell of the
"evil eye."

The employment of the human breath by the sorcerer as an adjunct for the
accomplishment of his nefarious purpose, is strikingly illustrated in
several terrible cases recorded in the French annals--notably those of
several Catholic priests. In fact, this species of sorcery was known
from the oldest times. The Emperor Constantine (in Statute iv., *Code de
Malef.,* etc.) prescribed the severest penalties against such as should
employ sorcery to do violence to chastity and excite unlawful passion.
Augustine (*Cite de Dieu*) warns against it; Jerome, Gregory, Nazianzen,
and many other ecclesiastical authorities, lend their denunciation of a
crime not uncommon among the clergy. Baffet (book v., tit. 19, chap. 6)
relates the case of the cure of Peifane, who accomplished the ruin of a
highly-respected and virtuous lady parishioner, the Dame du Lieu, by
resort to sorcery, and was burned alive for it by the Parliament of
Grenoble. In 1611, a priest named Gaufridy was burned by the Parliament
of Provence for seducing a penitent at the confessional, named
Magdelaine de la Palud, *by breathing upon her,* and thus throwing her
into a delirium of sinful love for him.

The above cases are cited in the official report of the famous case of
Father Girard, a Jesuit priest of very great influence, who, in 1731,
was tried before the Parliament of Aix, France, for the seduction of his
parishioner, Mlle. Catherine Cadiere, of Toulon, and certain revolting
crimes in connection with the same. The indictment charged that the
offence was brought about by resort to sorcery. Mlle. Cadiere was a
young lady noted for her beauty, piety, and exemplary virtues. Her
attention to her religious duties was exceptionally rigorous, and that
was the cause of her perdition. Father Girard's eye fell upon her, and
he began to manoeuvre for her ruin. Gaining the confidence of the girl
and her family by his apparent great sanctity, he one day made a pretext
to blow his breath upon her. The girl became instantly affected with a
violent passion for him. She also had ecstatic visions of a religious
character, stigmata, or blood-marks of the "Passion," and hysterical
convulsions. The long-sought opportunity of seclusion with his penitent
finally offering, the Jesuit breathed upon her again, and before the
poor girl recovered her senses, his object had been accomplished. By
sophistry and the excitation of her religious fervor, he kept up this
illicit relation for months, without her suspecting that she had done
anything wrong. Finally, however, her eyes were opened, her parents
informed, and the priest was arraigned. Judgment was rendered October
12th, 1731. Of twenty-five judges,

###### <span id="page_634">p. 634</span>

twelve voted to send him to the stake. The criminal priest was defended
by all the power of the Society of Jesus, and it is said that a million
francs were spent in trying to suppress the evidence produced at the
trial. The facts, however, were printed in a work (in 5 vols., 16mo),
now rare, entitled *Recueil General des Pieces contenues au Procez du
Pere Jean-Baptiste Girard, Jeuite,* etc., etc. <span
id="fr_1172"></span>[\*](#fn_1171)

We have noted the circumstance that, while under the sorcerous influence
of Father Girard, and in illicit relations with him, Mlle. Cadiere's
body was marked with the *stigmata* of the *Passion,* viz.: the bleeding
wounds of thorns on her brow, of nails in her hands and feet, and of a
lance-cut in her side. It should be added that the same marks were seen
upon the bodies of six other penitents of this priest, viz.: Mesdames
Guyol, Laugier, Grodier, Allemande, Batarelle, and Reboul. In fact, it
became commonly remarked that Father Girard's handsome parishioners were
strangely given to ecstasies and *stigmata!* Add this to the fact that,
in the case of Father Gaufridy, above noted, the same thing was proved,
upon surgical testimony, to have happened to Mlle. de Palud, and we have
something worth the attention of all (especially spiritualists) who
imagine these *stigmata* are produced by pure spirits. Barring the
agency of the Devil, whom we have quietly put to rest in another
chapter, Catholics would be puzzled, we fancy, despite all their
infallibility, to distinguish between the stigmata of the sorcerers and
those produced through the intervention of the Holy Ghost or the angels.
The Church records abound in instances of alleged diabolical imitations
of these signs of saintship, but, as we have remarked, the Devil is out
of court.

By those who have followed us thus far, it will naturally be asked, to
what practical issue this book tends; much has been said about magic and
its potentiality, much of the immense antiquity of its practice. Do we
wish to affirm that the occult sciences ought to be studied and
practiced throughout the world? Would we replace modern spiritualism
with the ancient magic? Neither; the substitution could not be made, nor
the study universally prosecuted, without incurring the risk of enormous
public dangers. At this moment, a well-known spiritualist and lecturer
on mesmerism is imprisoned on the charge of raping a subject whom he had
hypnotized. A sorcerer is a public enemy, and mesmerism may most readily
be turned into the worst of sorceries.

We would have neither scientists, theologians, nor spiritualists turn
practical magicians, but all to realize that there was true science,
profound

###### <span id="page_635">p. 635</span>

religion, and genuine phenomena before this modern era. We would that
all who have a voice in the education of the masses should first know
and then *teach* that the safest guides to human happiness and
enlightenment are those writings which have descended to us from the
remotest antiquity; and that nobler spiritual aspirations and a higher
average morality prevail in the countries where the people take their
precepts as the rule of their lives. We would have all to realize that
magical, *i.e*., spiritual powers exist in every man, and those few to
practice them who feel called to teach, and are ready to pay the price
of discipline and self-conquest which their development exacts.

Many men have arisen who had glimpses of the truth, and fancied they had
it all. Such have failed to achieve the good they might have done and
sought to do, because vanity has made them thrust their personality into
such undue prominence as to interpose it between their believers and the
*whole* truth that lay behind. The world needs no sectarian church,
whether of Buddha, Jesus, Mahomet, Swedenborg, Calvin, or any other.
There being but ONE Truth, man requires but one church--the Temple of
God within us, walled in by matter but penetrable by any one who can
find the way;

the pure in heart see God.

The trinity of nature is the lock of magic, the trinity of man the key
that fits it. Within the solemn precincts of the sanctuary the
**S**UPREME had and has no name. It is unthinkable and unpronounceable;
and yet every man finds in himself his god. "Who art thou, O fair
being?" inquires the disembodied soul, in the *Khordah-Avesta,* at the
gates of Paradise. "I am, O Soul, *thy good and pure thoughts,* thy
works and thy *good law* . . . thy angel . . . and thy god." Then man,
or the soul, is reunited with ITSELF, for this "Son of God" is one with
him; it is his own mediator, the *god* of his human soul and his
"Justifier." "*God not revealing himself immediately to man, the spirit
is his interpreter,*" says Plato in the

Banquet.

Besides, there are many good reasons why the study of magic, except in
its broad philosophy, is nearly impracticable in Europe and America.
Magic being what it is, the most difficult of all sciences to learn
experimentally--its acquisition is practically beyond the reach of the
majority of white-skinned people; and that, whether their effort is made
at home or in the East. Probably not more than one man in a million of
European blood is fitted--either physically, morally, or
psychologically--to become a practical magician, and not one in ten
millions would be found endowed with all these three qualifications as
required for the work. Civilized nations lack the phenomenal powers of
endurance, both mental and physical, of the Easterns; the favoring
temperamental idiosyncrasies of the Orientals are utterly wanting in
them. In the Hindu, the

###### <span id="page_636">p. 636</span>

Arabian, the Thibetan, an intuitive perception of the possibilities of
occult natural forces in subjection to human will, comes by inheritance;
and in them, the physical senses as well as the spiritual are far more
finely developed than in the Western races. Notwithstanding the notable
difference of thickness between the skulls of a European and a Southern
Hindu, this difference, being a purely climatic result, due to the
intensity of the sun's rays, involves no psychological principles.
Furthermore, there would be tremendous difficulties in the way of
*training,* if we can so express it. Contaminated by centuries of
dogmatic superstition, by an ineradicable--though quite
unwarranted--sense of superiority over those whom the English term so
contemptuously "niggers," the white European would hardly submit himself
to the practical tuition of either Kopt, Brahman, or Lama. To become a
neophyte, one must be ready to devote himself heart and soul to the
study of mystic sciences. Magic--most imperative of mistresses--brooks
no rival. Unlike other sciences, a theoretical knowledge of formulai
without mental capacities or soul powers, is utterly useless in magic.
The spirit must hold in complete subjection the combativeness of what is
loosely termed educated reason, until facts have vanquished cold human
sophistry.

Those best prepared to appreciate occultism are the spiritualists,
although, through prejudice, until now they have been the bitterest
opponents to its introduction to public notice. Despite all foolish
negations and denunciations, their phenomena are real. Despite, also,
their own assertions they are wholly misunderstood by themselves. The
totally insufficient theory of the constant agency of disembodied human
spirits in their production has been the bane of the *Cause.* A thousand
mortifying rebuffs have failed to open their reason or intuition to the
truth. Ignoring the teachings of the past, they have discovered no
substitute. We offer them philosophical deduction instead of
unverifiable hypothesis, scientific analysis and demonstration instead
of undiscriminating faith. Occult philosophy gives them the means of
meeting the reasonable requirements of science, and frees them from the
humiliating necessity to accept the oracular teachings of
"intelligences," which as a rule have less intelligence than a child at
school. So based and so strengthened, modern phenomena would be in a
position to command the attention and enforce the respect of those who
carry with them public opinion. Without invoking such help, spiritualism
must continue to vegetate, equally repulsed--not without cause--both by
scientists and theologians. In its modern aspect, it is neither a
science, a religion, nor a philosophy.

Are we unjust; does any intelligent spiritualist complain that we have
misstated the case? To what can he point us but to a confusion of
theories, a tangle of hypotheses mutually contradictory? Can he affirm
that

###### <span id="page_637">p. 637</span>

spiritualism, even with its thirty years of phenomena, has any
defensible philosophy; nay, that there is anything like an established
method that is generally accepted and followed by its recognized
representatives?

And yet, there are many thoughtful, scholarly, earnest writers among the
spiritualists, scattered the world over. There are men who, in addition
to a scientific mental training and a reasoned faith in the phenomena
*per se,* possess all the requisites of leaders of the movement. How is
it then, that, except throwing off an isolated volume or so, or
occasional contributions to journalism, they all refrain from taking any
active part in the formation of a system of philosophy? This is from no
lack of moral courage, as their writings well show. Nor because of
indifference, for enthusiasm abounds, and they are sure of their facts.
Nor is it from lack of capacity, because many are men of mark, the peers
of our best minds. It is simply for the reason that, almost without
exception, they are bewildered by the contradictions they encounter, and
wait for their tentative hypotheses to be verified by further
experience. Doubtless this is the part of wisdom. It is that adopted by
Newton, who, with the heroism of an honest, unselfish heart, withheld
for seventeen years the promulgation of his theory of gravitation, only
because he had not verified it to his own satisfaction.

Spiritualism, whose aspect is rather that of aggression than of defense,
has tended toward iconoclasm, and so far has done well. But, in pulling
down, it does not rebuild. Every really substantial truth it erects is
soon buried under an avalanche of chimeras, until all are in one
confused ruin. At every step of advance, at the acquisition of every new
vantage-ground of **F**ACT, some cataclysm, either in the shape of fraud
and exposure, or of premeditated treachery, occurs, and throws the
spiritualists back powerless because they *cannot* and their invisible
friends will not (or perchance can, less than themselves) make good
their claims. Their fatal weakness is that they have but *one* theory to
offer in explanation of their challenged facts--the agency of *human
disembodied spirits,* and the medium's complete subjection to them. They
will attack those who differ in views with them with a vehemence only
warranted by a better cause; they will regard every argument
contradicting their theory as an imputation upon their common sense and
powers of observation; and they will positively refuse even to argue the
question.

How, then, can spiritualism be ever elevated to the distinction of a
science? This, as Professor Tyndall shows, includes three absolutely
necessary elements: observation of facts; induction of laws from these
facts; and verification of those laws by constant practical experience.
What experienced observer will maintain that spiritualism presents
either one of these three elements? The medium is not uniformly
surrounded

###### <span id="page_638">p. 638</span>

by such test conditions that we may be sure of the facts; the inductions
from the supposed facts are unwarranted in the absence of such
verification; and, as a corollary, there has been no sufficient
verification of those hypotheses by experience. In short, the prime
element of accuracy has, as a rule, been lacking.

That we may not be charged with desire to misrepresent the position of
spiritualism, at the date of this present writing, or accused of
withholding credit for advances actually made, we will cite a few
passages from the London *Spiritualist* of March 2, 1877. At the
fortnightly meeting, held February 19, a debate occurred upon the
subject of "Ancient Thought and Modern Spiritualism." Some of the most
intelligent Spiritualists of England participated. Among these was Mr.
W. Stainton Moses, M. A., who has recently given some attention to the
relation between ancient and modern phenomena. He said: "Popular
spiritualism is not scientific; it does very little in the way of
scientific verification. Moreover, exoteric spiritualism is, to a large
extent, devoted to presumed communion with personal friends, or to the
gratification of curiosity, or the mere evolution of marvels. . . . The
truly esoteric science of spiritualism is very rare, and not more rare
than valuable. To it we must look to the origination of knowledge which
may be developed exoterically. . . . We proceed too much on the lines of
the physicists; our tests are crude, and often illusory; we know too
little of the Protean power of spirit. Here the ancients were far ahead
of us, and can teach us much. We have not introduced any certainty into
the conditions--a necessary prerequisite for true scientific experiment.
This is largely owing to the fact that our circles are constructed on no
principle. . . . We have not even mastered the elementary truths which
the ancients knew and acted on, *e.g*., the isolation of mediums. We
have been so occupied with wonder-hunting that we have hardly tabulated
the phenomena, or propounded one theory to account for the production of
the simplest of them. . . . We have never faced the question: What is
the intelligence? This is the great blot, the most frequent source of
error, and here we might learn with advantage from the ancients. There
is the strongest disinclination among spiritualists to admit the
possibility of the truth of occultism. In this respect they are as hard
to convince as is the outer world of spiritualism. Spiritualists start
with a fallacy, viz.: that all phenomena are caused by the action of
departed human spirits; *they have not looked into the powers of the
human spirit*; they do not know the extent to which spirit acts, how far
it reaches, what it underlies."

Our position could not be better defined. If Spiritualism has a future,
it is in the keeping of such men as Mr. Stainton Moses.

###### <span id="page_639">p. 639</span>

Our work is done--would that it were better done! But, despite our
inexperience in the art of book-making, and the serious difficulty of
writing in a foreign tongue, we hope we have succeeded in saying some
things that will remain in the minds of the thoughtful. The enemies of
truth have been all counted, and all passed in review. Modern science,
powerless to satisfy the aspirations of the race, makes the future a
void, and bereaves man of hope. In one sense, it is like the Baital
Pachisi, the Hindu vampire of popular fancy, which lives in dead bodies,
and feeds but on the rottenness of matter. The theology of Christendom
has been rubbed threadbare by the most serious minds of the day. It is
found to be, on the whole, subversive, rather than promotive of
spirituality and good morals. Instead of expounding the rules of divine
law and justice, it teaches but *itself.* In place of an ever-living
Deity, it preaches the Evil One, and makes him indistinguishable from
God Himself! "Lead us not into temptation" is the aspiration of
Christians. Who, then, is the tempter? Satan? No; the prayer is not
addressed to him. It is that tutelar genius who hardened the heart of
Pharaoh, put an evil spirit into Saul, sent lying messengers to the
prophets, and tempted David to sin; it is--the *Bible*-God of Israel!

Our examination of the multitudinous religious faiths that mankind,
early and late, have professed, most assuredly indicates that they have
all been derived from one primitive source. It would seem as if they
were all but different modes of expressing the yearning of the
imprisoned human soul for intercourse with supernal spheres. As the
white ray of light is decomposed by the prism into the various colors of
the solar spectrum, so the beam of divine truth, in passing through the
*three-sided* prism of man's nature, has been broken up into
vari-colored fragments called RELIGIONS. And, as the rays of the
spectrum, by imperceptible shadings, merge into each other, so the great
theologies that have appeared at different degrees of divergence from
the original source, have been connected by minor schisms, schools, and
off-shoots from the one side or the other. Combined, their aggregate
represents one eternal truth; separate, they are but shades of human
error and the signs of imperfection. The worship of the Vedic *pitris*
is fast becoming the worship of the spiritual portion of mankind. It but
needs the right perception of things objective to finally discover that
the only world of reality is the subjective.

What has been contemptuously termed Paganism, was ancient wisdom replete
with Deity; and Judaism and its offspring, Christianity and Islamism,
derived whatever of inspiration they contained from this ethnic parent.
Pre-Vedic Brahmanism and Buddhism are the double source from which all
religions sprung; Nirvana is the ocean to which all tend.

###### <span id="page_640">p. 640</span>

For the purposes of a philosophical analysis, we need not take account
of the enormities which have blackened the record of many of the world's
religions. True faith is the embodiment of divine charity; those who
minister at its altars, are but human. As we turn the blood-stained
pages of ecclesiastical history, we find that, whoever may have been the
hero, and whatever costumes the actors may have worn, the plot of the
tragedy has ever been the same. But the Eternal Night was in and behind
all, and we pass from what we see to that which is invisible to the eye
of sense. Our fervent wish has been to show true souls how they may lift
aside the curtain, and, in the brightness of that Night made Day, look
with undazzled gaze upon the **U**NVEILED **T**RUTH.

THE END.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[591:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1129) In its general
sense, *Isvara* means "Lord"; but the Isvara of the mystic philosophers
of India was understood precisely as the union and communion of men with
the Deity of the Greek mystics. *Isvara-Parasada* means, literally, in
Sanscrit, *grace*. Both of the "Mimansas," treating of the most abstruse
questions, explain *Karma* as merit, or the *efficacy of works*;
Isvara-Parasada, as grace; and *Sradha,* as faith. The "Mimansas" are
the work of the two most celebrated theologians of India. The
"Pourva-Mimansa" was written by the philosopher Djeminy, and the
"Outtara-Mimansa" (or Vedanta), by Richna Dvipayna Vyasa, who collected
the four "Vedas" together. (See Sir William Jones, Colebrooke, and
others.)

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[592:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1130) Suetonius:
"August."

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[592:\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1131) Plutarch.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[592:\*\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1132) "Pliny," xxx.,
pp. 2, 14.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[592:\*\*\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1133) "Servius ad.
Æon," p. 71.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[593:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1134) Peary Chand
Mittra: "The Psychology of the Aryas"; "Human Nature," for March, 1877.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[596:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1135) The Boulogne
(France) correspondent of an English journal says that he knows of a
gentleman who has had an arm amputated at the shoulder, "who is certain
that he has a spiritual arm, which he sees and actually feels with his
other hand. He can touch anything, and even pull up things with the
spiritual or phantom arm and hand." The party knows nothing of
spiritualism. We give this as we get it, without verification, but it
merely corroborates what we have seen in the case of an Eastern adept.
This eminent scholar and practical kabalist can at will project his
astral arm, and with the hand take up, move, and carry objects, even at
a considerable distance from where he may be sitting or standing. We
have often seen him thus minister to the wants of a favorite elephant.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[596:\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1136) Answer to a
question at "The National Association of Spiritualists," May 14th, 1877.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[597:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1137) "A Buddhist's
Opinions of the Spiritual States."

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[597:\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1138) See the "London
Spiritualist," May 25, 1877, p. 246.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[598:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1139) See Coleman's
"Hindu Mythology."

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[599:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1140) Russian subjects
are not allowed to cross the Tartar territory, neither the subjects of
the Emperor of China to go to the Russian factories.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[599:\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1141) These are the
representatives of the Buddhist Trinity, Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, or
Fo, Fa, and Sengh, as they are called in Thibet.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[600:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1142) A Bikshu is not
allowed to accept anything directly even from laymen of his own people,
least of all from a foreigner. The slightest contact with the body and
even dress of a person not belonging to their special community is
carefully avoided. Thus even the offerings brought by us and which
comprised pieces of red and yellow *pou-lou,* a sort of woollen fabric
the lamas generally wear, had to pass through strange ceremonies. They
are forbidden, 1, to ask or beg for anything--even were they
starving--having to wait until it is voluntarily offered; 2, to touch
either gold or silver with their hands; 3, to eat a morsel of food, even
when presented, unless the donor distinctly says to the disciple, "This
is for your master to *eat*." Thereupon, the disciple turning to the
*pazen* has to offer the food in his turn, and when he has said,
"Master, this is allowed; take and eat," then only can the lama take it
with the right hand, and partake of it. All our offerings had to pass
through such purifications. When the silver pieces, and a few handfuls
of annas (a coin equal to four cents) were at different occasions
offered to the community, a disciple first wrapped his hand in a yellow
handkerchief, and receiving it on his palm, conveyed the sum immediately
into the *Badir,* called elsewhere *Sabait*, a sacred basin, generally
wooden, kept for offerings.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[600:\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1143) These stones are
highly venerated among Lamaists and Buddhists; the throne and sceptre of
Buddha are ornamented with them, and the Taley Lama wears one on the
fourth finger of the right hand. They are found in the Altai Mountains,
and near the river Yarkuh. Our talisman was a gift from the venerable
high-priest, a *Heiloung,* of a Kalmuck tribe. Though treated as
apostates from their primitive Lamaism, these nomads maintain friendly
intercourse with their brother Kalmucks, the Chokhots of Eastern Thibet
and Kokonor, but even with the Lamaists of Lha-Ssa. The ecclesiastical
authorities however, will have no relations with them. We have had
abundant opportunities to become acquainted with this interesting people
of the Astrakhan Steppes, having lived in their *Kibitkas* in our early
years, and partaken of the lavish hospitality of the Prince Tumene,
their late chief, and his Princess. In their religious ceremonies, the
Kalmucks employ trumpets made from the thigh and arm bones of deceased
rulers and high priests.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[603:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1144) The Buddhist
Kalmucks of the Astrakhan steppes are accustomed to make their idols out
of the cremated ashes of their princes and priests. A relative of the
author has in her collection several small pyramids composed of the
ashes of eminent Kalmucks and presented to her by the Prince Tumene
himself in 1836.

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[603:\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1145) The sacred fan
used by the chief priests instead of an umbrella.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[603:\*\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1146) See vol. i.,
p. 476.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[606:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1147) See his "Lectures
on Sound."

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[607:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1148) From the compound
word sutra, maxim or precept, and antika, close or near.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[608:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1149) It sounds like
injustice to Asoka to compare him with Constantine, as is done by
several Orientalists. If, in the religious and political sense, Asoka
did for India what Constantine is alleged to have achieved for the
Western World, all similarity stops there.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[614:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1150) See "Indian
Sketches"; Appleton's "New Cyclopedia," etc.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[616:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1151) Aum (mystic
Sanscrit term of the Trinity), *mani* (holy jewel), *padme* (*in* the
lotus, padma being the name for lotus), *houm* (be it so). The six
syllables in the sentence correspond to the six chief powers of nature
emanating from Buddha (the abstract deity, not Gautama), who is the
s*eventh,* and the Alpha and Omega of being.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[616:\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1152) Moru (the pure)
is one of the most famous lamaseries of Lha-Ssa, directly in the centre
of the city. There the Shaberon, the Taley Lama, resides the greater
portion of the winter months; during two or three months of the warm
season his abode is at Foht-lla. At Moru is the largest typographical
establishment of the country.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[617:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1153) The Buddhist great
canon, containing 1,083 works in several hundred volumes, many of which
treat of magic.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[618:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1154) "Crawfurd's
Mission to Siam," p. 182.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[619:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1155) "Semedo," vol.
iii., p. 114.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[619:\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1156) There was an
anecdote current among Daguerre's friends between 1838 and 1840. At an
evening party, Madame Daguerre, some two months previous to the
introduction of the celebrated Daguerrean process to the *Academie des
Sciences,* by Arago (January, 1839), had an earnest consultation with
one of the medical celebrities of the day about her husband's mental
condition. After explaining to the physician the numerous symptoms of
what she believed to be her husband's mental aberration, she added, with
tears in her eyes, that the greatest proof to her of Daguerre's insanity
was his firm conviction that he would succeed in nailing his own shadow
to the wall, or fixing it on *magical* metallic plates. The physician
listened to the intelligence very attentively, and answered that he had
himself observed in Daguerre lately the strongest symptoms of what, to
his mind, was an undeniable proof of madness. He closed the conversation
by firmly advising her to send her husband quietly and without delay to
Bicetre, the well-known lunatic asylum. Two months later a profound
interest was created in the world of art and science by the exhibition
of a number of pictures taken by the new process. The *shadows* were
fixed, after all, upon metallic plates, and the "lunatic" proclaimed the
father of photography.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[620:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1157) Schott: "Uber den
Buddhismus," p. 71.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[620:\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1158) "The Book of Ser
Marco Polo," vol. ii., p. 352.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[620:\*\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1159) Ibid., vol.
ii., p. 130, quoted by Col. Yule in vol. ii., p. 353.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[621:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1160) No country in the
world can boast of more medicinal plants than Southern India, Cochin,
Burmah, Siam, and Ceylon. European physicians--according to time-honored
practice--settle the case of professional rivalship, by treating the
native doctors as quacks and empirics; but this does not prevent the
latter from being often successful in cases in which eminent graduates
of British and French schools of Medicine have signally failed. Native
works on Materia Medica do not certainly contain the secret remedies
known, and successfully applied by the native doctors (the Atibba), from
time immemorial; and yet the best febrifuges have been learned by
British physicians from the <span id="page_622">p. 622</span> Hindus,
and where patients, deafened and swollen by abuse of quinine, were
slowly dying of fever under the treatment of enlightened physicians, the
bark of the Margosa, and the Chiretta herb have cured them completely,
and these now occupy an honorable place among European drugs.

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[622:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1161) The Hindu
appellation for the peculiar mantram or charm which prevents the serpent
from biting.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[624:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1162) Between the bells
of the "heathen" worshippers, and the bells and pomegranates of the
Jewish worship, the difference is this: the former, besides purifying
the soul of man with their harmonious tones, kept *evil* demons at a
distance, "for the sound of pure bronze breaks the enchantment," says
Tibullius (i., 8-22), and the latter explained it by saying that the
sound of the bells "should be heard \[by the Lord\] when he \[the
priest\] goeth in unto the holy place before the Lord, and when he goeth
out, *that he die not*" (Exodus xxviii. 33; Eccles. xiv. 9). Thus, one
sound served to keep away *evil* spirits, and the other, the Spirit of
Jehovah. The Scandinavian traditions affirm that the Trolls were always
driven from their abodes by the bells of the churches. A similar
tradition is in existence in relation to the fairies of Great Britain.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[626:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1163) An elemental
daemon, in which every native of Asia believes.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[627:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1164) Lady, or Madam, in
Moldavian.

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[628:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1165) The hour in
Bucharest corresponded perfectly with that of the country in which the
scene had taken place.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[629:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1166) Capt. W. L. D.
O'Grady: "Life in India."

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[629:\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1167) Neither Russia
nor England succeeded in 1849 in forcing them to recognize and respect
the Turkish from the Persian territory.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[630:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1168) Persepolis is the
Persian Istakhaar, northeast of Shiraz; it stood on a plain now called
Merdusht. At the confluence of the ancient Medus and the Araxes, now
Pulwan and Bend-emir.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[630:\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1169) "Ægyptiaci
Theatrum Hierogliphicum," p. 544.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[632:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1170) We have twice
assisted at the strange rites of the remnants of that sect of
fire-worshippers known as the Guebres, who assemble from time to time at
Baku, on the "field of fire." This ancient and mysterious town is
situated near the Caspian Sea. It belongs to Russian Georgia. About
twelve miles northeast from Baku stands the remnant of an ancient Guebre
temple, consisting of four columns, from whose empty orifices issue
constantly jets of flame, which gives it, therefore, the name of Temple
of the Perpetual Fire. The whole region is covered with lakes and
springs of naphtha. Pilgrims assemble there from distant parts of Asia,
and a priesthood, worshipping the divine principle of fire, is kept by
some tribes, scattered hither and thither about the country.

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[632:\*\*](iu111.htm#fr_1171)
Baadey-ku-Ba--literally "a gathering of winds."

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[634:\*](iu111.htm#fr_1172) See also "Magic
and Mesmerism," a novel reprinted by the Harpers, thirty years ago.
