<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../chr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jlgi07.md) 
[Next](jlgi09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/156459498X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574J6/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jesus, the Last Great Initiate*, by Edouard Schuré, \[1908\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

### CHAPTER V

### FINAL JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM—THE PROMISE—THE SUPPER—TRIAL OF JESUS—DEATH AND RESURRECTION

"<span class="smallcaps">Hosanna</span> to the son of David!" This was
the cry which greeted Jesus as he entered by the eastern gate of
Jerusalem, along streets covered with branches of palm trees. They who
welcomed him with such enthusiasm were adherents of the Galilean prophet
who had assembled from both without and within the town to greet him
with this ovation. They were welcoming him who was to free Israel, who
would soon be crowned king. Even the twelve apostles still shared this
illusion in spite of all Jesus had said. He alone, the proclaimed
Messiah, knew that he was advancing to his death, and that only
afterwards would even his disciples penetrate the inner sanctuary of his
thought. Resolutely was he offering himself, of his own free will, and
fully conscious of the end. Hence his resignation, his sweet serenity.
As he passed beneath the colossal porch, cut in the gloomy fortress of
Jerusalem, the cry resounded beneath the vault and pursued him like the
voice of Destiny, seizing its prey: "Hosanna to the son of David!"

By this solemn entrance into the city, Jesus publicly declared to the
religious authorities of Jerusalem that he took upon himself the rôle of
the Messiah, with all its consequences. The following morning he
appeared in

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

the temple, in the Gentiles’ Court, and, advancing towards the
cattle-dealers and money-changers who by usury and the deafening click
of money profaned the parvise of the holy place, he uttered against them
Isaiah's words: "It is written, My house shall be called the house of
prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves." The dealers fled,
carrying off their tables and money-bags, intimidated by the partisans
of the prophet who formed a solid rampart around him, and even more
terrified by his imperious gesture and flashing look. The astonished
priests marvelled at this boldness and manifestation of power. A
deputation from the Sanhedrim came demanding an explanation, with the
words: "By what authority doest thou these things?" To this insidious
question Jesus, as was his wont, replied by a question no less
embarrassing for his enemies: "Whence was the baptism of John, from
heaven or of men?" Had the Pharisees replied: "From heaven," Jesus would
have said, "Then why did you not believe him?" Had they said, "From
men," they would have had to consider the anger of the people who looked
upon John the Baptist as a prophet. Accordingly, they replied: "We
cannot tell." "Neither tell I you," said Jesus, "by what authority I do
these things." Once the blow warded off, however, he assumed the
offensive and added: "Verily I say unto you, the publicans and harlots
go into the kingdom of God before you." Then in a parable he compared
them to the wicked husbandman, who kills his master's son so as to
inherit the vineyard; and he called himself: "the stone which had become
the head of the corner, and which should grind into powder whomsoever it
should fall upon." These acts and words show that in making this final
journey

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

to Israel's capital, Jesus wished to cut off all retreat. His enemies
had long been in possession of the two great keys of accusation
necessary for his ruin: his threats against the temple, and the
affirmation that he was the Messiah. These last attacks exasperated his
enemies; from that moment his death, determined upon by the authorities,
was only a matter of time. Since his entrance into Jerusalem, the most
influential members of the Sanhedrim, Scribes and Pharisees, reconciled
in common hatred against Jesus, had come to an understanding on the
death of this "seducer of the people." They hesitated only on the matter
of seizing him in public, for they dreaded a rising of the people. On
different occasions already, officials sent against him had returned,
won over by his words, or alarmed at the multitudes of people. Often had
the soldiers of the temple seen him disappear from their midst in
mysterious fashion. So also had the Emperor Domitian, fascinated and
struck with blindness, so to speak, by the image he wished to condemn,
seen Apollonius of Tyana disappear from before the tribunal and from the
midst of his guards! The struggle between Jesus and the priests thus
continued from day to day with increasing hatred on their side, and on
his, an enthusiastic strength and impetuosity, given him by the
certainty he felt as to the fatal issue. This was his last assault
against the powers of the day; in it he manifested a mighty energy as
well as that masculine force which like a coat of mail clothed that
sublime tenderness of his, which might be called: The Eternal-Feminine
of his soul. This formidable combat ended in terrible maledictions
against these debasers of religion: "Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
who shut up the kingdom of heaven against such as

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

wish to enter in. Ye fools and blind, who pay tithes and neglect
justice, pity, and fidelity; ye are like unto whited sepulchres which
appear beautiful from without, but are within full of dead men's bones
and of all uncleanness."

After having thus branded religious hypocrisy and false sacerdotal
authority what had for centuries held sway, Jesus considered his
struggles at an end. He left Jerusalem with his disciples and proceeded
to the Mount of Olives. As they ascended, Herod's temple could be seen
in all its majesty, with its terraces and vast porticoes, its
sculpturing of white marble incrusted with jasper and porphyry, and its
dazzling roof of gold and silver. The disciples, discouraged and under
the presentiment of a catastrophe, drew the master's attention to the
splendor of the building he was leaving forever. Their words were tinged
with melancholy and regret, for, to the last, they had hoped to take
their seats therein as judges of Israel around the Messiah, the crowned
priest-king. Jesus turned, facing the temple. and said: "See ye not all
these things? Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left here one
stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down." <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md) He was judging the duration of the temple
of Jehovah by the moral worth of those who ruled therein. He meant that
fanaticism, intolerance, and hatred were not sufficient arms against the
battle-axes and battering-rams of the Roman Cæsar. With the insight of
the initiate, which had become more intense through that clairvoyance
given by the approach of death, he saw the Judaic pride, the policy of
their king, the whole Jewish history, terminate fatally in this
catastrophe. Triumph did not exist there, it was rather

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

in the prophetic thought, the universal religion, that invisible temple
which he alone at that hour had full consciousness of. As for the
ancient citadel of Zion and the temple of stone, he already saw the
angel of destruction standing, sword in hand, at its doors.

Jesus knew that his hour was nigh, but he did not wish to fall into the
hands of the Sanhedrim, so he withdrew to Bethany. As he had a
predilection for the Mount of Olives, he came there almost daily to
converse with his disciples. From the summit the view was magnificent.
The range of vision embraces the rugged mountains of Judæa and Moab,
with their purplish-blue tints, whilst away in the distance could be
caught a glimpse of the Dead Sea, like a leaden-hued mirror, from whose
surface rise dense sulphurous mists. At the foot of the mountain
stretched Jerusalem, the Temple, and the citadel of Zion towering above
all other edifices. Even in these days, as twilight descends on the
dark, mysterious gorges of Hinnom and Jehoshaphat, the city of David and
of the Christ, protected by the sons of Ishmael, rises in imposing
majesty above these gloomy valleys. Its cupolas and minarets reflect the
fading light of the heavens and seem to be ever awaiting the angels of
judgment. It was there Jesus gave the disciples his final instructions
regarding the future of the religion he had come to found, and the
destiny of mankind, thus bequeathing them his promise—at once
terrestrial and divine—intimately wedded with his esoteric teaching.

Evidently the writers of the Synoptic Gospels have handed down to us the
apocalyptic sayings of Jesus amid a confusion which renders them almost
impenetrable. Their meaning only begins to become intelligible

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

in John's Gospel. If Jesus had really believed in his return on the
clouds, some years after his death, as is admitted according to the
naturalistic interpretation; or if he had imagined that the end of the
world, and the last judgment of men would take place in this manner, as
orthodox theology believes, he would have been a very ordinary visionary
indeed, instead of the sage initiate, the sublime seer every word of his
teaching and every action of his life proclaim him to have been. It is
evident that here, especially, his words must be understood in their
allegorical signification according to the transcendent symbolism of the
prophets. John's Gospel, the one which has most fully handed down to us
the Master's esoteric teaching, forces this interpretation, so perfectly
in accord as it is with the parabolical genius of Jesus, when he relates
the Master's words: "I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now.… These things have I spoken unto you in parables,
but the time cometh when I shall no more speak unto you in parables, but
I shall show you plainly of the Father."

The solemn promise of Jesus to the apostles embraces four objects, four
increasing spheres of planetary and cosmic life: the individual psychic
life; the national life of Israel; the earthly evolution and end of
humanity as well as the divine. Let us take one by one these four
spheres through which radiates the thought of the Christ before his
martyrdom, like the setting sun, filling with its glory the whole
terrestrial atmosphere right to the zenith, before shining on other
worlds.

1\. *The first judgment* signifies the ultimate destiny of the soul
after death. This is determined by its own inner nature and the acts of
its life. I have already

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

expounded this doctrine, with reference to Jesus’ conversation with
Nicodemus. On the Mount of Olives he says to his disciples: "Take heed
to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day
come upon you unawares.'' <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) And again:
"Be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of man
cometh." <span id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31.md)

2\. *The destruction of the temple and the end of Israel*. "Nation shall
rise against nation.… They shall deliver you up to be afflicted.… Verily
I say unto you, This generation shall not pass till all these things be
fulfilled." <span id="fr_32"></span>[3](#fn_32.md)

3\. *The terrestrial aim of humanity*, which is not fixed at some
definite epoch, but must be reached by a graduated series of successive
realizations. This aim is the coming of the social Christ or the divine
man on earth; *i. e.*, the organization of Truth, Justice, and Love in
human society, and consequently, the pacification of the nations. Isaiah
had already foretold this distant epoch in a splendid vision beginning
with the words: "For I know their works and their thoughts; it shall
come that I will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come and
see my glory. And I will set a sign among them," &c., &c. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[4](#fn_33.md) Jesus completing this prophecy explains to
his disciples what this sign shall be; the complete unveiling of the
mysteries or the coming of the Holy Ghost, whom he also calls the
Comforter or "the spirit of Truth

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

which shall lead you into all truth." <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md) The apostles shall have this revelation
beforehand, the mass of humanity in the course of time. But whenever it
takes place in an individual consciousness or among a group of men, it
pierces through and through. "For as the lightning cometh out of the
east and shineth even unto the west, so shall also the coming of the son
of man be." <span id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35.md) Thus, when the central
and spiritual truth is kindled it illumines all other truths throughout
creation.

4\. *The last judgment* signifies the end of the cosmic evolution of
humanity, or its entrance into a definitely spiritual state. This is
what Persian Esoterism had called the victory of Ormuzd over the
Ahrimanes, or of Spirit over Matter. Hindu Esoterism named it the
complete reabsorption of matter by Spirit, or the end of a day of
Brahma. After thousands of centuries a period must come when, through
series of births and rebirths, incarnations and regenerations, the
individuals composing a humanity shall have definitely entered the
spiritual state, or been annihilated as conscious souls by evil, *i. e.*
by their own passions symbolized by the fire of Gehenna and gnashing of
teeth. "Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven … they
shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds.… He shall send his angels
with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his
elect from the four winds." <span id="fr_36"></span>[3](#fn_36.md) The *Son
of Man*, a generic term, here signifies humanity in its perfect
representation, *i. e.* the small number of those who have raised
themselves to the rank

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

of Sons of God. His *Sign* is the Lamb and the Cross, *i. e.*, Love and
Eternal Life. The *Cloud* is the image of the Mysteries which have
become translucid, as well as of the subtle matter transfigured by the
spirit; of the fluidic substance which is no longer a dense obscure
veil, but a light transparent garment of the soul, no longer a gross
obstacle, but an expression of the truth; no longer a deceptive
appearance but spiritual truth itself, the inner world instantaneously
and directly manifested. The *Angels* who gather together the Elect are
glorified spirits, who have themselves sprung from humanity. The
*Trumpet* they sound symbolizes the living word of the Spirit, which
lays bare the real nature of the soul, and destroys all lying
appearances of matter.

Jesus, feeling his end near, thus explained to his astonished disciples
the lofty perspectives which from bygone times had formed part of the
doctrine of the mysteries, but to which each religious founder has
always given personal form and color. To engrave these truths on their
minds and facilitate their propagation, he summed them up in such images
as were characterized by extreme boldness and incisive energy. The
revealing image and speaking symbol formed the universal language of the
ancient initiates. Such a language possesses a communicative virtue, a
power of concentration and duration lacking in the abstract term. In
using it, Jesus merely followed the example of Moses and the prophets.
He knew the Idea would not immediately be understood, but he wished to
impress it in letters of flame in the simple souls of his followers,
leaving to succeeding ages the task of generating the powers contained
in his word. Jesus feels himself one with all the prophets of the earth
who had gone before, as he had

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

done, messengers of Life and of the eternal Word. In this sentiment of
unity and solidarity with immutable truth, he dared address to his
afflicted disciples the proud words: "Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but my word shall not pass away."

These mornings and evenings on the Mount of Olives flew swiftly by. One
day, obedient to an impulse peculiar to his ardent and impressionable
nature, which caused him suddenly to descend from the most sublime
heights to the sufferings of earth, which he felt as his own, he shed
tears over Jerusalem, the holy city and its inhabitants, whose frightful
destiny he foresaw. His own was also approaching with giant strides. The
Sanhedrim had already discussed his fate and decided on his death. Judas
Iscariot had already promised to deliver his master into their hands. It
was not sordid avarice, but rather ambition and wounded pride which
occasioned this black treachery. Judas, a type of cold egoism and
absolute positivism, incapable of the faintest idealism, had become a
disciple of the Christ merely from a spirit of [worldly](errata.htm#11.md)
speculation. He was relying on the earthly and immediate triumph of the
prophet, and on his own consequent gain. The Master's profound words: He
who wishes to save his life shall lose it, and he who is willing to lose
it, shall save it; had no meaning for him. Jesus, in his boundless
charity, had received him as one of his disciples, in the hope of
changing his nature. When Judas saw that matters were not proceeding as
he wished, that Jesus and his disciples were compromised, and himself
deceived in his hopes, his deception became converted into a feeling of
rage. The wretch denounced the man, who, in his eyes, was only a false
Messiah who had deceived him. The penetrating

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

insight of Jesus told him what was taking place in the mind of the
faithless apostle. He now determined he would no longer avoid the
destiny whose inextricable folds were daily tightening around him. It
was the eve of Easter, so he ordered his disciples to prepare the meal
at a friend's house in the town. He foresaw it would be his last repast,
and accordingly wished to give it an exceptional solemnity.

Now we enter upon the final act of the Messianic drama. In order to
thoroughly understand the spirit and work of Jesus, it has been
necessary to shed an inner light on the first two acts of his life; his
initiation and public career. Subsequently, the inner drama of his
consciousness has been unfolded. The final act of his life, or the drama
of the passion, is the logical consequence of the two preceding. Since
it is known to all. it explains itself, for the peculiarity of the
sublime is that it is at once simple, grandiose, and clear. The drama of
the passion has powerfully contributed to the institution of
Christianity. It has drawn tears from every human being possessed of a
heart, and converted millions of souls. Throughout all these scenes the
gospels are of incomparable beauty. Even John descends from his lofty
heights, and his circumstantiated account assumes a character of
poignant truth such as an eyewitness alone could give. Every one may
live again in himself the divine drama, no one could recreate it. And
yet, in ending my task, I must concentrate the rays of esoteric
tradition on the three essential events by which the life of the divine
Master came to an end: the Holy Supper, the trial of the Messiah, and
the Resurrection. If light is thrown on these points, it will be
reflected

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

backwards on the whole career of the Christ, and forwards on the
succeeding history of Christianity.

The twelve, forming thirteen with the Master, had met in the upper room
of a house in Jerusalem. The unknown friend, Jesus’ host, had covered
the floor with a rich carpet. In oriental fashion the Master and his
disciples reclined on four large divans in the form of triclinia
arranged around the table. When the paschal lamb, and the golden chalice
lent by the friend had been brought into the room, and the vases filled
with wine, Jesus, seated between John and Peter, said: "With desire I
have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer: For I say
unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the
kingdom of God." <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md) Thereupon their
countenances became overshadowed: silence filled the air. "The disciple
whom Jesus loved," who alone divined everything, bowed his head on the
Master's breast. As was usual among the Jews at the Easter meal, not a
word was uttered as they ate the bitter herbs and charoset placed before
them. Finally Jesus took bread, and after giving thanks, he brake it and
distributed unto them, saying: "This is my body which is given for you:
this do in remembrance of me." He also took the cup, saying: "This cup
is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you." <span
id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38.md)

Such is the institution of the Supper in all its simplicity. It has a
far wider signification than is generally granted or known, for not only
is the mystical and symbolic act the conclusion and *résumé* of the
entire teaching of the Christ, it is the consecration and rejuvenation
of a very ancient symbol of initiation. Among the initiates

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

of Egypt and Chaldea, as among the prophets and Essenes, the fraternal
agape marked the first stage of initiation. The Communion, under the
element of bread, the fruit of the sheaf, signified knowledge of the
mysteries of earthly life, as well as a sharing of terrestrial
blessings, and consequently the perfect union of affiliated brothers. In
the higher degree, communion under the element of wine, the blood of the
vine, penetrated through and through by the sun, signified the sharing
of heavenly blessings, a participation in spiritual mysteries and divine
science. Jesus, in bequeathing these symbols to the apostles, enlarged
their meaning. Through them he extends to the whole of mankind
fraternity and initiation,, formerly limited to the few. To them he adds
the profoundest of mysteries, the greatest of forces, that of his own
sacrifice. This he converts into the invisible but infrangible chain of
love between himself and his followers. It will give his glorified soul
a divine power over their hearts, as well as over the hearts of all men.
This cup of truth which had come from distant prophetic ages, this
golden chalice of initiation which the old Essene had offered him in
addressing him as prophet, this chalice of celestial love the Sons of
God had offered him in the ecstasy of his loftiest rapture—this cup in
which he now sees his own blood reflected—he now gives over to his
well-beloved disciples with the ineffable tenderness of a last farewell.

Do the apostles see and understand this redeeming, world-embracing
thought? It shines in the Master's profound though sorrowful glance, as
he turns from the "disciple he loved" to the one about to betray him.
No, they do not yet understand; they seem to breathe with difficulty, as
though under the power of some frightful

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

dream; a kind of heavy, ruddy vapor floats in the air, and they wonder
as to the source of that strange radiance about the Christ head. When,
finally, Jesus tells them that he is about to spend the night in prayer
on the Mount of Olives, and as he rises, requests them to follow him,
they no longer doubt as to what is about to happen.

\*      \*      \*      \*      \*      \*      \*

The night is past; the anguish of Gethsemane at an end. With terrifying
clearness he has seen the infernal circle about to destroy him grow less
and less. In the horror of the situation, and the dreadful momentary
expectation of being seized by his enemies, a shudder passed through his
frame; for a moment his soul shrank before the tortures that awaited
him; drops of bloody sweat stood on his brow. Then prayer came to his
aid.… Confused cries, torches flashing beneath the gloomy olive-trees,
the clash of arms, were so many signs testifying to the approach of a
band of soldiers sent by the Sanhedrim. Judas, at their head, kisses his
Master, so that they may recognize the prophet. Jesus returns the kiss
with a look of ineffable compassion, and says to him: "Friend, wherefore
art thou come?" The effect of this gentleness, this brotherly kiss given
in exchange for the basest treason, will be such on that
heart—notwithstanding its hardness—that, a moment later, Judas, overcome
with horror and remorse, will take his own life. And now, with rude,
cruel hands, the soldiers have seized the Galilean rabbi. After a brief
resistance the terrified disciples have fled. Peter and John alone
remain at hand, and follow the Master to the tribunal. Their hearts are
well-nigh broken as they anxiously await his fate. Jesus has now
regained control over himself; from

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

that moment not a single protest or complaint will break from his lips.

The entire Sanhedrin is hastily assembled, and Jesus is brought into
their presence at midnight, for the court is determined to deal promptly
with the dangerous prophet. Priests and sacrificers, turbans on their
heads and wearing purple, yellow and violet tunics, are solemnly seated
in a semi-circle. In their midst sits Caiaphas, the chief priest,
wearing on his head the "migbâh"; at each end of the arc, on two small
tribunes sit the clerks, one for acquittal, the other for condemnation:
*advocatus Dei*, *advocatus Diaboli*. Jesus, in his white Essenian robe,
stands impressive in the center. Officers of justice, armed with ropes
and thongs, men with bared arms and evil-looking eyes, stand around.
Witnesses for the accusation alone are present; there is not one for the
defense. The high priest, the supreme magistrate, is the principal
accuser; the trial, apparently a measure of public safety against a
crime or religious treason, is in reality the preventive vengeance of an
anxious priesthood which feels its power in danger.

Caiaphas rises and accuses Jesus of being a seducer of the people, a
"mésit." A few witnesses taken at hazard from the crowd give their
depositions, but only succeed in contradicting one another. Finally, one
of them reports the words of Jesus, "I can destroy the temple, and build
it again in three days"—words which had been considered blasphemous, and
which the Nazarene had more than once flung in the face of the Pharisees
under Solomon's porch. Jesus holds his peace. "Answerest thou nothing?"
asks the high priest. Jesus, who knows he will be condemned, and is
unwilling to lavish words to no purpose, still makes no reply.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> These words,
however, even if proved, would not form sufficient motive for a death
penalty. A graver avowal is needed. To force one, Caiaphas, the cunning
Sadducee, addresses him a question involving his honor, the vital
question of his mission. The greatest skill often consists in going
straight to the root of a matter. "If thou art the Messiah, say so now"
Jesus at first replies evasively, thus proving that he is not their
dupe. "If I say it, you will not believe me, but if I ask you the same
question you will give me no answer." As Caiaphas does not succeed in
his artifice, he uses his authority as high priest, and solemnly says:
"I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the
Christ, the Son of God." Thus called upon either to retract or affirm
his mission before the highest representative of the religion of Israel,
Jesus no longer hesitates. He replies calmly, "Thou hast said.
Nevertheless, I say unto you, hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man
sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming in the clouds of heaven."
Thus expressing himself in the prophetic language of Daniel, and of the
book of Henoch, Jehoshoua, the Essene initiate does not address Caiaphas
as an individual. He knows that the Sadducee agnostic is incapable of
understanding him, and accordingly speaks to the sovereign priest of
Jehovah, and through him to all future priests and priesthoods of earth,
saying to them: After my mission, sealed by death, the reign of
unexplained religious Law is at an end, both in principle and in deed.
The Mysteries shall be revealed, and man shall see the divine through
the human. Religions and acts of worship which cannot be demonstrated
and vivified by one another shall be void of authority. This, according
to the esoterism of the

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

prophets and Essenes, is the meaning of the Son sitting on the right
hand of the Father. Thus understood, Jesus’ reply to the high priest of
Jerusalem contains the intellectual and scientific testament of the
Christ to the religious authorities of the earth, just as the
institution of the Supper contains his testament of love and initiation
to the Apostles and to mankind in general.

In addressing Caiaphas Jesus spoke to the whole world. The Sadducee,
however, who had obtained what he wished, listens to nothing more.
Tearing his vestment of fine linen, he exclaims: "He has blasphemed;
what further need have we of witnesses? Ye have heard his blasphemy;
what think ye of it?" A gloomy though ominous murmur arose from the
Sanhedrim: "He is guilty of death." Immediately vile insults and brutal
outrage on the part of those of lower rank gave answer to the
condemnation uttered by their superiors. The guards spit on him and
strike him in the face, as they exclaim: "Prophesy unto us, thou Christ,
who is he that smote thee?" Beneath this outburst of low and savage
hatred, the pale sublime countenance of the great sufferer resumes its
visionary marble fixity. Some one has said that there are statues which
weep; there is indeed a tearless grief, victims’ unuttered prayers, full
of terror to their assailants whom they pursue for the remainder of
their lives.

All was not yet over, however. The Sanhedrin may pronounce the death
penalty, the secular power and the consent of the Roman authorities are
needed to put it into execution. The interview with Pilate, related in
detail by John, is no less remarkable than that with Caiaphas. This
strange dialogue between the Christ and the Roman governor, to which the
violence of the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jewish priests,
and the cries of a fanatical populace, play the part of an ancient
tragedy chorus, gives the conviction of a mighty dramatic truth, for it
lays bare the souls of the different characters, and shows the clash of
the three powers in play: Roman Cæsarism, bigoted Judaism, and the
universal religion of the Spirit represented by the Christ. Pilate,
totally indifferent to the religious quarrel, but greatly troubled over
the matter, for he is afraid the death of Jesus will occasion a rising
of the people, questions him with a certain amount of precaution, and
offers him a means of escape, in the hope that he will take advantage of
it. "Art thou the King of the Jews?" Jesus answered: "My kingdom is not
of this world." Pilate asked: "Then thou art a king?" Jesus again
replied: "To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth." Pilate no more
understands this affirmation of the spiritual royalty of Jesus than
Caiaphas understood his religious testament. "What is truth?" he
remarks, with a shrug of the shoulders. The sceptical Roman knight's
question reveals the state of mind in which the heathen world then was,
as it does that of all society in a state of decadence. All the same, as
he did not see in the accused Jesus anything other than a harmless
dreamer, he added: "I find no fault in him," and proposes to the Jews
that he should liberate him. The populace, however, instigated by the
priests, cries aloud: "Release unto us Barabbas!" Then Pilate, who
detests the Jews, gives himself the ironical pleasure of causing their
pretended king to be beaten with rods. He thinks this will satisfy the
fanatics, but they only become the more furious, and madly exclaim:
"Crucify him!"

In spite of this outburst of popular passion Pilate still

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

resists. He is tired of being cruel. Throughout his life he has seen so
much bloodshed, punished with death so many rebels, and heard so many
groans and curses without his equanimity being troubled in the
slightest. But the mute, stoic suffering of the Galilean prophet beneath
the purple cloak and crown of thorns has sent a hitherto unknown thrill
through his very being. In a strange fugitive vision he utters the
words, with no idea of their import: "Ecce Homo! Behold the Man!" The
stern, hard-hearted Roman is almost overcome with emotion; he is on the
point of pronouncing a sentence of acquittal. The priests of the
Sanhedrin, with eyes intently fixed on him, see this emotion, and are
filled with terror in consequence; they feel that their prey is escaping
them. Craftily they deliberate among themselves. After a few moments
they raise their right hands, and, turning aside their heads with
horrified gesture, exclaim in one voice: "He has made himself the Son of
God!"

When Pilate heard that saying, says John, his fear increased. Fear of
what? What meaning had this for the unbelieving Roman, who heartily
despised both the Jews and their religion, and believed in none other
than Cæsar, and the political religion of Rome? … There is a serious
reason for this. Although different meanings were given to it, the
expression "Son of God" was tolerably well known in ancient esoterism,
and Pilate, although sceptical, was not altogether free from
superstition. At Rome, in the Minor Mysteries of Mithras, in which Roman
knights became initiated, he had heard that a Son of God was a kind of
interpreter of divinity. To whatever nation or religion he belonged, an
attempt on his life was a great crime. Pilate had little faith in these
Persian reveries, but the name troubled him nevertheless,

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

and increased his embarrassment. Seeing this, the Jews fling at the
proconsul the final accusation: "If thou settest free this man, thou art
no friend of Cæsar's; whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against
Cæsar.… We have no king but Cæsar." Irresistible argument; denying God
is of little import, but conspiring against Cæsar is the crime of
crimes. Pilate is obliged to give way and pronounce sentence of
condemnation. Thus, at the end of his public career Jesus finds himself
face to face with the master of the world, against whom he—an occult
opponent—has fought indirectly all his life. The shadow of Cæsar sends
him to the cross! Profound is the logic of events; the Jews have
delivered him up to judgment, but it is the Roman specter which
stretches out its hand to kill. The body indeed is destroyed, but it is
he, the glorified Christ, whose martyrdom will forever deprive Cæsar of
the aureole he has usurped, the divine apotheosis, the infernal
blasphemy of absolute power.

.          .          .          .          .

Pilate, after washing his hands of the blood of the innocent Jesus, now
utters the terrible words: *Condemno, ibis in crucem;* and the impatient
mob hurries away in the direction of Golgotha.

Following them, we find ourselves on the barren heights overlooking
Jerusalem, and bearing the name of Gilgal, Golgotha, or place of skulls:
a sinister desert covered with human bones, for centuries the scene of
horrible punishments. Not a tree can be seen, the ground seems to
bristle with gibbets. It is here that Alexander Janneus had come with
his whole harem to witness the execution of hundreds of prisoners; here
that Varus had crucified two thousand rebels and now

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

the gentle Messiah, whose coming had been foretold by the prophets, was
on this same spot to undergo the terrible death penalty, invented by the
atrocious genius of the Phoenicians, and adopted by the implacable law
of Rome. The cohort of the legionaries has formed a mighty circle on the
top of the hill; they drive away with their lances the few followers who
remained faithful to the condemned Christ. These are Galilean women,
mute with despair, who fling themselves on the ground before the cross.
The final hour has come; the defender of the poor, the feeble and the
oppressed, must finish his task in that state of abject martyrdom
reserved for slaves and robbers. The prophet, consecrated by the
Essenes, must allow himself to be nailed to the cross he had accepted in
the vision of Engaddi; the Son of God must drink of the chalice which
had appeared to him in the Transfiguration, and must descend into the
depths of hell and of all earthly horror.… He has refused the
traditional drink prepared by the pious women of Jerusalem, and which is
intended to deaden the sufferings of the crucified victims. In fullest
consciousness will he suffer the agony of death. Bound to the cruel
gibbet, as the stern, hard-hearted soldiers with mighty hammer-blows
drive the nails into those feet, the object of such passionate
reverence, and through those hands never raised except in blessing, a
dull mist of horrible pain closes his eyes and chokes his throat. Still,
amid such convulsions of pain and infernal anguish, the Savior pleads
for his executioners: "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do."

Now the cup is being drained to its dregs; the death-agony lasts from
noon to sunset. Moral is added to physical torture, which it surpasses
in malignity. The

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

initiate has abdicated his powers, the Son of God is about to suffer
eclipse; only the man of sorrows remains. For a few hours he will lose
his heaven, to measure and fathom the depths of the abyss of human
suffering. There stands the cross with its victim, and the
superscription—the proconsul's final shaft of irony—"This is the King of
Jews!" As through a mist of anguish, the crucified one sees the holy
city Jerusalem he wished to glorify now hurling anathemas against him.
Where are his disciples? They have disappeared in all directions. He
hears nothing but the insults of the members of the Sanhedrim, who,
imagining that the prophet is no longer to be feared, exult with joy at
his death-struggles. "He saved others," they say; "himself he cannot
save!" Through such perverse blasphemies Jesus sees, in terrifying
prophetic vision, all the crimes that unjust potentates and fanatical
priests are to commit in his name. With his own sign will they pronounce
maledictions, and with his own cross will they crucify. It is not the
gloomy silence of the heavens veiled against him, but rather the light,
lost to humanity, which tears from him the despairing wail: "Father, why
hast thou forsaken me?" Then, in one final burst, there springs forth
from his soul the cry, "It is finished!"

Sublime Nazarene, divine Son of Man, even now is the victory thine.
Doubtless thy soul has once again found, in light more dazzling than
before, the heaven of Engaddi and Mount Tabor! Down through the ages
hast thou seen thy word fleeting victorious, and no other glory hast
thou desired than the uplifted hands and eyes of those thou hast healed
and comforted.… Even now a shudder of dread comes over thy torturers, as
they listen to thy, final words so full of meaning hut which

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

they do not understand. The Roman soldiers have turned their gaze at the
strange radiance thy spirit has left on the tranquil countenance of this
corpse, while thy slayers look at one another in wonder and say: "Could
this have been a God?"

.          .          .          .          .

Is the drama really finished? The silent though formidable strife now at
an end, the struggle between divine Love and Death which has united with
the reigning powers of earth to overwhelm him, at last closed? Where is
the victor? Does triumph remain with those self-satisfied priests as
they descend from Calvary well pleased with their deed, for they have
seen the prophet breathe his last, or with this pale crucified Christ,
already livid in death? For these faithful, weeping women. whom the
Roman legionaries have permitted to approach the foot of the cross, as
well as for the terror-stricken disciples who have taken refuge in the
grotto of Jehoshaphat, all is indeed at an end. The Messiah, who was to
he enthroned at Jerusalem, has died an infamous death on the cross. The
master has disappeared, and with him hope, the Gospel, the Kingdom of
Heaven itself. A gloomy silence of deep despair hangs over the small
community. Even Peter and John are overwhelmed with grief. Darkness is
all around; not a single ray illumines their souls. And yet, just as in
the Eleusinian mysteries, profound darkness is followed by a dazzling
light, so, in the Gospels, this deep despair is succeeded by a sudden
miraculous joy which bursts forth like a beam of light at sunrise, and
the joyful cry resounds throughout Judæa: "He is risen again!"

Mary Magdalene, wandering near the tomb in the excess of her grief, was
the first to see the master, and

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

to recognize him by his voice as he uttered her name, Mary! Overcome
with joy, she threw herself at his feet. Again she saw Jesus look at
her, and wave his hand as though to prevent her touching him; then the
apparition suddenly vanished, leaving around the Magdalene an atmosphere
of warmth and the delight of a real presence. Afterwards the holy women
met the Lord, who said to them: "Go and tell my brethren to proceed to
Galilee, there they shall see me." That same evening, as the eleven were
met in private, they saw Jesus enter the room. He took a seat in their
midst, and gently reproached them for their unbelief. Then he said: "Go
ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature." They
listened to him as in a dream, for they seemed to have completely
forgotten his death, and were persuaded that the Master would not again
leave them. However, just as they were about to speak, they saw him
disappear from their midst like a vanishing light. The echo of his voice
still vibrated in their ears. The apostles, amazed, sought the spot
where he had been; there still lingered a vague light, which quickly
disappeared. According to Matthew and Mark, Jesus appeared once more on
a mountain to five hundred of the brethren assembled by the apostles. He
also showed himself again to the eleven, after which the apparitions
ceased. Faith, however, had been created, the first impulse given, and
Christianity was a living force. The apostles, filled with the sacred
fire, went about healing the sick and preaching their Master's gospel.
Three years afterwards, a young Pharisee, named Saul, animated by
violent hatred against the new religion, whose defenders he persecuted
with all the vigor of youth, journeyed to Damascus, accompanied by
several companions.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

On the way he saw himself suddenly enveloped in so dazzling a flame of
fire that he fell to the earth. Trembling, he exclaimed: "Who art thou?"
A voice replied: "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; it is hard for thee
to kick against the pricks." Saul's terrified companions raised him to
his feet. They had heard the voice though they had seen nothing. The
young man, blinded by the flash, recovered his sight only three days
afterwards.

Converted to the faith of Christ, he became Paul, the apostle of the
Gentiles. On this one point is the whole world agreed, that but for
Saul's conversion Christianity, confined as it was to Judæa, would never
have conquered the Western world.

Such are the facts as related in the New Testament. Whatever efforts be
made to reduce their results to a minimum, and whatever be the religious
or philosophical idea attached to them, they cannot be regarded as
legends, pure and simple, and refused the value of authentic testimony
on all points essential. For eighteen centuries the waves of doubt and
denial have assailed the rock of this testimony; for a hundred years the
weapons of criticism have been directed against it. Breaches have been
effected in places, but its position remains steadfast. What is there
behind the visions of the apostles? Elementary theologians, interpreters
of the letter, and agnostic savants may dispute for ever; they will
never convert one another, and their reasonings will be in vain, so long
as Theosophy, the science of the Spirit, has not enlarged their
conceptions, and a superior experimental psychology, the art of laying
bare the soul, left their eyes unopened. But from the standpoint of the
conscientious historian, *i. e.*, the authenticity

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

of these facts as psychical actualities, there is one point on which
doubt is impossible; that the apostles had these apparitions, and that
it was impossible to shake their faith in the resurrection of the
Christ. If John's account be rejected on the ground of having received
its definite compilation about a hundred years after the death of Jesus,
and also Luke's account of the Christ's appearance to the disciples at
Emmaus as a mere poetical amplification, there still remain the simple
and positive affirmations of Matthew and Mark, which lie at the very
root of the Christian tradition and religion. And even more solid and
indisputable is the testimony of Paul. Wishing to explain to the
Corinthians the reason of his faith and the basis of the gospel he
preaches, he enumerates in order six successive appearances of Jesus:
those to Peter, to the eleven, to the five hundred, "most of whom," he
says, "are still living"; to James, to the assembled apostles, and
finally, his own vision on the way to Damascus. These facts were
communicated to Paul by Peter himself, and by James, three years after
the death of Jesus, just after Paul's conversion, at the time of his
first journey to Jerusalem. Accordingly he received them from
eye-witnesses. Finally, the most indisputable of all these visions is by
no means the least extraordinary; I refer to that of Paul himself. He
continually alludes to it in his Epistles as being the source of his
faith. Given the former psychological condition of Paul and the nature
of his vision, we see it is from without, not from within. Of an
unexpected and terrifying character, it completely changes his whole
being. Like a baptism of fire, it descends upon him, clothes him in a
new and impenetrable armor, and establishes him in

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

the sight of the whole world as the invincible champion of the Christ.

Paul's testimony accordingly possesses a double authority, in so far as
it confirms his own vision and corroborates those of the others. Whoever
might feel inclined to doubt the sincerity of such affirmations would be
obliged to reject *en masse* all historical testimony, and to renounce
the writing of history. Note, too, that if critical history is
incompatible with an exact weighing and well-thought-out selection of
all the documents, philosophical history would also be impossible, if
greatness of effects could not be referred back to greatness of causes.
It would be possible with Celsus, Strauss, and M. Renan to refuse all
objective value to the resurrection, and consider it as a phenomenon
resulting from pure hallucination. If so, one is obliged to found the
greatest religious revolution of humanity on an aberration of the senses
and a mere delusion of the mind. <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md)
There can be no denying that faith in the resurrection is the basis of
historical Christianity. But for this confirmation of Jesus’ teaching by
a dazzling fact, his religion would not even have had a beginning.

This event effected a complete revolution in the souls of the apostles.
In consequence of it their whole mental attitude, from being Judaic,
became Christian. The Christ is living in glory, he has spoken to them.
The heavens have opened; the life beyond has entered into the life
within, the dawn of immortality has touched them and kindled their souls
with a fire which nothing

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

can extinguish. Above Israel's tottering earthly kingdom they have
caught a glimpse of the world-wide heavenly kingdom in all its glory.
Hence their eagerness for the strife, their joy in martyrdom. Jesus’
resurrection gives birth to this mighty impulse and hope which carries
the gospel to all nations and the good tidings to the utmost limits of
earth. For the success of Christianity two things were necessary, as
Fabre d’Olivet has said: that Jesus should be willing to die, and that
he should have the power to rise again.

To form a rational idea of the fact of the resurrection, and understand
its religious and philosophical bearing, one must consider only the
phenomenon of the successive appearances, and, from the very outset,
remove from one's mind the absurd idea of the resurrection of the body,
one of the greatest stumbling-blocks of Christian dogma, which, in this
particular as in many others, has remained at quite a childish and
rudimentary stage. The disappearance of Jesus’ body can be explained by
natural causes, and it is worthy of note that the bodies of several
great adepts have disappeared quite as mysteriously and without leaving
the slightest trace. It has never been discovered what became of the
bodies of Moses, Pythagoras, and Apollonius of Tyana. Possibly the
brothers. known or unknown, who kept watch over them, destroyed by fire
their master's body, to prevent pollution at the hands of enemies. In
any case, it is only when regarded from the esoteric point of view that
the scientific aspect and spiritual grandeur of the resurrection really
appear.

By Egyptians as by Persians, of the religion of Zoroaster, both before
and after Jesus, by Israelites and by Christians of the first and second
centuries, the resurrection has been interpreted in two ways, the one
material

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

and absurd, the other spiritual and theosophical. The first is the
popular idea, finally adopted by the Church after the repression of
gnosticism; the second is the profound idea of the initiates. According
to the first view, the resurrection signifies the return to life of the
material body; in a word, the reconstitution of the decomposed or
dispersed corpse, so it was imagined, was destined to take place at the
coming of the Messiah, or at the Last Judgment. It is useless to insist
on the gross materialism and absurdity of this conception. To the
initiate the resurrection has a far different meaning. It refers to the
doctrine of the ternary constitution of man. It signifies the
purification and regeneration of the sidereal, ethereal, and fluidic
body, which is the very organism of the soul. This purification may take
place commencing from the present life, through the inner work of the
soul, and a certain method of existence; although, for the generality of
mankind, it finds accomplishment only after death, and then for those
only who, in one way or another, have aspired towards justice and truth.
In the other world hypocrisy is impossible. There souls appear as they
are in reality, they fatally manifest themselves under the form and
color of their essence dark and hideous if they are evil; radiant and
beautiful if they are good. Such is the doctrine given by Paul in the
Epistle to the Corinthians, where he formally says: "There is an animal
body and there is a spiritual body." <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md)
Jesus states this symbolically but with greater profundity for those who
can read between the lines in the secret conversation with Nicodemus.
Now, the more a soul is spiritualized, the farther will it be from the
earthly atmosphere; the farther away the cosmic region which

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

attracts it by the law of affinity, the more difficult its manifestation
to men.

Accordingly, superior souls seldom manifest themselves to man, except in
a state of ecstacy or profound slumber. Then, the physical eyes being
closed, the soul, half detached from the body, itself sees souls at
times. Nevertheless, it sometimes happens that a mighty prophet, a
veritable son of God, manifests himself to his own in the waking state
of consciousness, the better to persuade them by a striking appeal to
sense and imagination. In such instances the disincarnated soul succeeds
in momentarily giving its spiritual body a visible, sometimes even a
tangible appearance, by means of the special dynamism exercised by
spirit over matter, through the intermediary of the electrical forces of
the atmosphere and the magnetic forces of living bodies.

Apparently this is what happened in the case of Jesus. The appearances
related in the New Testament may be placed in one or the other,
alternately, of these two categories—spiritual vision and sense
apparition. What is certain is that they possessed for the apostles the
character of supreme reality. They would rather have doubted the
existence of heaven and earth than their living communion with the
resurrected Christ; for these soul-stirring appearances formed the
brightest events in their lives, the profoundest truth of which they
were conscious. There is nothing supernatural in them, though there is
an unknown element in Nature, its occult continuation into the Infinite,
the flashes of the invisible on the confines of the visible. In our
present corporeal state we can scarcely believe or even conceive of the
reality of the impalpable; in the spiritual state, it is matter which
will appear to us the unreal and non-existent.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the Spirit is
found the synthesis of soul and matter, two phases of the one substance.
Reverting to eternal principles and final causes, it is the innate laws
of intelligence which explain the dynamism of nature, as it is the study
of the soul, by experimental psychology which explains the laws of life.

Consequently the resurrection, esoterically understood as I have just
pointed out, was at once the necessary conclusion of the life of Jesus
and the indispensable preface to the historical evolution of
Christianity—necessary conclusion, for Jesus had on several occasions
announced it to his disciples. The power of appearing to them in
triumphant glory after his death was due to the purity and innate force
of his soul, increased a hundredfold by the grandeur of the effort and
of the accomplished work.

Regarded from without, and from an earthly point of view, the Messianic
drama ends on the cross. Though sublime in itself, there is yet lacking
the fulfilment of the promise. Regarded from within, from the inmost
consciousness of the Christ, and from the heavenly point of view, the
drama contains three acts, whose summits are marked by the Temptation,
the Transfiguration, and the Resurrection. These three phases represent
in other terms, the Initiation of the Christ, the total Revelation, and
the Crowning of the work. They correspond to what the apostles and the
Christian initiates of the first centuries called the Mysteries of the
Father, of the Son. and of the Holy Ghost.

A necessary crowning, as I have said. of the life of the Christ, and an
indispensable preface to the historical evolution of Christianity. The
ship, built on the beach, needed to be launched on the ocean. The
resurrection was, in addition, as a flood of light thrown on the whole

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

esoteric life of Jesus. We have no occasion for astonishment at finding
that the early Christians were, so to speak, dazzled and blinded by the
wonderful event, that they often gave a literal interpretation to the
Master's teaching, and mistook the meaning of his words. But in these
days, now that the human spirit has traversed ages, religions, and
sciences, we can divine what a Saint Paul, a Saint John, what Jesus
himself understood by the mysteries of the Father and of the Spirit. We
see that they contained the very highest and truest elements of the
psychical science and theosophic intuition of the East. We also see the
power of renewed expansion given by the Christ to the ancient eternal
truth by the grandeur of his love and the energy of his will. Finally,
we see the metaphysical and practical side of Christianity, the cause of
its power and vitality.

The old theosophists of Asia were acquainted with transcendent truths.
The Brahmans even found the key to the past and future life by
formulating the organic law of reincarnation and the alternation of
lives. In entering the life beyond, however, and contemplating Eternity,
they forgot terrestrial realization, individual and social life. Greece,
at first initiated into the same truths under more veiled and
anthropomorphic forms, became attached by its very genius to the natural
terrestrial life. This enabled it to reveal the immortal laws of Beauty,
and to formulate the principles of the sciences of observation. From
this point of view, its conception of the life beyond gradually
diminished and darkened. Jesus, in his breadth and universality,
embraces both sides of life. In the Lord's prayer, which sums up his
teaching, he says: "Thy kingdom come on earth as in heaven." Now the
kingdom of the divine on earth signifies the fulfilment

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

of the moral and social law in all its richness, in all the glory of the
Beautiful, the Good, and the True. Thus the magic of his doctrine,
his—in a sense—unlimited power of development, dwell in the unity of his
moral and metaphysical aspects, his ardent faith in the life eternal,
and the necessity he felt of beginning it in the world by a life of
action and love. The Christ says to the soul, cast down by earthly
trouble: "Rise; heaven is thy fatherland; still, in order to believe
this and to attain thereto, prove it here below by deeds of love."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[91:1](jlgi08.htm#fr_29.md) Matthew xxiv. 2.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[94:1](jlgi08.htm#fr_30.md) Luke xxi. 34.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[94:2](jlgi08.htm#fr_31.md) Matthew xxiv. 44.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[94:3](jlgi08.htm#fr_32.md) Matthew xxiv. 4-34.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[94:4](jlgi08.htm#fr_33.md) Isaiah lxvi. 18, &c.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[95:1](jlgi08.htm#fr_34.md) John xiv. 16-17.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[95:2](jlgi08.htm#fr_35.md) Matthew xxiv. 27.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[95:3](jlgi08.htm#fr_36.md) Matthew xxiv. 30, 31.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[99:1](jlgi08.htm#fr_37.md) Luke xxii. 15, 16.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[99:2](jlgi08.htm#fr_38.md) Luke xxii. 19.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[114:1](jlgi08.htm#fr_39.md) Strauss says: "The
fact of the resurrection is explicable only as 'ein welthistorischer
humbug.'" The expression is rather cynical than witty, and does not
explain the visions of the apostles and of Paul.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[116:1](jlgi08.htm#fr_40.md) 1 Cor. xv. 39-46.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Promise and Its Fulfilment—The Temple](jlgi09.md)

</div>
