<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Christianity](../../chr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jlgi08) 
[Next](jlgi10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/156459498X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574J6/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jesus, the Last Great Initiate*, by Edouard Schuré, \[1908\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

### CHAPTER VII

### THE PROMISE AND ITS FULFILMENT—THE TEMPLE

"<span class="smallcaps">IN</span> three days I will destroy the temple,
and in three days I will build it up again." This was said to his
disciples by the Son of Mary, the Essene consecrated as Son of Man,
*i. e.*, the spiritual inheritor of the Word of Moses, of Hermes, and of
all the former sons of God. Has this bold promise, the word of the
initiator and initiate, been realized? Yes, if consideration be taken of
the consequences which the teaching of the Christ, confirmed by his
death and spiritual resurrection, have had for humanity, and all the
consequences his promise hold over a limitless future. His word and
sacrifice have la, the foundations of an invisible temple, but it is
only continued and brought to completion in proportion as each
individual, throughout all time, contributes to the work.

What is this temple? It is of a nature at once moral, social, and
physical, the temple of regenerate humanity.

The moral temple is the regeneration of the human soul, the
transformation of individuals by the human ideal offered as an example
to humanity in the person of Jesus. The wonderful harmony and plenitude
of his virtues make it difficult to define; balanced reason, mystic
intuition, human sympathy, power of word and action; infinite
compassion, love even unto sacrifice, courage unto death; no experience
was unknown to him. There was

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

sufficient soul in every drop of his blood to make a hero, and yet, what
divine gentleness was his! The profound union of heroism and love, of
will and intelligence, of the Eternal-Masculine with the
Eternal-Feminine make of him the flower of the human ideal. His whole
moral teaching, whose loftiest expression is unending brotherly love and
a universal human alliance, flows naturally from such a mighty
personality. The work of the eighteen centuries which have elapsed since
his death has resulted in the inculcating of this ideal in the
consciousness of all mankind. For there is scarcely a man throughout the
civilized world who does not possess a more or less clear notion
thereof. Accordingly, it may be affirmed that the moral temple desired
by the Christ is, if not finished, at any rate based on an
indestructible foundation at the present day.

It is not so with the social temple. This supposes the establishment of
the kingdom of God or of the providential law in the organic
institutions of humanity; it remains to be constructed from the
foundation. For men still live in a state of warfare under the law of
Force and Destiny. The law of the Christ, which remains in the moral
conscience, has not yet passed into human institutions. I have only
incidentally touched upon questions of social and political organization
in this book, which is solely intended to throw light on the
philosophical and religious question at its base, through some of the
essential esoteric truths. In these few concluding words I will not
discuss the question any further. It is too vast and complex, and beyond
my power to attempt even to define it within the compass of a few words.
I will merely say that social warfare exists, as a principle, in all
European countries. There are no economic, religious,

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

or social principles admitted by all classes of society. The nations of
Europe, also, have not ceased existing in a state of open war or armed
peace with one another. They are united by no common federative
principle. Their interests and common aspirations appeal to no
recognized authority, they have no sanction before any supreme tribunal.
If the law of Christ has penetrated into individual consciousness and,
up to a certain point, into social life, it is still the pagan and
barbarian law which governs our political institutions. At the present
time, political power is everywhere constituted on insufficient
foundations. On the one hand it emanates from the so-called divine right
of kings, which is none other than military force; on the other from
universal suffrage, which is merely the instinct of the masses, or mere
average intelligence. A nation is not a number of uniform values or
ciphers; it is a living being composed of organs. So long as national
representation is not the image of this organization, right from its
working to its teaching classes, there will be no organic or intelligent
national representation. So long as the delegates of all scientific
bodies, and the whole of the Christian churches do not sit together in
one upper council, our societies will be governed by instinct, by
passion, and by might, and there will be no social temple.

Then how comes it that, rising above the Church which is too small to
contain him in his entirety, above politics which deny him, and above
Science which only half understands him, the Christ is fuller of life
than ever? It is because his sublime morality is the corollary of a
science even more sublime. Behind him we perceive, contemporary with and
beyond the time of Moses, the whole ancient theosophy of Indian,
Egyptian, and Grecian

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

initiates, of whom he forms a striking confirmation. We are beginning to
understand that Jesus, at the very height of his consciousness, the
transfigured Christ, is opening his loving arms to his brothers, the
other Messiahs who preceded him, beams of the Living Word as he was,
that he is opening them wide to Science in its entirety. Art in its
divinity, and Life in its completeness. But his promise cannot be
fulfilled without the help of all the living forces of humanity. Two
main things are necessary nowadays for the continuation of the mighty
work: un the one hand, the progressive unfolding of experimental science
and intuitive philosophy to facts of psychic order, intellectual
principles, and spiritual proofs; on the other, the expansion of
Christian dogma in the direction of tradition and esoteric science, and
subsequently a reorganization of the Church according to a graduated
initiation; this by a free and irresistible movement of all Christian
churches, which are also equally daughters of the Christ. Science must
become religious and religion scientific. This double evolution, already
in preparation, would finally and forcibly bring about a reconciliation
of Science and Religion on esoteric grounds. The work will not progress
without considerable difficulty at first, but the future of European
Society depends on it. The transformation of Christianity, in its
esoteric sense would bring with it that of Judaism and Islam, as well as
a regeneration of [Brahmanism](errata.htm#12) and Buddhism in the same
fashion, it would accordingly furnish a religious basis for the
reconciliation of Asia and Europe.

This is the spiritual temple to be constructed, the crowning of the word
intuitively conceived and desired by Jesus. Can his message of Love form
the magnetic

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

chain of Science and Art, of religions and peoples, and thus become the
universal word?

At the present time the Christ is master of the globe, through the two
youngest and most vigorous races, still full of faith. By way of Russia
he has a foothold in Asia, and through the Anglo-Saxon race he rules the
New World. Europe is older than America, but younger than Asia. They
slander Europe who believe her destined to an irremediable decadence.
Still, if she continues her internal struggles, instead of federating
beneath the rule of one capable authority, at once scientific and
religious; if, through the extinction of this faith which is only the
love-fed light of the spirit, she is continuing the preparation for her
moral and social decomposition, her civilization runs the risk of
perishing, first by social upheavals, and afterwards by the invasion of
younger races, which will seize the torch dropped from her hands.

Surely she has a more glorious part to play, the preservation of the
guiding of the world, by finishing the social work of the Christ,
formulating his complete and perfected thought, and crowning by the help
of Science, Art, and Justice, the spiritual temple of the greatest of
the Sons of God.

 

 

 

<span class="small">THE END</span>

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Advertisements](jlgi10)

</div>
