[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](rmn03)  [Next](rmn05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

<span id="img_pl03"></span> ![](img/pl03.jpg)  
Plate III.

 

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

# Venus Callipyge

(From Κάλλος, beautiful; πυγὴ, hips.)

IN MARBLE. *Height nearly 6 inches*.

PLATE III.

THIS Charming statuette, found at Rome, was placed in the Farnese
palace, and thus came into the possession of the King of Naples,
together with the ownership of that edifice. It does not form a portion
of the cabinet of private works of art, but is placed in a reserved
hall, where the curious are only introduced under the surveillance of a
guardian, though even this precaution has not prevented the rounded
forms which won for the goddess the name of Callipyge, from being
covered with a dark tint, which betrays the profane kisses that fanatic
admirers have every day impressed there. We ourselves knew a young
German tourist smitten with a mad passion for this voluptuous marble;
and the commisseration his state of mind inspired set aside all idea of
ridicule.

It is impossible, indeed, to imagine anything more graceful than the
Venus here spoken of. The power of beauty is recognized wherever it
manifests itself: the marble seems to palpitate; in contemplating it
modesty takes alarm, desire begins to awake, and imagination to kindle;

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

and we are obliged to hurry away in order to restore our agitated senses
to their original tranquillity.

The goddess is raising the light tunic in which she is enveloped; her
beautiful head is turned backwards, and her look, which glances lightly
at a wonderful bend of her loins, seems to arrest itself with
gratification on those graceful contours for the sake of which altars
were erected to her.

Athenæus relates as follows the origin of the worship of this Venus:--

"In those far-distant centuries mankind were so given over to the
pleasures of the senses that they built a temple to Venus Callipyge.
This was how it happened. A countryman had two fair daughters; they were
contending one day with each other about the beauty of their hips, each
declaring that hers were the most beautiful, and so disputing they came
upon the highway. A young man happening to pass that way whose father
was already well in years, they at once submitted themselves to the
judgment of his eyes, and he pronounced in favour of the eldest. But at
the same time he fell so deeply in love with her, that he had hardly
arrived at the town before he fell ill, kept his bed, and told his young
brother what had happened to him. The latter hastened to the fields to
look at the young girls, and fell in love with the youngest. Their
father sought in vain to persuade them to unite themselves with better
families. So, being obliged to yield, he obtained the consent of the
father of the two sisters, whom he sent for immediately from the fields,
and married his sons with them. This event caused the name of Callipyge
to be given to the two wives among their fellow-citizens, as Cercidas of
Megalopolis relates in his iambics.

"These two women, having thus become rich, they caused a temple to be
erected to Venus, whom they named Callipyge, according to what Archelaus
tells us in his iambics." (*Deipnospohistes*.)

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

The worship of Venus Callipyge was extensively spread over. the whole
Greece, where it was still preserved for a long time after the fall of
other divinities. It passed over to the continent of Italy, where it did
not find fewer devotees, and where it served in some sort as an
encouragement to a passion equally outrageous and criminal. The *Venus
Callipyge* was powerless to destroy the abominable worship of the
Hylases and Antinouses, and it became itself a new element of debauchery
in the shameless times of the Roman decline. It was not then unusual to
see scenic games in which young girls appeared entirely naked; the
public judged between them in certain contests of the same nature as
that which sprang up between the two sisters of whom Athenæus speaks,
and the empire received the news as an event.

The voluptuous figure which forms the subject of this article derives
its erotic charm chiefly from the arrangement of the vestments. It may
in fact, be remarked that absolute nudity is less immodest than partial
or accidental nudity. When the Spartans in the circus, and . the Romans
at the theatre, saw young and beautiful girls entirely naked, they
certainly experienced less voluptuous sensations than when they happened
accidentally to catch sight of the nakedness of a woman who might fall
awkwardly from her horse, or slip on the pavement of the street.
Complete nudity argues a state of independence and freedom which
possesses nothing alarming to modesty or seductive to the senses; but
partial nudity seems as if reserved for furtive and unusual actions. In
order to feel this fully, one should see side by side the Venus de
Médici, a chaste divinity entirely nude; and the Venus Callipyge, a
voluptuous courtezan, indecently clad.

Numerous copies have been made of this statue. A very remarkable one
exists in the park of Versailles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate IV: Sarcophagus](rmn05.md)
