[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rmn05)  [Next](rmn07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

<span id="img_pl05"></span> ![](img/pl05.jpg)  
Plate V.

 

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

# The God Pan on a Mule

BAS-RELIEF OF MARBLE. *Height, 8 inches; width, 18 inches*.

PLATE V.

IN this bas-relief the god Pan is mounted on a mule, of which the
covering is made of a leopard's skin. A little bell is suspended to the
animal's neck, which proves this custom, still kept up in Italy and
Spain, to be of great antiquity. In Sicily, where the mule is an
indispensable beast to the traveller, it carries a necklace of little
bells, whence a most wearisome tinkling proceeds; but he will seek in
vain to purchase from the muleteer an exemption from this disagreeable
accompaniment. Whether from prejudice, or from positive experience on
their part, they declare that, if deprived of their orchestra, the mules
would sleep on their way, and might fall over the precipices with which
the roads are not unfrequently bordered.

On this bas-relief the animal seems to be neighing, and he even
accompanies, with an expressive gesture, an action which among beasts of
burden indicates an amorous sensation. The position of his legs
sufficiently indicates that he wishes to stop: but his rider makes every
effort to compel him to pursue his road; he leans backward, strikes him
on the crupper, and raises the bridle. The face of the god is full of
expression; his lower

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

lip is protruded to make way for the exclamation well-known to all
muleteers: *dgia*. But who can thus retard the progress of the mule
which bears so noble a burden? One would say that he recoils before the
statue of Priapus, which is perceived on a mass of rocks to the
spectator's right. This Hermes, stripped of his usual attributes, holds
in his hands two objects which it is not very easy to distinguish: one
is, perhaps, a little cup, the other a cornucopia, or horn of plenty, or
simply a club. The ancients were sufficiently inclined to represent the
divinities who presided over the reproduction of the human species with
the horn of plenty; and this symbol of fecundity is an application so
easily understood, that it would be useless to explain it here.
Generally, among the fruits with which this horn was filled, might be
seen the quince, a fruit consecrated to erotic enjoyment. Among the
Romans a quince was given to a newly-married pair to cat before
conducting them to the nuptial bed.

The Priapus-Hermes of this bas-relief rises, as we said, over a mass of
rocks. Doubtless he is the guardian of a garden, placed on the limit of
the estate, with the inscription, which the dimensions of this fragment
do not admit of our distinguishing. On an antique marble referred to by
Grutler, <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) from Boissard, may be seen a
Priapus between two baskets of fruit and flowers; a club lies by his
side; and we read on it also this inscription: To Priapus Ithyphallus,
club bearer, keeper of gardens and chastiser of thieves.

An oak extends its vigorous branches over the Hermes: this tree was
consecrated to Priapus, to Pan, and to all the rural divinities. To one
of the branches is suspended a cymbal, the offering of a devout
Bacchante, and at the foot of the tree may be seen a little altar,
surrounded by a

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

sort of garland. Against the rocks stands a dog, and appears on the
point of springing upon the Hermes.

Behind the god Pan we observe a Doric column. It supports a small open
casket: this is the *arca ineffabilis*, in which the image of Bacchus
was shut up at the Dionysiac mysteries, or Bacchanalia.

Pan, who here plays the chief part, is represented, as usual, with
pointed ears and goat's legs. According to the principal mythologists,
he was the son of Penelope and Mercury: this god desiring, as they say,
to triumph over the chastity of the wife of Ulysses, metamorphosed
himself into a he-goat, and by this means obtained what he desired; the
god of the Satyrs was born of this union. This is, it must be admitted,
a pleasant way of preserving to Penelope her reputation of chastity!
Weighing the two faults together, she had better have yielded to a young
and beautiful god than to a filthy beast. According to another version,
no less shocking and absurd, Penelope, far from showing herself so
severe as has been supposed with respect to her admirers, granted, on
the contrary, her favours to all of them, and *Pan*, which signifies
*all* in the Greek language, was the result of the intrigue.

Setting aside these ridiculous interpretations, we will remind the
reader in this place of a fact of which we said a few words in the
introduction to this work. The first idea of Pans, Satyrs, and Fauns
originated in the mind of the men of ancient times in consequence of
their positive ignorance, their prejudices and superstition, and not as
the result of a high and eminently mystical conception. Then, as now,
shepherds who passed long months of the year in profound solitudes,
sometimes conceived a criminal passion for the animals entrusted to
their care. The crime of bestiality is still in our own day frequent
enough among Sicilian herdsmen. Among women it has

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

always been rarer, but not unknown. The ignorance of the men of this
epoch made them think that from these unions arose extraordinary beings,
half men and half goats. These same herdsmen often committed outrages
which rendered them objects of fear, and consequently of respect. If it
happened that one of them offered violence to a young girl in the
solitudes of the valley, the parents of the victim did not fail, whether
from interest or credulity, to make it known that their daughter had
been seduced by one of those rural divinities who partake both of the
man and the brute. Hence arose the worship of pans and satyrs; hence the
origin of the nymphs, the dryads, and hamadryads. It is needless to add
that legislators and priests laid hold of these ideas and used them to
govern the multitude. And our learned men do far too much honour to
antiquity when they would fain see mystic conceptions, ingenious
fictions, and brilliant allegories where nothing existed but materialism
and ignorance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[11:1](rmn06.htm#fr_9) GRUTLER, Pl. xcv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate VI: Invocation to Priapus](rmn07)
