[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](rmn04)  [Next](rmn06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

<span id="img_pl04"></span> ![](img/pl04.jpg)  
Plate IV.

 

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

# Sarcophagus

STONE. *Height of each Bas-relief about 2¼ feet*.

PLATE IV.

WE are shown by this bas-relief the two principal sides of a
sarcophagus, where, without doubt, a married pair were buried: the
sculptor has reproduced their features, together with the most important
epoch of their life. The first side represents the two, glowing with
youth and beauty, at the solemn moment of initiation. They are naked,
according to custom, as is also the hierophant; but the latter is free
in his movements: he is no longer ashamed of his nudity, for nature lies
underneath him, he has knowledge of sacred things, and he reveals them
to the young supplicants. But the latter appear abashed and surprised;
they listen devoutly to the sacred words of the hierophant, and keep
their hands crossed over the place where modesty would require a
covering.

In the background we perceive a Priapus-Hermes, a little bald old man,
who holds in his hands a large phallus. The wine-vat, which serves him
for a pedestal, and the thyrsus, which rests by his side, sufficiently
indicate the Dionysiac mysteries, so called from Bacchus, who was
surnamed Dionysus: we shall speak of these more at length in the
explanation of Plate VII.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

The second side presents a symbolic representation of the ceremonies
practised at funerals. A woman is seated on a rock near a tomb. Her
head-dress, a kind of turban, indicates mourning; for among the peoples
of antiquity, as among the Hebrews in modern times, the custom was to
veil oneself and to cover one's head in token of respect or grief: the
contrary is the case among Christians. This woman carries in her hands a
tragic mask: these masks were likewise employed at the theatre, at
festivals, in war, at triumphal solemnities, Bacchanalia, and at
funerals.

Near the figure, a kind of post, probably bearing an inscription,
indicates the limit of life at which the faithful married pair, whose
memory it is desired to honour, met again, after having descended the
stream of life together. To the right we perceive a tomb: it is placed
under an oak. This tree was properly that of Jupiter, of his mother
Rhea, and of Pan; but the Goddess Hecate, the Diana of Hades, also
crowned herself with oak-leaves. The shepherds of Arcadia were called
acorn-caters, and claimed to be descended from an oak-tree.

Behind the tomb, a youth, whose bust only is seen, holds in his hands a
broken wand, an image of the existence just extinguished. He appears to
be speaking, and is doubtless pronouncing an eulogium on the defunct
couple.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate V: The God Pan on a Mule](rmn06.md)
