[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](rmn37)  [Next](rmn39.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

<span id="img_pl37"></span> ![](img/pl37.jpg)  
Plate XXXVII.

 

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

# An Erotic Scene

FRESCO FROM HERCULANEUM

PLATE XXXVII.

A YOUNG woman, half-naked, is showing her lover a quince-tree leaf, as
if to excite him to take what she still refuses him. The youth amorously
presses his mistress's neck and shoulders, and looks anxiously at the
leaf which the latter holds in her hand, and which doubtless the painter
considered as the symbol of a virginity ready to be plucked.

It was the custom at Rome to give the bride a quince to eat before
conducting her to the nuptial bed. We may therefore consider this fresco
as a representation of the first private intercourse between a young
married pair.

The figures are perfectly well preserved; but -the same thing cannot be
said of the background of the fresco. In its present state, the actors
look as if they were seated on banks of stone; but we are inclined to
think they were originally seen seated on cushions, in a chamber covered
with drapery. The youth's legs are concealed by a red mantle, and those
of the young woman by the *flammeum*, a garment of gold-coloured silk,
set apart for brides. Still, in order completely to set aside all doubt
as to the subject of

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

this plate, the girdle or belt is wanting which Roman virgins left their
husbands to untie on the bridal night.

The flower, leaf, and fruit of the quince-tree were all dedicated by the
Greeks to the *phallus*, and by the Indians to the *lingam*.

We are indebted to the learned German historian Niebuhr for some
valuable details as to the manner in which marriage was celebrated among
the Romans.

The first solemnity was the confarreation. It took place in the presence
of ten witnesses, and with the intervention of the pontiffs. The
*farreum*, or sacred cake, was offered to the betrothed pair; five
torches were lighted in their presence; the betrothed woman touched
water and fire, and performed other ceremonies equally symbolical. After
this solemnity, the woman was in the hands and power of the man who had
become her husband: she took his name, and became his presumptive
heiress, concurrently with her children.

This ceremony did not take place for *free* marriage, a sort of union
which did not confer on the wife the name of her husband or the right of
inheritance, and which, on the other hand, gave him no power over her.
These are what are still called in Germany *left-handed* marriages.

A woman who came under the absolute power of her husband might be
condemned by him to the penalty of death for certain offences more or
less grave, among which may be remarked that of drinking wine. The use
of this beverage was generally forbidden to women, under the severest
penalties: this was a law of the Twelve Tables.

But a woman was not under her husband's power until they had passed a
year together beneath the conjugal roof, and she could break through the
prescription by absenting herself every year for three nights.

After the betrothal, the man gave his future mate a metal ring and a

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

kiss. On the appointed day, the relations and friends of the married
pair conducted them to the temple with great pomp; the procession was
led by young children who carried a work-basket, a distaff it torch, and
a branch of hawthorn. joyous cries might be heard, among which that of
*Thalossio*, was distinguished; instrumental players joined the
procession, and accompanied it as far as the temple. There the pontiffs
celebrated the union. after consulting the auspices.

Then the young wife was conducted with the same pomp to her husband's
abode. On reaching the threshold of the door, she sprinkled it with an
odoriferous oil, and her companions immediately seized her and lifted
her across the threshold in their arms. Then came, as in our own day,
the famous marriage-feast, so coveted by all the guests, and so tedious
for the newly-married pair, the cynosure of every eye, and the mark for
every stale and worn-out jest,

Finally, the young wife, clad, as we have said, in the *flammeum*,
crowned with lemon-flower, and, above all, adorned with the precious
virginal zone, was led by her relations and companions to the conjugal
chamber, where it quince was given her to eat, and every one immediately
retired, leaving her alone with her husband and the cubicular slave. The
latter also withdrew, after bringing his mistress's shoes, carefully
shut up in a precious casket, and placed himself as a sentinel behind
the door, attentively watching that no inquisitive intruder came to
disturb the mysteries of the nuptial bed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate XXXVIII: Spinthria](rmn39.md)
