[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Ismâ’ili
materials](../../isl/isma/index)  
[Previous](isma1-1) [Next](isma1-3)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## {Excerpts from Esh-Shahrastâny's *Book of Creeds and Sects*}

   "*The Bâṭinîyeh*.<span
id="page_263_fr_para"></span>[¶](#page_263_note_para)—This appellation
is affixed to them only because they give out that every thing outward
has an inward; and every letter of revelation, an allegorical sense. And
they have many appellations beside this, according to <span
id="page_264">p. 264</span> the language of one and another people. For
in ’Irâḳ, they are named the Bâṭinîyeh, and the Ḳarâmaṭeh, and the
Mazdakîyeh;<span id="page_264_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_264_note_*) and in
Khorasan, the Ta’lîmîyeh,<span
id="page_264_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_264_note_dagger) and the
Mulḥideh.<span
id="page_264_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_264_note_ddagger) And they
say, 'We are Isma’îlîlyeh,<span
id="page_264_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_264_note_sect) for we are
distinguished from the parties of the Shî’ah, by this name and this
impersonation.'

   "Now the ancient Bâṭinîyeh have mingled with their system something
of the system of the sect of Philosophers,<span
id="page_264_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_264_note_dvert) and composed
their books after that way. Say they respecting the Creator,—let him be
exalted! 'As for us, we say not that he is existent, nor that he is
non-existent; neither that he is one who knows, nor that he is ignorant;
neither that he is one possessed of power, nor that he is impotent; and
in like manner, with regard to all the attributes. For veritable
affirmation requires the association of him with other existences in
that respect in which we speak of him absolutely, and that is
anthropomorphism; so that he does not admit of judgement by absolute
affirmation and absolute denial; on the contrary, he is the Deity of
those who stand opposed to one another, and the Creator of disputers,
and the arbiter between those who differ.' And respecting this, they
also tell of Muḥammed Ibn ’Aly El-Bâḳir, that he said, 'Because he
bestows knowledge on the knowing, it is said that he is one who knows;
and because he bestows power on the powerful, it is said that he is one
possessed of power. So then, he is one who knows, one possessed of
power, in the sense that he bestows knowledge and power, not in the
sense that knowledge subsists in him, and power, or that he is qualified
with <span id="page_265">p. 265</span> knowledge and power.' But it is
said respecting them that they are deniers of the attributes, who
despoil the divine essence of the attributes.

   "Say they, 'And in like manner we say, with regard to eternity, that
he is not eternal, nor originated; on the contrary, the Eternal is his
Amr and his Word,<span id="page_265_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_265_note_*)
and that which is originated is his creation and his workmanship. He
produced, by the Amr, the prime Intelligence, which is perfect in
action; and by the intervention of that, he produced the secondary Soul,
which is not perfect. And the relation of the Soul to the Intelligence
is either the relation of the genital seed to the perfection of created
form, and of the egg to the bird, or the relation of the child to the
father, and of the offspring to her who brings forth, or the relation of
the female to the male, and of consort to consort.' Say they, 'And
because the Soul yearns after the completion of the Intelligence, it
requires motion from incompleteness to completion, and motion requires
the means of motion. And so the celestial spheres originate, and move
with a circular movement, as governed by the Soul. And after them, the
simple natural properties originate, and move with the movement of
directness, also as governed by the Soul. And so are compounded the
composites, namely, minerals, and plants, and animals, and man; and
particular souls enter into bodies. And the species of man is
distinguished from other existences, by peculiar preparedness for the
effusion of those Lights; and his world stands opposed to the whole
world. And an Intelligence and a Soul which is universal, in the higher
world, makes necessary that there should be in this world an
impersonated Intelligence which is a whole, and of which the bearing is
the bearing of a complete, mature impersonation,' which they name the
Nâṭiḳ,<span id="page_265_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_265_note_dagger)
and which is the Prophet, and an impersonated Soul which is also a
whole, and of which the bearing is the bearing of an infant who is
incomplete, tending to completion, or the bearing of the genital seed
tending to perfection, <span id="page_266">p. 266</span> or the bearing
of the female consorted with the male,' which they name the Asâs,<span
id="page_266_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_266_note_*) and which is the
Legatee.

   "Say they, 'And as the celestial spheres move as moved by the Soul
and the Intelligence, and the natural properties too, in like manner
souls and persons move in accordance with laws, as moved by the Prophet
and the Legatee, in every age, in a circle of successive sevens, until
the final period is reached, and the age of resurrection is entered, and
obligations are taken off, and rules and laws are unloosed. And these
movements of the celestial spheres, and the rules enjoined by law, are
only in order to the Soul's attaining to the state of its completion;
and its completion is its attaining to the degree of the Intelligence,
and its being united to that, and its reaching the rank of that, as an
actuality. And as for that, it is the greater resurrection, upon which
the compoundings of the celestial spheres and the elements, and the
composites, are unloosed; and the heavens are rent; and the stars are
dispersed; and the earth is exchanged for the absence of earth; and the
heavens are rolled up like the rolling up of the scroll for the Book
written upon within; and creatures are reckoned with; and the good one
is separated from the bad one, and the obedient one, from the
disobedient one; and the constituents of truth are joined to the whole
Soul, and the constituents of falsehood to the false Sheitân.<span
id="page_266_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_266_note_dagger) And so, from
the time of motion up to rest is the beginning; and from the time of
rest up to that which has no end is the completion.'

   "Moreover they say, 'There is no statute, nor rule, nor sentence of
the sentences of law, concerning barter, or patronage, or giving, or
marriage, or divorce, or wounding, or revenge, or the price of blood,
without its counterpart pertaining to the world, by number against
number, and bearing against bearing; for the laws are worlds spiritual,
of the Amr, and worlds are the laws embodied, belonging to created
things. And in like manner, compoundings which respect the letters and
the words \[of the Ḳurân,\] are in the way of counter-part to the
compoundings <span id="page_267">p. 267</span> of forms and bodies; and
as for the single letters, their relation to the composites, of the
words, is as bare simples to composites, of bodies. And every letter has
a counter-part in the world, and a natural property with which it
belongs, and an impress, so far as that property is in souls. And so, in
consequence of this, sciences deriving virtue from the words of
instruction, become an aliment to souls, like as aliments deriving
virtue from the natural properties belonging to created things, become
an aliment to bodies. And God has indeed ordained that something of that
out of which it was created should be the aliment of every existence.'

   "And on the ground of this equivalence, they go to telling the
numbers of the words and verses \[of the Ḳurân,\] and that the calling
upon the divine name<span
id="page_267_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_267_note_*) is a composite of seven
and of twelve; and that the extolling God is a composite of four words
in one of the formulas of testimony, and of three words in the second
formula of testimony; and that there are seven segments in the first,
and six in the second; and that there are twelve letters in the
second;<span id="page_267_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_267_note_dagger)
and in like manner, with regard to every verse which admits of their
calculating its number;—all which he who is intelligent exercises not
his thought upon, without coming short of it, through fear of his
meeting his match!

   "These counter-balancings constituted the way of their men of early
times; who composed books respecting them, and called men to an Imâm, in
every age, who knows the equivalences of these sciences, and directs to
the paths of these positions and definitions.

   "Afterwards, the men of the new call departed from this way, when
El-Ḥasan Ibn Eṣ-Ṣabbâḥ proclaimed his call, and was unequal to the
exigencies of his word, and asked <span id="page_268">p. 268</span> help
of men, and fortified himself in castles. And the commencement of his
going up to the castle of Alamût was in Sha’bân in the year 483. And
that was after he had made journey to the country of his Imâm,<span
id="page_268_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_268_note_*) and had got from him
how to call the men of his age; upon which he returned and called men
with the first of a call to the doctrine of the appearance of a rightful
Imâm taking his stand in every age, and of the distinction of the party
which obtain deliverance from the other parties in this point; which is
to say, that they have an Imâm, and that the others have not any Imâm.
And the refined gold of his system, after the rejection of that which
was said respecting it, amounts, ultimately, in the Arabic language and
in the Persian language, to this particular. And as for us, we shall
translate that which he wrote in the Persian language, into the Arabic;
and there is no fault resting upon the translator; and the prospered is
whosoever follows the truth, and turns aside from falsehood; and God is
the Prosperer, and the Helper.

   "So then we begin with the four Articles with which began the call,
and which he wrote in the Persian, and so I have put into the Arabic.
Says he, 'He who gives an answer respecting the knowledge of the
Creator,—let him be exalted! has one of two things to say, either to
say, "I know the Creator by mere intellect and speculation, without need
of the teaching of a teacher," or to say, "There is no way to knowledge,
with intellect and speculation, except by the teaching of a rightful
teacher."' Says he, 'And whoever answers with the former, denies not
another's intellect and speculation. For, as for him, if ever he so
denies, he teaches; and the denial is a teaching, and a proof, that that
which is denied has need of something other than itself.' Says he, 'And
the two parts are both necessary consequences. For as for man, whenever
he gives decisions, or makes a declaration, he speaks on his own part,
or on the part of another; and in like manner, whenever he is bound with
an obligation, he is bound with it on his own part, or on the part <span
id="page_269">p. 269</span> of another.' This is the first Article;
which is a rupture with the Men of opinion and intellect.<span
id="page_269_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_269_note_*)

   "And he states in the second Article, as follows: 'Since the need of
a teacher is established, is then absolutely every teacher suitable, or
must there of necessity be a rightful teacher?' Says he, 'And whoever
says that every teacher is suitable, is not allowed to deny a teacher
adverse to himself, forasmuch as, when he so denies, he yields the point
that there must of necessity be a reliable, rightful teacher.' So much
for this. And this is a rupture with the Men of tradition.<span
id="page_269_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_269_note_dagger)

   "And he states in the third Article, as follows: 'Since the need of a
rightful teacher is established, must there not of necessity be
knowledge of the teacher, first of all, and possession of him, and
afterwards instruction by him? or may there be instruction by every
teacher, without his person being fixed upon, and his right being made
clear? And the latter is a coming, back to the former,<span
id="page_269_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_269_note_ddagger) forasmuch
as, if one can not walk the way, except with one going before, and a
companion, let there be the companion, and afterwards let the way be
trod,'—which is a rupture with the Shî’ah.

   "And he states, in the fourth Article, that 'men constitute two
parties, namely, a party who say, "There is need, with respect to
knowledge of the Creator,—let him be exalted! of a rightful teacher; and
the fixing upon him, and the recognition of him, is necessary, first of
all, and afterwards instruction by him;" and a party who take up from a
teacher, and from one who is not a teacher; in every science. <span
id="page_270">p. 270</span> 'And it is clear, by the preceding premises,
that the truth is with the former party; so that, as for their head, he
must needs be the head of those who hold to the truth. And since it is
clear that falsehood is with the latter party, their heads, consequently
must needs be the heads of those who hold to falsehood. Says he, 'And
this way is that which causes us to know the place of truth by the
truth, with general knowledge. Then, after that, we know the truth the
place of truth, with special knowledge; so that the rotation of
questions is not requisite.' And by 'the truth' he here means only the
having need;<span id="page_270_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_270_note_*) and
by 'the place of truth,' him who is needed. And says he, 'By the having
need we know the Imâm, and by the Imâm we know the measures of the
having need; just as by potentiality we know necessity, that is, the
Necessarily Existing, and by this know the measures of potentiality in
things potential.' Says he, 'And the way to the profession of unity is,
by the measuring of feather by feather, in like manner.'<span
id="page_270_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_270_note_dagger)

   "Moreover, he states certain Articles which have respect to the
confirmation of his doctrine, either by way of accommodation to, or by
way of rupture with, received doctrines; and most of them are some
rupture or other, and an insisting upon, and a demonstration of,
diversity on the ground of falsehood, and agreement on the ground of
truth. One of them is the 'Article of truth and falsehood, and the
little and the great.' He states that 'in the world there is a truth and
a falsehood;' after which he states that, 'as for the mark of truth, it
is unity, and as for the mark of falsehood, it is multiplicity; and
unity accompanies instruction, and multiplicity, opinion; and
instruction accompanies the forming one party, and the forming one
party, the Imâm; and opinion accompanies diverse parties, which
accompany their heads.' And he lays down truth and falsehood, and the
similarity between them, on the one hand, and the difference between
them, on the other hand, the mutual confronting in the two extremes, and
the ranking in one of the two extremes, as a balance by which he weighs
every thing about which he disputes. Says he, 'And I have derived <span
id="page_271">p. 271</span> this balance only from the word of
testimony, and its being compounded of denial and affirmation, or denial
and exception;' says he, 'so that not that which merits denial, is
falsehood; and not that which merits affirmation, is truth. And by that
is weighed the good and the bad, and the true and the false, and the
other opposites.'<span id="page_271_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_271_note_*)
And his main point is to come back, as respects every declaration and
word \[of the Ḳurân,\] to the affirmation of a teacher; and that, as for
the profession of unity, it is the profession of unity together with the
doctrine of a Prophet, while it is the profession of unity; and that, as
for the doctrine of a Prophet, it is the doctrine of a Prophet together
with the doctrine of an Imâm, while it is the doctrine of a
Prophet.<span id="page_271_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_271_note_dagger)

   "This is the end of his system. He prohibited common people, however,
from meddling with a matter of science; and in like manner, people of
note, from examining the ancient Books;<span
id="page_271_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_271_note_ddagger) except those
who knew the state of the case respecting every Book, and the degree
attained by men in every science. And in respect to points relating to
the Deity, he went not with his followers beyond his saying, 'Our Deity
is the Deity of Muḥammed.' Says he, 'I and you say, that our Deity is
the Deity of intellects, that is, that that which directs to him is the
intellect of every intelligent being.' But if it is said to one of them,
'What sayest thou respecting the Creator,—let him be exalted! as for
him, is he? and as for him, is he one, or multiple, possessed of
knowledge, powerful, or not?' this definition alone is given for answer,
'My Deity is the Deity of Muḥammed; and he it is who sent his Envoy with
the direction; and as for the Envoy, he is the director to him.'

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

   "And often as I have entered into discussion with the people, on the
ground of the premises stated, they have not taken a step beyond their
saying, 'Have we then need of thee?' or 'Shall we hear this from thee?'
or 'Shall we be instructed by thee?' And often as I have been
conciliating towards the people, respecting the having need, and have
said, 'Where is he who is needed? and how determines he for me the
points relating to the Deity? and what is it which he prescribes in
respect to things which are objects of the intellect? inasmuch as "the
teacher" has no meaning intrinsically, and only has meaning because
teaches; and ye, indeed, shut up the gate of science, and open the gate
of submission to dictation, and the following of authority; and an
intelligent being is not content to believe a doctrine, without any
evidence to rest upon, or to walk in a way, without any proof that he
should do so,'—the beginnings of the system have been authorizings to
judge, and submissions to authority. 'But not, by thy Lord, not believe
will they, until they make thee the judge respecting that which is in
controversy between them; after which, they will not find, in their
souls, any fault pertaining to that which thou determinest; and they
will submit themselves, with submission.'"<span
id="page_272_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_272_note_*)

 

   "*The Ghâlîyeh*.<span
id="page_272_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_272_note_dagger)—These are they
who are extravagant in respect to the reality of their Imâms, to such a
degree that they put them out of the limits of the creature-state, and
pronounce bearings of the state of Deity to be in them. For often they
liken one of their Imâms to God; and often they liken God to the
creature; and they hold to the two extremes of extravagance and
curtailment.<span
id="page_272_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_272_note_ddagger) And their
assimilations have only grown out of the doctrines of the
Incarnationists and the Transmigrationists, and the doctrines of the
Jews and the Christians; inasmuch as the Jews liken the Creator to the
creature, and the Christians liken the creature to the Creator; and so
these assimilations passed into the minds of the Extravagant Shî’ah, to
such a <span id="page_273">p. 273</span> degree that they pronounce
bearings of the state of Deity to be in the reality of some of their
Imâms. And anthropomorphism was, as a principle, and fundamentally,
among the Shî’ah; and only went over to some of the People of the
Sunneh, after that. And the system of the Mu’tazileh prevailed among the
latter, after they saw that it was nearer to that which is objective to
the intellect, and farther from anthropomorphism and incarnation.

   "And the heresies of the Extravagants are comprehended in four
things, namely, anthropomorphism, and the coming forth, and the return,
and transmigration. And there are appellations belonging to them; and in
every country, they have an appellation. They are called in Iṣfahân the
Khurramîyeh,<span id="page_273_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_273_note_*) and
the Kûdîyeh;<span
id="page_273_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_273_note_dagger) and in Rei,
the Mazdakîyeh, and the Sinbâdîyeh;<span
id="page_273_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_273_note_ddagger) and in
Adherbîjân, the Dhuḳûlîyeh;<span
id="page_273_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_273_note_sect) and in a certain
place, the Muḥammarîyeh;<span
id="page_273_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_273_note_dvert) and in
Mâ-warâ-l-nahr, the Mubeiyeḍhîyeh."<span
id="page_273_fr_para"></span>[¶](#page_273_note_para)

 

   "*The Nuṣairîyeh and the Isḥâḳîyeh*.<span
id="page_273_fr_**"></span>[\*\*](#page_273_note_**)—They are among the
Extravagants of the Shî’ah. And there is a set of them who defend their
doctrine, and act the part of leaders in respect to their declarations.
And there is a disagreement among them respecting the way to generalize
the name appropriate to the state of Deity, so as to include the Imâms
of the people of the Family. Say they, 'The appearance <span
id="page_274">p. 274</span> of the spiritual in a material body is a
thing which no intelligent being denies; whether on the side of good,
like the appearance of Jebrîl,—let peace be to him! by some
impersonation, and the being fashioned in the form of one of the Arab
race, and the being likened to the form of mankind; or on the side of
evil, like the appearance of Esh-Sheiṭân in the form of man, so that he
may work evil in his form, and the appearance of the Jinns in the form
of mankind, so that they may dispute with its tongue. And so, on account
of that, we say that God,—let him be exalted! appears in the form of
impersonations. And because there is not, after the Envoy of God,—let
the divine benediction and peace be to him! any impersonation more
excellent than ’Aly,—let benediction and peace be to him! and after him,
his appropriated descendants,<span
id="page_274_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_274_note_*) who are the best of
creatures, therefore, the true God appears in their form, and speaks
with their tongue, and holds with their hands. So then, by virtue of
this we generalize the name appropriate to the state of Deity so as to
include them. And we affirm this being appropriated of ’Aly, preferably
of any one else only because he had given to him specially an aiding
from God,—let him be exalted! which is something that connects itself
with the hidden sense of mysteries. Said the Prophet,—let the divine
benediction and peace be to him! "I judge by the outward, and God has
charge of secrets."<span
id="page_274_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_274_note_dagger) And by virtue
of this, it was the lot of the Prophet,—let the divine benediction and
peace be to him! to fight with polytheists, and the lot of ’Aly to fight
with hypocrites. And by virtue of this, he likened him to ’Îsa Ibn
Maryam, and said, "And if men may not have said respecting thee that
which they say respecting ’Îsa Ibn Maryam, have not I, indeed, declared
respecting thee with a declaration?"'<span
id="page_274_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_274_note_ddagger)

   "And often they affirm of him a participation in the envoyship,
inasmuch as he said, 'Among you is one who fights on the ground of its
allegorical sense, as I fight on the ground of its letter; is he not,
indeed, the sewer of the sandal?'<span
id="page_274_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_274_note_sect) and so, that the
knowledge of the allegorical sense, and the fighting with hypocrites,
and the disputing with the Jinns, and <span id="page_275">p. 275</span>
the removing of the gate of Khaibar, not by corporeal power,<span
id="page_275_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_275_note_*) are the most convincing
proof that in him was a divine part, and a sovereign power from the
Lord, or that it is he in whose form God appeared, and with whose hand
he created, and with whose tongue he commanded. And by virtue of this,
they say, 'He was in existence before the creation of the heavens and
the earth; says he, "We were shadows on the right hand of the throne;
and so we gave glory, and then the angels gave glory with our giving
glory,"—and as for those shadows, and those forms not casting shade,
they are real, and shine with shining, by the light of the Lord; which
is not cut off from them, whether they are in this world or in that
world. And by virtue of this, ’Aly said, "I am of Aḥmed as light of
light,"—meaning that there is no distinction between the two lights,
except that one of them precedes, and the second, a correlate to it,
comes on after it. And this proves a sort of association.'

   "But the Nuṣairîyeh are more inclined to maintain the divine part;
and the Isḥâḳîyeh are more inclined to maintain the association in the
prophetic office. And they have other disagreements which we shall not
mention."

 

   "*The Bâḳirîyeh, and the constant Ja’farîyeh*.—They are the followers
of Abû Ja’far Muḥammed Ibn ’Aly El-Bâḳir, and his son Ja’far Eṣ-Ṣâdiḳ.
They declare the imamship of both of them, and the imamship of their
parent Zein el-’Âbidîn; except that among them are some who are constant
to one of the two, and forward not the imamship to their descendants,
and some who do forward.<span
id="page_275_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_275_note_dagger) And we
distinguish this party over and above the sects professing to be Shî’ah
which we shall mention, only because those of the Shî’ah who are
constant to El-Bâḳir, and declare his return, are in constancy like
those \[of the Shî’ah\] who declare the imamship of Abû ’Abdallah Ja’far
Ibn Muḥammed Eṣ-Ṣâdiḳ.

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

   "And he was a possessor of rare science in religion, and perfect
culture in philosophy, and consummate self-restraint in respect to this
world, and complete abstinence from appetites. And he had dwelt in
Medîneh a length of time, doing much service to the Shî’ah who sided
with him, and committing to those friendly to him the secrets of the
sciences; when he entered ’Irâḳ, and dwelt there a length of time. He
never assumed the imamship, nor contended with any one respecting the
khalifship; and whoever plunges into the sea of knowledge, is not eager
for a shore; and whoever is elevated to the summit of verity, fears not
a letting down; and there is a saying, 'Whoever has converse with God,
is empty of men, and whoever cultivates familiarity with others than
God, the Tempter makes a prey of him.'<span
id="page_276_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_276_note_*) And he was related, on
the father's side, to the stock of prophecy; and on the mother's side,
he was related to Abû Bekr,—let God be gracious to him! And he cleared
himself of that which any one of the Extravagants had to do with, and
cleared himself of him, and cursed them; and he was clear of the
peculiarities of the doctrines of the Râfiḍheh,<span
id="page_276_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_276_note_dagger) and their
fooleries, namely, the declaring of the disappearance and the
return,<span id="page_276_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_276_note_ddagger)
and the coming forth,<span
id="page_276_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_276_note_sect) and
transmigration, and incarnation, and anthropomorphism.

   "But the Shî’ah were divided, after his day, and every one of them
professed a doctrine, and desired to pass it on upon his followers, and
referred its origin to him, and fixed it on him; while the master was
clear of that, and of the system of the Mu’tazileh,<span
id="page_276_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_276_note_dvert) and also of the
doctrine of the Ḳadarîyeh.<span
id="page_276_fr_para"></span>[¶](#page_276_note_para) This is his saying
respecting volition, namely, 'God,—let him be exalted! wills by us
something, and <span id="page_277">p. 277</span> wills from us
something; and so, that which be wills by us he hides from us, and that
which he wills from us he manifests to us. So then, what have we to do,
to meddle with that which he wills by us, to the neglect of that which
he wills from us?' And this is his saying respecting predestination,
namely, 'It is a thing between two things, not absolutism, and not
indifferentism.' And he was wont to say, in prayer, 'O God, to thee
belongs the praise, if I obey thee; and to thee it belongs to convict,
if I disobey thee. There pertains not to me, nor to any one else, any
efficiency in the case of a doing well; and there is no convicting on my
part, or on the part of any one else, in the case of a doing ill.'

   "Now then, we will mention the sects which differed from each other
respecting him, and after his day, not on the ground of their being
divisions of his partizans,—on the contrary, on the ground of their
having to do with the root of his stock, and the branches of his
descendants."<span id="page_277_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_277_note_*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](isma1-3)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_263">p. 263</span>

<span id="page_263_note_para"></span>[¶](#page_263_fr_para) i. e. Party
of the hidden sense.

<span id="footnotes_page_264">p. 264</span>

<span id="page_264_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_264_fr_*) i. e. Party of
Mazdak. Mazdak was the author of a modification of Magism, who was
patronized by Kobâd, one of the Sâsânide kings, and put to death by
Nûshirwân. For his opinions, see *The Dabistân*, transl. by Shea and
Troyer, Vol. I. pp. 372, ff.; Esh-Shahrastâny's *Book of Relig. and
Philos. Sects*, pp. 192, ff. What particular ground there may have been
for the application of this name to the Ismâ’ilis, we do not know. But
there is reason to believe that they may have derived some of their
peculiar doctrines from a Persian source.

<span id="page_264_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_264_fr_dagger) i. e.
Party of instruction. The ground of this appellation appears from some
of Ḥasan Ibn Ṣabbâḥ's "articles," stated farther on by Esh-Shahrastâny.

<span id="page_264_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_264_fr_ddagger) i. e.
Heretics.

<span id="page_264_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_264_fr_sect) i. e. Party
of Isma’îl, son of Ja’far Eṣ-Ṣâdiḳ, the seventh and last Imâm of the
Ismâ’ilis.

<span id="page_264_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_264_fr_dvert) Those of
the Muslim learned men who were influenced in their religious opinions
by the study of Greek philosophy, introduced among them especially under
the Khalifeh Mamûn, were called by this name.

<span id="footnotes_page_265">p. 265</span>

<span id="page_265_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_265_fr_*) It will be
evident, farther on, that the Ismâ’ilian Word, or Amr, is a prime
emanation from the Deity, having divine names and attributes, but
distinct from the Deity itself.

<span id="page_265_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_265_fr_dagger) Nâṭiḳ,
i. e. Utterer, is the name which the Ismâ’ilis give to every Prophet of
a period, who declares the divine will for that time.

<span id="footnotes_page_266">p. 266</span>

<span id="page_266_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_266_fr_*) Asâs, i. e.
Foundation, is the name given in the Ismâ’ilian system to first of seven
supposed successors of every Nâṭiḳ, that is, the first of seven Imâms of
each period, whose office it is to confirm his teaching by the
disclosure of its allegorical sense.

<span id="page_266_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_266_fr_dagger) See Rev.
vi. 12-17; Id. xx. 5.

<span id="footnotes_page_267">p. 267</span>

<span id="page_267_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_267_fr_*) \#\#\# *In the
name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate*, of which the first part,
*In the name of God*, consists in the original of seven letters, and the
remainder, of twelve.

<span id="page_267_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_267_fr_dagger) The two
"formulas" here referred to are \#\#\# i. e. *There is no Deity but
God*; and \#\#\# i. e. *Muḥammed is the Prophet of God*. By "segments,"
are meant separate syllables; to make these of the numbers mentioned,
final vowels must be thrown off, and the Prophet's name must be
pronounced Muḥmed.

<span id="footnotes_page_268">p. 268</span>

<span id="page_268_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_268_fr_*) The Fâṭimite
Khalîfeh Mustanṣer-billah, who reigned in Egypt when Ḥasan began his
career, is undoubtedly here intended. Before Ḥasan established an
independent dynasty, he went about in the character of an Ismâ’ilian
Dâ’i, advocating the legitimacy of the Fâṭimites, as descendants of
’Aly, against the ’Abbâsides. See *Mém. de l'Inst.*, Tome iv. p. 8;
*Notices et Extraits des Manuscrits*, Tome iv. p. 687; Id. Tome ix. p.
152, ff.

<span id="footnotes_page_269">p. 269</span>

<span id="page_269_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_269_fr_*) The amount of
this article seems to be, that religious instruction is necessary,
contrary to the doctrine of those who hold that God is known by mere
intellect and speculation; because whoever affirms the latter, if he
would establish any definite criterion, must confine it to himself, and
in so doing contradict his principle, by making circumstances personal
to himself, independent of the possession of mere intellect and
speculative faculty, requisite to the end.

<span id="page_269_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_269_fr_dagger)
Exaggerators of ancient authority are here referred to. Esh-Shahrastâny
elsewhere says that they were called Men of tradition, "because their
aim is to get traditions, and to hand down accounts, and to base
sentences on authorities, and they do not go back to analogy, manifest
or hidden, so long as they find an account, or a memorial." See
Esh-Shahrastâny's *Book of Relig. and Philos. Sects*, ed. Cureton, p.
160. That such a party were wanting in discrimination, as Ḥasan affirms,
may easily be credited.

<span id="page_269_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_269_fr_ddagger) That
is to say, the very statement of the latter alternative involves the
affirmation of the former.

<span id="footnotes_page_270">p. 270</span>

<span id="page_270_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_270_fr_*) The need of a
teacher.

<span id="page_270_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_270_fr_dagger) The
meaning is, that one comes to the profession of the divine unity, with a
full understanding of it, through the Imâm, precisely as it is through
him that one attains to a complete conviction of his need of
instruction.

<span id="footnotes_page_271">p. 271</span>

<span id="page_271_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_271_fr_*) This "balance,"
or principle of judgment as to the true and the false, the good and the
bad, and all opposites, was derived from the fundamental confession of
faith among the Muslims, *There is no Deity but God*, which expresses
the truth of the divine unity only as the propositions included in it,
namely, *There is no Deity*, and *God is a Deity*, each of which, by
itself, may stand either for truth or for falsehood, are taken together
as mutually complementary. The general principle may be stated as
follows: that what may be affirmed absolutely, as between any opposites,
consists in the complementary relation to each other of those opposites.

<span id="page_271_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_271_fr_dagger) This
means, that the declaration *There is no Deity but God*, implies the
doctrine of a Prophet to reveal the truth thus expressed, and that the
doctrine of a Prophet, expressed in the declaration *Muḥammed is his
Prophet*, implies that of an Imâm to carry on the Prophet's work.

<span id="page_271_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_271_fr_ddagger) The
Scriptures of former periods, or previous Divine Revelations.

<span id="footnotes_page_272">p. 272</span>

<span id="page_272_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_272_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sur. iv.
v. 68. It is the edition of Flügel which is referred to in these notes,
in all cases.

<span id="page_272_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_272_fr_dagger) i. e.
Party of the Extravagants.

<span id="page_272_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_272_fr_ddagger) The
writer means that they not only exalt the creature to the rank of the
Deity, but also bring down the Deity to the level of the creature.

<span id="footnotes_page_273">p. 273</span>

<span id="page_273_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_273_fr_*) i. e. Party of
the Voluptuous.

<span id="page_273_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_273_fr_dagger) i. e.
Party of the Self-willed, probably. In this sense, the word seems to be
originally Persian, as is Khurramîyeh.

<span id="page_273_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_273_fr_ddagger) i. e.
Party of the Followers of Sinbâd. Sinbâd was a leader of the Extravagant
Shî’is, in Khorâsân, in the reign of the Khalîfeh Mamûn. See Weil's
*Geschichte der Chalifen*, Bd. ii. s. 236.

<span id="page_273_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_273_fr_sect) I can make
no sense of this word, however pronounced, either as Arabic, or Persian.
But if we read Duḳûlîyeh, it is an Arabic word, meaning Self-hiders. Now
from one of our new documents it appears, that certain Ismâ’ilian
followers of Bâbek, whose standard of rebellion was first raised in
Ajerbîjân, took from him the fashion of going abroad in mantles of
Yemen, an article of dress covering the whole person, from the top of
the head down; and the class of people there called, from that
circumstance, Bâbekîyeh, may have been the same as those here named. See
[p. 281](isma1-3.htm#page_281).

<span id="page_273_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_273_fr_dvert) i. e.
Party of the Reddened, because they wore red there.

<span id="page_273_note_para"></span>[¶](#page_273_fr_para) i. e. Party
of the Whitened, because they wore white in that country.

<span id="page_273_note_**"></span>[\*\*](#page_273_fr_**) The origin of
this name I do not know. The name Nuṣairyeh, signifying Little
Christians, was probably given in derision. See *Zeitschrift d. Deutsch.
Morgenländ Gesellschaft*, vol, iii. p. 308.

<span id="footnotes_page_274">p. 274</span>

<span id="page_274_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_274_fr_*) Appropriated as
dwelling-places of the Deity.

<span id="page_274_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_274_fr_dagger) A
traditionary saying.

<span id="page_274_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_274_fr_ddagger) A
traditionary saying.

<span id="page_274_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_274_fr_sect) Meaning,
does he not complete what I begin? This also is one of the traditionary
sayings of the Prophet.

<span id="footnotes_page_275">p. 275</span>

<span id="page_275_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_275_fr_*) This must refer
to some tradition connected with the taking of Khaibar by Muḥammed.

<span id="page_275_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_275_fr_dagger) The
meaning is, that some regard one or the other of the two as the last
Imâm, to whom the imamship still belongs, although he is for a season
withdrawn from human view; while others consider the imamship as the
inheritance of successive generations in the line of his posterity.

<span id="footnotes_page_276">p. 276</span>

<span id="page_276_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_276_fr_*) This is probably
a traditionary saying of Muḥammed.

<span id="page_276_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_276_fr_dagger) i. e.
Party of the Deserters, the name given to a party whose doctrinal belief
Esh-Shahrastâny characterizes by saying that "they are extravagant in
respect to the prophetic office and imamship, to such a degree that they
come to the doctrine of incarnation \[of the Deity.\]" See
Esh-Shahrastâny's *Book of Relig. and Philos. Sects*, p. 9.

<span id="page_276_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_276_fr_ddagger) The
disappearance and return of the Imâm.

<span id="page_276_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_276_fr_sect) The
manifestation of the Deity by emanation.

<span id="page_276_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_276_fr_dvert) This was
essentially, as Esh-Shahrastâny expresses it, such an "extravagance in
the way of thinking about the divine unity, as amounted to making God a
vacuity by the denial of attributes." See Esh-Shahrastâny's *Book of
Relig. and Philos. Sects*, p. 9.

<span id="page_276_note_para"></span>[¶](#page_276_fr_para) i. e.
Maintainers of power \[in man,\] in opposition to the doctrine of
absolute divine decrees.

<span id="footnotes_page_277">p. 277</span>

<span id="page_277_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_277_fr_*) Meaning, as
holding in common that the imamship is perpetuated in his family, while
distinguished by particular attachment to one or another of his
descendants.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
