[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Ismâ’ili
materials](../../isl/isma/index)  
[Previous](isma1-4)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Two fragments of a *Risâleh* by Khâlid Ibn Zeid El-Ju’fy

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

## INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   THE following is a translation of that portion of an Arabic
manuscript sent to me by Dr. Henry W. De Forest, missionary in Syria,
which was spoken of in the introduction to a translation of the larger
part of the manuscript, published in the last volume of this Journal, as
for the time set aside. It consists of two fragments of a *Risâleh*, or
Missive, by one Khâlid Ibn Zeid El-Ju’fy, designed for the instruction
of certain persons supposed to have "deviated from the path of
orthodoxy," and chiefly taken up with relating a conversation which the
author professes to have had with the Imâm Muḥammed Ibn ’Aly El-Bâḳir.
Who this Khâlid was, whether a contemporary of Muḥammed El-Bâḳir, or
not, I have not been able to determine. But the probability is, that he
represents one of the numerous Shî’ite seets which, after the El-Bâḳir's
day, as Esh-Shahrastâny informs us, availed themselves of his
distinguished name to give currency to their own opinions. It is to be
observed, however, that the doctrine of this Risâleh accords very well
with the sketch given by Esh-Shahrastâny of El-Bâḳir's views; so that we
may have here, at least, an authentic tradition of what he taught. As
respects the heterodoxy opposed in this Risâleh, there is, in some of
its statements, an evident antagonism to the doctrine of the Ismâ’ilis:
as, for example, is the fundamental representation of the Amr, or Word,
which is here the Absolute Deity, while, in the Ismâ’ilian system, it is
the prime emanation from the Deity; and again, in the view given of the
Meshiyeh, which, with the Ismâ’ilis, is only another name for the Tâly,
while here it is represented as a Divine Volition caused by the Sâbiḳ
and the Tâly; and yet again, in the statement of the origin of the
world, which, in the Ismâ’ilian system, is viewed as an emanation from
the Deity, in consequence of his creative mandate, but is here carefully
distinguished <span id="page_168">p. 168</span> as not in any sense the
work of the Deity. But the opposition of this Risâleh seems to me to be,
chiefly, to the doctrine of the Ghâlis, or Extravagants; with some
allusions to that particular branch of this party denominated the
Nuṣairis. What was said respecting these sects in the article above
referred to, will enable the reader to appreciate this suggestion. It
should be remembered, also, that these and the Ismâ’ilis belong to the
same general family.

   The footnotes to the translation are intended to facilitate the
understanding of the text, without entering into any discussion of the
doctrines set forth in it.

   The portion of our manuscript translated in the following pages, was
obtained through the courtesy of the late Prussian Consul General for
Syria, Mr. Von Wildenbruch.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

## TRANSLATION.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   . . . . . except me and my brother,"—let peace be to them both!
Afterwards he said, "And no one knows us<span
id="page_169_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_169_note_*) with verity of
knowledge, except the Prophets and the Legatees, and the Believers,
'whose hearts God opens'<span
id="page_169_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_169_note_dagger) to the faith,
or our eminent Naḳîbs,<span
id="page_169_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_169_note_ddagger) who are
elected, and whom we elect. Hearest thou not God, where he says, 'And
whomsoever we direct and choose, when the signs of the Merciful are read
to them, they fall down worshipping and weeping'?<span
id="page_169_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_169_note_sect) And he upbraids
the other party, saying, 'And when it is said to them, "Worship ye the
Merciful," they say, "And what is the Merciful? shall we worship that
which thou commandest us?" and it increases their shyness,'<span
id="page_169_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_169_note_dvert)—meaning, that
they are shy of the disclosure to them of the knowledge of the verity of
the science of the hidden sense, pertaining to the knowledge of the
Prince of the believers ’Aly Ibn Abû Ṭâlib,—let peace from him be to
us!"

   "And know thou, O Khâlid, that this name means, by a similitude, the
Merciful, which is one of the names of the prince of the believers ’Aly
Ibn Abû Ṭâlib,—let peace be him! and that the Compassionate is, by a
similitude, a derived name among the names of the Envoy Muḥammed,—let
the divine benediction and peace be to him and to his family! Hearest
thou not the Ḳurân, where it says, <span id="page_170">p. 170</span>
'Verily an Envoy has come to you from among yourselves, to whom it is a
grievous thing that ye are corrupted, who is eager for your being
believers, mild, compassionate,' and so on, to the end of the
sûrah?<span id="page_170_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_170_note_*) So then the
Merciful is a name of the Prince of the believers ’Aly Ibn Abû
Ṭâlib,—let peace be to him! and the Compassionate is a name of
Muḥammed,—let the divine benediction and peace be to him!"

   "And they are shy, only forasmuch as, after the Nâṭiḳ has called them
to himself, they respond to him, but, after he has said to them,
'To-morrow, will he be gracious whose confederate I am,'—to wit, ’Aly
his confederate,—they shy of covenanting with him, and shy of the Nâṭiḳ;
and that is from a shyness of following the Nâṭiḳ, which is from the
contrariness which besets them. And know thou, that, as for those
others, of whom he speaks, when the signs of the Merciful are read to
them, they fall down worshipping and weeping.'"

   "And know thou, O Khâlid Ibn Zeid, that they are these twelve who are
Ḥujjehs of the Imâms,—let peace be to them! the Executors of the bidding
of God, and the Attendants, who have sojourned only in eighteen men,
whom I will by and by enumerate to thee, if God will, and who are those
who were on the side of the Prince of the believers ’Aly,—let peace from
him be to us! Hearest thou not the saying of the Envoy Muḥammed,—let the
divine benediction and peace be to him! 'The Believer sees by the Light
of God'—meaning only them, these who pertain to him, and who are his
Ḥujjehs? And whoever adheres to them, they are the light of the lights
of his wisdom, as seeing by the Light of God; for God is not beheld
except by his Light, and how is it possible for man to see by his own
light, or to be directed by the Candle?<span
id="page_170_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_170_note_dagger) But that
saying of his, 'sees by the Light of God,' means his Deity,<span
id="page_170_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_170_note_ddagger) who bestows
upon him his acceptance, and to whom he will return. And they must of
necessity return to the earth with their Master, whenever the Ḳâim,—let
peace be to his memory! takes his stand."

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

   And in like manner El-Bâḳir,—let peace be to him! said, "Whoever
believes not in our rotation, and our returning, he is not ours, and we
are not his,"—meaning,—let peace be to him! that the imamship is never
cut off, and that it is transmitted from one group of seven to another
group of seven, to the Ḳâim,—let peace be to him! by a return of
something hidden, not outward, of something subtle, not gross;
"therefore the knowledge of that is highly necessary."

   "And it is necessary for thee that thou shouldst acknowledge the Tâly
in that which is made, and in that which appears, and its Measure<span
id="page_171_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_171_note_*) which it takes to
itself, namely, its Spiritual Measure, and its Corporeal Measure; and
that there is no distinction between the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly; and that
one of them excells not the other, either in respect to spiritual
quality, or in respect to corporeal quality, or in respect to their
science, in which they shroud themselves, or in respect to the showing
of their miraculous signs. And so we say as follows. O Khâlid Ibn Zeid,
thou shalt not be extravagant respecting the Prince of believers,—let
peace from him be to us! devoid of science. O Khâlid Ibn Zeid, the
Prince of the belivers,—let peace from him be to us! is as when sandal
is measured with sandal, part answering, all but a trifle, to part. For
he is the reinforcement of the Nâṭiḳ,<span
id="page_171_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_171_note_dagger) by means of
the Sâbiḳ, as something spiritual, without any thing corporeal, and the
reinforcement of the Asâs of the higher world, in the image of
El-Fatḥ,<span
id="page_171_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_171_note_ddagger) by means of
the Tâly. Hearest thou not the Prophet,—let peace be to him! who says,
'I and ’Aly are like two *hés*, and the putting together of the two
fore-fingers'?—wherein he shows thee that there is no distinction
between the two, and between the Imâm<span
id="page_171_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_171_note_sect) and the
Legatee,—let peace be to him! And if he \[’Aly\] shows miraculous signs,
he says,—let peace be to him! 'But the Prophet,—let peace be to him and
to his Family! has already brought to pass things miraeulous, beyond the
scope of inquirers respecting them, such as his dividing the moon at
Mekkeh, and his <span id="page_172">p. 172</span> turning out the
serpent from the precincts of the Ka’beh and his overpowering those who
designed evil to Mekkeh, so that he sent upon them the torrent, and his
bringing the Distinguisher.' And to each of them belongs a determined
Measure, which he exceeds not, and it is not at all necessary that there
should be distinction made between the two. Has not God said in the
Ḳurân, '"We distinguish not between his several Envoys, and we are
resigned to him,"'—meaning by that his Envoys and his Legatees,—'and
say, "We hear and we obey thy pardon, O our Lord! and to thee will be
our coming,"'<span id="page_172_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_172_note_*)—the
meaning of, 'O our Lord!' which points to the Amr of the Creator,—let it
be magnified and glorified! being that there is no distinction between
the two, because they are the Correspondents of the two Eternal
Roots?<span id="page_172_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_172_note_dagger)
And know thou, O Khâlid Ibn Zeid, that I shall by and by return to the
Primary Attribute,<span
id="page_172_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_172_note_ddagger) and explain
it to thee with an explanation which thou wilt understand. As for the
Prince of the believers,—let peace from him be to us! he is the Measure
of the Tâly, which is that which causes bodies to be, and creates them,
and does well the forming of them; while it is the Sâbiḳ, of which the
Correspondent is Muḥammed,—let the divine benediction and peace be to
him! which causes spirits to be. All of them together are by means of
the two Roots. Hence, O Khâlid Ibn Zeid, spirits excell not bodies, nor
do bodies excell spirits, because the two are of one rank; although
bodles alone stay in the dust without ever parting from it, while
spirits stay but for a moment of time in the dust, (which is the moment
of time while body moves from place to to place, together with which
they move from place to place,) until body is stationary, whereupon
they, the spirits, mount to their world. And know thou, O Khâlid Ibn
Zeid, that spirit is subject to punishment which body is not <span
id="page_173">p. 173</span> subject to; for, if it believes, then it
goes to happiness, and if it is refractory, then, to the punishment of
Es-Sa’îr, while body is not known, after that, as long as its way is in
the dust."

   "And know thou, that it is that on account of which the Sâbiḳ and the
Tâly are named.<span id="page_173_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_173_note_*)
And the two match in respect to the state of being, because each of them
is indispensable to its mate. For the Amr of the Creator,—let its memory
be glorified! has made all things to be reciprocal and conjoined, so
that there is a conjunction in a reciprocity, and a reciprocity in a
conjunction; while the Amr of the Creator is separate, without any
reciprocal, or any resemblant, or any associate, or any like, or any
image; and number applies not to it;<span
id="page_173_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_173_note_dagger) nor are
conjectures applicable; and the intellect of man embraces it not,—let
its name be blessed, clear of that which they say by a great
superiority! And know thou, O Khâlid, that any thing pertaining to the
Tâly, is completed only through the Sâbiḳ; for its \[the Tâly's\]
reinforcements are from the Sâbiḳ, because, otherwise, it \[the thing\]
would be a mockery. And if spirits were not, bodies would not articulate
speech; and if bodies were not, spirits would not stay; so that they are
indispensable to one another. It is like water in the pitcher: if the
pitcher were not, the water would not stay; and if it were not for the
use of the water, it would not come to the pitcher; and its use consists
in the union of the two things, one following the other. So then 'Glory
be to him who created all the mates of that which the earth brings
forth, and of themselves, and of that which they know not'!"<span
id="page_173_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_173_note_ddagger)

   Then said I, "O my master,—my life for thee! and what are 'the
mates'?"

   Whereupon he said, "Muḥammed and ’Aly,—let peace be to them both! are
'all the mates;' and 'of that which the earth brings forth' are our
Ḥujjehs; and 'of themselves' <span id="page_174">p. 174</span> are the
Imâms, one being of another, Light of Light, Imâm of Imâm, and thus
ever, without intermission, without cessation, who are undiminished, up
to the determined bound, and the known limit, which is our Ḳâim, 'on the
day when riches profit not, nor sons, only be who brings to God a
resigned heart.'"<span id="page_174_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_174_note_*)

   "So then the Sâbiḳ, of which the Correspondent is Muḥammed,—let the
divine benediction and peace be to him! is the Creator as to spirits;
and the Tâly, of which the Correspondent is the Prince of the
believers,—let peace from him be to us!—is the Creator as to bodies.
Hearest thou not that which says, 'As for us, we cause to live, and we
cause to die, and to us will be the coming'<span
id="page_174_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_174_note_dagger)—wherein shows
thee the origin of life, and considers the origin of death, as something
hidden, not outward? Therefore understand thou that. And as for the Amr
of the Creator, not anything is above it, and no occasion has to do with
it, and it pertains not to any occasion;<span
id="page_174_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_174_note_ddagger) and there is
no deity like it; and not any thing resembles it; and it is 'the Hearer,
the Knowing One.'<span
id="page_174_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_174_note_sect) That it is which
committed all things to these two Higher Measures; and to them it will
fall to reckon with creatures, on the day of reckoning. Hearest thou not
that which says, 'Verily, to us will be their coming; and on us will
devolve the reckoning with them'?<span
id="page_174_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_174_note_dvert) So then let the
Amr, namely, the Amr of the Creator,—let it be exalted! be glorified,
clear of all things! forasmuch as it committed the same to the Sâbiḳ and
the Tâly, and left to them Higher Similitudes and Earthly
Resemblances,<span id="page_174_fr_para"></span>[¶](#page_174_note_para)
which renew themselves, without his giving to be seen in them, and are
unchanged, without his causing to be known through them."

   "And know thou, O Khâlid Ibn Zeid, that the Prince of the believers,
together with Muḥammed,—let the divine benediction be to them both! must
of necessity descend to <span id="page_175">p. 175</span> the earth; and
that, at the beginning of every new period, on the completion of the
period of the seven Imâms, simultaneously with the coming of every Nâṭiḳ
and Legatee. For, as for Muḥammed,—let the divine benediction and peace
be to him! he reinforces the Nâṭiḳ in the first of the Transients; and
so, when the law is finished for the latter, the Veil is withdrawn, as
respects him, from the former.<span
id="page_175_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_175_note_*) And so be it known,
that his reinforcement is from both these Earthly Measures, having to
him and to his Asâs accompanying him the force of the two Higher
Measures; for the Prince of the believers,—let peace from him be to us!
reinforces his Asâs, as something hidden, not outward,<span
id="page_175_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_175_note_dagger) just as
Muḥammed,—let peace be to him and to his Family! reinforces him. And so,
what with the two Higher Measures, which reinforce the two Lower
Measures, come to be the Four Measures. And in like manner, the two
Lower Measures reinforce bodies which they set apart, and elect, and in
which they consequently cause to appear and to dwell spirits inspired by
the Pen;<span
id="page_175_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_175_note_ddagger) and by and
by I will acquaint thee with them, and their names, in order that the
verity of thy knowledge may be made perfect."

   "O Khâlid Ibn Zeid, know thou that the Sâbiḳ delivered up its science
and its reinforcement to the Meshiyeh, which was caused by the Sâbiḳ and
the Tâly, upon their glorifying and hallowing.<span
id="page_175_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_175_note_sect) For all of them
together form the council of sciences, and accordingly the Tâly
committed thereto the reinforcernent of its science; whereupon it
glorified, and its glorifying was that it said, 'Be thou glorified, O
Eternal of Eternals! verily, thou makest strong that which thou dost
create.' And upon that, there came to it \[the Meshiyeh\] an
Amr-reinforcernent, from the First Cause, which is the <span
id="page_176">p. 176</span> Amr of the Creator, the Veritable
Deity,<span id="page_176_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_176_note_*)—let it be
exalted! whereby it strengthened it. Afterwards, the Meshiyeh beheld the
Sâbiḳ with the eye of predestination, and beheld the Tâly with the eye
of love; whereupon there came to be, for the two in the earth, a
Correspondent,<span
id="page_176_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_176_note_dagger) like to that
which had come to be, for the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly. And so it reinforces
the Nâṭiḳ, with its Amr-reinforcement, and its reinforcements which are
from the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly. The Prophet,—let the divine benediction and
peace be to him and to his Family! speaks of Faṭimeh, where he
denominates her 'the mother of her father,' with the meaning that she
reinforces her father, with her Amr-reinforcements, and the
reinforcements of the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly; for all that a certain party
has said that the Fâṭimeh-Station,<span
id="page_176_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_176_note_ddagger)—let peace be
to her! was the Station of a male person, that is, Gabriel,—let peace be
to him! And this is an error, because God says respecting them, 'As for
them, they have the angels with the naming of woman, while yet they have
no knowledge concerning it. That which they follow is not any thing but
supposition, and their own desire, for all there has come to them
direction from their Lord.'<span
id="page_176_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_176_note_sect) And it \[the
Meshiyeh\] teaches those things which are unknown, except to the two
Higher Measures, by an aiding on their part, derived from his Word,—let
it be exalted! through the medium of the two Asâses.<span
id="page_176_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_176_note_dvert) And as for this,
again, it is a tradition handed down from the Prophet,—let the divine
benediction and peace be to him! that he said, 'On the night when I was
borne up to heaven, and entered the Garden, I ate a quince; and so,
after I had descended to the earth, I went in to Khadîjeh, and she
became with child <span id="page_177">p. 177</span> of Fâṭimeh,'—let,
peace be to her! and the meaning of the 'quince' is that the higher
reinforcement manifests itself only by the Meshiyeh; and so the Meshiyeh
willed to have in the earth a fixed Correspondent, and that consisting
of the reinforcement of the Sâbiḳ, together with the will of the Amr of
the Creator,—let it be exalted! and efficiencies from the Tâly;
whereupon Fâṭimeh,—let peace be to her! came to be, by the causation of
the two Eternal Lights,<span
id="page_177_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_177_note_*) and on account of their
manifestation by the two Lower Measures.<span
id="page_177_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_177_note_dagger) And to her
pertain, in heaven, two Measures, and on the earth four. And by reason
of that, the Prophet,—let the divine benediction and peace be to him!
says, 'Verily, Fâṭimeh has two names in heaven, and on the earth
four,'—in allusion to the Measures which pertain to her in heaven, and
those which pertain to her on the earth."

   Says Khâlid Ibn Zeid El-Ju’fy, Thereupon I said, "O my Master, I
inquire of thee respecting her reality,—it is thine to tell,—and
respecting the reality of those who constituted for thee this rank, and
respecting the reality of the Imâms without end whom people pride
themselves in. Does not that which thou tellest me concerning the
Envoy,—let the divine benediction and peace be to him and to his family!
respect the verity of his Station? so then tell me, with regard to
El-Ḥasan and El-Ḥusein, how was the beginning of the Amr to them."

   El-Bâḳir,—let his peace be to us! said, "As for the Envoy, his
Station was the Sâbiḳ,<span
id="page_177_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_177_note_ddagger) and he was
its Correspondent. And in like manner was the Envoy<span
id="page_177_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_177_note_sect) resembled by a
Correspondent ’Abdallah Ibn Râwaḥah El-Anṣâry, who it is whom trouble
befell, whose four side-teeth were broken, who hid himself in the
cave.<span id="page_177_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_177_note_dvert) For,
as for the impersonation of Muḥammed,—let the divine benediction and
peace be to him and to his Family! it did not absent itself, nor hide,
<span id="page_178">p. 178</span> nor betake itself to flight, nor did
any evil come upon it,—nay, but befell it seemmgly. And in like manner,
as for Fâṭimeh, all the misfortunes and things disagreeable which
happened to her, rested upon the Image, that is, the Veil; and it must
of necessity be, that every Naṭiḳ and every Asâs has a Veil which hides
him. And in like manner, as for El-Ḥasan and El-Ḥusein,—let peace be to
them both! they had two Correspondents; and so, whatever there was of
misfortune, or trial, or affliction, it befell the Correspondent,—and
may the enemies of the Imâms,—let peace be to them! suffer the
penalties, because they insist that that punishment befell them!"

   "And know thou, O Khâlid Ibn Zeid, that El-Ḥasan and El-Ḥusein,—let
peace be to them! were children of Fâṭimeh,—let peace be to her! by the
Prince of the believers,—let peace be to him! although they were
enveloped where the intestines are seated in man, and came out from that
which is not the place of coming out for children, and our Master Abû
’Abdallah El-Ḥasan,—let peace be to him! came out from the right side,
independently of any of the states of women, and without any occasion of
disgust at Fâṭimeh,—let peace be to her! But the primary Ḥasan and
Ḥusein,—let peace be to them! came to be, as children of the Meshiyeh,
while these were earthly impersonations. And they are Creators, by their
sciences, to their Correlates;<span
id="page_178_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_178_note_*) forasmuch as two
created ones have made them to descend with their aiding received from
the two Roots; through the medium of the two Asâses; and they second the
setting up of the Perfect, the Correlates, and the Measures. And they
are made for those above them, namely, the two Asâses and the two Roots,
which are established as sovereign over them, and are not established
over any thing above them; so that they are sovereign with the
sovereignty of the Amr of the Creator,—let its memory be exalted!
through the medium of the two Roots and the two Asâses, and work, in
their working, with a loosing power and a binding might, which changes
not, nor ceases; and there is no dispensing with them by the sovereignty
of the Amr of the Creator, while to them pertains no sovereignty which
is superior to the sovereignty of the Amr of the Creator,—let its memory
<span id="page_179">p. 179</span> be exalted! and they 'act by his Amr.'
Hearest thou not that which says, 'Nay, but honored servants, who
precede him not in speaking, and who act by his Amr'<span
id="page_179_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_179_note_*)—meaning that they
create, and nourish, and endow, and enlarge, and cause to grow, by
spiritual sciences received from the two Roots, through the medium of
the two Asâses, and that they are signs of the reckoning, and the
penalty, and the Garden, and the Fire? And the Amr is clear of all
things since its Relatives, the Correspondents of the Sâbiḳ and the
Tâly, who manifest its sovereignty, namely, Muḥammed and ’Aly,—let the
divine benediction be to them! are 'honored servants,' created to be
kings by that which is not resembled in the Similitudes and Stations
which I have given to them. And every thing which thou seest is by the
operation of the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly; and the creation of them is by the
operation of the Amr."

   Thereupon I said, "O my Master, did I not say to thee that thou
shouldst disclose to me the verity of that which is of the Amr to
them?"<span id="page_179_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_179_note_dagger)

   He said, "Yes."

   Said I, "O my Master, how was the beginning of the bidding of the Amr
of the Creator with respect to them, and their creation by the Amr? and
how was the causing of them to be?"

   El-Bâḳir,—let peace be to him! said, "Know thou that the Amr of the
Creator,—let it be magnified and glorified! willed that there should be
a world, and heavens and an earth, and days and nights, and seas and
mountains, and Jinns and angels, and trees and waters, and the like. But
the Amr of the Creator,—let it be exalted! knew that creatures would be
disobedient and obedient, and that they would contract impurities from
the foulness of acts of disobedience; and so the Amr kept itself clear
therefrom. It created Light, which accordingly was. Afterwards, it
willed to separate it, and so it separated it with the separation of a
reality.<span
id="page_179_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_179_note_ddagger) Whereupon,
after it had yielded to it in respect <span id="page_180">p. 180</span>
to all that which it willed, the Amr exposed it to all things, namely,
all good, and evil, and trial, whatever; it said, 'Be thou patient,' and
it was patient. Afterwards, it commanded it to obey, and so it obeyed
with an obedience without any disobedience. Whereupon, it delivered up
to it, and so that Light became an originating act, neither creating nor
created, not a thing, which is the Sâbiḳ. And there was made to subsist
therein, and aided it with the Holy Spirit, an Ultimate Producer,
possessed of power, and activity, and a spirit of its own, which is the
Tâly; and as for this, thou findest it in the Ḳurân, since it says,
'Remember my favor towards thee and towards her who bore thee, when I
aided thee with the Holy Spirit, that thou mightest talk with man in the
cradle,'<span id="page_180_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_180_note_*)—where
'the Holy Spirit' is Muḥammed,—let the divine benediction be to him and
to his Family! who is the Measure of the Sâbiḳ, and its Correspondent in
the corporeal world; and the 'talking' which it mentions is the talking
of the Measure of the Tâly, which is the Prince of the believers,—let
peace from him be to us! and its Correspondent in the corporeal world.
And thus is the aiding transmitted from one to another, until it reaches
the Ḳâim, the seventh Nâṭiḳ,—let his peace be to us! and so all the
aiding is concentrated in him; and the Lights branch out, Light after
Light, to Imâm after Imâm, one inheriting from another the Light, the
Light of God, which he made to enter into the two Eternal Roots. 'God
directs to his Light whom he will.'<span
id="page_180_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_180_note_dagger) And as for
that which I have told thee as to the elected impersonations,<span
id="page_180_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_180_note_ddagger) I will by
and by acquaint thee with them. Hear thou, O Khâlid Ibn Zeid, and
consider thou those who, says God,—let his memory be glorified! 'when
the signs of the Merciful are read to the down worshipping and
weeping,'—worshipping with submission, and weeping through fear lest
their hearts should fall away. And know thou that one wills to be above
another in respect to science and rank, and that they rival one another
in the two worlds, the spiritual and the corporeal, <span
id="page_181">p. 181</span> while they transmit, united with them, in
the periods and the revolutions, their Primary."<span
id="page_181_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_181_note_*)

   And their names,<span
id="page_181_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_181_note_dagger) O Khâlid Ibn
Zeid, are Selmân and his Station, and El-Miḳdâd and his Station, and
Ṣa’ṣa’h Ibn Ṣaukhân and his Station, and Saḳîneh and his Station, and
Jâbir Ibn ’Abdallah and his Station, and Zeid El-Hijry and his Station,
and El-Faḍhl Ibn ’Omar and his Station, and Ṣuheib and his Station, and
Abû Nuṣair and his Station, and Yaḥya Ibn Omm-Eṭ-Ṭawîl and his
Station,—let the complacence of God and his peace be to them all! And
know thou, O Khâlid, that the rank of these is the highest of ranks, and
the most elevated of degrees, before their Master!—let its memory be
glorified! which entrusts the command to them, and all things, by the
way of the two Asâses, which are Muḥammed, the Truthful Envoy and the
Nâṭiḳ, and the Prince of the believers ’Aly,—let peace from him be to
us! And its Station is Selmân, the Correspondent of Jebrîl, and who is
in the pattern of the corporeal world; and his Station is ’Ammâr,<span
id="page_181_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_181_note_ddagger) the Likeness
of Mîkâil, and his Correspondent; and his Station is Abû-d-Darr, the
Station of Andarâil, and his Correspondent; and his Station is Uweis
El-Ḳarny, the Likeness of Asrâḳîl and his Correspondent, and the Station
of Mâlik El-Ashtar ’Azrâil, and his Correspondent. And in accordance
with this is the Station of each one severally, until thou comest to
El-Miḳdâd; and so his Station is Mâlik the Guardian of the Fire, who is
his Correspondent. And the Station of Ṣa’ṣa’h Ibn Ṣaukhân is the
Likeness of the Station of Ridhwân the Attendant of the gardens."

   "And their correlate Likenesses belong to every age and epoch; every
one of whom holds the place of a Favorite Angel, or the place of a
Commissioned Prophet, (although he is not like the Station of the Envoy,
the Nâṭiḳ, and the likeness of the Asâs,) or the place of the Mature
Believer. For the Imâm El-Bâḳir,"—let his peace be to us! "says, Our
sciences are difficult, hard to be got along with; the <span
id="page_182">p. 182</span> burthen of them is borne only by a
Commissioned Prophet—meaning, commissioned to the heart, in order to the
knowledge of the two Primary Roots, and their Correspondents, the two
Asâses,—or a Favorite Angel,—meaning their Stations, (and their
Likenesses are these four, namely, Selmân, and ’Imâd, and Uweis
El-Ḳarny; and Mâlik El-Ashtar,—let peace be to them! so that these,
those to whom these names appertain, are the Favorites, while the rest
are angels, but not Favorites,)—or, to return to what he says, a
Believer 'whose heart God opens' with the faith,—which means the
followers in their track, that is, ’Abdallah Ibn Râwaḥah and ’Othmân Ibn
Ma’ṭûn;<span id="page_182_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_182_note_*) and
’Othmân, this one, was a foster-brother to the Prince of the
believers,—let his peace be to us!"

   Says Khâlid, Thereupon I said, "O son of the Envoy of God,<span
id="page_182_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_182_note_dagger) I have heard
thee say that the Merciful is a name pertaining to the Prince of the
believers,—let peace from him be to us! and that the Compassionate is a
name pertaining to the Envoy,—let peace be to him and to his Family! and
I hear that certain names, as well as these names, presuppose one name.
What does this mean?"

   He then said, "O Khâlid, know thou,—let God be merciful to thee! that
these ninety-nine names which are in the Ḳurân, are names of the Sâbiḳ
and the Tâly, and names of the angels, that is, the Hidden Name, of
which it is said in the Ḳurân, 'Read thou with the name of thy Lord, who
did the work of creation, who created man out of the dust;' after which
there is a reiteration, and so it is said, 'read thou, and thy Lord is
the Most Noble, is he who has taught by the Pen, who has taught man that
which he knew not,'—where, in the first address, passes the expression
'the name of thy Lord,' which is an announcement of, and a pointing to,
the Amr of the Creator,—let it be exalted! which is not taken in by the
eyes; after which there is a reiteration, in order to a pointing to the
Sâbiḳ, whence the words, 'thy Lord is the Most Noble;' after which there
is a reiteration, in order to a pointing to the Tâly, and so it is said,
'is he who has taught by the Pen,who has taught <span id="page_183">p.
183</span> that which he knew not,—nay indeed, as for man, he is
rebellious,'<span id="page_183_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_183_note_*)—'man'
meaning the race of Adam, who are rebellious in neglect of the covenant.
And know thou, O Khâlid, that the Amr is not denoted by names, as
qualities and attributes are not predicable of it."

   "And know thou, O Khâlid, that these names belong to the Sâbiḳ and
the Tâly; which are such as thy saying: O Presider, O Surety, O Light, O
Gracious One, O Compassionate One, O Lord, O Protector, O Hider, O
Coverer, O Returner, O Munificent One, O Believer, O Maker, O Creator, O
Affectionate One, O Recompenser, O Knowing One, O Noble One, O Powerful
One, O Pardoner, O Preserver, O Holy One, O Unique One, O Single One, O
Conqueror, O Defender, O Continuer, O Propitious One, O Producer, O
Lofty One, O Just One, O Liberal One, O One, O Restorer of life, O
Judge, O Inclined to favor, O Fair in conduct, O Beholder, O Arbiter, O
Advocate, O Informed One, O Director, O Truthful One,—which names belong
to the Sâbiḳ,—let its peace be to us! The names of the Tâly are such as
thy saying: O Subduer, O Vanquisher, O Potent One, O Mighty One, O
All-powerful One, O Great One, O Peace, O First One, O Last One, O
Manifest One, O Hidden One, O Sustainer, O Sovereign Disposer, O
Unapproachable One, O Survivor, O Hearer, O Conjoined One, O Possessor
of glory and honor, O Observer, O Reckoner, O Perfect One, O Witnessing
One, O Creator, O Self-exalter, O Giver of form, O Supporter, O
Abounding One, O Established One, O Abiding One, O Merciful One, O
Living One, O Forgiver, O King, O Director, O Grasper, O Full One, O
Excellent One, O Arbitrator, O Refuge, O Glorious One, O Responder; and
it is enough that we have distinguished for thee these names, which
belong to the Tâly,—let it show favor, and let thanks be to it, first
and last! verily, verily, O my Master, thou art the Worthy to be
praised, the Noble One.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

   Says Khâlid Ibn Zeid, Afterwards, our Master El-Bâḳir Muḥammed Ibn
’Aly,—let his peace be to us! wept with violent weeping, and said, "O
Khâlid, they who make equal with God lie, and err with wide erring, and
lose with 'manifest losing.' 'God has not begotten any child; and there
is not; together with him, any deity. Had there been, each deity would
have certainly gone off with that which it created, and one would have
certainly been over the other. So then, glory be to God,—let him be
exalted! clear of their associating!'<span
id="page_184_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_184_note_*) O Khâlid, there are men
who say concerning us that which we say not, and who make us of a
lineage which does not belong to us. Far be it, far be it; they have
gone out of the way, and are turned aside; and they lose, while we make
profit. 'But as for these, they are those whose actions come to nought,
in this world and the next.'<span
id="page_184_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_184_note_dagger) 'That, indeed,
is manifest losing.'<span
id="page_184_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_184_note_ddagger) O Khâlid,
hear thou what I say, and hold on to my instruction, and testify to that
which thou hearest; for 'He utters not any speech, except there is a
Prepared One, an Observer, at his side.'<span
id="page_184_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_184_note_sect)

   O Khâlid, Muḥammed and ’Aly,—let the divine benediction be to them
both! are Creators who were created, empowered, described as 'honored
servants, who precede him not in speaking, and who act by his Amr.'<span
id="page_184_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_184_note_dvert) O Khâlid, the
Amr, namely, the Amr of the Creator,—let it be exalted! 'the like of
whom not any thing is, and who is the Hearer, the Knowing One,'<span
id="page_184_fr_para"></span>[¶](#page_184_note_para) which is that
which the searcher apprehends not, and which is not measured with men,
committed <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> all things to these two
Primaries, that is the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly, in which the Creator,—let its
memory be exalted! deposited, by its command, something of that which is
spiritual and corporeal, and which it constituted the Correspondent of
its corporeity, so that they were such as thou hast heard them to be, as
created out of the very Light. And their Lights branched out into three
lights; namely, El-Jedd, and El-Fatḥ, and El-Khiyâl; and their
Likenesses in respect to that which is corporeal are Ez-Zuhra,<span
id="page_185_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_185_note_*) El-Ḥasan, and
El-Ḥusein. Hast thou not, indeed, heard, in the recital which the man of
note makes not up, and of which the common man is ignorant,<span
id="page_185_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_185_note_dagger)—does it not
say, "I have derived names for them from some of my names: for I am
El-Maḥmûd, and this is Muḥammed; and I am El-’Aly, and this is ’Aly; and
I am Fâṭim, and this is Fâṭimeh; and I am El-Iḥsân, and this is
El-Ḥasan; and I am El-Muḥsin, and this is El-Ḥusein'?—let their peace be
to us! but these are some of the names of the Sâbiḳ. And the Lights
which branched out enter into the two words, the saying of the Ḳurân,
*Kun*, two letters, *fatekun*, five, which are expanded from the two
letters; for Light had its origin in the Creator,—let it be magnified
and glorified! because it came to be by a volition on the part of the
Amr, and so they were created."<span
id="page_185_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_185_note_ddagger)

   "Afterwards, it said to the Sâbiḳ, 'Thou art like the Ṣirâṭ,'<span
id="page_185_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_185_note_sect) and said to the
Tâly, 'Thou art like the Balance.' The former gives transit, the latter
weighs. So then, 'As for him whose balances are heavy, he will lead a
pleasant life,'—meaning, on account of the knowledge of the Tâly, <span
id="page_186">p. 186</span> and its Likeness, the Prince of the
believers,—let his peace be to us!—'and as for him whose balances are
light, Hâwiyeh will be his mother; and what shall give thee to know what
that is?—a burning fire;'<span
id="page_186_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_186_note_*) and oh the crying pains
of him who is tainted with a burning fire, inasmuch as he acknowedges
not the Imâm, the Tâly, and, what is more, opposes him, and turns away
from him to another, of diminished rank!"

   "Afterwards, the Amr of the Creator,—let its memory be glorified!
said, 'I reinforce you two with my Lights; do ye, therefore, with them
that which ye will;' and so it is said, 'who act by his Amr.' And it
kept itself clear of reckoning with the nations, and of their
defilements, saying, 'Obedience to me is difficult; I lay it upon you
alone, because ye are of my very Light, the Most High. So then, be ye
charged, ye, with obedience to me, which is due to me from you; and do
ye charge, ye, the nations with obedience to you; and to trace to the
Cause is the pith of knowledge of you, so that whoever knows you, will
know me, and whoever obeys you, will obey me. This is my covenant;
accept it, therefore, as conditioned; and whoever, then, yields to you,
yields to me, and whoever disobeys you, disobeys me; my being pleased is
your being pleased, and my being indignant is your being indignant.'"

   "So then they two became created out of the Light of the Amr,—meaning
the caused and the Cause;<span
id="page_186_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_186_note_dagger)—and they
produced the Lights, and so became Creators."

   "And there are set in the heavens seven Lights which are the Higher
Letters,—let their peace be to us! and in the earths seven Lights,—let
their peace be to us! the seven Imâms being subordinate to the seven
Nâṭiḳs. And in respect to all of the seven Imâms, who are the Pillars of
the earth and its Corner-Stones, transmitted in the periods and the
revolutions, there is no exception to their having Similitudes to
themselves in the heavens, and Likenesses. And the Ḳurân has already
expressed that, where it says, 'So, in two days, he made them to be
seven heavens, and inspired <span id="page_187">p. 187</span> every
heaven with its Amr.'<span
id="page_187_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_187_note_*) Consequently, inasmuch
as the celestial spheres are vacated, after they have made their round,
and disappear, if the earths had been emptied of the Imâms, certainly
they would have sunk and vanished; since they, \[the Imâms,\] O Khâlid,
hold the place of the seven Planets. And in like manner, the twelve
Stars are the Likenesses of their Ḥujjehs; and, accordingly, they must
of necessity have, in the earths, Ḥujjehs, who accept the covenant with
him who is above the inhabitants of the heavens, and the covenant with
him who is in the heavens, which is the covenant accepted in favor of
the Chief of the earth, in the earth."<span
id="page_187_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_187_note_dagger)

   "And there is no Imâm whose spirit is transmitted, except it goes
where its Place<span
id="page_187_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_187_note_ddagger) is; and it
has no elevation in spiritual degrees, as created, up to the limit of
that which is corporeal, when the period is completed, and the seven is
made out in full; for he who dies, among us, dies not without his soul's
being ennobled, returning to that which is better for it than the state
in which it has been. Hearest thou not the Ḳurân, where it says, 'And of
us are only such as have their known Places,'?"<span
id="page_187_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_187_note_sect)—let their peace be
to us! And so, as for these their Measures and their Places, let their
peace be to us and to all believers!

   Says Khâlid, Thereupon I said, "O my Master,—let peace from thee be
to me! who is, then, the 'Observer,' and who, the 'Prepared One'?"

   He said, "O Khâlid, the 'Prepared One' is the Place of the Measure of
the Sâbiḳ, that is, the Station of the Nâṭiḳ; and the 'Observer' is the
Measure of the Tâly, that is, the Station of the Asâs. Hearest thou not
the Ḳurân, where <span id="page_188">p. 188</span> it says, 'But after
thou didst take me to thyself, thou wast, thou, the Observer of
them,'<span id="page_188_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_188_note_*)—meaning,
after the law was finished, I was discharged,—meaning, after I was
refined as to my corporeal impersonation, to the degree of the spiritual
world, thou wast, thou, the Imâm after me, and the Legatee? But know
thou" . . . {here follow five lines of ellipsis} . . . "he is a
polytheist; and whoever worships the Ma’na<span
id="page_188_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_188_note_dagger) in its verity,
has hit the mark. And know thou, O Khâlid, that the meaning of that is,
that whoever worships the Ism, is an unbeliever; and the Ism is that
with which the Sâbiḳ is named, so that one is certainly an unbeliever,
inasmuch as he worships that on the ground of its being the
Creator,—meaning the Sâbiḳ. And whoever worships the Ism and the
Ma’na,<span
id="page_188_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_188_note_ddagger)—meaning the
Sâbiḳ and the Tâly,—is a polytheist. But whoever knows that the Amr of
the Creator,—let it be exalted! made these two Roots, he believes in its
unity, and worships it. So then, glory be to that which hath indeed
performed the work of creation, and hath done well its creating, which
is the Creator,—let it be exalted! beside which there is no Lord!"

   "And be it known, that, as for these two Roots, they are a Light from
that Light, not a Light like to that Light; for each of these two Lights
comes forth, and is manifested. Acknowledge thou that, then, O Khâlid
Ibn Zeid. And know thou, that, if men had acknowleged their Creator, and
the Mediators of their Creator, they certainly would not have been
wicked, and would have never come into the Fire of Jehennam."

   "O Khâlid, beware lest thou sayest concerning me that which I say
not, and tellest from me that which I do not <span id="page_189">p.
189</span> tell. Dost thou do so, I shall call thee to account for it on
the day of resurrection, and shall be quit of thee, and thou wilt be
quit of me. We are 'servants in honor' to God, and purified by God, and
made to be of the Light of God. We serve God with the reality of serving
him; and if ye had served him with any thing of our service of him, or
had been charged, in order to something of that, with the weight of an
atom thereof, it certainly would have proved too much for you; and if
there had been put upon the mountains, and the heavens and the earths,
the weight of an atom of that to which we are obligated, of obedience
and service, they certainly would not have borne it, and would have sunk
and disappeared, on account of the burthen of that service. So then we
are charged in your stead; and we serve him with the reality of serving
him, and acknowledge him with the reality of knowledge of him, while
there is not that obligatory upon you, thereof, which is obligatory upon
us. But as for you, it is incumbent upon you, that ye should acknowledge
us, and not deny us, and that ye should obey us, and not disobey us; and
whoever acknowledges us with the reality of knowledge of us, and
knowledge of our service, knows that from us things come forth, and to
us they will return. We are the Subject Lords, and the Hidden Creatures.
When thou wouldst us, O Khâlid, seek us, with thine inmost soul, in the
invisible realm, and thou wilt find us above that which is above; there
is not above us any superior other than the Amr of the Creator,—let it
be exalted! and the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly,<span
id="page_189_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_189_note_*)—a truth respecting
which it is due to no one of those created out of clay, that a word
should be uttered; and how shall that be apprehended by such as pass
away, and are gone, and die? wherefore yield ye to our dictum, and
acknowledge ye it. This, then, O Kâlid Ibn Zeid, is the end of seeking,
therefore be thou a seeker; we, then, are the final end of the devotee,
therefore be thou a devotee. And beware lest thou goest astray, or
slidest; verily, Sheiṭân is thine enemy, so be thou wary of him."

   Says he, \[the author,\] Thereupon I said, "O my Chief, thou hast
said to me, that if any one reaches to the Measure of the Word, there is
no measure beyond that, nor the like <span id="page_190">p. 190</span>
of that; and that whoever acknowledges the Tree, attains with certainty,
to whatever degree he wills. What, then, is this 'Word'? and what, this
'Tree'?"

   Then said our Master El-Bâḳir,—let the benedictions of God be to him!
"As for the 'Word,' it is Muḥammed; and as for the 'Tree,' it is the
Prince of the believers ’Aly,—let peace from them both be to us! Hearest
thou not God, who says in the Ḳurân, 'And it is the parable of a good
Word like a good Tree, of which the root is fast, and the top is in
heaven'?<span id="page_190_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_190_note_*)—wherein
the root of the Word and its top are made two limits, the root being the
Sâbiḳ, and the top, the Tâly, which is the Measure of Muḥammed,—let the
divine benediction be to him! And the 'Tree' is the Prince of the
believers ’Aly,—let his peace be to us and to all believers! inasmuch as
they two are the two tops belonging to the two Roots, which constitute
the Asâs of the corporeal world. He,—let his name be magnified! adds,
'which bears its fruit every season, with the permission of its
Lord,'—meaning the Imâms whom he \[the Prince of the believers\]
generates."

   Afterwards, he said to me, "O Khâlid, dost thou keep in mind? dost
thou hearken?"

   I replied, "Yes, O my Master,—my life for thee!"

   Thereupon he said, "O Khâlid Ibn Zeid, if thou wouldst acquire our
sciences, acquire them from the Mines?"

   To this I said, "And what are 'the Mines'?"

   He replied, "Those Imâms,"—let their peace be to us! "whom God causes
to inherit the prophetic gift."<span
id="page_190_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_190_note_dagger)

   Then said I, "What if I meet with no Imâm?"

   He replied, "Thou shalt take, on the authority of the reliable
’Ulemas, that which they take on the authority of the Orthodox
Imâms,"—let their peace be to us and to all believers! "or else thou
shalt draw from a known book, to which the Ḳurân testifies, and which
tradition authenticates, and the intellect approves, and from other
books.<span id="page_190_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_190_note_ddagger)
But beware thou, and again beware. And be thou a servant sincere in the
love of us, and thou shalt be saved."

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

   "O Khâlid Ibn Zeid, this is my instruction to thee; so then receive
thou it. And it is the mystery of the Almighty God, the 'flesh' and the
'blood' of which the Mesîḥ,—let peace be to him! said to his disciples,
'This is my flesh and my blood; so then, eat ye, and drink ye.'<span
id="page_191_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_191_note_*) And I have indeed
opened to thee the pasture, and have given thee to eat, and given thee
to drink, and have drawn water for thee; so then, eat thou with good
digestion, and drink thou to thine health; and behave thou uprightly
towards thy brethren, the believers. And sufficient for thee is that
which I say. And let peace be to those who follow direction! And this is
enough for men, and it is that they may be warned by it, and may know
that he is one God, and that the possessors of hearts may
consider'."<span
id="page_191_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_191_note_dagger)

   Says Khâlid Ibn Zeid, There is, therefore, not, by God, not any deity
except God. After this instruction, no vacillation is in my heart
respecting God, nor does there lurk in my inmost soul any doubt. And I
neither deny him, nor avow him, to any one except those in whom I
confide as respects friendship to the Prince of the believers ’Aly,—let
peace from him be to us!

   And already, indeed, have many people been directed by this Missive,
of those who had deviated from the path of orthodoxy, while I have not
ceased to rehearse the instruction of our Master El-Bâḳir,—let his peace
be to us! and to present it to the hearts of his friends. Now then,
whoever comes forward, will be delivered; and whoever remains behind,
will wander in the Fire, and be precipitated into El-Hâwiyeh. And this
is that which I hear and see. And God is sufficient for me! And well is
he the Guardian!

 

<span class="small">A CHAPTER.</span>

   And know thou, O my brother, that the reinforcement which comes to
man from the Imâm, is the intelligence of man; and that intelligence
belongs to the Imâm, and thought to the Bâb,<span
id="page_191_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_191_note_ddagger) and
attention to the Ḥujjeh, and <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> memory to
the Dâ’i, and speculation to the Madhûn; and that this reinforcement
comes from the Imâm and his Ḥujjehs to man in a state of indifference,
and not knowing where they are placed;<span
id="page_192_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_192_note_*) and that there is in
man the imagining faculty, and the thinking faculty, and the attending
faculty, and the knowing faculty, and the understanding faculty; and
that they are a resemblance of the Higher Measures, that is, the
Intelligence,<span
id="page_192_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_192_note_dagger) and the Soul,
and El-Jedd, and El-Fatḥ, and El-Khiyâl. Know thou that, and thou wilt
be orthodox, if God will.

 

<span class="small">A CHAPTER.</span>

   And know thou, O my brother,—let God aid thee, and us, with a spirit
of his own, and enlighten thy vision with a light of thought, and a
capacity for the universal! that the entire world is a spherical
impersonation, the celestial spheres being globes which encircle and are
encircled, that is, a great man,—let glory, then, be to its Creator, and
hallowing to its Maker! and that its Producer, as to its intelligence,
was the Sâbiḳ, and as to its holy soul, the Tâly, and as to its heart,
El-Jedd, and as to its power of sensation and growth, El-Fatḥ, and
El-Khiyâl, and as to its form, the Hiyûly;<span
id="page_192_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_192_note_ddagger) and that the
Hiyûly and for in constitute its higher, right side, which is animals
and man; and that its lower, left side, consists of minerals and
plants.<span id="page_192_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_192_note_sect) Thus
it was predetermined by the Mighty One, the Knowing One.

 

<span class="small">A CHAPTER.</span>

   And know thou, that, as for the Imâm, a transmission from the
corporeal world to the spiritual world is not his lot,—nay, but his soul
is in conjunction with the spiritual world and the corporeal world,
because he is the medium between creatures and the Creator; and it is
because he is God's Ḥujjeh to the creation, that by him is the
deliverance <span id="page_193">p. 193</span> of the entire world. And
as often as an Imâm disappears, an Imâm takes his stand; nor is one
different from the other, except in respect to his manifestation in
bodily form; so that the earth is not without him the twinkling of an
eye, and it happens not to him to disappear except at the time of his
manifestation, and the transmission from one form to another. And an
Imâm is not transmitted from this state of being, until another Imâm
takes his stand,<span id="page_193_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_193_note_*)
on acccount of the transmission of the Word of the Imâm from one Place
of manifestation to another.

   And let there be peace! The word of thy Lord, true and just, is
ended. Of his words there is no changing. And he is the Hearer, the
Knowing One. Let it be accomplished!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_169">p. 169</span>

<span id="page_169_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_169_fr_*) The Imâms.

<span id="page_169_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_169_fr_dagger) Ḳurân,
Sûr. xlix. v. 3.

<span id="page_169_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_169_fr_ddagger) The
Ḥujjehs of the Imâms. See *Journ. of Am. Or. Soc.*, vol. ii. [p. 290,
note §](isma1-3.htm#page_290_note_sect); Ibid., [p. 280, note
†](isma1-3.htm#page_280_note_dagger).

<span id="page_169_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_169_fr_sect) Ḳurân, Sûr.
xix. v. 59.

<span id="page_169_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_169_fr_dvert) Ḳurân,
Sûr. xxv, v. 61. The passage refers, properly, to those who rejected
Muḥammed. El-Beiḍhâhy says, "The command to worship the Merciful
increases their shyness of the faith." See *Beidhawii Commentarius*,
vol. ii. p. 44.

<span id="footnotes_page_170">p. 170</span>

<span id="page_170_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_170_fr_*) Ḳurân. Sûr. ix.
vv. 129-130.

<span id="page_170_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_170_fr_dagger)
*Es-Sirâj*, meaning one who is most enlightened with human science

<span id="page_170_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_170_fr_ddagger) The
Deity of the "Believer."

<span id="footnotes_page_171">p. 171</span>

<span id="page_171_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_171_fr_*) The word *Ḥadd*,
Measure, is used in this Risâleh as synonymous with Correspondent, or
Representative.

<span id="page_171_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_171_fr_dagger) See
*Journ. of Am. Or. Soc.*, vol. ii. [p. 265, note
†](isma1-2.htm#page_265_note_dagger).

<span id="page_171_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_171_fr_ddagger)
El-Fatḥ is a super-human type of El-Ḥasan, who is the first Imâm in this
system. See [p. 185](#page_185).

<span id="page_171_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_171_fr_sect) The Imâm
*par éminence*, i. e. the Prophet, as the connection shows.

<span id="footnotes_page_172">p. 172</span>

<span id="page_172_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_172_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sûr. ii.
v. 285. "We distinguish not etc." is properly the language of believers
in Muḥammed's mission.

<span id="page_172_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_172_fr_dagger) The
argument proceeds upon the assumption that "O our Lord!" is addressed to
the Envoy Muḥammed as representing the Amr, by virtue of his
correspondence to the Sâbiḳ, one of the two Eternal Roots created by the
Amr. This being assumed, it follows that the Prince of the believers is
co-equal with the Envoy Muḥammed, since he too represents the Amr by his
correspondence to the other Eternal Root, namely, the Tâly.

<span id="page_172_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_172_fr_ddagger) The
Light of the Amr, which constitutes the essence of the two Eternal
Roots. See below.

<span id="footnotes_page_173">p. 173</span>

<span id="page_173_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_173_fr_*) See *Journ. of
Am. Or. Soc.*, vol. ii. [pp. 300-302](isma1-4.htm#page_300). But it is
here affirmed that the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly are named from their being the
creators of spirits and bodies, respectively, the former having a higher
destiny than the latter.

<span id="page_173_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_173_fr_dagger) See
*Journ. of Am. Or. Soc.*, vol. ii. [p. 306, note
§](isma1-4.htm#page_306_note_sect).

<span id="page_173_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_173_fr_ddagger) Ḳurân,
Sûr. xxxvi. v. 36. According to El-Beiḍhâwy's interpretation of this
verse, it means, 'Glory he to him who created the varieties and species
of plants and trees, the male and the female, and the mates of what he
has not given them to know, nor made for them a way to the knowledge
of." See *Beidhawii Comment.*, vol. ii. p. 160.

<span id="footnotes_page_174">p. 174</span>

<span id="page_174_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_174_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sûr. xxvi.
vv. 88-89.

<span id="page_174_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_174_fr_dagger) Ḳurân,
Sûr. l. v. 42.

<span id="page_174_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_174_fr_ddagger) A
denial that secondary causes connect themselves with the Amr.

<span id="page_174_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_174_fr_sect) That is, the
true God, these being among the epithets most frequently applied to God
in the Ḳurân.

<span id="page_174_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_174_fr_dvert) Ḳurân,
Sûr. lxxxviii. vv. 25-26.

<span id="page_174_note_para"></span>[¶](#page_174_fr_para) The "Higher
Similitudes" are the super-human Muḥammed and ’Aly and the super-human
Fâṭimeh, Ḥasan, and Ḥusein, called El-Jedd, El-Fatḥ, and El-Khiyâl,
whose origin is explained in the sequel. The "Earthly Resemblances" are
the same beings embodied on earth.

<span id="footnotes_page_175">p. 175</span>

<span id="page_175_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_175_fr_*) That is, the
super-human Muḥammed shows himself under the Veil of the temporary
Prophet, as soon as he has furnished the latter with the law which he is
to establish.

<span id="page_175_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_175_fr_dagger) In other
words, inspires with the allegorical sense of the established law, which
it is the office of the Asâs to disclose, See *Journ. of Am. Or. Soc.*,
vol ii. [p. 266, note \*](isma1-2.htm#page_266_note_*).

<span id="page_175_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_175_fr_ddagger)
Supernatural inspiration, conceived of as a pen inscribing characters on
the spirit.

<span id="page_175_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_175_fr_sect) ln the
Ismâ’ilian and Druze systems, the Meshiyeh is the Tâly. See *Journ. of
Am. Or. Soc.*, vol ii. [p. 300, note §](isma1-4.htm#page_300_note_sect).

<span id="footnotes_page_176">p. 176</span>

<span id="page_176_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_176_fr_*) The conception of
the Amr as being the Veritable Deity, here distinctly expressed, and
implied through the whole of this Risâleh, presents an important point
of contrast with Ismâ’ilian doctrine, according to which the Amr is the
prime emanation from the Absolute Deity. See *Journ. of Am. Or. Soc.*,
vol. ii. pp. [265, note \*](isma1-2.htm#page_265_note_*),
[299-300](isma1-4.htm#page_299).

<span id="page_176_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_176_fr_dagger) Namely,
to itself, that is, the super-human Fâṭimeh, who sustains a relation to
the super-human Muḥammed and ’Aly, similar to that which the Meshiyeh
sustains to the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly.

<span id="page_176_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_176_fr_ddagger)
*Menzeleh*, Station, is a term used in this Risâleh to signify
impersonation.

<span id="page_176_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_176_fr_sect) Ḳurân, Sûr.
liii. v. 28, with a clause added. "They name the angels with the naming
of woman," is explained by El-Beiḍhâwy to mean, "that they name each of
them a daughter." See *Beidhawii Comment.*, vol. ii. p. 294.

<span id="page_176_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_176_fr_dvert) The
super-human Muḥammed and ’Aly.

<span id="footnotes_page_177">p. 177</span>

<span id="page_177_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_177_fr_*) The Sâbiḳ and the
Tâly. See [p. 180](#page_180).

<span id="page_177_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_177_fr_dagger) That is
the super-human Muḥammed and ’Aly, for whom the super-human Fâṭimeh was
created, that she might serve as their medium of communication with each
Prophet and Legatee. See [p. 176](#page_176).

<span id="page_177_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_177_fr_ddagger) That
is, the Sâbiḳ constituted the essential reality of the impersonated
Muḥammed. This is sufficiently explained by what goes before.

<span id="page_177_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_177_fr_sect) That is, the
Envoy personified in Muḥammed.

<span id="page_177_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_177_fr_dvert) Allusions
to well-known circumstances in the life of Muḥammed. See *Mohammed der
Prophet*, von Dr. Gustav Weil, pp. 40, ff., and 127. ’Abdallah Râwaḥah
El-Anṣâry was one of Muḥammed's most zealous partizans.

<span id="footnotes_page_178">p. 178</span>

<span id="page_178_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_178_fr_*) The Imâms.

<span id="footnotes_page_179">p. 179</span>

<span id="page_179_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_179_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sûr. xxi.
vv. 26-27. El-Beiḍhâwy informs us that this passage was revealed "on
account of the Khuzâ’ites, upon their saying that the angels are
daughters of God." The proper sense of the last clause is: "who act at
his bidding." See *Beidhawii Comment.*, vol. i. pp. 614-615.

<span id="page_179_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_179_fr_dagger) See [p.
177](#page_177).

<span id="page_179_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_179_fr_ddagger) Or,
made it a distinct essence.

<span id="footnotes_page_180">p. 180</span>

<span id="page_180_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_180_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sûr. v. v.
109. These words, addreseed to Jesus, make a part of what it is supposed
God will say, on the day of judgement, to remind the Prophets of their
miracles, and so to reprove the infidels for their infidelity. See
*Beidhawii Comment.*, vol. i. p. 279.

<span id="page_180_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_180_fr_dagger) Ḳurân,
Sûr. xxiv. v. 35.

<span id="page_180_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_180_fr_ddagger) See
[p. 175](#page_175).

<span id="footnotes_page_181">p. 181</span>

<span id="page_181_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_181_fr_*) The Light of the
Amr.

<span id="page_181_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_181_fr_dagger) Namely,
the names of the so-called "elected impersonations." It is probable that
these names are all taken from friends of Muḥammed and ’Aly; but have
not been able to identify them all. They are here applied to beings of a
higher order than man, though not strictly spiritual.

<span id="page_181_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_181_fr_ddagger) ’Ammâr
and Abû-d-Darr are known as names of friends of Muḥammed.

<span id="footnotes_page_182">p. 182</span>

<span id="page_182_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_182_fr_*) This person was
another of Muḥammed's friends.

<span id="page_182_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_182_fr_dagger) El-Bâḳir
is so called as a descendant of Muḥammed. See the statement of
Esh-Shahrastâny on this point, *Journ. of Am. Or. Soc.*, vol ii. [p.
276](isma1-2.htm#page_276).

<span id="footnotes_page_183">p. 183</span>

<span id="page_183_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_183_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sûr. xcvi.
vv. 1-6. According to El-Beḍhâwy, "Read thou with the name of thy Lord"
is the same as to say, "Read thou the Ḳurân, beginning with the name of
thy Lord, or asking help therewith." "By the Pen" is explained by this
commentator to signify "by writing with the pen," "which," he adds, "is
said because sciences are closely connected therewith, and that which is
remote is thereby known." See *Beidhawii Comment.*, vol ii. pp. 409-10.

<span id="footnotes_page_184">p. 184</span>

<span id="page_184_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_184_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sûr.
xxiii. vv. 93-94, slightly abridged. El-Beiḍhâwy develops the argument
here employed, thus: "If there had been deities beside him, as they say,
each one of them would have certainly gone off with that which it
created, and would have appropriated it to itself; and its dominion
would have been distinct from the dominion of the others, and there
would have arisen between them contention and striving for superiority,
as is the case with kings in this world, and so the sovereignty over all
things would not have been in its hands alone." See *Beidhawii
Comment.*, vol. ii. p. 11.

<span id="page_184_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_184_fr_dagger) Ḳurân,
Sûr. ii. v. 214.

<span id="page_184_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_184_fr_ddagger) Ḳurân,
Sûr. xxii. v. 11; Id. xxxix v. 17.

<span id="page_184_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_184_fr_sect) Ḳurân, Sûr.
l. v. 17. The passage alludes to two angels supposed to stand, one on
the right, and the other on the left, of man, during his course on
earth, to take account of his good and bad deeds. See *Beidhawii
Comment.*, vol. ii. p. 279.

<span id="page_184_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_184_fr_dvert) See [p.
179, note \*](#page_179_note_*).

<span id="page_184_note_para"></span>[¶](#page_184_fr_para) Ḳurân, Sûr.
xlii. v. 9.

<span id="footnotes_page_185">p. 185</span>

<span id="page_185_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_185_fr_*) i. e. The
Brilliant, meaning Fâṭimeh. Some intimation of what is symbolized under
the names here given to the super-human Fâṭimeh, Ḥasan and Ḥusein, may
be derived from *Journ. of Am. Or. Soc.*, vol. ii. [p. 312, note
†](isma1-4.htm#page_312_note_dagger), and the passage there referred to.

<span id="page_185_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_185_fr_dagger) Meaning,
the Collection of traditions.

<span id="page_185_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_185_fr_ddagger) The
words here mystified, signifying "be thou, and so it is," are those by
which the creative power of God is so often expressed in the Ḳurân. The
Creator's mandate, *Kun*, be thou, is here imagined to represent the
Light of the Amr under the two-fold form of the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly;
while in the result of that mandate, *fatekun*, and so it is, is found a
symbol of the super-human Muḥammed and ’Aly, and the super-human
Fâṭimeh, Ḥasan, and Ḥusein, as branches from that Light.

<span id="page_185_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_185_fr_sect) See *Journ.
of Am. Or. Soc.*, vol. ii. [p. 309, note
‡](isma1-4.htm#page_309_note_ddagger).

<span id="footnotes_page_186">p. 186</span>

<span id="page_186_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_186_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sûr. ci.
vv. 5-8. El-Beiḍhâwy explains the clause "Hâwiyeh will be his mother" by
"his dwelling-place will be the Fire." See *Beidhawii Comment.*, vol.
ii. p. 414.

<span id="page_186_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_186_fr_dagger) That is,
the Light created by the Amr.

<span id="footnotes_page_187">p. 187</span>

<span id="page_187_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_187_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sûr. xli.
v. 11. The " Amr" of each heaven is explained by El-Beiḍhâwy to mean
"its business, that which is brought to pass by it, through being
charged therewith, of choice, or by nature," alluding to planetary
influences. See *Beidhawii Comment.*, vol ii. p. 220. In our text, these
influences are personified.

<span id="page_187_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_187_fr_dagger) The Imâm
is here described under three aspects: first, as comprehended in the
five Lights put forth from the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly, then, as prefigured
in the seven Planets, and last, as existing in human form.

<span id="page_187_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_187_fr_ddagger) That
is, an embodiment adapted to it.

<span id="page_187_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_187_fr_sect) Ḳurân, Sûr.
xxxvii. v. 164. This is interpreted by El-Beiḍhâwy as "a confession by
the angels of their subordination, by way of disowning their being
eternal;" "their known places," he adds, "in respect to knowledge, and
service, and deference to the command of God, in the government of the
world." See *Beidhawii Comment.*, vol ii. p. 179.

<span id="footnotes_page_188">p. 188</span>

<span id="page_188_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_188_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sûr. v. v.
117. These words are a part of what Jesus, as is supposed, will say to
God at the last day, in justification of himself, in view of the errors
of Christians. In the application here made of them, it seems to be
implied, that, if the "Observer" means the Legatee, the "Prepared One,"
as the Observer's mate, must be the Prophet.

<span id="page_188_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_188_fr_dagger) See
*Journ. of Am. Or. Soc.*, vol. ii. [p. 289, note
\*](isma1-3.htm#page_289_note_*).

<span id="page_188_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_188_fr_ddagger)
Compare what is said of the doctrine of the Nuṣairis, in *Journ. of Am.
Or. Soc.*, vol. ii. [pp. 289-290](isma1-3.htm#page_289).

<span id="footnotes_page_189">p. 189</span>

<span id="page_189_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_189_fr_*) See [p.
185](#page_185).

<span id="footnotes_page_190">p. 190</span>

<span id="page_190_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_190_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sûr. xiv.
vv. 29-30, quoted *ad sensum*.

<span id="page_190_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_190_fr_dagger) See [p.
180](#page_180).

<span id="page_190_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_190_fr_ddagger) This
passage suggests an important inquiry; to which, however, no
satisfactory answer can be given, at present. Perhaps an acquaintance
with the books of the Nuṣairis may serve to explain the allusion.

<span id="footnotes_page_191">p. 191</span>

<span id="page_191_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_191_fr_*) An allusion to
the words of Christ in instituting the sacrament of the Last Supper.

<span id="page_191_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_191_fr_dagger) Ḳurân,
Sûr. xiv. v. 52.

<span id="page_191_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_191_fr_ddagger)
Respecting the Bâb, the Ḥujjeh, the Dâ’i, and the Madhan, see *Journ. of
Am. Or. Soc.*, vol ii. [p. 280, notes
†](isma1-3.htm#page_280_note_dagger), §, ‖, ¶.

<span id="footnotes_page_192">p. 192</span>

<span id="page_192_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_192_fr_*) See [p. 187, note
‡](#page_187_note_ddagger).

<span id="page_192_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_192_fr_dagger) "The
Intelligence" and "the Soul" are names here applied to the super-human
Muḥammed and ’Aly. Compare the Ismâ’ilian doctrine in *Journ. of Am. Or.
Soc.*, vol. ii. [pp. 300-301](isma1-4.htm#page_300).

<span id="page_192_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_192_fr_ddagger) See
*Journ. of Am. Or. Soc.*, vol. ii. [p. 300, note
‡](isma1-4.htm#page_300_note_ddagger).

<span id="page_192_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_192_fr_sect) Compare the
Ismâ’ilian cosmogony, in *Journ. of Am. Or. Soc.*, vol ii. [pp.
302-306](isma1-4.htm#page_302).

<span id="footnotes_page_193">p. 193</span>

<span id="page_193_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_193_fr_*) Namely, at the
commencement of a new period. See [p. 175](#page_175).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
