[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep027)  [Next](dep029.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVII

#### ON THE WAYS IN WHICH IMPRESSIONS COME TO US: AND THE AIDS WE MUST PROVIDE FOR OURSELVES TO DEAL WITH THEM

<span class="smallcaps">Impressions</span> come to us in four ways:
either things are and seem so to us; or they are not and seem not to be;
or they are and seem not; or they are not and yet seem to be. Now it is
the business of the true philosopher to deal rightly with all these; he
ought to afford help at whatever point the pressure comes. If it is the
fallacies of Pyrrho and of the Academy which crush us, let us render
help against them. If it is the plausibilities of circumstances, which
make things seem good which are not, let us seek help against this
danger: if it is habit which crushes us, we must try to discover help
against that.

What, then, can we discover to help us against habit?

Contrary habit.

You hear ignorant folk saying, 'Unhappy man that he was, he died': 'His
father perished, and his mother': 'He was cut off, yes, and untimely and
in a foreign land.' Now listen to the arguments on the other side;

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

draw yourself away from these voices, set against habit the opposite
habit. Set against fallacious arguments the processes of reason,
training yourself to be familiar with these processes: against the
plausibilities of things we must have our primary conceptions clear,
like weapons bright and ready for use.

When death appears an evil we must have ready to hand the argument that
it is fitting to avoid evils, and death is a necessary thing. What am I
to do? Where am I to escape it? Grant that I am not Sarpedon son of
Zeus, to utter those noble words, 'I would fain go and achieve glory or
afford another the occasion to achieve it: if I cannot win success
myself, I will not grudge another the chance of doing a noble deed'.
Grant that this is beyond us, can we not compass the other?

I ask you, Where am I to escape death? Point me to the place, point me
to the people, among whom I am to go, on whom it does not light, point
me to a charm against it. If I have none, what would you have me do? I
cannot escape death: am I not to escape the fear of it? Am I to die in
tears and trembling? For trouble of mind springs from this, from wishing
for a thing which does not come to pass. Wheresoever I can alter
external things to suit my own will, I alter them: where I cannot, I am
fain to tear any man's eyes out who stands in my way. For man's nature
is such that he cannot bear to be deprived of what is good, nor can he
bear to be involved in evil. And so the end of the matter is that when I
cannot alter things, nor blind him that hinders me, I sit still and moan
and revile whom I can—Zeus and the other gods; for if they heed me not,
what have I to do with them?

'Yes, but that will be impious of you.'

Well, how shall I be worse off than I am now? In a word, we must
remember this, that unless piety and true interest coincide, piety
cannot be preserved in a man. Do not these principles seem to you to be
urgent?

Let the Pyrrhonist and the disciple of the Academy come and maintain the
contrary! For my part I have no leisure for these discussions, nor can I
act as advocate to the common-sense view.

If I had some petty action concerned with a plot of land, I should have
called in another to be my advocate, how much more in a matter of this
concern.

With what argument, then, am I content? With what is appropriate to the
subject in hand. How sensation takes place, whether through the whole
body or through particular parts, I cannot render a reasoned account,
though I find difficulty in both views. But that you and I are not the
same persons, I know absolutely and for certain. How is that? When I
want to swallow a morsel I never lift it to your mouth, but to mine.
When I want to take a piece of bread, I never take rubbish instead,

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

but go to the bread as to a mark. And even you who make nothing of the
senses, act just as I do. Which of you when he wants to go to the bath
goes to the mill instead?

What follows? Must we not to the best of our power hold fast to this
—that is, maintain the view of common sense, and guard ourselves against
all that upsets it? Yes, who disputes that? But these are matters for
one who has the power and the leisure: the man who trembles, and is
disturbed, and whose heart is shaken within him, ought to devote his
time to something else.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII. That We Must not be Angry with Men: and
Concerning what Things are Small and what are Great Among Men](dep029.md)
