[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep035)  [Next](dep037.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### TO THE MAN CAUGHT IN ADULTERY

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> Epictetus was saying that man is
born for mutual trust, and he who overthrows this overthrows the quality
peculiar to man, there came in one of those who are reputed scholars, a
man who had once been caught committing adultery in the city. If, said
Epictetus, we put away this trust, for which we are born, and plot
against our neighbour's wife, what are we doing? Are we not pulling down
and destroying? Whom? The man of trust, of honour, of piety. Is this
all? Are we not overthrowing neighbourly feeling, friendship, the city
itself? What position are we taking up?

How am I to treat you, my fellow man? As a neighbour? As a friend? Of
what kind? As a citizen? What trust am I to put in you? No doubt, if you
were a piece of pottery, so cracked that you could not be used for
anything, you would be cast out on the dunghill, and no one would stoop
to take you thence: what shall we do with you then, if being a man you
can fill no place becoming to a man? Granted that you cannot hold the
position of a friend, can you hold that of a slave? And who will trust
you? Will you not then consent to be cast upon a dunghill yourself as a
useless vessel, as a thing for the dunghill?

Will you complain, 'No man pays any attention to me, a man and a
scholar'?

Of course, for you are bad and useless. Wasps might as well be indignant
because no one heeds them, but all avoid them and any one who can
strikes and crushes them. Your sting is such that you cause pain and
trouble to any one you strike with it. What would you have us do to you?
There is no place to put you.

What then? Is it not true that 'women are common property by nature'? I
agree, for the sucking-pig is the common property of those who are
bidden to the feast. Very well, when it has been cut into portions,
come, if you see fit, and snatch the portion of the guest who sits next
you, steal it secretly or slip your hand over it and taste it, or if you
cannot snatch any of the flesh rub your fingers on the fat and lick
them. A fine companion you are for a feast or a dinner, worthy of
Socrates indeed!

Again, is not the theatre common to all citizens? When they are seated
there, come, if you see fit, and turn one of them out. In the same way
you may say that women are common property by nature. But when the
law-giver, like the giver of the feast, has apportioned them,

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

will you not look for your own portion instead of stealing what is
another's and guzzling that?

'Yes, but I am a scholar and understand Archedemus.'

Well then, understand Archedemus, be an adulterer and a man of broken
trust, a wolf or an ape instead of a man; for what is there to hinder
you?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. How A Careful Life is Compatible with a Noble
Spirit](dep037.md)
