[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep005)  [Next](dep007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V

#### AGAINST FOLLOWERS OF THE ACADEMY

<span class="smallcaps">If a</span> man, says Epictetus, objects to what
is manifestly clear, it is not easy to find an argument against him,
whereby one shall change his mind. And this is not because of his power,
nor because of the weakness of him that is instructing him; but, when a
man, worsted in argument, becomes hardened like a stone, how can one
reason with him any more?

Now there are two ways in which a man may be thus hardened: one when his
reasoning faculty is petrified, and the other when his moral sense is
petrified, and he sets himself deliberately not to assent to manifest
arguments, and not to abandon what conflicts with them. Now most of us
fear the deadening of the body and would take all possible means to
avoid such a calamity, yet we take no heed of the deadening of the mind
and the spirit. When the mind itself is in such a state that a man can
follow nothing and understand nothing, we do indeed think that he is in
a bad condition; yet, if a man's sense of shame and self-respect is
deadened, we even go so far as to call him 'a strong man'.

Do you comprehend that you are awake?

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

'No,' he says, 'no more than I comprehend it, when I seem to be awake in
my dreams.'

Is there no difference then between the one sort of impression and the
other?

'None.'

Can I argue with him any longer? What fire or sword, I say, am I to
bring to bear on him, to prove that his mind is deadened? He has
sensation and pretends that he has not; he is worse than the dead. One
man does not see the battle; he is ill off. This other sees it but stirs
not, nor advances; his state is still more wretched. His sense of shame
and self-respect is cut out of him, and his reasoning faculty, though
not cut away, is brutalized. Am I to call this 'strength'? Heaven
forbid, unless I call it 'strength' in those who sin against nature,
that makes them do and say in public whatever occurs to their fancy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. On Providence](dep007.md)
