[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep095)  [Next](dep097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

### CHAPTER X

#### WHAT THINGS WE SHOULD DESPISE, AND WHAT WE SHOULD DEEM IMPORTANT

<span class="smallcaps">All</span> men's difficulties and perplexities
are concerned with external things. 'What am I to do?' 'How is it to be
done?' 'How is it to turn out?' 'I fear this or that may befall me.' All
these phrases are used by persons occupied with matters outside their
will. For who says, 'How am I to refuse assent to the false?' 'How am I
to refuse to swerve from the true?' If a man is so gifted by nature as
to be anxious about these things, I will remind him: 'Why are you
anxious? It rests with you: be not troubled. Be not over-hasty in
assent, before you have applied the rule of nature.'

Again, if he is anxious about his will to get, lest it should fail of
its object and miss the mark, and about his will to avoid, lest it
should fall into what it avoids, first of all I will salute him, because
he has got rid of the excitements and fears of other men, and has turned
his thoughts to his own business where his true self lies. Then I shall
say to him: 'If you would not fail to get what you will, nor fall into
what you will to avoid, do not will to get what is not your own, nor to
avoid what is not in your control: otherwise you are bound to fail and
to fall into disaster. Where is the difficulty if you do as I say? What
room is there for phrases like, "How am I to get it?" "How is it to turn
out?" "I fear this or that may befall me."'

Is not the issue of the future outside our will?

'Yes.'

And the essence of good and evil is in the region of the will?

'Yes.'

Is it in your power then to make a natural use of every event that
happens? Can any one hinder you from that?

'No one.'

Say no more then, 'What is to happen?' For whatever happens, you will
turn it to good purpose, and the issue will be your good fortune. What
would Heracles have been if he had said, 'How am I to prevent a big lion
from appearing, or a big boar, or brutal men?' What care you, I say? If
a big boar appears, you will have a greater struggle to engage in; if
evil men appear, you will free the world from evil men.

'But if I die thus?'

You will die a good man, fulfilling a noble action. For since you must
die in any case, you must be found doing something—whatever it be—

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

farming or digging or trading or holding the counsulship or suffering
indigestion or diarrhoea. What then would you have death find you doing?
For my part I would be found busy with some humane task, whatever it
be—something noble, beneficent, advancing the common weal. And if I
cannot be found doing great things like these, I would do what none can
hinder, what is given me to do, setting myself right, bringing to
perfection the faculty that deals with impressions, working to achieve
freedom from passion, rendering what is due to each relation in life;
nay, if I am so fortunate, attaining to the third sphere of
activity, <span id="fr_52"></span>[4-6](dep100.htm#fn_52) that concerned
with certainty of judgements.

If death finds me thus occupied, I am content if I can lift up my hands
to God and say, 'I have not neglected the faculties which I received
from Thee, to enable me to understand Thy governance and follow it, I
have not dishonoured Thee so far as in me lay. See how I have dealt with
my senses, see how I have dealt with my primary notions. Did I ever
complain of Thee, did I ever show discontent with anything that happened
to any one, or wish it to happen otherwise, did I offend in my relations
towards others? In that Thou didst beget me I am grateful for Thy gifts:
in so far as I have used what Thou gayest me I am satisfied. Take Thy
gifts back again and place them where Thou wilt: for they were all
Thine, Thou hast given them to me.' Are you not content to leave the
world in this state of mind? Nay, what life is better or more seemly
than his who is so minded, and what end can be more happy?

But to achieve this, you must put up with great troubles and great
losses. You cannot have this and wish to get a consulship, you cannot
have this and set your heart on owning lands, you cannot take thought
for yourself and for wretched slaves at the same time. No, if you wish
for what is not your own, you lose what is yours. This is in the nature
of things: nothing is done but at a price. And what need for wonder? If
you wish to become consul, you must keep late hours, run to and fro,
kiss people's hands, lie perishing at other men's doors, say and do many
things unfit for a free man, send gifts to many, and presents every day
to some. And what do you get for it? Twelve bundles of rods, <span
id="fr_53"></span>[4-7](dep100.htm#fn_53) the privilege of sitting three
or four times on the tribunal and of giving games in the Circus, and
doles in baskets. If it be not so, let any one show me what there is
besides. Will you then spend nothing, and use no effort to secure
release from passion and perturbation, that sleeping you may sleep and
waking you may wake, that you may fear nothing and be anxious for
nothing? But if while you are thus engaged you have losses or spend
money amiss, or if another gets what you ought to have got, are you
going to be vexed all at once at what happens? Will you not weigh what
the exchange is and how precious your gain, instead

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

of wishing to obtain this great prize for nothing? Nay, how can you?
'One business interferes with another.'

You cannot combine attention to outward possessions with attention to
your own Governing Principle. If you want outward things, let your
reason go, or you will have neither the one nor the other, being pulled
both ways. If you wish for reason, you must let outward things go. The
oil will be spilt, my poor furniture will perish, but I shall be free
from passion. Say a fire shall arise when I am away and my books perish,
yet I shall deal with my impressions in accord with nature.

'But I shall have nothing to eat.'

If I am so miserable, death is my harbour. Death: this is the harbour,
this the refuge from all things, therefore nothing in life is difficult.
When you wish, you leave, and no smoke annoys you. Why then are you
anxious, why keep late hours? Why do you not reckon up at once where
your good and your evil lie, and say, 'Both are in my power: no one can
deprive me of my good, and no one can plunge me in evil against my will.
Why then do I not snore at my ease? I am secure in what is mine: what is
not mine will be the concern of any one who gets it as a gift from Him
who has authority to give it. Who am I to will that what is not mine
should be thus or thus? Is it given to me to choose? Has any one set me
to administer it? I am content with the things over which I have
authority. These I must make as beautiful as possible; the rest must be
as their master wills.'

If a man has this before his eyes he is no longer wakeful, 'hither and
thither tossed'. \[Homer, *Iliad*, XXIV. 5\] What would he have, or what
does he long for? Does he long for Patroclus or Antilochus or Menelaus?
When did he think any of his friends was immortal? When had he not
before his eyes the fact that to-morrow or the day after he or his
friend must die?

'Yes,' he says, 'but I thought he would outlive me and enrich my son.'

Yes, for you were a fool, and set your thoughts on uncertainties. Why
not then accuse yourself, instead of sitting crying like young girls?
'Nay, but he set food for me to eat.'

Yes, fool, for he was alive: now he cannot. But Automedon will set meat
for you, and if he dies you will find another. If the pot in which your
meat was boiling is broken, must you needs die of hunger, because you
have lost the pot you are used to? Do not you send and buy another?

'Nay,' he says,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

'*No worse ill could befall me*.'  
                          \[Homer, *Iliad*, XIX. 321\]

</div>

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

What! Is this what you call ill? And yet you forbear to remove it and
blame your mother for not warning you, that you might spend your days
lamenting ever since. What think you? Did not Homer compose these lines
on purpose that we might see that there is nothing to prevent the
noblest, the strongest, the richest, the most handsome, from being most
wretched and most miserable when they have not the judgements they
should have? <span id="fr_54"></span>[4-8](dep100.htm#fn_54)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. On Cleanliness](dep097)
