[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep039)  [Next](dep041.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII

#### WHAT IS THE TRUE NATURE OF THE GOOD

<span class="smallcaps">God</span> is beneficent, but the good also is
beneficent. It is natural therefore that the true nature of the good
should be in the same region as the true nature of God. What then is the
nature of God? Is it flesh? God forbid. Land? God forbid. Fame? God
forbid. It is intelligence, knowledge, right reason. In these then and
nowhere else seek the true nature of the good. Do you look for it in a
plant? No. Or in an irrational creature? No. If then you seek it in what
is rational why do you seek it elsewhere than in what distinguishes it
from irrational things? Plants have not the faculty of dealing with
impressions; therefore you do not predicate 'good' of them.

The good then demands power to deal with impressions. Is that all it
demands? If that be all, you must say that other animals also are
capable of good and of happiness and unhappiness. But you do not say so
and you are right, for whatever power they may have to deal with
impressions, they have not the power to understand how they do so, and
with good reason, for they are subservient to others, and are not of
primary importance.

Take the ass, for instance, is it born to be of primary importance? No;
it is born because we had need of a back able to bear burdens. Nay,
more, we had need that it should walk; therefore it has further received
the power of dealing with impressions, for else it could not have
walked. Beyond that its powers cease. But if the ass itself had received
the power to understand how it deals with impressions, then it is plain
that reason would have required that it should not have been subject to
us or have supplied these needs, but should have been our equal and like
ourselves. Will you not then seek the true nature of the good in that,
the want of which makes you refuse to predicate good of other things?

'What do you mean? Are not they too God's works?'

They are, but not His principal works, nor parts of the Divine. But

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

you are a principal work, a fragment of God Himself, you have in
yourself a part of Him. Why then are you ignorant of your high birth?
Why do you not know whence you have come? Will you not remember, when
you eat, who you are that eat, and whom you are feeding, and the same in
your relations with women? When you take part in society, or training,
or conversation, do you not know that it is God you are nourishing and
training? You bear God about with you, poor wretch, and know it not. Do
you think I speak of some external god of silver or gold? No, you bear
Him about within you and are unaware that you are defiling Him with
unclean thoughts and foul actions. If an image of God were present, you
would not dare to do any of the things you do; yet when God Himself is
present within you and sees and hears all things, you are not ashamed of
thinking and acting thus: O slow to understand your nature, and
estranged from God!

Again, when we send a young man from school to the world of action, why
is it that we fear that he may do something amiss—in eating, in
relations with women, that he may be humbled by wearing rags, or puffed
up by fine clothes?

He does not know the God that is in him, he knows not in whose company
he is going. Can we allow him to say, 'I would fain have you with me'?
Have you not God there? and, having Him, do you look for any one else?
Will He tell you anything different from this? Why, if you were a statue
wrought by Phidias—his Zeus or his Athena—you would have remembered what
you are and the Craftsman who made you, and if you had any intelligence,
you would have tried to do nothing unworthy of him who made you or of
yourself, and to bear yourself becomingly in men's eyes. But as it is,
do you, whom Zeus has made, for that reason take no thought what manner
of man you will show yourself? Yet what comparison is there between the
one artificer and the other or the one work and the other? What work of
art, for instance, has in itself the faculties of which it gives
indication in its structure? Is it not stone or bronze or gold or ivory?
Even the Athena of Phidias having once for all stretched out her hand
and received the Victory upon it stands thus for all time, but the works
of God are endowed with movement and breath, and have the faculty of
dealing with impressions and of testing them.

When this Craftsman has made you, do you dishonour his work? Nay, more,
He not only made you, but committed you as a trust to yourself and none
other. Will you not remember this, but even dishonour the trust
committed to you?

If God had committed some orphan to your care, would you have neglected
him so? Yet He has entrusted your own self to you and He says, 'I had
none other more trustworthy than you: keep this man for

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

me such as he is born to be, modest, faithful, high-minded, undismayed,
free from passion and tumult.' After that, do you refuse to keep him so?

But they will say, 'Where has this man got his high looks and his lofty
countenance?'

Nay, I have not got them yet as I ought: for as yet I have not
confidence in what I have learnt and assented to, I still fear my own
weakness. Only let me gain confidence and then you shall see a proper
aspect and a proper bearing, then I will show you the statue as it is
when it is finished and polished. What think you? That this means proud
looks? Heaven forbid! Does Zeus of Olympia wear proud looks? No, but his
gaze is steadfast, as his should be who is to say:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*For my word cannot be taken back, nor can it deceive*.  
                                         \[Homer, *Iliad*, I. 256\]

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Such will I show
myself to you—faithful, self-respecting, noble, free from tumult.

'Do you mean, free from death and old age and disease?'

No, but as one who dies as a god, and who bears illness like a god.
These are my possessions, these my faculties; all others are beyond me.
I will show you the sinews of a philosopher.

'What do you mean by sinews?'

Will to achieve that fails not, will to avoid that falls not into evil,
impulse to act appropriately, strenuous purpose, assent that is not
precipitate. This is what you shall see.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. That We Adopt the Profession of the Philosopher When
We Cannot Fulfil That of a Man](dep041.md)
