[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep046)  [Next](dep048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XV

#### ON THOSE WHO CLING STUBBORNLY TO THEIR JUDGEMENTS

<span class="smallcaps">There</span> are some who when they hear these
precepts—that a man must be steadfast, and that the will is by nature a
free thing and not subject to compulsion, whereas all else is subject to
hindrance and compulsion, being in bondage and dependence—imagine that
they must abide without swerving by every judgement that they have
formed. No—first of all the judgement arrived at must be sound.

For I would have the body firmly braced, but it must be the firmness of
health and good condition; if you show me that you have the firmness of
a madman and boast of that, I shall say to you, 'Look, man, for some one
to cure you.' This is not firmness, but the opposite.

Let me describe another state of mind to be found in those who hear
these precepts amiss. A friend of mine, for instance, determined for no
reason to starve himself. I learnt of it when he was in the third day of
his fasting, and went and asked him what had happened.

'I have decided', said he.

Yes, but, for all that, say what it was that persuaded you; for if

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

your decision was right, here we are at your side ready to help you to
leave this life, but, if your decision was against reason, then change
your mind.

'A man must abide by his decisions.'

What are you doing, man? Not all decisions, but right decisions. For
instance, if you were convinced at the moment that it was right, abide
by that opinion if you think fit, and do not change it, but say, 'one
must abide by one's decisions.'

Will you not lay this foundation to begin with—that is, examine your
decision and see whether it is sound or unsound, and then afterwards
build on it your firmness and unshaken resolve? But if you lay a rotten
and crumbling foundation you will not be able to build even a tiny
building; the more courses and the stronger that you lay upon it the
quicker will it collapse. You are removing from life without any reason
our familiar friend, our fellow citizen in the great City and the small,
and then, though you are guilty of murder and of killing one who has
done no wrong, you say, 'I must abide by my decisions.' If perchance it
occurred to you to kill me, would you be bound to abide by your
decisions?

Well, I had much ado to persuade that friend to change his mind. But it
is impossible to move some of the men of to-day, so that I think that I
know now what I did not know before, the meaning of the familiar saying,
'A fool is not to be persuaded nor broken of his folly.' May it never be
my lot to have for friend a wise fool: nothing is more difficult to
handle.

'I have decided.'

So have the madmen, but the more firmly they persist in false judgements
the more hellebore <span id="fr_19"></span>[2-5](dep059.htm#fn_19.md) do
they require. Will you not act as the sick man should, and call in the
physician? As he says, 'I am sick, master; help me: consider what I
ought to do, it is for me to obey you', so you should say, 'I do not
know what I ought to do, but I have come to learn.' Oh no, you say:
'Talk to me about other things; this I have decided.' Other things
indeed! What is greater or more to your advantage than that you should
be convinced that it is not sufficient to have decided and to refuse all
change of mind? This is the firmness of madness, not of health.

'If you force me to this, I would fain die.'

Why, man, what has happened?

'I have decided.'

Lucky for me that you have not decided to kill me.

'I do not take fees.'

Why?

'I have decided.'

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

Let me tell you that the same energy with which you now refuse to take
fees may incline you one day (what is to prevent it?) to take them and
to say again, 'I have decided.'

Just as in an ailing body, which suffers from a flux, the flux inclines
now to this part and now to that, so it is with a weak mind: no one can
tell which way it sways, but when this swaying and drift has energy to
back it, then the mischief becomes past help and remedy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. That We do not Practise Applying our Judgements
About Things Good and Evil](dep048.md)
