[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep047)  [Next](dep049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVI

#### THAT WE DO NOT PRACTISE APPLYING OUR JUDGEMENTS ABOUT THINGS GOOD AND EVIL

<span class="smallcaps">Where</span> lies the good?

In a man's will.

Where lies evil?

In the will.

Where is the neutral sphere?

In the region outside the will's control.

Well, now, does any one of us remember these principles outside the
lecture-room? Does any man practise by himself to answer facts as he
would answer questions? For instance, is it day? 'Yes.' Again, is it
night? 'No.' Again, are the stars even in number? 'I cannot say.' When
money is shown you have you practised giving the proper answer, that it
is not a good thing? Have you trained yourself in answers like this, or
only to meet fallacious arguments? Why are you surprised, then, that you
surpass yourself in the sphere where you have practised, and make no
progress where you are unpractised?

Why is it that the orator, though he knows that he has written a good
speech, and has got by heart what he has written, and brings a pleasant
voice to his task, still feels anxiety in spite of all? The reason is
that merely to declaim his speech does not content him. What does he
want then? To be praised by his audience. Now he has been trained to be
able to declaim, but he has not been trained in regard to praise and
blame. For when did he hear from any one what praise is and what blame
is: what is the nature of each, what manner of praise must be pursued,
and what manner of blame must be avoided? When did he go through this
training in accordance with these principles?

Why, then, are you still surprised that he is superior to others in the
things he has been taught, and on a level with the mass of men in the
things he has not studied? He is like the singer accompanying the lyre
who knows how to play, sings well, and wears a fine tunic, and yet

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

trembles when he comes on; for though he has all this knowledge he does
not know what the people is or the clamour or mockery of the people.
Nay, he does not even know what this anxiety is that he is feeling,
whether it depends on himself or on another, whether it can be
suppressed or not. Therefore, if men praise him, he leaves the stage
puffed up; if they mock him, his poor bubble of conceit is pricked and
subsides.

Very much the same is our position. What do we admire? External things.
What are we anxious about? External things. And yet we are at a loss to
know how fears or anxiety assail us! What else can possibly happen when
we count impending events as evil? We cannot be free from fear, we
cannot be free from anxiety. Yet we say, 'O Lord God, how am I to be rid
of anxiety?' Fool, have you no hands? Did not God make them for you? Sit
still and pray forsooth, that your rheum may not flow. Nay, wipe your
nose rather and do not accuse God.

What moral do I draw? Has not God given you anything in the sphere of
conduct? Has He not given you endurance, has He not given you greatness
of mind, has He not given you manliness? When you have these strong
hands to help you, do you still seek for one to wipe your rheum away?

But we do not practise such conduct nor pay attention to it. Find me one
man who cares how he is going to do a thing, who is interested not in
getting something but in realizing his true nature. Who is there that
when walking is interested in his own activity, or when deliberating is
interested in the act of deliberation, and not in getting that for which
he is planning? And then if he succeeds he is elated and says, 'What a
fine plan that was of ours! Did not I tell you, my brother, that if we
have thought a thing out it is bound to happen so?' But if he fails he
is humbled and miserable, and cannot find anything to say about what has
happened. Which of us ever called in a prophet in order to realize his
true nature? Which of us ever slept in a temple of dreams for this? Name
the man. Give me but one, that I may set eyes on him I have long been
seeking for, the man who is truly noble and has fine feeling; be he
young or old, give me one.

Why, then, do we wonder any more that, whereas we are quite at home in
dealing with material things, when we come to express ourselves in
action we behave basely and unseemly, are worthless, cowardly,
unenduring, failures altogether? But if we kept our fear not for death
or exile, but for fear itself, then we should practise to avoid what we
think evil. As it is we are glib and fluent in the lecture-room, and if
any paltry question arises about a point of conduct, we are capable of
pursuing the subject logically; but put us to the practical test and you
will find us miserable shipwrecks. Let a distracting thought

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

occur to us and you will soon find out for what we were studying and
training. The result of our want of practice is that we are always
heaping up terrors and imagining things bigger than they really are.
When I go a voyage, as soon as I gaze down into the deep or look round
on the sea and find no land, I am beside myself, imagining that if I am
wrecked I must swallow all this sea, for it never occurs to me that
three quarts are enough for me. What is it alarms me? The sea? No, but
my judgement about it. Again, when an earthquake happens, I imagine that
the city is going to fall on me. What! Is not a tiny stone enough to
knock my brains out?

What, then, are the burdens that weigh upon us and drive us out of our
minds? What else but our judgements? When a man goes away and leaves the
companions and the places and the society that he is used to, what else
is it that weighs upon him but judgement? Children, when they cry a
little because their nurse has left them, forget her as soon as they are
given a bit of cake.

'Do you want us to be like children too?'

No, not at all; it is not by cake I would have you influenced, but by
true judgements. What do I mean? I mean the judgements that a man must
study all day long, uninfluenced by anything that does not concern him,
whether it be companion or place or gymnasia, or even his own body; he
must remember the law and keep this before his eyes.

What is the law of God?

To guard what is your own, not to claim what is another's; to use what
is given you, not to long for anything if it be not given; if anything
be taken away, to give it up at once and without a struggle, with
gratitude for the time you have enjoyed it, if you would not cry for
your nurse and your mammy. For what difference does it make what a man
is a slave to, and what he depends on? How are you better than one who
weeps for a mistress, if you break your heart for a paltry gymnasium and
paltry colonnades and precious young men and that sort of occupation?
Here comes a man complaining that he is not to drink the water of Dirce
any more.

What! is not the Marcian water <span
id="fr_20"></span>[2-6](dep059.htm#fn_20) as good as that of Dirce?

'Nay, but I was used to the other.'

Yes, and you will get used to this in turn. I say, if such things are
going to influence you, go away and cry for it, and try to write a line
like that of Euripides,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*The baths of Nero and the Marcian spring*  
      This line parodies Euripides, *The Phoenissae*, 368\]

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> See how tragedy
arises when fools have to face everyday events!

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

'When shall I see Athens again, then, and the Acropolis?'

Unhappy man, are you not content with what you see day by day? Can you
set eyes on anything better or greater than the sun, the moon, the
stars, the whole earth, the ocean? And if you really understand Him that
governs the universe and if you carry Him about within you, do you still
long for paltry stones and pretty rock? What will you do, then, when you
are going to leave the very sun and moon? Shall you sit crying like
little children? What were you doing, then, at school? What did you
hear? What did you learn? Why did you write yourself down a philosopher
when you might have written the truth, saying, 'I did a few
Introductions and read Chrysippus’ sayings, but I never entered the door
of a philosopher. What share have I in the calling of Socrates, who
lived and died so nobly, or of Diogenes? Can you imagine one of them
weeping or indignant, because he is not going to see this man or that or
be in Athens or in Corinth, but in Susa, if it so chance, or Ecbatana?
Does he who may leave the banquet when he will and play no longer, vex
himself while he stays on? Does he not stay at play just as long as it
pleases him? Do you suppose the man I describe would endure interminable
exile or condemnation to death?

Will you not be weaned at last, as children are, and take more solid
food, and cease to cry 'nurse' and 'mammy', cries for old women's ears?
'But I shall distress them', you say, 'by departing.'

You will distress them? No, you will not distress them; what distresses
them and you is judgement. What can you do then? Get rid of your
judgement: theirs, if they do well, they will get rid of themselves, or
they will sorrow for it and have themselves to thank. Man, be bold at
last, even to despair, as the phrase is, that you may have peace and
freedom and a lofty mind. Lift up your neck at last, as one released
from slavery. Have courage to look up to God and say, 'Deal with me
hereafter as Thou wilt, I am as one with Thee, I am Thine. I flinch from
nothing so long as Thou thinkest it good. Lead me, where Thou wilt, put
on me what raiment Thou wilt. Wouldst Thou have me hold office, or
eschew it, stay or fly, be poor or rich? For all this I will defend Thee
before men. I will show each thing in its true nature, as it is.'

Nay, stay rather in the cow's belly and wait for your mammy's milk to
fill you. What would have become of Heracles, if he had stayed at home?
He would have been Eurystheus, and no Heracles.

But tell me, how many friends and companions had he, as he went about
the world? No nearer friend than God: and that is why he was believed to
be son of Zeus, and was so. Obedient to Him, he went about the world,
cleansing it of wrong and lawlessness.

Do you say you are no Heracles, nor able to get rid of other men's
evils, not even a Theseus, to cleanse Attica of ills?

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

Cleanse your own heart, cast out from your mind, not Procrustes and
Sciron, but pain, fear, desire, envy, ill will, avarice, cowardice,
passion uncontrolled. These things you cannot cast out, unless you look
to God alone, on Him alone set your thoughts, and consecrate yourself to
His commands. If you wish for anything else, with groaning and sorrow
you will follow what is stronger than you, ever seeking peace outside
you, and never able to be at peace: for you seek it where it is not, and
refuse to seek it where it is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. How We Must Adjust Our Primary Conceptions to
Particular Things](dep049)
