[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep086)  [Next](dep088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

# BOOK IV

### CHAPTER I

#### ON FREEDOM

<span class="smallcaps">That</span> man is free, who lives as he wishes,
who is proof against compulsion and hindrance and violence, whose
impulses are untrammelled, who gets what he wills to get and avoids what
he wills to avoid.

Who then would live in error?

No one.

Who would live deceived, reckless, unjust, intemperate, querulous,
abject?

No one.

No bad man then lives as he would, and so no bad man is free. Who would
live in a state of distress, fear, envy, pity, failing in the will to
get and in the will to avoid?

No one.

Do we then find any bad man without distress or fear, above
circumstance, free from failure?

None. Then we find none free.

If a man who has been twice consul hear this, he will forgive you if you
add, 'But you are wise, this does not concern you.' But if you tell him
the truth, saying, 'You are just as much a slave yourself as those who
have been thrice sold', what can you expect but a flogging?

'How can I be a slave?' he says; 'my father is free, my mother is free,
no one has bought me; nay, I am a senator, and a friend of Caesar, I
have been consul and have many slaves.'

In the first place, most excellent senator, perhaps your father too was
a slave of the same kind as you, yes and your mother and your
grandfather and the whole line of your ancestors. And if really they
were ever so free, how does that affect you? What does it matter if they
had a fine spirit, when you have none, if they were fearless and you are
a coward, if they were self-controlled and you are intemperate?

'Nay, what has this to do with being a slave?' he replies.

Does it seem to you slavery to act against your will, under compulsion
and with groaning?

'I grant you that,' he says, 'but who can compel me except Caesar, who
is lord of all?'

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

Why, then, your own lips confess that you have one master: you must not
comfort yourself with the thought that he is, as you say, the common
master of all, but realize that you are a slave in a large household.
You are just like the people of Nicopolis, who are wont to cry aloud,
'By Caesar's fortune, we are free.'

However, let us leave Caesar for the moment if you please, but tell me
this: Did you never fall in love with any one, with a girl, or a boy, or
a slave, or a free man?

'What has that to do with slavery or freedom?'

Were you never commanded by her you loved to do anything you did not
wish? Did you never flatter your precious slave-boy? Did you never kiss
his feet? Yet if any one compel you to kiss Caesar's, you count it an
outrage, the very extravagance of tyranny. What is this if not slavery?
Did you never go out at night where you did not wish, and spend more
than you wished and utter words of lamentation and groaning? Did you put
up with being reviled and shut out? If you are ashamed to confess your
own story, see what Thrasonides says and does: he had served in as many
campaigns or more perhaps than you and yet, first of all, he has gone
out at night, at an hour when Getas does not dare to go, nay, if he were
forced by his master to go, he would have made a loud outcry and have
gone with lamentations over his cruel slavery, and then, what does he
say?

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*A worthless girl has made a slave of me,  
Whom never foe subdued*.  
                            \[Menander, Fragment 338, Koch\]

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Poor wretch, to be
slave to a paltry girl and a worthless one too! Why do you call yourself
free then any more? Why do you boast of your campaigns? Then he asks for
a sword, and is angry with the friend who refuses it out of goodwill,
and sends gifts to the girl who hates him, and falls to praying and
weeping, and then again when he has a little luck he is exultant. How
can we call him free when he has not learnt to give up desire and fear?

Now look at the lower animals and see how we apply the notion of freedom
to them. Men put lions in cages and rear them as tame creatures and feed
them, and sometimes even take them about with them. Yet who will call a
lion like that 'free'? The softer he lives, the worse is his slavery.
What lion, if he got sense or reason, would wish to be a lion of that
sort? Look at the birds yonder and see what lengths they go in striving
to escape, when they are caught and reared in cages; why, some of them
actually starve themselves rather than endure that sort of life; and
even those that do not die, pine away and barely keep alive, and dash
out if they find any chance of an opening. So strong

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

is their desire for natural freedom, an independent and unhindered
existence.

Why, what ails you in your cage?

'What a question! I am born to fly where I will, to live in the air, to
sing when I will; you take all this away, from me, and say, "What ails
you?"'

Therefore we will call only those creatures free, that do not endure
captivity, but escape by death as soon as they are caught. So too
Diogenes says somewhere, 'A quiet death is the one sure means of
freedom', and he writes to the Persian king, 'You cannot enslave the
city of the Athenians any more than you can enslave fishes.'

'What! shall I not capture them?'

'If you capture them,' he says, 'they will straightway leave you and be
gone, like fishes; for when you take one of them, he dies. So if the
Athenians die as soon as you take them, what is the good of your
armament?' These are the words of a free man who has seriously examined
the question and found the truth, as is reasonable; but if you look for
it elsewhere than where it is, what wonder if you never find it?

The slave is anxious to be set free at once. Why? Do you think it is
because he is anxious to pay the tax on his manumission? No! the reason
is he imagines that up till now he is hampered and ill at ease because
he has not got his freedom. 'If I am enfranchised,' he says, 'at once
all will be well, I heed nobody, I talk to all men as an equal and one
of their quality, I go where I will, I come whence I will and where I
will.' Then he is emancipated, and having nothing to eat he straightway
looks for some one to flatter and to dine with; then he either has to
sell his body to lust and endure the worst, and if he gets a manger to
eat at, he has plunged into a slavery much severer than the first; or if
perchance he grows rich, being a low-bred fellow he dotes on some paltry
girl and gets miserable and bewails himself and longs to be a slave
again.

'What ailed me in those days? Another gave me clothes and shoes, another
fed me and tended me in sickness, and the service I did him was a small
matter. Now, how wretched and miserable I am, with many masters instead
of one! Still, if I can get rings <span
id="fr_47"></span>[4-1](dep100.htm#fn_47) on my fingers I shall live
happily and prosperously enough.'

And so first, to get them, he puts up with what he deserves, and having
got them repeats the process. Next he says, 'If I go on a campaign I am
quit of all my troubles.' He turns soldier and endures the lot of a
criminal, but all the same he begs for a second campaign and a
third. <span id="fr_48"></span>[4-2](dep100.htm#fn_48) Lastly, when he
gets the crown to his career and is made a senator, once more he becomes
a slave again as he goes to the senate; then he enjoys the noblest and
the sleekest slavery of all.

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

Let him not be foolish, let him learn, as Socrates said, what is the
true nature of everything, and not apply primary conceptions at random
to particular facts. For this is the cause of all the miseries of men,
that they are not able to apply their common primary conceptions to
particular cases. One of us fancies this, another that. One fancies he
is ill. Not at all; it is only that he does not apply his primary
conceptions. Another fancies that he is poor, that his father or mother
is cruel, another that Caesar is not gracious. But really it is one
thing, and one thing only; they do not know how to adjust their primary
conceptions. For who has not a primary notion of evil—that it is
harmful, to be shunned, by every means to be got rid of? One primary
notion does not conflict with another, the conflict is in the
application.

What then is this evil which is harmful and to be shunned?

'Not to be Caesar's friend', he says.

He has gone out of his way, he has failed to apply his notions, he is in
sore distress, he is seeking for what is nothing to the purpose; for
when he has got Caesar's friendship he has equally failed of his object.
For what is the object of every man's search? To have a quiet mind, to
be happy, to do everything as he will, to be free from hindrance and
compulsion. Very well: when he becomes Caesar's friend is he relieved
from hindrance and compulsion, is he in peace and happiness? Of whom are
we to inquire? Whom can we better trust than the very man who has become
Caesar's friend?

Come forward and tell us! when was your sleep more tranquil, now or
before you became Caesar's friend?

At once the answer comes, 'Cease, by the gods I beg you, to mock at my
fortune; you do not know what a miserable state is mine; no sleep comes
near to me, but in comes some one to say, "Now he's awake, now he'll be
coming out"; then troubles and cares assail me.'

Tell me, when did you dine more agreeably, now or before?

Hear again what he says about this: if he is not invited, he is
distressed, and if he is invited he dines as a slave with his lord,
anxious all the while for fear he should say or do something foolish.
And what do you think he fears? To be flogged like a slave? How should
he come off so well? No, so great a man as he, and Caesar's friend, must
fear to lose his neck; nought less were fitting. When did you bathe with
more peace of mind, or exercise yourself more at your ease? In a word,
which life would you rather live, to-day's or the old life? No one, I
can swear, is so wanting in sense or feeling, that he does not lament
his lot the louder the more he is Caesar's friend.

Inasmuch then as neither those who bear the name of kings nor kings'
friends live as they will, what free men are left? Seek, and you shall
find, for nature supplies you with means to find the truth. If, with
these

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

means and no more to guide you, you cannot find the answer for yourself,
then listen to those who have made the search. What do they say? Does
freedom seem to you a good thing?

'The greatest good.'

Can any one who attains the greatest good be miserable or fare badly?

'No.'

Whensoever then you see men unhappy, miserable, mourning, you may
declare with confidence that they are not free.

'I do declare it.'

Well then, we have got away from buying and selling, and. that kind of
disposal of property which they deal with. For if you are right in
making these admissions, no one who is miserable can be free, whether he
be a great king or a little one, a consular or one who has twice been
consul.

'Granted.'

Answer me once more. Does freedom seem to you a great and noble and
precious thing?

'Certainly.'

Can then one who possesses so great and precious and noble a thing be of
a humble spirit?

'He cannot.'

Therefore when you see a man cringing to another or flattering him
against his true opinion, you may say with confidence that he too is not
free, and not only if he does it for a paltry dinner, but even if he
does it for a province or a consulship. But those who do it for small
objects you may call slaves on a small scale, and the others, as they
deserve, slaves on a large scale.

'I grant you this too.'

Again, does freedom seem to you' to be something independent, owning no
authority but itself?

'Certainly.'

Then whenever a man can be hindered or compelled by another at will,
assert with confidence that he is not free. Do not look at his
grandfathers and great grandfathers and search whether he was bought or
sold, but if you hear him say 'Master' from the heart and with feeling,
then call him slave, though twelve fasces go before him; <span
id="fr_49"></span>[4-3](dep100.htm#fn_49) and if you hear him say,
'Wretched am I, that I am so treated', call him slave; in a word, if you
see him bewailing himself, complaining, miserable, call him slave,
though he wears the purple hem. If, however, he does not behave like
this, call him not free yet, but get to know his judgements and see
whether they are liable to compulsion or hindrance or unhappiness, and
if you find any such, call him a slave on holiday at the Saturnalia;

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

say that his master is away; he will presently return and then you will
learn his true condition.

'In what form will he return?'

In the form of every one who has authority over the things that a man
wishes for, to get them for him or to take them away.

'Have we then so many masters?'

Yes, for even before these personal masters, we have masters in
circumstance, and circumstances are many. It must needs follow then that
those who have authority over any of these are our masters. For no one
really fears Caesar himself; men fear death, exile, deprivation of
property, prison, disfranchisement. Nor does any one love Caesar, unless
he has great merit; we love wealth, the tribunate, the praetorship, the
consulship. When we love and hate and fear these, the men who have
authority over them are bound to be our masters, and that is why we
worship them like gods; for we consider that that which has authority
over the greatest benefit is divine; and then if we make a false minor
premiss, 'this man has control over the greatest benefit', our
conclusion is bound to be wrong too.

What is it then which makes man his own master and free from hindrance?
Wealth does not make him so, nor a consulship, nor a province, nor a
kingdom; we must find something else. Now what is it which makes him
unhindered and unfettered in writing?

'Knowledge of how to write.'

What makes him so in flute-playing?

'Knowledge of flute-playing.'

So too in living, it is knowledge of how to live. You have heard this as
a general principle; consider it in detail. Is it possible for one who
aims at an object which lies in the power of others to be unhindered? Is
it possible for him to be untrammelled?

'No.'

It follows that he cannot be free. Consider then: have we nothing which
is in our power alone, or have we everything? Or only some things in our
power, and some in that of others?

'How do you mean?'

When you wish your body to be whole, is it in your power or not?

'It is not.'

And when you wish it to be healthy?

'That is not in my power.'

And when you wish it to be beautiful?

'That is not in my power.'

And to live or die?

'That is not mine either.'

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

The body then is something not our own and must give an account to any
one who is stronger than ourselves.

'Granted.'

Is it in your power to have land when you will, and as long as you will,
and of the quality you will?

'No.'

And slaves?

'No.'

And clothes?

'No.'

And your bit of a house?

'No.'

And horses?

'None of these things.'

And if you wish your children or your wife or your brother or your
friends to live, whatever happens, is that in your power?

'No, that is not either.'

Have you nothing then which owns no other authority, nothing which you
alone control, or have you something of that sort?

'I do not know.'

Look at the matter thus and consider it. Can any one make you assent to
what is false?

'No one.'

Well, then, in the region of assent you are unhindered and unfettered.

'Granted.'

Again, can any one force your impulse towards what you do not wish?

'He can; for when he threatens me with death or bonds, he forces my
impulse.'

Well now, if you despise death and bonds, do you heed him any longer?

'No.'

Is it your doing then to despise death, or is it not yours?

'Mine.'

It rests with you then to be impelled to action, does it not?

'I grant it rests with me.'

And impulse not to act, with whom does that rest? It is yours too.

'Supposing that my impulse is to walk, and he hinders me, what then?'

What part of you will he hinder? Your assent?

'No, but my poor body.'

Yes, as a stone is hindered.

'Granted; but I do not walk any more.'

Who told you that it is your business to walk unhindered? The only thing
I told you was unhindered was your impulse; as to the service of

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

the body, and its cooperation, you have heard long ago that it is no
affair of yours.

'I grant you this too.'

Can any one compel you to will to get what you do not wish?

'No one.'

Or to purpose or to plan, or in a word to deal with the impressions that
you meet with?

'No one can do this either; but if I will to get something a man will
hinder me from obtaining it.'

How will he hinder you, if you set your will upon things which are your
own and beyond hindrance?

'Not at all.'

But no one tells you that he who wills to get what is not his own is
unhindered.

'Am I then not to will to get health?'

Certainly not, nor anything else that is not your own. For nothing is
your own, that it does not rest with you to procure or to keep when you
will. Keep your hands far away from it; above all, keep your will away,
or else you surrender yourself into slavery, you put your neck under the
yoke, if you admire what is not your own, and set your heart on anything
mortal, whatever it be, or anything that depends upon another.

'Is not my hand my own?'

It is a part of you, but by nature a thing of clay, subject to hindrance
and compulsion, slave to everything that is stronger than itself. Nay,
why do I name you the hand? You must treat your whole body like a poor
ass, with its burden on its back, going with you just so far as it may,
and so far as it is given you; but if the king's service calls, and a
soldier lays hands on it, let it go, do not resist or murmur; if you do,
you will only get a flogging and lose your poor ass all the same.

But when this is your proper attitude to your body, consider what is
left for you to do with other things that are procured for the body's
sake. As the body is the poor ass, other things become the ass's bridle
and pack-saddle, shoes and barley and fodder. Give them up too, let them
go quicker and with a lighter heart than the ass itself.

And when you have prepared and trained yourself thus to distinguish what
is your own from what is not your own, things subject to hindrance from
things unhindered, to regard these latter as your concern, and the
former as not, to direct your will to gain the latter and to avoid the
former, then have you any one to fear any more?

'No one.'

Of course. What should you fear for? Shall you fear for what is your
own, that is, for what makes good and evil for you? Nay, who has
authority over what is yours? Who can take it away, who can hinder it,

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

any more than they can hinder God? Is it your body and your property
that you fear for? Are you afraid for what is not your own, for what
does not concern you at all?

Why, what have you been studying all along but to distinguish what it
yours from what is not yours, what is in your power from what is not in
your power, things subject to hindrance from things unhindered? Why did
you go to the philosophers? Was it that you might be just as unfortunate
and miserable as ever? I say that so trained you will be free from fear
and perturbation. What has pain to do with you now, for it is only
things that cause fear in expectation which cause pain when they come?
What shall you have desire for any longer, for your will is tranquil and
harmonious, set on objects within its compass to obtain, objects that
are noble and within your reach, and you have no wish to get what is
beyond your will, and you give no scope to that jostling element of
unreason which breaks all bounds in its impatience?

When once you adopt this attitude towards things, no man can inspire
fear in you any longer. For how can man cause fear in man by his aspect
or his talk or by his society generally, any more than fear can be
roused by horse or dog or bee in another horse or dog or bee? No, it is
things which inspire fear in every man; it is the power of winning
things for another or of taking them away from him, that makes a man
feared.

How then is the citadel destroyed? Not by fire or sword, but by
judgements. For if we pull down the citadel in the city, we have not got
rid of the citadel which is held by fever or by fair women, in a word
the citadel in ourselves and the tyrants who are within us, who threaten
each one of us day by day, now in new forms, now in old. This is the
point where we must begin, this is where the citadel must be destroyed,
and the tyrants cast forth; we must give up our body, and all that
belongs to it —faculties, property, reputation, offices, honours,
children, brothers, friends—all these we must regard as having no
concern for us.

If the tyrants are cast forth from this, what need is there for me to
blockade the outward citadel? What harm does it do to me by standing?
Why do I try and cast forth the guards? I feel them no longer; their
rods and their spears and swords are pointed against others. I was never
hindered in my will or compelled against my wish.

Nay, how can this be?

I have submitted my will to God. He wills that I should have a fever; I
will it too. He wills that I should have an impulse. I will it too. He
wills that I should will to get a thing. I too will it. He wills that I
should get something, and I wish it; He wills that I should not, I wish
it no more I am willing then (if He wills it) to die or be put on the
rack. Who can hinder me any more against my own judgement or put
compulsion on me? I am as safe as Zeus.

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

I act as the more cautious travellers do. A man has heard that the road
is infested by robbers; he does not dare to venture on it alone, but
waits for company—a legate, or a quaestor, or a proconsul—and joining
him he passes safely on the road. The prudent man does the same in the
world; in the world are many haunts of robbers, tyrants, storms,
distresses, chances of losing what is dearest. 'Where is a man to
escape? How is he to go on his way unrobbed? What company is he to wait
for that he may pass through in safety? To whom is he to join himself?
To this or that rich man, or consular? What is the good of that? Your
great man himself is stripped, and utters mourning and lamentation. What
if my fellow traveller turns against me himself to rob me? What am I to
do? I will be "a friend of Caesar"; if I am his companion no one will do
me wrong. But first, how many things must I endure and undergo, to
become a distinguished person! How often must I suffer robbery and from
how many! And then, if I rise to distinction, even Caesar is mortal. And
if some circumstance lead him to become my enemy, where, I ask, is it
better for me to retire? To the wilderness? Why, does not fever come
there? What is to become of me then? Is it impossible to find a
travelling-companion who is safe, trustworthy, strong, proof against
attack?' Thus he reflects and comes to understand that if he attaches
himself to God, he will pass through the world in safety.

'What do you mean by "attach" himself?'

That what God wills, he may will too, and what God wills not, he may not
will either.

How then is this to be done?

How else, but by examining the purposes of God and His governance of the
world. What has He given me to be my own, and independent, what has He
reserved for Himself? He has given me all that lies within the sphere of
my choice, and has put it in my hands, unfettered, unhindered. How could
He make my clay body free from hindrance? My property, my chattels, my
honour, my children, my wife, He made subject to the revolution of the
universe. Why then do I fight against God? Why do I will what is not for
me to will, what is not given me to hold under all conditions, but to
hold only as it is given and so far as it is given?

Suppose He that gave takes away. Why then do I resist? I shall not
merely be silly, if I try to compel Him that is stronger; first of all I
shall be doing wrong. For whence did I bring what I have into the world?
My father gave them me. And who gave them him? Who is it that has made
the sun, and the fruits of the earth, and the seasons, and the union and
fellowship of men with one another?

You have received everything, nay your very self, from Another, and yet
you complain and blame the Giver, if He takes anything away from

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

you. Who are you and for what have you come? Did not He bring you into
the world? Did not He show you the light? Has He not given you fellow
workers? Has He not given you senses too, and reason? And in what
character did He bring you into life? Was it not as a mortal, one who
should live upon earth with his little portion of flesh and behold God's
governance and share for a little while in His pageant and His festival?
Will you not then look at the pageant and the festal gathering as long
as it is given you, and then, when God leads you forth, go away with an
obeisance to Him and thanksgiving for what you have heard and seen?

'No, I wanted to go on feasting.'

Yes, those at the Mysteries too want to go on with the. ceremony, and
those at Olympia to see fresh competitors, but the festival is at an
end. Leave it and depart, in a thankful and modest spirit; make room for
others. Others must come into being, even as you did, and being born
must have room and dwellings and necessaries. But if the first corners
do not retire, what is left for them? Why will nothing satisfy or
content you? Why do you crowd the world's room?

'Yes, but I want my wife and my children to be with me.'

Are they yours? Are they not His who gave them? Are they not His who has
made you? Will you not give up what it not yours, and give way to Him
who is stronger than you?

'Why then did He bring me into the world on these terms?'

Depart, if it does not suit you. God has no need of a querulous
spectator. He needs men who join in the feast and in the dance, ready to
applaud and glorify and praise the festival. But the impatient and
miserable He will gladly see left outside the festival: for even when
they were there they did not behave as at a festival nor fill the place
appropriate to them, but were peevish and complained of fate and fortune
and their company: insensible to fortune's gifts and to their own
faculties, which they have received for just the opposite—a great heart,
a noble spirit, and the very freedom we are now in search of.

'For what then have I received these gifts?'

To use them.

'For how long?'

Just so long as He who lent them wills.

'But what if they are necessary for me?'

Do not set your heart on them, and they will not be. Do not tell
yourself that they are necessary, and they are not.

This is what you ought to practise from sunrise to sunset, beginning
with the meanest things and those most subject to injury—a jug or a cup.
From this go on to a tunic, a dog, a horse, a field; and from that to
yourself, your body and its members, your children, your wife, your

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

brothers. Look carefully on all sides and fling them away from you.
Purify your judgements, and see that nothing that is not your own is
attached to you or clings to you, that nothing shall give you pain if it
is torn from you. And as you train yourself day by day, as in the
lecture-room, say not that you are a philosopher (I grant you that would
be arrogant)., but that you are providing for your enfranchisement; for
this is freedom indeed. This was the freedom which Diogenes won from
Antisthenes, and said that no one could enslave him any more. That
explains his bearing as a captive, and his behaviour to the pirates: did
he call any of them master? I do not mean the mere name (I have no fear
of that), but the state of mind, of which it is the expression. Think
how he rebukes them for feeding their prisoners badly. Think how he was
sold: did he look for a master? No, for a slave. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[4-4](dep100.htm#fn_50) And when he was sold, think
how he bore himself towards his master: he began talking to him at once,
telling him that he ought not to dress as he did, or shave as he did,
and what life his sons ought to lead. What wonder in that? For if he had
bought a slave skilled in gymnastic would he have used him as a servant
in the palaestra or as a master? As a master; and in the same way if he
had bought a man skilled in medicine or in architecture. And on this
principle the man with skill is bound in every subject to be superior to
the man without skill. Whoever then possesses knowledge of life in
general must be master. For who is master on shipboard?

'The helmsman.'

Why? Is it because any one who disobeys him is punished? No! but because
he possesses skill in steering.

'But my master can flog me.'

Can he do it with impunity?

'So I thought.'

But as he cannot do it with impunity, therefore he has no authority to
do it. No one can do wrong acts with impunity.

'What penalty falls on the man who imprisons his own slave, if he think
fit?'

The very act of imprisoning him is his penalty, and this you will admit
yourself, if you will hold fast the principle that man is not a brute
but a civilized creature. For when does a vine do badly? When it acts
against its nature. When does a cock do badly? In the same conditions.
The same is true of a man. What is his nature then? Is it to bite and
kick and cast into prison and behead? No, but to do good, to work with
others and pray for them. Therefore, whether you will or no, man does
badly when he acts without sense.

'Did not Socrates then do badly?'

No, but his judges and accusers did.

'Did not Helvidius in Rome do badly?'

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

No, but his murderer did.

'What do you mean?'

Just as you do not say the fighting-cock has done badly when it has won
and been wounded, but when it has been beaten without a scratch, and you
do not count a hound happy when he does not strain in the pursuit, but
when you see him sweating, in distress, his flanks bursting with the
chase. What is there incredible in the statement that every man's evil
is that which contradicts his nature? Is this incredible? Is it not what
you say in every other sphere? Why then do you take another line only
when man is in question? Is our other statement then incredible—that
man's nature is civilized and affectionate and trustworthy?

'No, this is not, either.'

How comes it then, further, that he suffers no harm though he be flogged
or imprisoned or beheaded? Is not it true that, if he suffer these
things in a noble spirit, he goes away the gainer, and is profited,
whereas he who suffers harm is the man who undergoes the most pitiful
and shameful fate, the man who changes from a man into a wolf or a
serpent or a wasp?

Come now and let us review the conclusions we have agreed to. He is
free, whom none can hinder, the man who can deal with things as he
wishes. But the man who can be hindered or compelled or fettered or
driven into anything against his will, is a slave. And who is he whom
none can hinder? The man who fixes his aim on nothing that is not his
own. And what does 'not his own' mean? All that it does not lie in our
power to have or not to have, or to have of a particular quality or
under particular conditions. The body then does not belong to us, its
parts do not belong to us, our property does not belong to us. If then
you set your heart on one of these as though it were your own, you will
pay the penalty deserved by him who desires what does not belong to him.
The road that leads to freedom, the only release from slavery is this,
to be able to say with your whole soul:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Lead me, O Zeus, and lead me, Destiny,  
Whither ordainèd is by your decree*.  
                                          \[Cleanthes\]

</div>

But, what say you, my philosopher, suppose the tyrant call on you to say
something unworthy of you? Do you assent or refuse? Tell me. 'Let me
think it over.'

You will think it over now, will you? And what, pray, did you think over
when you were at lecture? Did you not study what things are good and
what are evil, and what are neither?

'Yes, I did.'

What conclusion did you approve then?

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

'That things right and noble were good, things wrong and shameful bad.'

Is life a good thing?

'No.'

Is death evil?

'No.'

Is prison?

'No.'

And what did you think of ignoble and faithless speech, and treachery to
a friend and flattery of a tyrant?

'We thought them evil.'

Why do you ask the question now, then? You should have asked it and made
up your mind long ago. It is nonsense to question now whether, when I
can win the greatest goods, it is fitting for me not to win the greatest
evils? A fine and necessary question forsooth, needing a deal of
thought! Man, why do you mock us?

That is not the sort of thing that men 'question'. If you really
imagined shameful acts to be bad, and noble acts good, and all else to
be indifferent, you would not have proceeded to raise this question: not
at all: you would at once have been able to decide the question by
intuition, as an act of sight. For when do you question whether black
things are white, or heavy things light, instead of following the
obvious conclusions of your senses? Why then do you talk now of
considering whether things indifferent are more to be shunned than
things evil? These are not your judgements: prison and death do not seem
to you indifferent, but the greatest evils, nor do base words and acts
seem evil, they seem not to matter for us.

This is the habit to which you have trained yourself from the first.
'Where am I? In the lecture-room. And who are listening to me? I am
talking to philosophers. But now I have left the lecture-room. Away with
those sayings of pedants and fools!' That is how a philosopher gives
witness against a friend, that is how a philosopher turns parasite: that
is how he hires himself out at a price, and speaks against his real
opinion in the Senate, while in his heart his judgement cries aloud, not
a flat and miserable apology for an opinion, hanging to idle discussions
as by a hair-thread, but a judgement strong and serviceable, trained by
actions, which is the true initiation. Watch yourself and see how you
take the news, I do not say that your child is dead (how should that
befall you? ), but that your oil is spilt, or your wine drunk up: well
may one who stands by, as your temper rises high, say just this to you,
'Philosopher, you use different language in the lecture-room: why do you
deceive us? Why, worm that you are, do you call yourself a man?' I would
fain stand by one of these men when he is indulging his lust, that I
might see how

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

eager he is, and what words he utters, and whether he remembers his own
name, or the discourses which he hears or delivers or reads.

'Yes, but what has this to do with freedom?'

Nay! what else but this has to do with it, whether you rich people
agree, or not?

'And who is your witness to this?'

Why, it is none other than your very selves. You who own that great
master, and live at his nod and motion, and your blood runs cold if he
so much as look at one of you with a sour face: you who pay court to old
women and old men, and say, 'I cannot do that, I am not allowed.' Why
are you not allowed? Did you not just now contend with me and assert you
were free?

'Yes, but Aprulla has forbidden me.'

Tell the truth then, slave that you are, and do not run away from your
masters, nor disown your slavery, nor dare to claim your
enfranchisement, when you have so many proofs of slavery against you. I
declare that the man who is compelled by love to act against his
opinion, seeing the better course all the time, but wanting the strength
to follow it, one might be more inclined to think deserving pardon, as
overpowered by an influence violent and in a way divine. But who can
bear with you, whose love is all for old women and old men, wiping their
faces clean and washing them and giving them presents, and tending them
like a slave in their illness, while all the time you are praying for
them to die, and questioning the doctors, whether they are sick unto
death at last? Or again, when you kiss the hands of other people's
slaves in order to get those great and splendid offices and honours,
becoming the slave of men who are not even free? Then, if you please,
you walk in splendour as praetor or consul. Do I not know how you became
praetor, where you got the consulship, who gave it you? For my part I
would not wish to live, if I had to owe my life to Felicio, and put up
with his contempt and slavish arrogance; for I know what a slave is who
is prosperous as the world thinks and puffed up with vanity.

'Are you then free?' says one.

By the gods, I wish to be and pray to be, but I cannot yet look in the
face of my masters, I still set store by my poor body, I count it of
great moment to keep it sound, yes though I have not a sound body to
begin with. But I can show you one who is free, that you may not have to
look for your example. Diogenes was free. How came he by this? Not
because he was of free parents (he was not), but because he was free
himself, had cast away all the weakness that might give slavery a hold
on him, and so no one could approach or lay hold on him to enslave him.
Everything he had he was ready to let go, it was loosely attached to
him. If you had laid hold on his property, he would have let it go
rather than have followed

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

you for it; if you seized his leg, he would have let that go; if his
whole poor body, he would have let his whole body go; and the same with
kinsfolk, friends, and country. For he knew whence he had them and from
whom, and on what conditions he received them. His true ancestors, the
gods, and his true Country he would never have deserted, nor have
suffered another to yield them more obedience or attention, nor would
another have died for his Country more cheerfully. For he never sought
to get the reputation of acting for the universe, but he remembered that
everything that comes to pass has its source there and is done for that
true Country's sake and is entrusted to us by Him that governs it.
Wherefore look what he says and writes himself: 'Therefore, Diogenes,'
he says, 'you have power to converse as you will with the king of the
Persians and with Archidamus, king of the Lacedaemonians.' Was it
because he was the son of free parents? When all the men of Athens and
Lacedaemon and Corinth were unable to converse with them as they wished,
and feared and flattered them instead, was it because they were sons of
slaves? 'Why have I the power to do it then?' he says. 'Because I count
my poor body not my own, because I need nothing, because law and nothing
else is all in all to me.' These were the things which left him free.

And that you may not think that I point you to the example of a man
alone in the world, with no wife or children or country or friends or
kindred, who might have bent his will and drawn him from his purpose,
take Socrates and look at him: he had wife and children, but regarded
them as not his own; a country, in such manner and so far as duty
allowed: friends, kinsmen, all these things he had made subject to law
and obedience to law. For this reason, when duty called him to take the
field, he was the first to leave Athens and ran all risks of battle most
ungrudgingly, but when he was sent by the Tyrants to fetch Leon, he
never entertained the idea, because he thought it shameful, though he
knew that he would have to die, if it so chanced. And what did it matter
to him? Why, he wanted to preserve something else—not his poor flesh,
but his honour and self-respect. These are things which cannot be
trusted to another or made subject to another. Afterwards when he had to
plead for his life, did he behave as one who had children or as one who
had a wife? No, but as one alone in the world. And again, when he had to
drink the poison, how did he behave? When he might have saved himself,
and when Crito said to him, 'Escape, for the sake of your children',
what did he say? Did he think the chance a godsend? No, he looked at
what was fitting, and had no eye, no thought for anything besides. For
he wished to save not his poor body, but 'that which right increases and
preserves, and wrong diminishes and makes to wither'. Socrates refuses
to save himself with dishonour: he who would not put the question to the
vote, when

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

the Athenians bade him, who despised the Tyrants, who held such noble
discourse on virtue and goodness—it is impossible to save him with
dishonour: his safety is secured by death, not by flight. For the good
actor too, if he stops when he ought, has more chance of safety than one
who acts out of season.

What will your children do then?

'If I had gone away to Thessaly you would have looked after them: and
when I have gone away to Hades, will there be no one to look after
them?' \[Plato, *Crito*, 54a\]

See how he calls death by smooth names and scoffs at it. But if you and
I had been in his place, we should at once have argued that we ought to
repay injury with injury: and we should have added, 'I shall be useful
to many men if I keep alive, but to no one if I die.' Nay, had it been
necessary to creep out through a hole in the rock to escape, we should
have done so. And yet how could we have been of use to any one? For
those we were trying to help would not have stood fast. Or again, if we
did good by living, should we not have done much more good to men by
dying when and as we ought? Even so now that Socrates is dead, the
memory of what he did or said in his lifetime is no less useful to men,
or it may be even more useful than before.

Make this your study, study these judgements, and these sayings: fix
your eyes on these examples, if you wish to be free, if you set your
desires on freedom as it deserves. It is no wonder that you pay this
great, this heavy price for so vast an object. Men hang themselves, or
cast themselves down headlong, nay sometimes whole cities perish for the
sake of what the world calls 'freedom', and will you not repay to God
what He has given, when He asks it, for the sake of true freedom, the
freedom which stands secure against all attack? Shall you not practise,
as Plato says, not death only, but torture and exile and flogging, in a
word practise giving back all that is not yours? If not, you will be a
slave among slaves, even if you are consul ten thousand times, and no
less, if you go up into Caesar's Palace; and you will discover that
'what philosophers say may be contrary to opinion', as Cleanthes said,
'but not contrary to reason'. For you will really get to know that what
they say is true, and that none of these objects that men admire and set
their hearts on is of any use to those who get them, though those who
have never chanced to have them get the impression, that if only these
things were theirs their cup of blessings would be full, and then, when
they get them, the sun scorches them and the sea tosses them no less,
and they feel the same boredom and the same desire for what they have
not got. For freedom is secured not by the fulfilling of men's desires,
but by the removal of desire. To learn the truth of what I say, you must
spend your pains on these new studies instead of your studies in the
past: sit up late

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

that you may acquire a judgement that makes you free: pay your
attentions not to a rich old man, but to a philosopher, and be seen
about his doors: to be so seen will not do you discredit: you will not
depart empty or without profit, if you approach in the right spirit. If
you doubt my word, do but try: there is no disgrace in trying.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. On Intercourse With Men](dep088)
