[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep087)  [Next](dep089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II

#### ON INTERCOURSE WITH MEN

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> one thing to be careful about beyond
all others is this—not to get so involved with any of your former
companions or friends, as to compromise your character for his sake, for
if you do this you will destroy yourself. If the thought slips in, 'I
shall seem rude to him, and he will not be the same to me as before',
remember that nothing is done without paying for it, and that it is not
possible to be the same man that you once were, unless you do as you did
before. Choose then which you will —to be like your former self and be
loved as before by those who loved you, or to be better than before, and
so miss what they once gave you. For if this is the better choice, then
incline to this, and let no irrelevant arguments distract you, for no
one can make progress by facing both ways. No; if you have chosen this
course before all, if you wish to devote yourself to this and nothing
else, and to spend all your labour on this, then dismiss all other
thoughts, or else this facing both ways will produce a double result—you
will not make progress as you ought, and you will fail to get what you
got before; for before, when you frankly set your desires on worthless
objects, you were agreeable to your companions. You cannot excel both
ways; in proportion as you succeed on the one side, you must needs fall
short on the other. When you do not drink with those whom you used to
drink with, you cannot seem as agreeable to them as of old; choose then,
whether you wish to be a drinker and gratify them, or sober and
displease them. If you do not sing with those that you sang with, you
cannot win their affection as before: here too then you must choose
which you prefer. For if it is better to have self-respect and
self-control, than to have it said of one, 'What a charming fellow!',
then give up all other considerations, put them from you, turn away from
them, and have nothing to do with them. But if this is not going to
satisfy you, then turn round completely, and practise the very
opposite—unnatural lust, adultery, and all that is in keeping with them,
and you shall get what you want. Yes, jump up and shriek applause over
your dancer.

But characters so opposite do not mix: you cannot act both Thersites

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

and Agamemnon. If you want to be Thersites you must be humpbacked and
bald, if Agamemnon, you must be handsome and tall, and love your
subjects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. What To Aim at in Exchange](dep089)
