[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep057)  [Next](dep059.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVI

#### WHAT IS THE DISTINCTIVE CHARACTER OF ERROR

<span class="smallcaps">Every</span> error implies conflict; for since
he who errs does not wish to go wrong but to go right, plainly he is not
doing what he wishes. For what does the thief wish to do? What is to his
interest. If then thieving is against his interest, he is not doing what
he wishes. But every rational soul by nature dislikes conflict; and so,
as long as a man does not understand that he is in conflict, there is
nothing to prevent him from doing conflicting acts, but, whenever he
understands, strong necessity makes him abandon the conflict and avoid
it, just as bitter necessity makes a

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

man renounce a falsehood when he discovers it, though as long as he has
not this impression he assents to it as true.

He then who can show to each man the conflict which causes his error,
and can clearly bring home to him how he fails to do what he wishes and
does what he does not wish, is powerful in argument and strong to
encourage and convict. For if one shows this, a man will retire from his
error of himself; but as long as you do not succeed in showing this, you
need not wonder if he persists in his error, for he acts because he has
an impression that he is right. That is why Socrates too, relying on
this faculty, said, 'I am not wont to produce any other witness to
support what I say, but am content with him to whom I am talking on each
occasion; it is his vote that I take, his evidence that I call, and his
sole word suffices instead of all.' For Socrates knew what moves the
rational soul, and that it will incline to what moves it, whether it
wishes to or not. Show the conflict to the rational Governing Principle
and it will desist. If you do not show it, blame yourself rather than
him who refuses to obey.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes](dep059.md)
