[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep044)  [Next](dep046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIII

#### CONCERNING ANXIETY

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> I see a man in a state of anxiety, I
say, 'What can this man want? If he did not want something which is not
in his power, how could he still be anxious? It is for this reason that
one who sings to the lyre is not anxious when he is performing by
himself, but when he enters the theatre, even if he has a very good
voice and plays well: for he not only wants to perform well, but also to
win a great name, and that is beyond his own control.

In fact, where he has knowledge there he has confidence. Bring in any
unskilled person you like, and he pays no heed to him. On the other hand
he is anxious whenever he has no knowledge and has made no study of the
subject. What does this mean? He does not know what 'the people' is, nor
what its praise is worth: he has learnt to strike the bottom note or the
top note, but he does not know what the praise of the multitude is, nor
what value it has in life; he has made no study of that. So he is bound
to tremble and grow pale.

When I see a man, then, in this state of fear I cannot say that he is no
performer with the lyre, but I can say something else of him, and not
one thing but many. And first of all I call him a stranger and say, This
man does not know where in the world he is; though he has been with us
so long, he does not know the laws and customs of the City—what he may
do and what he may not do—no, nor has he called in a lawyer at any time
to tell him and explain to him what are the requirements of the law. Of
course he does not draw up a will without knowing how he ought to draw
it up, or without calling in one who knows, nor does he lightly put his
seal to a guarantee or give a written security; but he calls in no
lawyer when he is exercising the will to

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

get and will to avoid, impulse and intention and purpose. What do I mean
by 'having no lawyer'? I mean that he does not know that he is wishing
to have what is not given him, and wishing not to have what he cannot
avoid, and he does not know what is his own and what is not his own. If
he did know, he would never feel hindrance or constraint or anxiety; how
could he? Does any one fear about things which are not evil?

'No.'

Or again about things which are evil but are in his power to prevent?
'Certainly not.'

If, then, nothing beyond our will's control is either good or evil, and
everything within our will's control depends entirely on ourselves, so
that no one can take any such thing away from us or win it for us
against our will, what room is left for anxiety? Yet we are anxious for
our bit of a body, for our bit of property, for what Caesar will think,
but are not anxious at all for what is within us. Am I anxious about not
conceiving a false thought? No, for that depends on myself.

Or about indulging an impulse contrary to nature?

No, not about this either. So, when you see a man pale, just as the
physician, judging from his colour, says, 'This man's spleen is out of
order, or that man's liver', so do you say, 'This man is disordered in
the will to get and the will to avoid, he is not in the right way, he is
feverish'; for nothing else changes the complexion and causes a man to
tremble and his teeth to chatter,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*and droop the knee and sink upon his feet*.  
                                  \[Homer, *Iliad*, XIII, 281\]

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Therefore Zeno was
not distressed when he was going to meet Antigonus, for Antigonus had no
authority over any of the things that Zeno admired, and Zeno paid no
attention to the possessions of Antigonus. Antigonus was anxious when he
was going to meet Zeno, and with good reason, for he wanted to please
him, and this lay beyond his control; but Zeno did not wish to please
Antigonus, any more than any artist cares to please one who has no
skill.

Do I want to please you? Why should I? Do you know the standards by
which man judges man? Have you made it your study to learn what a good
man is and what a bad man is, and what makes each of them so? Why, then,
are you not good yourself?

'Not good? What do you mean?' he replies.

Why, no good man whines or groans or laments, no good man grows pale or
trembles or says, 'How will he receive me? What hearing will he give
me?'

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

Slave, he will do as he thinks good. What concern have you in what does
not belong to you? Is it not his fault if he gives a bad reception to
what you offer?

'His fault, certainly.'

But can the fault be one man's and the harm another's?

'No.'

Why, then, are you anxious about another's concerns?

'Nay, but I am anxious to know how I am to address him.' What, is it not
in your power to address him as you will? 'Yes, but I am afraid I may
lose my self-possession.'

Are you afraid of losing your self-possession when you are going to
write the name Dion?

'Certainly not.'

What is the reason? Is it not, that you have practised writing?

Of course it is. Or again, when you are about to read, would you not be
in like case?

'Exactly.'

What is the reason? The reason is that every art contains within it an
element of strength and confidence. Have you not practised speaking,
then? What else did you study at school? You studied syllogisms and
variable arguments. What for? Was it not that .you might converse with
skill, and does not 'with skill' mean in good season, with security and
good sense, and, more than that, without failure or hindrance, and, to
crown all, with confidence?

'Yes.'

Well, if you are a rider and have to confront a man on foot in the
plain, where you have the advantage of practice and he has not, are you
anxious?

'Nay, but he has power to put me to death.'

Miserable man, tell the truth and be not a braggart nor claim to be a
philosopher. Know who are your masters. As long as you give them this
hold over your body, you must follow every one who is stronger than you.

But Socrates, who spoke to the Tyrants, to his judges, and in prison, in
the tone we know, had studied speaking to some purpose. So had Diogenes,
who spoke in the same tone to Alexander, to Philip, to the pirates, to
his purchaser. . . . Leave this to those who have made it their concern,
to the confident: and do you go to your own concerns and never leave
them again. Go and sit in your corner and weave syllogisms and propound
them to others,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*No ruler of a state is found in you*.  
                                     \[Author unknown\]

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. On Naso](dep046)
