[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep018)  [Next](dep020.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVIII

#### THAT WE SHOULD NOT BE ANGRY AT MEN'S ERRORS

<span class="smallcaps">If what</span> philosophers say is true, that in
all men action starts from one source, feeling, as in assent it is the
feeling that a thing is so, and in denial the feeling that it is not so,
yes, by Zeus, and in withholding judgement, the feeling that it is
uncertain: so also impulse towards a thing is originated by the feeling
that it is fitting, and will to get a thing by the feeling that it is
expedient for one, and it is impossible to judge

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

one thing expedient and will to get another, and to judge one thing
fitting and be impelled to another. If all this be true, why are we
angry with the multitude?

'They are thieves', he says, 'and robbers.'

What do you mean by thieves and robbers?

'They are gone astray and know not what is good and what is evil.'

Ought we then to be angry with them or to pity them? Only show them
their error and you will see how they desist from their faults. But if
their eyes are not opened, they regard nothing as superior to their own
judgement.

'What!' you say. 'Ought not this robber and this adulterer to be put to
death?'

Nay, say not so, but rather, 'Should I not destroy this man who is in
error and delusion about the greatest matters and is blinded not merely
in the vision which distinguishes white and black, but in the judgement
which distinguishes good and evil?' If you put it this way, you will
recognize how inhuman your words are; that it is like saying, 'Should I
not kill this blind man, or this deaf one?' For if the greatest harm
that can befall one is the loss of what is greatest, and a right will is
the greatest thing in every one, is it not enough for him to lose this,
without incurring your anger besides? Man, if you must needs harbour
unnatural feelings at the misfortune of another, pity him rather than
hate him; give up this spirit of offence and hatred: do not use these
phrases which the backbiting multitude use, 'These accursed and
pestilent fools'.

Very well. How are you suddenly converted to wisdom? What an angry
temper you show!

Why then are we angry? Because we admire the material things of which
they rob us. For only cease to admire your clothes, and you are not
angry with him who steals them: cease to admire your wife's beauty, and
you cease to be angry with the adulterer. Know that the thief and
adulterer have no place among things that are your own, but only among
things that are another's and beyond your power. If you let them alone
and count them as nothing you have no one to be angry with any more. But
as long as you admire these things you must be angry with yourself
rather than with them. For, look you, you have fine clothes, your
neighbour has none: you have a window, you wish to air them. He does not
know what is the true good of man, but fancies, as you do too, that it
is to have fine clothes. Is he not to come then and carry them off? Why,
if you show a cake to greedy men, and gobble it down all to yourself, do
you expect them not to snatch at it? Do not provoke them, do not have a
window, do not air your clothes.

For my part, yesterday I had an iron lamp beside my household gods, and
hearing a noise I rushed to the window. I found the lamp had been

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

carried off. I reasoned with myself, that the man who took it yielded to
some plausible feeling. What do I conclude? To-morrow, I say, you will
find one of earthenware. The truth is, a man loses only what he has. 'I
have lost my cloak.' Yes, for you had one. 'I have got a headache.' Have
you a horn-ache too? Why then are you vexed? Your losses and your pains
are concerned only with what you possess.

'But the tyrant will chain me.'

Yes, your leg.

'But he will cut off.'

What? Your neck. But what will he fail to bind or cut off? Your will.
That is why the men of old enjoined 'Know thyself.' What follows? You
ought to practise in small things and go on from them to greater.

'I have a headache.'

Then do not say, 'Ah me!'

'I have earache.'

Do not say, 'Ah me!' And I do not mean that you may not groan, but do
not groan in spirit. And if the boy brings you your leg-bands slowly, do
not cry out loud and pull a long face and say, 'Every one hates me.' Who
is not likely to hate such an one?

Put confidence in these thoughts for the future and walk erect and free,
not relying on bulk of body like an athlete. For you do not need to be
invincible by brute force like an ass.

Who then is the man who is invincible? He whom nothing beyond his will
can dismay. So I go on observing him in each set of circumstances as if
he were an athlete. He has overcome the first round. What will he do in
the second? What if it be a hot sun, and the struggle is in Olympia?

So it is in life. If you offer a man a trifle of silver, he will scorn
it. What will happen if you offer him a young. maid? What if you do it
in the dark? What happens if you ply him with reputation, or abuse, or
praise, or death? All these he can conquer. What will he do if he is
wrestling in the hot sun, I mean, if he has drunk too much? What if he
is in a frenzy, or in sleep? The man who can overcome in all these
circumstances is what I mean by the invincible athlete.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. How One Should Behave Towards Tyrants](dep020.md)
