[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep068)  [Next](dep070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X

#### HOW ONE SHOULD BEAR ILLNESSES

<span class="smallcaps">We should</span> have each judgement ready at
the moment when it is needed: judgements on dinner at dinner-time, on
the bath at bathing-time, on bed at bedtime.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Admit not sleep into your tender eyelids  
Till you have reckoned up each deed of the day—  
How have I erred, what done or left undone?  
So start, and so review your acts, and then  
For vile deeds chide yourself, for good be glad*.  
                                         \[Ascribed to Pythagoras\]

</div>

Keep hold of these lines for practical use, not to declaim them as a cry
like 'Paean Apollo'. Again in a fever we must be ready with judgements
for that; if we fall into a fever we must not give up and forget
everything, and say, 'If I ever study philosophy again, may the worst
befall me! I must go off somewhere and attend to my poor body.' Well,
but does not fever come there? What does studying philosophy mean? Does
it not mean preparing to face events? Do you not understand then that
what you are saying comes to this, 'If I go on preparing to bear events
quietly, may the worst befall me'? That is as though a man should give
up competing for the pancration because he has been struck. But there it
is possible to leave off and so escape a beating: but what profit do we
get if we leave off studying philosophy?

What ought one to say then as each hardship comes? 'I was practising for
this, I was training for this.' God says to you, 'Give me a proof,
whether you have kept the rules of wrestling—eaten the proper food,
trained, and obeyed the trainer.' After that, are you going to play the
coward when the moment of action comes? If now is the time for fever,
take your fever in the right way; if for thirst, thirst in the right
way, if for hunger, hunger aright. Is it not in your power? Who will
hinder you? The physician will hinder you from drinking, but he

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

cannot hinder you from thirsting aright: he will hinder you from eating,
but he cannot hinder you from hungering in the right way. 'But am I not
a student?'

Why are you a student? Slave, is it not that you may be happy and have
peace of mind? Is it not that you may conform to nature and so live your
life? What hinders you in a fever from keeping your Governing Principle
in accord with Nature? Here is the test of the matter, this is how the
philosopher is proved. For fever too is a part of life, like walking,
sailing, travelling. Do you read when you are walking? No. Nor do you in
a fever: but if you walk aright, you have done your part as a walker; if
you bear your fever aright, you have done your part as a sick man. What
does bearing fever rightly mean? It means not to blame God or man, not
to be crushed by what happens, to await death in a right spirit, to do
what you are bidden; when the physician comes in, not to be afraid of
what he may say, and if he says, 'You are doing well', not to be
overjoyed: for what good is there in that? What good had you when you
were in health? It means not to be disheartened if he says, 'You are
doing badly'; for what does 'doing badly' mean? It means drawing near
the dissolution of the soul from the body. What is there to fear in
that? If you do not draw near now, shall you not draw near later? Is the
world going to be turned upside down by your death? Why then do you coax
the physician? Why do you say, 'Master, if you will, I shall get well'?
Why do you give him occasion to lift his brow in arrogance? As you give
the shoemaker his due in regard to the foot, the builder in regard to
the house, why do you not give the physician his due (and no more) in
regard to the paltry body, for the body is not mine and is naturally
dead? This is what the moment requires from the man in a fever: if he
fulfils these requirements, he has what is his own.

It is not the business of the philosopher to guard these outward
things—paltry wine or oil or body—but to guard his Governing Principle.
How is he to regard outward things? Only so far that he does not concern
himself with them unreasonably. What occasion is left then for fear?
What occasion for anger, what occasion for fear concerning things that
are not our own, nor of any value? For the two principles we must have
ready at command are these: that outside the will there is nothing good
or evil, and that we must not lead events but follow them. 'My brother
ought not to have behaved so to me.' No, but it is his business to look
to that; however he may behave, I will deal with him as I ought. This is
my part, that is another's: this no one can hinder, that is subject to
hindrance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Scattered Sayings](dep070)
