[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep006)  [Next](dep008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI

#### ON PROVIDENCE

<span class="smallcaps">Each</span> single thing that comes into being
in the universe affords a ready ground for praising Providence, if one
possesses these two qualities—a power to see clearly the circumstances
of each, and the spirit of gratitude therewith. Without these, one man
will fail to see the usefulness of nature's products and another though
he see it will not give thanks for them. If God had created colours and,
in general, all visible things, but had not created a faculty to behold
them, of what use would they be? None at all. If on the other hand He
had created this faculty, but had not created objects of such a nature
as to fall under the faculty of vision, even so of what use would it be?
None at all. If again He had created both these, and had not created
light, even so there would be no use in them. Who is it then that has
adapted this to that, and that to this? Who is it that has fitted the
sword to the scabbard and the scabbard to the sword? Is there no one?
Surely the very structure of such finished products leads us commonly to
infer that they must be the work of some craftsman, and are not
constructed at random. Are we to say then that each of these products
points to the craftsman, but that things visible and vision and light do
not? Do not male and female and the desire of union and the power to use
the organs adapted for it—do not these point to the craftsman? But if
these things are so, then the fact that the intellect is so framed that
we are not merely the passive subjects of sensations, but select and
subtract from them and add to them, and by this means construct
particular objects, nay more, that we pass

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

from them to others which are not in mere juxtaposition—I say are not
these facts sufficient to rouse men's attention and to deter them from
leaving out the craftsman? If it be not so, let them explain to us what
it is which makes each of these things, or how it is possible that
objects so marvellously designed should have come into being by chance
and at random?

Again, are these faculties found in us alone? Many in us alone—faculties
which the rational creature had special need of—but many you will find
that we share with irrational creatures. Do they also then understand
events and things? No—for using is one thing, and understanding is
another. God had need of them as creatures dealing with impressions, and
of us as dealing with them and understanding them as well. That is why
it is enough for them to eat and drink and rest and breed, and every
function is theirs which each irrational creature fulfils; while we, to
whom He gave also the power of understanding, cannot be satisfied with
these functions, but, unless we act with method and order and
consistently with our respective natures and constitutions, we shall no
longer attain to our end. For those whose constitutions are different
have also different functions and different ends. Therefore that which
by constitution is capable only of using things, is satisfied to use
them anyhow; but that which by constitution is capable of understanding
things as well as using them, will never attain its end, unless to use
it adds method also. What is my conclusion? God makes one animal for
eating, and another for service in farming, another to produce cheese,
and others for different uses of a like nature, for which there is no
need of understanding impressions and being able to distinguish them;
but He brought man into the world to take cognizance of Himself and His
works, and not only to take cognizance but also to interpret them.
Therefore it is beneath man's dignity to begin and to end where the
irrational creatures do: he must rather begin where they do and end
where nature has ended in forming us; and nature ends in contemplation
and understanding and a way of life in harmony with nature. See to it
then that ye do not die without taking cognizance of these things.

You travel to Olympia, that you may see the work of Phidias, and each of
you thinks it a misfortune to die without visiting these sights, and
will you have no desire to behold and to comprehend those things for
which there is no need of travel, in the presence of which you stand
here and now, each one of you? Will you not realize then who you are and
to what end you are born and what that is which you have received the
power to see?

'Yes, but there are unpleasant and hard things in life.'

Are there none such at Olympia? Are you not scorched with heat? Are you
not cramped for room? Is not washing difficult? Are you not

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

wet through when it is wet? Do you not get your fill of noise and
clamour and other annoyances? Yet I fancy that when you set against all
these hardships the magnificence of the spectacle you bear them and put
up with them. And have you not received faculties, which will enable you
to bear all that happens to you? Have you not received greatness of
spirit? Have you not received courage? Have you not received endurance?
If I am of a great spirit what concern have I in what may happen? What
shall shake me or confound me or seem painful to me? Instead of using my
faculty for the purpose for which I have received it, am I to mourn and
lament at the events of fortune?

'Yes, but my rheum flows.'

Slave! What have you hands for then? Is it not to wipe your rheum away?

'Is it reasonable then that there should be rheum in the world?'

Well, how much better it is to wipe your rheum away than to complain!
What do you think would have become of Heracles if there had not been a
lion, as in the story, and a hydra and a stag and a boar and unjust and
brutal men, whom he drove forth and cleansed the world of them? What
would he have done, if there had been nothing of this sort? Is it not
plain that he would have wrapped himself up and slept? Nay to begin with
he would never have been a Heracles at all, had he slumbered all this
life in such ease and luxury; and if by any chance he had been, of what
good would he have been? What use would he have made of his arms and his
might and his endurance and noble heart as well, had not he been
stimulated and trained by such perils and opportunities?

'Was it his duty then to contrive these occasions for himself and to
seek means to bring a lion, a boar, or a hydra into his country?'

That were madness and folly; but as they had come into being and were
found in the world these monsters were of service to display Heracles’
powers and to train them.

It is for you then, when you realize this, to look to the faculties you
possess, and considering them to say, 'Zeus, send me what trial Thou
wilt; for I have endowments and resources, given me by Thee, to bring
myself honour through what befalls.' Nay, instead, you sit trembling for
fear of what may happen, or lamenting, mourning, and groaning for what
does happen, and then you reproach the gods. What else but impiety
indeed can attend upon so ignoble a spirit as yours? And yet God not
only gave us these faculties, which will enable us to bear all the issue
of events without being humiliated or broken down by it, but, as became
a good king and a true father, He gave us this gift free from all let or
hindrance or compulsion—nay, He put it wholly in our hands, not even
leaving Himself any power to let or hinder us. Yet possessing these

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

powers in freedom for your own you refuse to use them and will not
realize what gifts you have received and from whose hand, but you sit
mourning and grieving, some of you blinded to the giver Himself and
refusing to recognize your benefactor, and some from meanness of spirit
turning to reproaches and complaints against God. Yet I will show you
that you have resources and endowment to fit you for a noble and
courageous spirit: show me, if you can, what endowments you have for
complaining and reproach.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. On the Use of Variable Premisses and Hypothetical
Arguments and the Like](dep008.md)
