[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep004)  [Next](dep006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### ON PROGRESS, OR MORAL ADVANCE

How shall we describe 'progress'? <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1-6](dep032.htm#fn_5.md) It is the state of him who
having learnt from philosophers that man wills to get what is good, and
wills to avoid what is evil, and having learnt also that peace and calm
come to a man only if he fail not to get what he wills, and if he fall
not into that which he avoids, has put away from him altogether the will
to get anything and has postponed it to the future, and wills to avoid
only such things as are dependent on his will. For if he tries to avoid
anything beyond his will, he knows that, for all his avoidance, he will
one day come to grief and be unhappy. And if this is the promise that
virtue makes to us—the promise to produce happiness and peace and calm,
surely progress toward virtue is progress toward each of these. For to
whatever end the perfection of a thing leads, to that end is progress an
approach.

How is it then that, though we admit that this is the nature of virtue,
we search elsewhere for progress and display it elsewhere?

What does virtue produce?

Peace of mind.

Who then makes progress? Is it he who has read many treatises of
Chrysippus? Can this be virtue—to have understood Chrysippus? For if
this be so, we must admit that progress is nothing but to understand a
lot of sayings of Chrysippus. But, the fact is, we admit that virtue
tends to one result, and yet declare that progress, the approach to
virtue, tends to another.

'Yonder man', he says, 'can already read Chrysippus by himself.'

Bravo, by the gods, you make progress, fellow. Progress indeed! Why do
you mock him? Why do you draw him away from the sense of his own
shortcomings? Will you not show him what virtue really means, that he
may learn where to seek for progress? Miserable man, there is only one
place to seek it—where your work lies. Where does it lie? It lies in the
region of will; that you may not fail to get what you will to get, nor
fall into what you will to avoid; it lies in avoiding error in the
region of impulse, impulse to act and impulse not to act: it lies in
assent and the withholding of assent, that in these you may never be
deceived. <span id="fr_6"></span>[1-7](dep032.htm#fn_6.md) But the first
department I have named comes first and is most necessary. If you merely
tremble and mourn and seek to escape misfortune, progress is of course
impossible.

Show me your progress then in this field. You act as though when I

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

was talking to an athlete and said, 'Show me your shoulders', he
answered, 'Look at my leaping-weights.' That is for you and your
leaping-weights to look to; I want to see the final result of your
leaping-weights.

'Take the treatise on "Impulse" and learn how I have read it.'

Slave, that is not what I am looking for—I want to know what impulses
you have, for action and against it, to know what you will to get and
will to avoid; how you plan and purpose and prepare—whether in harmony
with nature, or out of harmony with nature. Show me that you act in
harmony with nature, and I will tell you that you are making progress;
act out of harmony with nature, and I bid you begone and write books on
such things and not merely expound them. What good, I ask, will they do
you? Do not you know that the whole book is worth but five pence? Do you
think then that the man who expounds it is worth more? Therefore never
seek your work in one place and progress in another.

Where then is progress?

If any one of you, dismissing things without, has brought his mind to
bear on his own will, to work out its full development, that he may
bring it into perfect harmony with nature—lofty, free, unhindered,
untrammelled, trustworthy, self-respecting; if he has learnt that he
that wills to get or to avoid what is not in his power cannot be
trustworthy nor free, but must needs himself change as they change,
fitful as the winds, and must needs have made himself subservient to
others, who can procure or hinder such things; and if, in a word, when
he rises in the morning he guards and keeps these principles, washes as
one that is trustworthy, eats as one that is self-respecting, and on
each occasion that arises labours to achieve his main tasks, even as the
runner makes running his one aim and the voice-trainer his training—he
is the man who is indeed in the path of progress and who has not
travelled to no purpose.

But if all his efforts are turned to the study of books, if on this he
spends his labour, and for this has gone abroad, then I bid him go
straight home and not neglect what he finds there; for this that he has
gone abroad for is nothing; his true work is to study to remove from his
life mourning and lamentation, the 'ah me' and 'alas for my misery', the
talk of 'bad fortune' and 'misfortune'; and to learn, what is death,
what is exile, what is imprisonment, what is the cup of hemlock; that he
may be able to say in prison, 'My dear Crito, if it pleases the gods, so
be it', and not such words as 'miserable old man that I am, is it for
this I kept my grey hairs?' (Plato, *Crito*, 43d) Whose words are they?
Do you think I shall name to you a mean man of no reputation? Are they
not the words of Priam and of Oedipus? Are they not the words of all
kings that are? For what else are tragedies but a portrayal in such

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

metrical form of the sufferings of men who have set their admiration on
outward things? If delusion after all were the only means for a man to
learn this lesson—the lesson that not one of the things beyond the
compass of our will concerns us, then I for my part would choose a
delusion such as this, if it should procure me a life of undisturbed
tranquillity; I leave it to you to see what you choose.

What then does Chrysippus offer us?

'That you may know', he says, 'that these truths from which tranquillity
and peace of mind come to men are not false—take my books and you shall
find that what gives me peace of mind is true and in harmony with
nature.'

O great good fortune! O great benefactor, who shows us the way! And
yet—though all men have raised temples and altars to Triptolemus, for
teaching us the cultivation of the crops, yet what man of you ever set
up an altar in honour of him who found the truth and brought it to light
and published it among all men—not the truth of mere living, but the
truth that leads to right living? Who ever dedicated a shrine or an
image for this gift, or worships God for it? I say shall we, who offer
sacrifices because the gods gave us wheat or the vine, never give thanks
to God that they produced this manner of fruit in the mind of men,
whereby they were to show us the true way of happiness?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Against Followers of the Academy](dep006.md)
