[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep092)  [Next](dep094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII

#### ON FREEDOM FROM FEAR

<span class="smallcaps">What</span> makes the Emperor an object of fear?

The guards, one says, with their swords, and the chamberlains and those
who close the door against those who enter.

Why is it then that, if you bring a child to him when his guards are
with him, the child is not afraid? Is it because the child is not aware
of them? Now if a man is aware of the guards and their swords, but comes
for that very purpose, because his misfortunes make him wish to die and
he is anxious to die easily by some one else's hand, does he fear the
guards?

'No, for he wishes for the very thing which makes men fear them.'

If then a man whose will is not set on dying or living, but who is
content with what is given him, comes before the Tyrant, what prevents
him from coming without fear?

'Nothing.'

Now suppose a man is of the same mind in regard to property as this man
in regard to his body: suppose he feels the same about wife and
children: suppose, in a word, he is so distracted and desperate that he
regards it as indifferent whether he has these things or not: just as
children playing with potsherds are anxious about the game, but do not
care for the potsherds in themselves, so he has not set his heart on
material things, but accepts the game cheerfully, and enjoys handling
them—how can any tyrant, how can any guards or swords inspire fear in
such a one?

Yet if madness can produce this attitude of mind, if even habit can

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

produce it in the Galilaeans, <span
id="fr_51"></span>[4-5](dep100.htm#fn_51) can reason and demonstration
teach no one that God has made all things in the world, and the world
itself as a whole to have its own end without hindrance, but its
individual parts to subserve the whole? Now all other things are without
the capacity of understanding His governance, but the rational creature
has faculties that enable him to reflect on all these things, to realize
that he is a part, and what part he is, and that it is well for the
parts to give way to the whole. And further, being by nature noble and
generous and free, he sees that he has some of the things about him
unhindered and in his own control, and some again subject to hindrance
and dependent on others, the acts of his will unhindered, and things
beyond his will subject to hindrance. And therefore if he makes up his
mind that his good and his interest lie in the former alone, in things
that are unhindered and depend upon himself, he will be free, tranquil,
happy, unharmed, high-minded, reverent, giving thanks for everything to
God, on no occasion blaming or accusing any one for what happens; but if
he finds his good in things outside and beyond his will, he is bound to
be hindered and hampered, and to be the slave of those who have
authority over those things on which his admiration and his fear are
centred, he is bound to be irreverent because he thinks that God is
injuring him, and unfair, always seeking to win for himself more than
his share; he is bound to be of a mean and paltry spirit.

If a man understands this, there is nothing to prevent him from living
with an easy and obedient spirit, content with his past lot and awaiting
with a gentle spirit all that may yet befall him.

'Would you give me poverty?' Give it me and you shall learn what poverty
is when a good actor plays the part. 'Would you give me office?' Give it
me, and troubles with it. 'Exile?' Wherever I go, it will be well with
me: for even here it was not the place that made me well off, but my
judgements, and these I shall carry away with me, for no one can rob me
of them; these alone are my own and cannot be taken away, with these I
am content wherever I am and whatever I do. 'But now the time is come to
die.' What do you mean by 'die'? Do not use fine words, but state the
facts as they are. 'Now is the time for your material part to be
restored to the elements of which it was composed.' What is there
dreadful in that? What loss to the universe will this mean, what strange
or irrational event? Is this a thing to make one fear the tyrant? Is
this what makes the swords of the guards seem long and sharp? Let others
look to that; I have considered the whole matter, and no one has
authority over me. God has set me free, I have learnt to understand His
commands, no one can make a slave of me any more, my judges and he who
claims my freedom are as they should be.

'Am I not master of your body?'

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

What does that concern *me?*

'Am I not master of your property?'

Well, how does that concern m*e*?

'Am I not master of exile and imprisonment?'

Again, I resign all, yes, and my body itself for you to deal with, when
you will. Only try your authority and you will learn how far it extends.
What then can I fear any more? The chamberlains? What should I fear
their doing? Fear their shutting me out? If they find me wanting to
enter, let them shut me out!

'Why then do you come to the king's door?'

Because I think it is fitting for me to join in the game while it lasts.

'How then do you escape being shut out?'

If I am not received, it is not my will to enter; my will is always to
prefer what comes to pass, for I consider what God wills better than
what I will. I will attach myself to Him as His minister and servant, my
impulses and my wishes are one with His, in a word my will is His will.
There can be no exclusion for me, but only for those who try to press
in.

Why then do I not press in?

Because I know that nothing good is given within to those who have
entered. But when I hear a man called happy because he is honoured by
Caesar I say, 'What is his portion?' 'A province or a procuratorship.'
Does he also get a judgement, such as a governor should have? Does he
get the skill to use a procuratorship? Why should I push my way in any
more? Some one flings a shower of figs and nuts: the children try to
seize them, and fight with one another for them; grown men do not, for
they count it a small matter. If one fling potsherds even children do
not try to catch them. Governorships are being given to this man and
that: the children shall see to them! A praetorship, a consulship: let
the children scramble for them: let them be shut out and beaten, let
them kiss the hands of the giver and his slaves; for me they are figs
and nuts. But what if a fig chance to fall into my lap when he is
throwing? Take and eat it, for one may value a fig so far. But if I
stoop for it and upset my neighbour or am upset by him, if I flatter
those who enter, the fig is not worth while, nor is any other of the
good things which the philosophers have persuaded me not to believe to
be good.

Show me the swords of the guards.

'See how large and how sharp they are.'

Well, what do these large, sharp swords do?

'They kill.'

What does fever do?

'The same.'

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

What does a tile do?

'The same.'

Would you have me then stand in awe of all these things, and pay them
reverence, and go about as the slave of all?

God forbid! No, if I have once learnt that what is born must needs also
be destroyed in order that the world may not stand still or be hindered,
it makes no difference to me whether a fever is to destroy it or a
falling tile or a soldier, but if I must compare them I know that the
soldier will do the thing quicker and with less pain. Seeing then that I
neither fear anything that he can do to me nor desire anything that he
can provide, why do I stand in awe and amazement before him any more?
Why do I fear the guards? Why do I rejoice if he speaks to me in a
friendly way and gives me a welcome? Why do I tell other people how he
talked to me? Is he a Socrates or a Diogenes, that his praise of me
should be a proof of what I am? Do I admire his character? No, it is to
keep up the game that I come to him and serve him, so long as he
commands me to do nothing stupid or unseemly. But if he says to me, 'Go
and fetch Leon of Salamis', I say to him, 'Look for some one else, I
will play no longer.'

'Away with him.'

I follow; it is in the game.

'But you lose your neck.'

Well! does the Emperor himself, and you who obey him, keep his neck for
ever?

'But you will be flung abroad unburied.'

I shall be, if I and the dead body are one, but if I am not the same as
the dead body, state the facts with more discrimination, and do not try
to frighten me. These are things to frighten children and fools. But if
a man has once entered a philosopher's lecture-room and does not know
what his true self is, he deserves to fear and to flatter what he
flattered afterwards: I mean, if he has not yet learnt that he is not
flesh or bones or sinews, but the faculty which uses them, and which
also governs the impressions and understands them.

'Yes, but these arguments make men despise the laws.'

'Nay, these arguments of all others make those who adopt them obedient
to the laws. Law is not what any fool can do. Yet see how these
arguments make us behave rightly even towards our critics, since they
teach us to claim nothing against them, in which they can surpass us.
They teach us to give way in regard to our poor body, to give way in
regard to property, children, parents, brothers, to give up everything,
resign everything: only our judgements they reserve, and these Zeus
willed should be each man's special property. How can you call this
lawlessness, how can you call it stupidity? I give way to you in that

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

wherein you are better and stronger than I: where, on the other hand, I
am the better man, it is for you to give way to me, for I have made this
my concern, and you have not. You make it your concern, how to live in a
palace, how slaves and freedmen are to serve you, how you are to wear
conspicuous raiment, how you are to have a multitude of huntsmen,
minstrels, players. Do I lay claim to any of these? But you, for your
part, have you concerned yourself with judgements? Have you concerned
yourself with your own rational self? Do you know what are its
constituents, what is its principle of union, how it is articulated,
what are its faculties and of what nature? Why are you vexed then, if
another who has made these things his study has the advantage of you
here?

'But these are the greatest matters of all.'

Who, I ask, prevents you from busying yourself with these and devoting
your attention to these? Who has a larger equipment of books, of
leisure, of masters who will do you good? Only incline your mind to
these things, bestow a little time, if no more, on your own Governing
Principle, consider what this possession is and whence it has come to
you, this faculty which uses all the rest, which proves all the rest,
selecting and rejecting. So long as you busy yourself with external
things, no one will succeed with them so well as you, but this faculty
of reason will be, what your own choice makes it, mouldy and neglected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. To Those Who Hastily Assume the Character of
Philosophers](dep094)
