[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep043)  [Next](dep045.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

### CHAPTER XII

#### ON THE ART OF DISCUSSION

<span class="smallcaps">Our</span> philosophers have precisely defined
what a man must learn in order to know how to argue: but we are still
quite unpractised in the proper use of what we have learnt. Give any one
of us you like an unskilled person to argue with, and he does not
discover how to deal with him: he just rouses the man for a moment, and
then if he answers him in the wrong key he cannot deal with him any
longer: he either reviles him or laughs at him ever after, and says, 'He
is an ignoramus, there is nothing to be got out of him.'

But the true guide, when he finds a man wandering, leads him to the
right road, instead of leaving him with a gibe or an insult. So should
you do. Only show him the truth and you will see that he follows. But so
long as you do not show it him, do not laugh at him, but rather realize
your own incapacity.

Now how did Socrates proceed? He compelled the man who was conversing
with him to be his witness, and needed no witness besides. Therefore he
was able to say: 'I am satisfied with my opponent as a witness, and let
every one else alone: and I do not take the votes of other people, but
only of him who is arguing with me.' \[Plato, *Gorgias*, 474a\] For he
drew out so clearly the consequences of a man's conceptions that every
one realized the contradiction and abandoned it.

'Does the man who envies rejoice in his envy?'

'Not at all; he is pained rather than pleased.'

Thus he rouses his neighbour by contradiction.

'Well, does envy seem to you to be a feeling of pain at evil things? Yet
how can there be envy of things evil?'

So he makes his opponent say that envy is pain felt at good things.
'Again, can a man envy things which do not concern him?' 'Certainly
not.'

In this way he made the conception full and articulate, and so went
away. He did not say, 'Define me envy', and then, when the man defined
it, 'You define it ill, for the terms of the definition do not
correspond to the subject defined.' Such phrases are technical and
therefore tiresome to the lay mind, and hard to follow, yet you and I
cannot get away from them. We are quite unable to rouse the ordinary
man's attention in a way which will enable him to follow his own
impressions and so arrive at admitting or rejecting this or that. And
therefore those of us who are at all cautious naturally give the subject
up, when we

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

become aware of this incapacity; while the mass of men, who venture at
random into this sort of enterprise, muddle others and get muddled
themselves, and end by abusing their opponents and getting abused in
return, and so leave the field. But the first quality of all in
Socrates, and the most characteristic, was that he never lost his temper
in argument, never uttered anything abusive, never anything insolent,
but bore with abuse from others and quieted strife. If you would get to
know what a faculty he had in this matter, read the Banquet of Xenophon
and you will see how many strifes he has brought to an end. Therefore
the poets too with good reason have praised this gift most highly:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*And straightway with skill he brought to rest a mighty quarrel*.  
                                               \[Hesiod, *Theogony*,
87\]

</div>

What follows? The occupation is not a very safe one nowadays, and
especially in Rome. For he who pursues it will certainly not have to do
it in a corner, but he must go up to a consular or a rich man, if it so
chance, and ask him: 'You there, can you tell me to whose care you trust
your horses?'

'Yes.'

Do you trust them to a chance corner and one unskilled in horse-keeping?

'Certainly not.'

Again, tell me to whom you trust your gold or your silver or your
clothes.

'Not to a chance corner either.'

And your body—have you ever thought of trusting that to anybody to look
after it?

'Certainly.'

He too, no doubt, is one skilled in the art of training or of medicine,
is he not?

'Certainly he is.'

Are these then your best possessions or have you got something besides,
better than all?

'What can you mean?'

I mean, of course, that which makes use of all these possessions and
tests each one, and thinks about them.

'Do you mean the soul?'

You are right; that is exactly what I do mean.

'Yes, I certainly think that this is a better possession than all the
rest.'

Can you tell me, then, in what manner you have taken care of your soul?
for it is not likely that one so wise as you. and of such position

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

in the state, should lightly and recklessly allow the best possession
you have to be neglected and go to ruin.

'Certainly not.'

Well, have you taken care of it yourself? Did any one teach you how, or
did you find out for yourself?

When you do this, the danger is, you will find, that first he will say:
'My good sir, what concern is it of yours? Are you my master?' Then, if
you persist in annoying him he will lift his hand and give you a
drubbing.

That (says Epictetus) was a pursuit I had a keen taste for once, before
I was reduced to my present condition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Concerning Anxiety](dep045.md)
