[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep012)  [Next](dep014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

### CHAPTER XII

#### ON CONTENTMENT

<span class="smallcaps">Concerning</span> the gods there are some who
say that the Divine does not exist, others that it exists but is
inactive and indifferent and takes no thought for anything, others again
that God does exist and take thought but only for great things and
things in the heavens, but for nothing on earth; and a fourth class say
that God takes thought also for earthly and human things, but only in a
general way, and has no care for individuals: and there is a fifth
class, to whom belong Odysseus and Socrates, who say

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

              *where’er I move  
Thou seest me*.  
                                  \[Homer, Iliad, X. 279\]

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Before all things
then it is necessary to examine each of these views, to see whether it
is true or untrue. For if there are no gods, how can following the gods
be the end of man? If again there are gods, but they care for nothing,
in that case too what good will it be to follow them? But once more, if
they exist and do care, yet if there is no communication between them
and men, nay what is more, if there is none between them and me, to
follow them cannot be a true end. The good man then, having examined
into all these questions, has submitted his mind to Him that orders the
universe, as good citizens submit to the law of the city. The man who is
under education ought to approach education with this purpose in his
mind: 'How can I follow the gods in everything, and how can I be content
with the divine governance and how can I become free?' For he is free,
for whom all things happen according to his will and whom no one can
hinder.

'What then? Is freedom the same as madness?'

Heaven forbid! frenzy and freedom have nothing in common.

'But', you say, 'I want everything to happen as I think good, whatever
that may be.'

Then you are in a state of madness, you are out of your mind. Do you not
know that freedom is a noble thing, and worthy of regard? But merely to
want one's chance thoughts to be realized, is not a noble thing; it
comes perilously near being the most shameful of all things. How do we
act in matters of grammar? Do I want to write Dion's name as I will? No,
I am taught to will the right way of writing. How is it in music? Just
the same. So it is universally, in every region of art or science.

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Otherwise it would
not be worth while to know anything, if everything conformed itself to
each man's will.

Are we to say then that in this sphere alone, the greatest and most
momentous of all, the sphere of freedom, it is permitted me to indulge
chance desires? By no means: education is just this—learning to frame
one's will in accord with events. How do events happen? They happen as
the Disposer of events has ordained them. He ordained summer and winter,
fruitful and barren seasons, virtue and vice and all such opposites for
the sake of the harmony of the universe, and gave to each one of us a
body and bodily parts and property and men to associate with.

Remembering then that things are thus ordained we ought to approach
education, not that we may change the conditions of life, that is not
given to us, nor is it good for us—but that, our circumstances being as
they are and as nature makes them, we may conform our mind to events.

I ask you, is it possible to avoid men? How can we? Can we change their
nature by our society? Who gives us that power? What is left for us
then, or what means do we discover to deal with them? We must so act as
to leave them to do as seems good to them, while we remain in accord
with nature.

But you are impatient and discontented; if you are alone you call it a
wilderness, and if you are with men you describe them as plotters and
robbers, and you find fault even with your own parents and children and
brothers and neighbours.

Why, when you are alone you ought to call it peace and freedom and
consider yourself the equal of the gods; when you are in a large company
you should not call it a crowd or a mob or a nuisance, but a high-day
and a festival, and so accept all things in a spirit of content.

What punishment is there, you ask, for those who do not accept things in
this spirit? Their punishment is to be as they are. Is one discontented
with being alone? Let him be deserted. Is one discontented with his
parents? Let him be a bad son, and mourn his lot. Is one discontented
with his children? Let him be a bad father.

'Cast him into prison.'

What do you mean by prison? he is in prison already; for a man's prison
is the place that he is in against his will, just as, conversely,
Socrates was not in prison, for he chose to be there.

'Am I then to have a maimed leg?'

Slave, do you mean to arraign the universe for one wretched leg? Will
you not make a gift of it to the sum of things? Will you not resign it?
Will you not joyfully yield it up to Him who gave it? Will you be vexed
and discontented with the ordinances of Zeus, laid down and ordained by
Him witl- the Fates who were present at your birth and

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

span your thread of life? Do you not know, what a little part you are,
compared with the universe? I say this of your body, for in reason you
are not inferior to the gods nor less than they; for the greatness of
reason is judged not by length or height but by its judgements.

Will you not then set your good in that region where you are equal to
the gods?

'Alas, but look what a father and mother I have got!'

Why? was it given you on entering life to choose and say, 'Let such an
one marry such an one at this hour, that I may be born?' No such choice
was given you: your parents had to be in existence first, and your birth
had to follow. Of what parents? Of such as they were.

Well then, as your parents are what they are, is no resource left you?
Surely if you did not know to what end you possess the faculty of
vision, you would be unhappy and miserable if you closed your eyes, when
colours were brought near you; but are you not more wretched and unhappy
still for not knowing that you have a high and noble spirit to face each
occasion as it arises? The objects which correspond to the faculty that
you have are brought near you: yet you turn away your faculty just at
the very moment when you ought to keep it open-eyed and alert. Rather
give thanks to the gods that they set you above those things which they
put out of your power, and made you responsible only for what is within
your control. For your parents they left you without responsibility; and
the same is true of brothers, body, property, death, life. For what then
did they make you responsible? For that which alone is in your power,
the proper handling of your impressions. Why then do you insist on
dragging in these things for which you are not responsible? That is to
make trouble for yourself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. How One May Act in All Things so as to Please the
Gods](dep014.md)
