[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep028)  [Next](dep030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVIII

#### THAT WE MUST NOT BE ANGRY WITH MEN: AND CONCERNING WHAT THINGS ARE SMALL AND WHAT ARE GREAT AMONG MEN

<span class="smallcaps">What</span> is the reason that we assent to a
thing? Because it seems to us that it is so. It is impossible that we
shall assent to that which seems not to be. Why? Because this is the
nature of the mind—to agree to what is true, and disagree with what is
false, and withhold judgement on what is doubtful.

What is the proof of this?

'Feel now, if you can, that it is night.'

It is impossible.

Put away the feeling that it is day.'

It is impossible.

'Assume or put away the feeling that the stars are even in number.' It
is not possible.

When a man assents, then, to what is false, know that he had no wish to
assent to the false: 'for no soul is robbed of the truth with its own
consent,' as Plato says, but the false seemed to him true.

Now, in the sphere of action what have we to correspond to true and
false in the sphere of perception? What is fitting and unfitting,
profitable and unprofitable, appropriate and inappropriate, and the
like.

Cannot a man, then, think a thing is to his profit, and not choose it?

He cannot.

What of her <span id="fr_14"></span>[1-15](dep032.htm#fn_14) who says

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*I know full well what ills I mean to do  
But passion overpowers what counsel bids me*.  
                                      \[Euripides, *Medea*, 1078\]

</div>

Here the very gratification of passion and the vengeance she takes on

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

her husband she believes to be more to her profit than saving her
children.

'Yes, but she is deceived.'

Prove to her plainly that she is deceived and she will not do it, but as
long as you do not show her, what else can she follow but that which
appears to her? Nothing. Why then are you indignant with her, because,
unhappy woman, she is deluded on the greatest matters and is transformed
from a human being into a serpent? Why do you not rather pity her—if so
it may be? As we pity the blind and the lame, so should we pity those
who are blinded and lamed in their most sovereign faculties.

We must remember this clearly, that man measures his every action by his
impressions; of course they may be good or bad: if good, he is free from
reproach; if bad, he pays the penalty in his own person, for it is
impossible for one to be deluded and another to suffer for it. The man
who remembers this, I say, will be angry with no one, indignant with no
one, revile none, blame none, hate none, offend none.

'So you say that deeds so great and awful take their origin from this,
the impressions of the mind?'

From this and nothing else. The Iliad is nothing but men's impressions
and how they dealt with them. It was impressions that made Paris take
away the wife of Menelaus, impressions that drew Helen to follow him.
If, then, his impressions had led Menelaus to feel that it was a gain to
be robbed of such a wife, what would have happened? We should have lost
the Iliad, and not only that but the Odyssey too.

'What? Do these great matters depend on one that is so small?'

What are these you call 'such great matters'? Wars and factions, deaths
of many men and destructions of cities. What is there great in this,
pray?

'Is there nothing great?'

Why, what is there great in the death of many oxen and many sheep, and
the burning and destruction of many nests of swallows and storks? 'Are
these like those other horrors?'

Most like: bodies of men perished, so did bodies of oxen and sheep. Huts
of men were burnt: so were storks' nests. What is great or awful here?
Or if it be so, show me how a man's home differs from a stork's nest, as
a dwelling.

'Is a stork, then, like a man?'

What do you say? In respect of his body, very like; save only that men's
homes are built of beams and rafters and bricks, and storks’ nests of
sticks and clay.

'Does a man then differ in nothing from a stork?'

God forbid: but he does not differ in these matters.

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

'In what then does he differ?'

Search and you will find that he differs in something else. Look whether
it be not that he differs in understanding what he does, in his faculty
for society, in his good faith, his self-respect, his security of aim,
his prudence.

Where then is man's good and man's evil, in the true sense, to be found?

In that faculty which makes men different from all else. If a man
preserves this and keeps it safely fortified; if his sense of honour,
his good faith, and his prudence are not destroyed, then he too is
preserved; but if any of these perish or be taken by storm, then he too
perishes with them. And it is on this that great events depend. Was
Alexander's great failure when the Hellenes came against the Trojans and
sacked Troy and when his brothers perished? By no means: for no one
fails by the act of another; yet then there was destruction of storks'
nests. Nay, his failure was when he lost the man of honour, the man of
good faith, the man who respected manners and the laws of hospitality.
When did Achilles fail? Was it when Patroclus died? God forbid: it was
when he was angry, when he cried for a trumpery maiden, when he forgot
that he was there not to win lady-loves, but to make war. These are
man's failures—this is his siege, this is his razed city, when his right
judgements are broken to the ground, and when they are destroyed.

'But when women are carried off, and children are made captive, and men
themselves are slaughtered—are not these things evil?'

Where do you get this idea from? If it is true, teach it me too.

'No, I cannot: but how can you say that they are not evil?'

Let us turn to our standards, let us look to our primary notions. For I
cannot be sufficiently astonished at what men do. When we want to judge
weights, we do not judge at random: when we judge things straight and
crooked, it is not at random: in a word, when it is important to us to
know the truth on any subject, no one of us will ever do anything at
random. Yet when we are dealing with the primary and sole cause of right
or wrong action, of prosperity or adversity, of good or bad fortune,
there alone we are random and headlong: we nowhere have anything like a
scale, nowhere anything like a standard: some impression strikes me, and
straightway I act on it.

Am I any better than Agamemnon or Achilles, that they should do and
suffer such evils because they follow their impressions, and I should be
content with mine?

Surely tragedy has no other source but this. What is the 'Atreus' of
Euripides? Impressions. What is the 'Oedipus' of Sophocles? Impressions.
'Phoenix'? Impressions. 'Hippolytus'? Impressions. How do you think then
we should describe the man who takes no pains to discipline

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

his impressions? What name do we give to those who follow everything
that comes into their mind?

'Madmen.'

Well, is not this exactly what we do?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX. On Constancy](dep030)
