[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep064)  [Next](dep066.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI

#### SCATTERED SAYINGS

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> one of his acquaintances asked why
more progress was made in old days, although the processes of reason
have been more studied by the men of to-day, he answered, On what has
the effort been spent, and in what was the greater progress in the past?
For you will find that progress to-day corresponds exactly to the effort
spent. The fact is that to-day men have spent their effort on the
analysis of syllogisms, and progress is made in that: in old days men
spent their effort on maintaining their mind in accord with Nature, and
they made progress in that. Therefore do not confound the processes, nor
seek to spend effort on one thing and make progress in another. If you
look whether any of us who sets himself to keep in accord with Nature
and to live his life so, fails to make progress, you will find there is
none.

'The good man can suffer no defeat.'

Of course, for he engages in no contest where he is not superior. 'Take
my lands, if you will: take my servants, take my office, take my poor
body, yet you will not make me fail to get what I will or fall into what
I will to avoid.' This is the only contest for which he enters—that
which is concerned with the sphere of the will, and therefore he cannot
fail to be invincible.

When some one asked him what 'general perception' meant, he replied, You
might describe the faculty which only distinguishes sounds as 'general'
hearing, but the faculty which distinguishes musical sounds you would
not call 'general' but 'technical'. In the same way there are certain
things which all men who are not utterly perverted can see in virtue of
their general faculties. It is this mental constitution to which the
name 'general perception' is given.

It is not easy to give stimulus to young men who have no grit: 'you
cannot lift a cream-cheese by a hook' \[Musonius Rufus\]; but young men
of parts hold fast to reason even if you try to deter them. That is why
Rufus generally tried to deter them, and made this his test of those who
were gifted and those who were not; 'for', said he, 'just as the stone,
if you throw it up, will fall to the earth by its own nature, so the
gifted soul is all the more inclined towards its natural object, the
more you try to beat it off.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Dialogue with the Commissioner of the Free Cities,
Who was an Epicurean](dep066.md)
