[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep037)  [Next](dep039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI

#### ON WHAT IS MEANT BY 'INDIFFERENT' THINGS

<span class="smallcaps">Take</span> a given hypothetical proposition. In
itself it is indifferent, but your judgement upon it is not indifferent,
but is either knowledge, or mere opinion, or delusion. In the same way
though life is indifferent, the way you deal with it is not indifferent.
Therefore, when you are told 'These things also are indifferent', do not
be careless, and when you are urged to be careful, do not show a mean
spirit and be overawed by material things.

It is a good thing to know what you can do and what you are prepared
for, that in matters where you are not prepared, you may keep quiet and
not be vexed if others have the advantage of you there. For when

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

it is a question of syllogisms, you in your turn will expect to have the
advantage, and if they are vexed with this you will console them with
the words, 'I learnt them, but you did not. So when acquired dexterity
is needed it is for you in your turn not to seek what only practice can
give: leave that to those who have acquired the knack, and be content
yourself to show constancy.

'Go and salute such an one.'

I have saluted him.

'How?'

In no mean spirit.

'But his house was shut upon you.'

Yes, for I have not learnt to enter by the window: when I find the door
shut, I must either retire or go in by the window.

'But again one says, "Talk to him."'

I do talk to him.

'How?'

In no mean spirit.

Suppose you did not get what you wanted? Surely that was his business
and not yours. Why then do you claim what is another's? If you always
remember what is yours and what is not yours, you will never be put to
confusion. Therefore Chrysippus well says, 'As long as the consequences
are unknown to me, I always hold fast to what is better adapted to
secure what is natural, for God Himself created me with the faculty of
choosing what is natural.' Nay, if I really knew that it was ordained
for me now to be ill, I should wish to be ill; for the foot too, if it
had a mind, would wish to get muddy.

For instance, why do ears of corn grow? Is it not that they may ripen in
the sun? And if they are ripened is it not that they may be reaped, for
they are not things apart? If they had feelings then, ought they to pray
never to be reaped at any time? But this is a curse upon corn—to pray
that it should never be reaped. In like manner know that you are cursing
men when you pray for them not to die: it is like a prayer not to be
ripened, not to be reaped. But we men, being creatures whose fate it is
to be reaped, are also made aware of this very fact, that we are
destined for reaping, and so we are angry; for we do not know who we
are, nor have we studied human things as those who are skilled in horses
study the concerns of horses.

But Chrysantas, when he was about to strike the enemy, and heard the
bugle sounding the retreat, desisted: so convinced was he that it was
more to his advantage to do the general's bidding than his own. But not
a man of us, even when necessity calls, is willing to obey her easily,
but we bear what comes upon us with tears and groans, and we call it
'circumstances'.

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

What do you mean by 'circumstances', fellow men? If you mean by
'circumstances' what surrounds you, everything is circumstance: if you
use the term in the sense of hardships, how is it a hardship that what
was born should be destroyed? The instrument of destruction is a sword
or a wheel or the sea or a potsherd or a tyrant. What matters it to you,
by what road you are to go down to Hades? All roads are alike. But, if
you will hear the truth, the road the tyrant sends you is shorter. No
tyrant ever took six months to execute a man, but a fever often takes a
year to kill one. All these complaints are mere noise and vanity of idle
phrases.

'In Caesar's presence my life is in danger.'

But am not I in equal danger, dwelling in Nicopolis, where earthquakes
are so many? And you too, when you sail across the Adriatic, are you not
in danger of your life?

'Yes, but in thought too I am in danger.'

Your thought? How can that be? Who can compel you to think against your
will? The thought of others? How can it be any danger to you for others
to have false ideas?

'Yes, but I am in danger of being banished.'

What is being banished? Is it being elsewhere than in Rome? 'Yes,
suppose I am sent to Gyara?'

If it makes for your good, you will go: if not, you have a place to go
to instead of Gyara, a place whither he who is sending you to Gyara will
also go whether he will or no. Why then do you go to Rome as though it
meant so much? It is not much compared with your preparation for it: so
that a youth of fine feeling may say, 'It was not worth this price—to
have heard so many lectures and written so many exercises, and sat at
the feet of an old man of no great merit.'

There is only one thing for you to remember, that is, the distinction
between what is yours and what is not yours. Never lay claim to anything
that is not your own. Tribunal and prison are distinct places, one high,
the other low; but your will, if you choose to keep it the same in both,
may be kept the same. So we shall emulate Socrates, but only when we can
write songs of triumph in prison. As for our condition up till now, I
doubt whether we should have borne with one who should say to us in
prison, 'Would you like me to recite to you songs of triumph?'

'Why do you trouble me? Do you not know the ills which beset me? for
this is my state.'

What is it?

'I am at the point of death.'

Yes, but are other men going to be immortal?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. How to Consult Diviners](dep039)
