[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dep062)  [Next](dep064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Discourses of Epictetus*, tr. by P.E Matheson, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV

#### AGAINST ONE WHO WAS INDECOROUSLY EXCITED IN THE THEATRE

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> the Procurator of Epirus offended
decorum by the way he showed interest in a comedian, the people reviled
him for this; thereupon when he brought word of this to Epictetus and
expressed annoyance at those who reviled him: Why! he said, what harm
were they doing? They too showed their interest as you did!

'What!' said he, 'is this the way they show interest?'

Yes, he said, when they saw you, their Governor, the friend and
Procurator of Caesar, showing your interest in this way, would you not
expect them to do the same? If it is not right to show interest in that
way, leave off doing it yourself: but if it is right, why are you angry
at their imitating you? For whom else but you, their superiors, have the
people to imitate? Whom are they to look to when they come to the
theatre but you? 'See', they say, 'how Caesar's Procurator behaves in
the theatre. He cries out: then I will cry out too. He jumps from his
seat. I will do so too. His claque of slaves shout from their scattered
seats: I have no slaves, I will cry as loud as I can to make up for it.'
You ought to know then that when you enter the theatre you enter it as a
pattern and example to all other spectators how to behave. Why then did
they revile you? Because every man hates what stands in his way. They
wanted So-and-so to be crowned, you wanted another; they

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

stood in your way and you in theirs. You were found to be stronger than
they; they did what they could, they reviled what stood in their way.
What would you have then? That you should do what you wish, and they
should not even say what they wish? Nay, what wonder they should talk
so? Do not farmers revile Zeus, when He stands in their way? Do not
sailors revile Him? Do they not revile Caesar without ceasing? What
follows? Does not Zeus know? Does not Caesar have reported to him what
men say? What does he do then? He knows that if he punishes all who
revile him he will have no one left to rule over. What is my conclusion?
When you enter the theatre you ought not to say, 'Let me have Sophron
crowned', but, 'Let me keep my will in accord with Nature in this
matter, for no one is dearer to me than myself: it is absurd then that I
should be injured, that another may be victorious on the stage.'

Whom then do I want to win? The victor: and so the victory will always
be in accordance with my wish.

'But I wish Sophron to be crowned.'

Hold as many contests as you please in your own house and proclaim him
there victor in the Nemean, Pythian, Isthmian and Olympic games: but in
public do not claim more than your share, nor steal what is public
property. If you do, you must put up with being reviled: for when you do
as the people do, you put yourself on their level.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Against Those Who Make Illness an Excuse For Leaving
the Lecture-Room](dep064)
