<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](adta09)  [Next](adta11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3ST7Y/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dreamer's Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f08"></span>

THE IDLE CITY

There was once a city which was an idle city, wherein men told vain
tales.

And it was that city's custom to tax all men that would enter in, with
the toll of some idle story in the gate.

So all men paid to the watchers in the gate the toll of an idle story,
and passed into the city unhindered and unhurt. And in a certain hour of
the night when the king of that city arose and went pacing swiftly up
and down the chamber of his sleeping, and called upon the name of the
dead queen, then would the watchers fasten up the gate and go into that
chamber to the king, and, sitting on the floor, would tell him all the
tales that they had gathered. And listening to them some calmer mood
would come upon the king, and listening still he would lie down again
and at last fall asleep, and all the watchers silently would arise and
steal away from the chamber.

A while ago wandering, I came to the gate of that city. And even as I
came a man stood up to pay his toll to the watchers. They were seated
cross-legged on the ground between him and the gate, and each one held a
spear. Near him two other travellers sat on the warm sand waiting. And
the man said:

"Now the city of Nombros forsook the worship of the gods and turned
towards God. So the gods threw their cloaks over their faces and strode
away from the city, and going into the haze among the hills passed
through the trunks of the olive groves into the sunset. But when they
had already left the Earth, they turned and looked through the gleaming
folds of the twilight for the last time at their city; and they looked
half in anger and half in regret, then turned and went away for ever.
But they sent back a Death, who bore a scythe, saying to it: 'Slay half
in the city that forsook us, but half of them spare alive that they may
yet remember their old forsaken gods.'

"But God sent a destroying angel to show that He was God, saying unto
him: 'Go into that city and slay half of the dwellers therein, yet spare
a half of them that they may know that I am God.'

"And at once the destroying angel put his hand to his sword, and the
sword came out of the scabbard with a deep breath, like to the breath
that a broad woodman takes before his first blow at some giant oak.
Thereat the angel pointed his arms downwards, and bending his head
between them, fell forward from Heaven's edge, and the spring of his
ankles shot him downwards with his wings furled behind him. So he went
slanting earthward through the evening with his sword stretched out
before him, and he was like a javelin that some hunter hath hurled that
returneth again to the earth: but just before he touched it he lifted
his head and spread his wings with the under feathers forward, and
alighted by the bank of the broad Flavro that divides the city of
Nombros. And down the bank of the Flavro he fluttered low, like to a
hawk over a new-cut cornfield when the little creatures of the corn are
shelterless, and at the same time down the other bank the Death from the
gods went mowing.

"At once they saw each other, and the angel glared at the Death, and the
Death leered back at him, and the flames in the eyes of the angel
illumined with a red glare the mist that lay in the hollows of the
sockets of the Death. Suddenly they fell on one another, sword to
scythe. And the angel captured the temples of the gods, and set up over
them the sign of God, and the Death captured the temples of God, and led
into them the ceremonies and sacrifices of the gods; and all the while
the centuries slipped quietly by, going down the Flavro seawards.

"And now some worship God in the temple of the gods, and others worship
the gods in the temple of God, and still the angel hath not returned
again to the rejoicing choirs, and still the Death hath not gone back to
die with the dead gods; but all through Nombros they fight up and down,
and still on each side of the Flavro the city lives."

And the watchers in the gate said, "Enter in."

Then another traveler rose up, and said:

"Solemnly between Huhenwazy and Nitcrana the huge grey clouds came
floating. And those great mountains, heavenly Huhenwazi and Nitcrana,
the king of peaks, greeted them, calling them brothers. And the clouds
were glad of their greeting, for they meet with companions seldom in the
lonely heights of the sky.

"But the vapours of evening said unto the earth-mist, 'What are those
shapes that dare to move above us and to go where Nitcrana is and
Huhenwazi?'

"And the earth-mist said in answer unto the vapours of evening, 'It is
only an earth-mist that has become mad and has left the warm and
comfortable earth, and has in his madness thought that his place is with
Huhenwazi and Nitcrana.'

"'Once,' said the vapours of evening, 'there were clouds, but this was
many and many a day ago, as our forefathers have said. Perhaps the mad
one thinks he is the clouds.'

"Then spake the earth-worms from the warm deeps of the mud, saying 'O
earth-mist, thou art indeed the clouds, and there are no clouds but
thou. And as for Huhenwazi and Nitcrana, I cannot see them, and
therefore they are not high, and there are no mountains in the world but
those that I cast up every morning out of the deeps of the mud.'

"And the earth-mist and the vapours of evening were glad at the voice of
the earth-worms, and looking earthward believed what they had said.

"And indeed it is better to be as the earth-mist, and to keep close to
the warm mud at night, and to hear the earth-worm's comfortable speech,
and not to be a wanderer in the cheerless heights, but to leave the
mountains alone with their desolate snow, to draw what comfort they can
from their vast aspect over all the cities of men, and from the whispers
that they hear at evening of unknown distant gods."

And the watchers in the gate said, "Enter in."

Then a man stood up who came out of the west, and told a western tale.
He said:

"There is a road in Rome that runs through an ancient temple that once
the gods had loved; it runs along the top of a great wall, and the floor
of the temple lies far down beneath it, of marble, pink and white.

"Upon the temple floor I counted to the number of thirteen hungry cats.

"'Sometimes,' they said among themselves, 'it was the gods that lived
here, sometimes it was men, and now it's cats. So let us enjoy the sun
on the hot marble before another people comes.'

"For it was at that hour of a warm afternoon when my fancy is able to
hear silent voices.

"And the awful leanness of all those thirteen cats moved me to go into a
neighbouring fish shop, and there to buy a quantity of fishes. Then I
returned and threw them all over the railing at the top of the great
wall, and they fell for thirty feet, and hit the sacred marble with a
smack.

"Now, in any other town but Rome, or in the minds of any other cats, the
sight of fishes falling out of heaven had surely excited wonder. They
rose slowly, and all stretched themselves, then they came leisurely
towards the fishes. 'It is only a miracle,' they said in their hearts."

And the watchers in the gate said, "Enter in."

Proudly and slowly, as they spoke, drew up to them a camel, whose rider
sought entrance to the city. His face shone with the sunset by which for
long he had steered for the city's gate. Of him they demanded toll.
Whereat he spoke to his camel, and the camel roared and kneeled, and the
man descended from him. And the man unwrapped from many silks a box of
divers metals wrought by the Japanese, and on the lid of it were figures
of men who gazed from some shore at an isle of the Inland Sea. This he
showed to the watchers, and when they had seen it, said, "It has seemed
to me that these speak to each other thus:

"'Behold now Oojni, the dear one of the sea, the little mother sea that
hath no storms. She goeth out from Oojni singing a song, and she
returneth singing over her sands. Little is Oojni in the lap of the sea,
and scarce to be perceived by wondering ships. White sails have never
wafted her legends afar, they are told not by bearded wanderers of the
sea. Her fireside tales are known not to the North, the dragons of China
have not heard of them, nor those that ride on elephants through Ind.

"'Men tell the tales and the smoke ariseth upwards; the smoke departeth
and the tales are told.

"'Oojni is not a name among the nations, she is not know of where the
merchants meet, she is not spoken of by alien lips.

"'Indeed, but Oojni is a little among the isles, yet is she loved by
those that know her coasts and her inland places hidden from the sea.

"Without glory, without fame, and without wealth, Oojni is greatly loved
by a little people, and by a few; yet not by few, for all her dead still
love her, and oft by night come whispering through her woods. Who could
forget Oojni even among the dead?

"For here in Oojni, wot you, are homes of men, and gardens, and golden
temples of the gods, and sacred places inshore from the sea, and many
murmurous woods. And there is a path that winds over the hills to go
into mysterious holy lands where dance by night the spirits of the
woods, or sing unseen in the sunlight; and no one goes into these holy
lands, for who that love Oojni could rob her of her mysteries, and the
curious aliens come not. Indeed, but we love Oojni though she is so
little; she is the little mother of our race, and the kindly nurse of
all seafaring birds.

"And behold, even now caressing her, the gentle fingers of the mother
sea, whose dreams are far with that old wanderer Ocean.

"And yet let us forget not Fuzi-Yama, for he stands manifest over clouds
and sea, misty below, and vague and indistinct, but clear above for all
the isles to watch. The ships make all their journeys in his sight, the
nights and the days go by him like a wind, the summers and winters under
him flicker and fade, the lives of men pass quietly here and hence, and
Fuzi-Yama watches there—and knows."

And the watchers in the gate said, "Enter in."

And I, too, would have told them a tale, very wonderful and very true;
one that I had told in many cities, which as yet had no believers. But
now the sun had set, and the brief twilight gone, and ghostly silences
were rising from far and darkening hills. A stillness hung over that
city's gate. And the great silence of the solemn night was more
acceptable to the watchers in the gate than any sound of man. Therefore
they beckoned to us, and motioned with their hands that we should pass
untaxed into the city. And softly we went up over the sand, and between
the high rock pillars of the gate, and a deep stillness settled among
the watchers, and the stars over them twinkled undisturbed.

For how short a while man speaks, and withal how vainly. And for how
long he is silent. Only the other day I met a king in Thebes, who had
been silent already for four thousand years.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hashish Man](adta11)

</div>
