<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](adta03)  [Next](adta05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3ST7Y/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*A Dreamer's Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f02"></span>

BLAGDAROSS

On a waste place strewn with bricks in the outskirts of a town twilight
was falling. A star or two appeared over the smoke, and distant windows
lit mysterious lights. The stillness deepened and the loneliness. Then
all the outcast things that are silent by day found voices.

An old cork spoke first. He said: "I grew in Andalusian woods, but never
listened to the idle songs of Spain. I only grew strong in the sunlight
waiting for my destiny. One day the merchants came and took us all away
and carried us all along the shore of the sea, piled high on the backs
of donkeys, and in a town by the sea they made me into the shape that I
am now. One day they sent me northward to Provence, and there I
fulfilled my destiny. For they set me as a guard over the bubbling wine,
and I faithfully stood sentinel for twenty years. For the first few
years in the bottle that I guarded the wine slept, dreaming of Provence;
but as the years went on he grew stronger and stronger, until at last
whenever a man went by the wind would put out all his might against me,
saying, 'Let me go free; let me go free!' And every year his strength
increased, and he grew more clamourous when men went by, but never
availed to hurl me from my post. But when I had powerfully held him for
twenty years they brought him to the banquet and took me from my post,
and the wine arose rejoicing and leapt through the veins of men and
exalted their souls within them till they stood up in their places and
sang Provencal songs. But me they cast away—me that had been sentinel
for twenty years, and was still as strong and staunch as when first I
went on guard. Now I am an outcast in a cold northern city, who once
have known the Andalusian skies and guarded long ago Provencal suns that
swam in the heart of the rejoicing wine."

An unstruck match that somebody had dropped spoke next. "I am a child of
the sun," he said, "and an enemy of cities; there is more in my heart
than you know of. I am a brother of Etna and Stromboli; I have fires
lurking in me that will one day rise up beautiful and strong. We will
not go into servitude on any hearth nor work machines for our food, but
we will take out own food where we find it on that day when we are
strong. There are wonderful children in my heart whose faces shall be
more lively than the rainbow; they shall make a compact with the North
wind, and he shall lead them forth; all shall be black behind them and
black above them, and there shall be nothing beautiful in the world but
them; they shall seize upon the earth and it shall be theirs, and
nothing shall stop them but our old enemy the sea."

Then an old broken kettle spoke, and said: "I am the friend of cities. I
sit among the slaves upon the hearth, the little flames that have been
fed with coal. When the slaves dance behind the iron bars I sit in the
middle of the dance and sing and make our masters glad. And I make songs
about the comfort of the cat, and about the malice that is towards her
in the heart of the dog, and about the crawling of the baby, and about
the ease that is in the lord of the house when we brew the good brown
tea; and sometimes when the house is very warm and slaves and masters
are glad, I rebuke the hostile winds that prowl about the world."

And then there spoke the piece of an old cord. "I was made in a place of
doom, and doomed men made my fibres, working without hope. Therefore
there came a grimness into my heart, so that I never let anything go
free when once I was set to bind it. Many a thing have I bound
relentlessly for months and years; for I used to come coiling into
warehouses where the great boxes lay all open to the air, and one of
them would be suddenly closed up, and my fearful strength would be set
on him like accurse, and if his timbers groaned when first I seized
them, or if they creaked aloud in the lonely night, thinking of
woodlands out of which they came, then I only gripped them tighter
still, for the poor useless hate is in my soul of those that made me in
the place of doom. Yet, for all the things that my prison-clutch has
held, the last work that I did was to set something free. I lay idle one
night in the gloom on the warehouse floor. Nothing stirred there, and
even the spider slept. Towards midnight a great flock of echoes suddenly
leapt up from the wooden planks and circled round the roof. A man was
coming towards me all alone. And as he came his soul was reproaching
him, and I saw that there was a great trouble between the man and his
soul, for his soul would not let him be, but went on reproaching him.

"Then the man saw me and said, 'This at least will not fail me.' When I
heard him say this about me, I determined that whatever he might require
of me it should be done to the uttermost. And as I made this
determination in my unfaltering heart, he picked me up and stood on an
empty box that I should have bound on the morrow, and tied one end of me
to a dark rafter; and the knot was carelessly tied, because his soul was
reproaching him all the while continually and giving him no ease. Then
he made the other end of me into a noose, but when the man's soul saw
this it stopped reproaching the man, and cried out to him hurriedly, and
besought him to be at peace with it and to do nothing sudden; but the
man went on with his work, and put the noose down over his face and
underneath his chin, and the soul screamed horribly.

"Then the man kicked the box away with his foot, and the moment he did
this I knew that my strength was not great enough to hold him; but I
remembered that he had said I would not fail him, and I put all my grim
vigour into my fibres and held by sheer will. Then the soul shouted to
me to give way, but I said:

"'No; you vexed the man.'

"Then it screamed for me to leave go of the rafter, and already I was
slipping, for I only held on to it by a careless knot, but I gripped
with my prison grip and said:

"'You vexed the man.'

"And very swiftly it said other things to me, but I answered not; and at
last the soul that vexed the man that had trusted me flew away and left
him at peace. I was never able to bind things any more, for every one of
my fibres was worn and wrenched, and even my relentless heart was
weakened by the struggle. Very soon afterwards I was thrown out here. I
have done my work."

So they spoke among themselves, but all the while there loomed above
them the form of an old rocking-horse complaining bitterly. He said: "I
am Blagdaross. Woe is me that I should lie now an outcast among these
worthy but little people. Alas! for the days that are gathered, and alas
for the Great One that was a master and a soul to me, whose spirit is
now shrunken and can never know me again, and no more ride abroad on
knightly quests. I was Bucephalus when he was Alexander, and carried him
victorious as far as Ind. I encountered dragons with him when he was St.
George, I was the horse of Roland fighting for Christendom, and was
often Rosinante. I fought in tournays and went errant upon quests, and
met Ulysses and the heroes and the fairies. Or late in the evening, just
before the lamps in the nursery were put out, he would suddenly mount
me, and we would gallop through Africa. There we would pass by night
through tropic forests, and come upon dark rivers sweeping by, all
gleaming with the eyes of crocodiles, where the hippopotamus floated
down with the stream, and mysterious craft loomed suddenly out of the
dark and furtively passed away. And when we had passed through the
forest lit by the fireflies we would come to the open plains, and gallop
onwards with scarlet flamingoes flying along beside us through the lands
of dusky kings, with golden crowns upon their heads and scepters in
their hands, who came running out of their palaces to see us pass. Then
I would wheel suddenly, and the dust flew up from my four hooves as I
turned and we galloped home again, and my master was put to bed. And
again he would ride abroad on another day till we came to magical
fortresses guarded by wizardry and overthrew the dragons at the gate,
and ever came back with a princess fairer than the sea.

"But my master began to grow larger in his body and smaller in his soul,
and then he rode more seldom upon quests. At last he saw gold and never
came again, and I was cast out here among these little people."

But while the rocking-horse was speaking two boys stole away, unnoticed
by their parents, from a house on the edge of the waste place, and were
coming across it looking for adventures. One of them carried a broom,
and when he saw the rocking-horse he said nothing, but broke off the
handle from the broom and thrust it between his braces and his shirt on
the left side. Then he mounted the rocking-horse, and drawing forth the
broomstick, which was sharp and spiky at the end, said, "Saladin is in
this desert with all his paynims, and I am Coeur de Lion." After a while
the other boy said: "Now let me kill Saladin too." But Blagdaross in his
wooden heart, that exulted with thoughts of battle, said: "I am
Blagdaross yet!"

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Madness of Andelsprutz](adta05.md)

</div>
