<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](adta15)  [Next](adta17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3ST7Y/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*A Dreamer's Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f14"></span>

THE FIELD

When one has seen Spring's blossom fall in London, and Summer appear and
ripen and decay, as it does early in cities, and one is in London still,
then, at some moment or another, the country places lift their flowery
heads and call to one with an urgent, masterful clearness, upland behind
upland in the twilight like to some heavenly choir arising rank on rank
to call a drunkard from his gambling-hell. No volume of traffic can
drown the sound of it, no lure of London can weaken its appeal. Having
heard it one's fancy is gone, and evermore departed, to some coloured
pebble agleam in a rural brook, and all that London can offer is swept
from one's mind like some suddenly smitten metropolitan Goliath.

The call is from afar both in leagues and years, for the hills that call
one are the hills that were, and their voices are the voices of long
ago, when the elf-kings still had horns.

I see them now, those hills of my infancy (for it is they that call),
with their faces upturned to the purple twilight, and the faint
diaphanous figures of the fairies peering out from under the bracken to
see if evening is come. I do not see upon their regal summits those
desirable mansions, and highly desirable residences, which have lately
been built for gentlemen who would exchange customers for tenants.

When the hills called I used to go to them by road, riding a bicycle. If
you go by train you miss the gradual approach, you do not cast off
London like an old forgiven sin, nor pass by little villages on the way
that must have some rumour of the hills; nor, wondering if they are
still the same, come at last upon the edge of their far-spread robes,
and so on to their feet, and see far off their holy, welcoming faces. In
the train you see them suddenly round a curve, and there they all are
sitting in the sun.

I imagine that as one penetrated out from some enormous forest of the
tropics, the wild beasts would become fewer, the gloom would lighten,
and the horror of the place would slowly lift. Yet as one emerges nearer
to the edge of London, and nearer to the beautiful influence of the
hills, the houses become uglier, the streets viler, the gloom deepens,
the errors of civilisation stand bare to the scorn of the fields.

Where ugliness reaches the height of its luxuriance, in the dense misery
of the place, where one imagines the builder saying, "Here I culminate.
Let us give thanks to Satan," there is a bridge of yellow brick, and
through it, as through some gate of filigree silver opening on
fairyland, one passes into the country.

To left and right, as far as one can see, stretches that monstrous city;
before one are the fields like an old, old song.

There is a field there that is full of king-cups. A stream runs through
it, and along the stream is a little wood of osiers. There I used often
to rest at the streams edge before my long journey to the hills.

There I used to forget London, street by street. Sometimes I picked a
bunch of king-cups to show them to the hills.

I often came there. At first I noticed nothing about the field except
its beauty and its peacefulness.

But the second time that I came I thought there was something ominous
about the field.

Down there among the king-cups by the little shallow stream I felt that
something terrible might happen in just such a place.

I did not stay long there, because I thought that too much time spent in
London had brought on these morbid fancies and I went on to the hills as
fast as I could.

I stayed for some days in the country air, and when I came back I went
to the field again to enjoy that peaceful spot before entering London.
But there was still something ominous among the osiers.

A year elapsed before I went there again. I emerged from the shadow of
London into the gleaming sun; the bright green grass and the king-cups
were flaming in the light, and the little stream was singing a happy
song. But the moment I stepped into the field my old uneasiness
returned, and worse than before. It was as though the shadow was
brooding there of some dreadful future thing and a year had brought it
nearer.

I reasoned that the exertion of bicycling might be bad for one, and that
the moment one rested this uneasiness might result.

A little later I came back past the field by night, and the song of the
stream in the hush attracted me down to it. And there the fancy came to
me that it would be a terribly cold place to be in the starlight, if for
some reason one was hurt and could not get away.

I knew a man who was minutely acquainted with the past history of that
locality, and him I asked if anything historical had ever happened in
that field. When he pressed me for my reason in asking him this, I said
that the field had seemed to me such a good place to hold a pageant in.
But he said that nothing of any interest had ever occurred there,
nothing at all.

So it was from the future that the field's terrible trouble came.

For three years off and on I made visits to the field, and every time
more clearly it boded evil things, and my uneasiness grew more acute
every time that I was lured to go and rest among the cool green grass
under the beautiful osiers. Once to distract my thoughts I tried to
gauge how fast the stream was trickling, but I found myself wondering if
it flowed faster than blood.

I felt that it would be a terrible place to go mad in, one would hear
voices.

At last I went to a poet whom I knew, and woke him from huge dreams, and
put before him the whole case of the field. He had not been out of
London all that year, and he promised to come with me and look at the
field, and tell me what was going to happen there. It was late in July
when we went. The pavement, the air, the houses and the dirt had been
all baked dry by the summer, the weary traffic dragged on, and on, and
on, and Sleep spreading her wings soared up and floated from London and
went to walk beautifully in rural places.

When the poet saw the field he was delighted, the flowers were out in
masses all along the stream, he went down to the little wood rejoicing.
By the side of the stream he stood and seemed very sad. Once or twice he
looked up and down it mournfully, then he bent and looked at the
king-cups, first one and then another, very closely, and shaking his
head.

For a long while he stood in silence, and all my old uneasiness
returned, and my bodings for the future.

And then I said, "What manner of field is it?"

And he shook his head sorrowfully.

"It is a battlefield," he said.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Day of the Poll](adta17.md)

</div>
