<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j3000)  [Next](j3002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. III*, tr. by H.T. Francis and R.A. Neil, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

### CONTENTS.

30I. CULLAKĀLIṄGA-JĀTAKA [1](j3002.htm#page_1)

A king, being eager to fight, finds occasion to quarrel with another
king. Misled by a prophecy of victory and neglecting the omens, he is
defeated by his adversary.

302\. MAHĀASSĀROHA-JĀTAKA [1](j3002.htm#page_1)

A king, being defeated by rebels, finds a hospitable shelter with a poor
countryman, and rewards his benefactor with the half of his kingdom.

303\. EKARAJA-JATAKA [9](j3004.htm#page_9)

A king is taken prisoner and tortured, and by his patience under
suffering wins his enemy to repentance.

304\. DADDARA-JĀTAKA [10](j3004.htm#page_10)

How two brothers were driven from their father's kingdom, and how their
pride was humbled by the contumely they suffered in their exile.

305\. SĪLAVĪMAṀSANA-JĀTAKA [12](j3005.htm#page_12)

A teacher tests the virtue of his pupils by tempting them to steal. The
only youth, that stands the test, is rewarded by marrying his master's
daughter.

306\. SUJĀTA-JĀTAKA [13](j3006.htm#page_13)

How the daughter of a fruiterer became a queen, and by her pride nearly
lost her position.

307\. PALĀSA-JĀTAKA [15](j3007.htm#page_15)

A brahmin pays honour to a tree-spirit and is rewarded by the discovery
of a buried treasure.

308\. JAVASAKUṆA-JĀTAKA [17](j3009.htm#page_17)

The story of the woodpecker and the ungrateful lion.

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

309\. CHAVAKA-JĀTAKA [18](j3009.htm#page_18)

How a pariah, who stole mangoes, ventured to reprove a king for allowing
a priest to teach him from a lower seat.

310\. SAYHA-JĀTAKA [20](j3010.htm#page_20)

How a brahmin refused to give up the ascetic life in order to become
family priest to a king.

311\. PUCIMANDA-JĀTAKA [22](j3011.htm#page_22)

How a nimb-tree spirit frightened away a robber whose presence
endangered the safety of the tree.

312\. KASSAPAMANDIYA-JĀTAKA [24](j3013.htm#page_24)

A father and son in journeying together fall out by the way, and the old
man is reproved for his want of self-restraint.

313\. KHANTIVĀDI-JĀTAKA [26](j3014.htm#page_26)

How a wicked king cruelly maltreated an ascetic, and how the patience of
the holy man endured to the end, and the king was cast into Hell.

314\. LOHAKUMBHI-JĀTAKA [29](j3014.htm#page_29)

A king is terrified by hearing awful cries in the night and is urged by
his family priest to avert the evil omen by the sacrifice of living
creatures. A young brahmin interprets the sounds to be the cries uttered
by lost souls in Hell, and the king takes comfort and forbids the
sacrifice.

315\. MAṀMMSA-JĀTAKA[32](j3015.htm#page_32)

How four young merchants tried to wheedle a hunter out of his venison,
and how one alone by his cunning address succeeded.

316\. SASA-JĀTAKA [34](j3016.htm#page_34)

How a hare, in default of other food, offered its own flesh to be eaten,
and was rewarded by having its form supernaturally impressed on the face
of the moon.

317\. MATARODANA-JĀTAKA [38](j3018.htm#page_38)

How a youth, when his brother died, demonstrated the folly of grieving
for the dead.

318\. KANAVERA-JĀTAKA [39](j3018.htm#page_39)

How a courtezan rescued a robber by betraying her lover to death, and
how she was afterwards punished for her treachery.

319\. TITTIRA-JĀTAKA [43](j3020.htm#page_43)

A decoy-partridge is troubled with scruples of conscience.

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

320\. SUCCAJA-JĀTAKA [44](j3020.htm#page_44)

How a prince requited his wife's devotion with base ingratitude, until
he was brought to a better mind by the admonition of his minister.

321 KUṬIDŪSAKA-JĀTAKA [47](j3021.htm#page_47)

How a monkey, through envy, destroyed a bird's nest.

322\. DADDABHA-JĀTAKA [49](j3022.htm#page_49)

Of the timid hare and the flight of the beasts.

323\. BRAHMADATTA-JĀTAKA [52](j3023.htm#page_52)

Of the ascetic who for twelve years had not the courage to ask for a
trifling boon.

324\. CAMMASĀṬAKA-JĀTAKA [55](j3025.htm#page_55)

Of a foolish mendicant who met his death by mistaking the butting of a
ram for a respectful salutation.

325\. GODHA-JĀTAKA [56](j3025.htm#page_56)

How a greedy ascetic was outwitted by a lizard.

326\. KAKKĀRU-JĀTAKA [58](j3026.htm#page_58)

How a wicked priest was punished for assuming virtues to which he had no
claim.

327\. KĀKĀTI-JĀTAKA [60](j3027.htm#page_60)

How a roc carried off a king's wife to his island home, and was
afterwards outwitted by the king's minstrel.

328\. ANANUSOCIYA-JĀTAKA [62](j3028.htm#page_62)

The story of the holy man who found a wife by means of a golden image,
and how on her death he neither fasted nor wept.

329\. KĀLABĀHU-JĀTAKA [65](j3030.htm#page_65)

The story of the parrots and the black monkey, and how the monkey fell
into disgrace and the parrots regained the king's favour.

330\. SĪLAVĪMAṀSA-JĀTAKA [66](j3030.htm#page_66)

Of the man who tested the power of virtue and of the moral lessons he
learned from the hawk and the piece of meat and from the slave-girl to
whom loss of hope alone brought peace.

331\. KOKĀLIKA-JĀTAKA [68](j3031.htm#page_68)

How a talkative king was admonished by the fate of the young bird that
cried "cuckoo" too soon.

332\. RATHALAṬṬHI-JĀTAKA [69](j3032.htm#page_69)

Of the priest and the carters and the danger of giving judgment before
hearing both sides.

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

333\. GODHA-JĀTAKA [71](j3034.htm#page_71)

How a roasted lizard ran away and how a king was convicted of
ingratitude to his wife.

334\. RĀJOVĀDA-JĀTAKA [73](j3035.htm#page_73)

A king is taught by the parable of the sweet and bitter fig how his
realm is affected by a just or unjust rule.

335\. JAMBUKA-JĀTAKA [74](j3035.htm#page_74)

Of the fate of the jackal that presumed to play the part of the lion.

336\. BRAHĀCHATTA-JĀTAKA [76](j3036.htm#page_76)

How a prince by means of a spell discovered buried treasure and
substituted grass for gold.

337\. PĪṬHA-JĀTAKA [78](j3037.htm#page_78)

The duty of hospitality inculcated by the story of the merchant and the
ascetic.

338\. THUSA-JĀTAKA [80](j3038.htm#page_80)

How a king was saved from being killed by his son, through the
repetition of a spell at critical moments.

339\. BĀVERU-JĀTAKA [83](j3039.htm#page_83)

How a crow was ousted from a position of favour when a peacock appeared.

340\. VISAYHA-JĀTAKA [85](j3041.htm#page_85)

How a rich merchant, after he was reduced to beggary, continued to
exercise charity.

341\. KAṆḌARI-JĀTAKA [87](j3041.htm#page_87)

(*See* Kunūla-Jātaka, No. 523.)

342\. VĀNARA-JĀTAKA [87](j3041.htm#page_87)

The crocodile outwitted by the monkey.

343\. KUNTANI-JĀTAKA [89](j3044.htm#page_89)

The heron's revenge for the loss of her young ones.

344 AMBACORA-JĀTAKA [90](j3044.htm#page_90)

How a false ascetic robbed a mango orchard and charged some innocent
maidens with the theft.

345\. GAJAKUMBHA-JĀTAKA [92](j3045.htm#page_92)

Of a slothful king admonished by the example of a lazy tortoise.

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

346\. KESAVA-JĀTAKA [93](j3046.htm#page_93)

The sick hermit and his friend, or love the best physician.

347\. AYAKŪṬA-JĀTAKA [96](j3047.htm#page_96)

How a king who had forbidden the sacrifice of living creatures was
shielded by a god from the vengeance of a goblin.

348\. ARAÑÑA-JĀTAKA [98](j3049.htm#page_98)

Of a virtuous youth led astray by evil communications.

349\. SANDHIBHEDA-JĀTAKA [99](j3049.htm#page_99)

A jackal by slanderous words brings about a fatal quarrel between a lion
and a bull.

350\. DEVATĀPAÑHA-JĀTAKA [101](j3050.htm#page_101)

(*See* Ummagga-Jātaka.)

351\. MAṆIKUṆḌALA-JĀTAKA [102](j3052.htm#page_102)

(Same as No. 303.)

352\. SUJĀTA-JĀTAKA [103](j3052.htm#page_103)

A father is cured of inordinate grief by the feigned madness of his son.

353\. DHONASĀKHA-JĀTAKA [105](j3054.htm#page_105)

How a king, who was guilty of gross cruelty, met with fitting
retribution.

354\. URAGA-JĀTAKA [107](j3054.htm#page_107)

How, when a brahmin lost his son, neither he nor any of his family
lamented or wept, and of their exceeding great reward.

355\. GRATA-JĀTAKA [111](j3055.htm#page_111)

(Same as No. 303.)

356\. KĀRAṆḌIYA-JĀTAKA [113](j3057.htm#page_113)

A teacher is taught by his pupil the folly of preaching to unwilling
hearers.

357\. LAṬUKIKA-JĀTAKA [115](j3058.htm#page_115)

How a quail brought about the destruction of an elephant that had killed
her young ones.

358\. CULLADHAMMAPĀLA-JĀTAKA [117](j3058.htm#page_117)

A king, being jealous of his queen's affection for her child, has the
boy mutilated and killed, and is punished by being cast into Hell.

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

359\. SUVAṆṆAMIGA-JĀTAKA [120](j3059.htm#page_120)

How a stag caught in a snare was released from death by the devotion of
his doe.

360\. SUSSONDI-JĀTAKA [123](j3060.htm#page_123)

(Same as No. 327.)

361\. VAṆṆĀROHA-JĀTAKA [126](j3062.htm#page_126)

The jackal as calumniator tries in vain to set a lion and a tiger at
variance.

362\. SĪLAVĪMAṀSA-JĀTAKA [128](j3063.htm#page_128)

How a man tried his own reputation for virtue.

363\. HIRI-JĀTAKA [129](j3063.htm#page_129)

(Imperfect. Same as Akataññu-Jātaka, No. 90.)

364\. KHAJJOPANAKA-JĀTAKA [130](j3064.htm#page_130)

(*See* Mahāummagga. )

365\. AHIGUṆḌIKA-JĀTAKA [130](j3064.htm#page_130)

How a monkey that had been beaten was not to be cajoled by soft words.

366\. GUMBIYA-JĀTAKA [132](j3067.htm#page_132)

How a merchant warned the members of his caravan against eating strange
food, and how those that neglected his warning were poisoned by an evil
spirit.

367\. SĀLIYA-JĀTAKA [133](j3067.htm#page_133)

The biter bit, or the story of the knavish doctor who was killed by the
snake which he pretended was harmless.

368\. TACASĀRA-JĀTAKA [134](j3068.htm#page_134)

The same story as the preceding one, to which is added how certain lads
were acquitted of the charge of having caused the death of the doctor.

369\. MITTAVINDA-JĀTAKA [136](j3070.htm#page_136)

(A fragment of No. 41.)

370\. PALĀSA-JĀTAKA [137](j3070.htm#page_137)

How a Judas tree was destroyed by the parasitic growth of a banyan
shoot.

371\. DĪGHITIKOSALA-JĀTAKA [139](j3072.htm#page_139)

A prince spares the life of the king who had slain his father and
thereby wins him to repentance.

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

372\. MIGAPOTAKA-JĀTAKA [140](j3072.htm#page_140)

An ascetic is admonished against excessive grief for the loss of a pet
deer.

373\. MŪSIKA-JĀTAKA [142](j3074.htm#page_142)

A king by repeating a spell at critical moments baffles the attempts of
his heir to kill him.

374\. CULLADHANUGGAHA-JĀTAKA [144](j3074.htm#page_144)

A woman who betrayed her husband to death, and was afterwards deserted
by her lover, has her folly brought home to her by witnessing the fate
of a greedy jackal.

375\. KAPOTA-JĀTAKA [148](j3075.htm#page_148)

How a greedy crow was made ridiculous and tortured to death.

376\. AVĀRIYA-JĀTAKA [151](j3077.htm#page_151)

How a foolish ferryman behaved when offered good advice instead of his
fare.

377\. SETAKETU-JĀTAKA [153](j3077.htm#page_153)

How caste and feigned sanctity were foiled.

378\. DARĪMUKHA-JĀTAKA [156](j3078.htm#page_156)

How a king renounced his kingdom on the advice of an old friend, who had
become a paccekabuddha.

379\. NERU-JĀTAKA [159](j3079.htm#page_159)

How royal birds avoid a golden mountain which makes all birds appear
alike.

380\. ĀSAṆKA-JĀTAKA [161](j3081.htm#page_161)

How a king spent three years in finding out the name of his future
queen.

381\. MIGĀLOPA-JĀTAKA [164](j3081.htm#page_164)

How a disobedient vulture perished.

382\. SIRIKĀLAKAṆṆI-JĀTAKA [165](j3082.htm#page_165)

How precedence was settled by a good merchant between the goddesses of
Good and Ill Fortune.

383\. KUKKUṬA-JĀTAKA [168](j3083.htm#page_168)

How a cat failed to deceive a cock.

384\. DHAMMADDHAJA-JĀTAKA [170](j3085.htm#page_170)

How a hypocritical crow was put to death.

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

385\. NANDIYAMIGA-JĀTAKA [171](j3085.htm#page_171)

How a good deer brought blessings to his kindred and to all animals.

386\. KHARAPUTTA-JĀTAKA [174](j3086.htm#page_174)

How a king got a charm from a nāga by which he understood the sounds of
all animals: his queen tried to get the charm from him, but was foiled
through some advice given by Sakka, disguised as a goat.

387\. SŪCI-JĀTAKA [178](j3088.htm#page_178)

How a young smith made a marvellous needle, and thereby won to wife the
daughter of a head-smith.

388\. TUṆḌILA-JĀTAKA [180](j3088.htm#page_180)

How a pig explained to his younger brother that death is not to be
feared.

389\. SUVAṆṆAKAKKAṬA-JĀTAKA [183](j3089.htm#page_183)

How a farmer was saved by a good crab from being killed by a snake in
league with a crow: the two latter were themselves killed.

390\. MAYHAKA-JĀTAKA [186](j3090.htm#page_186)

How a greedy, murdering uncle was compared to a certain bird, and so
converted.

391\. DHAJAVIHEṬHA-JĀTAKA [189](j3092.htm#page_189)

How a wicked person, disguised as a Brother, caused the expulsion of
Brethren from a kingdom, and the spiritual ruin of the people: Sakka
interfered and saved the kingdom.

392\. BHISAPUPPHA-JĀTAKA [191](j3092.htm#page_191)

How a brahmin was accused of stealing the smell of a flower.

393\. VIGHĀSA-JĀTAKA [193](j3093.htm#page_193)

How certain self-indulgent monks were warned by a parrot.

394\. VAṬṬAKA-JĀTAKA [194](j3094.htm#page_194)

How a quail explained to a crow how to get fat.

395\. KĀKA-JĀTAKA [195](j3095.htm#page_195)

How a greedy crow was made ridiculous and put to death.

396\. KUKKU-JĀTAKA [197](j3097.htm#page_197)

How a king was converted by certain parables.

397\. MANOJA-JĀTAKA [199](j3098.htm#page_199)

How a lion was enticed to his death by the counsel of a jackal.

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

398\. SUTANO-JĀTAKA [201](j3099.htm#page_201)

How a king, falling into the power of a man-eating goblin, sent people
daily to be eaten: a young man got the better of the goblin and
converted him.

399\. GIJJHA-JĀTAKA [204](j3100.htm#page_204)

How a good young vulture was loosed from a snare by a hunter.

400\. DABBHAPUPPHA-JĀTAKA [205](j3101.htm#page_205)

How two otters, who had caught a fish, were cheated by a jackal.

40I. DASAṆṆAKA-JĀTAKA [207](j3101.htm#page_207)

How a king was cured of a sickness, born of longing for his wife, by
seeing a man swallowing a sword.

402\. SATTUBHASTA-JĀTAKA [210](j3102.htm#page_210)

How an old brahmin was sent away by his wife to beg: a snake got into
his meal-bag unperceived: a young brahmin preacher guessed that the
snake was there, and then exposed the wife's wickedness.

403\. AṬṬHISENA-JĀTAKA [216](j3104.htm#page_216)

How a brahmin explains to a king why he makes no petition.

404\. KAPI-JĀTAKA [218](j3105.htm#page_218)

How a naughty monkey brought ruin on his kindred.

405\. BAKABRAḤMA-JĀTAKA [219](j3105.htm#page_219)

How an angel was converted from heresy.

406\. GANDHĀRA-JĀTAKA [221](j3106.htm#page_221)

How two kings became ascetics, and one was admonished in a fault by the
other.

407\. MAHĀKAPI-JĀTAKA [225](j3108.htm#page_225)

How a monkey saved his followers at the cost of his own life.

408\. KUMBHAKĀRA-JĀTAKA [228](j3109.htm#page_228)

How four kings became ascetics through observing a mango-tree, a
bracelet, a flock of birds, and same bulls respectively: a potter and
his wife separately follow their example.

409\. DAḶHADHAMMA-JĀTAKA [233](j3110.htm#page_233)

How a she-elephant, forgotten by the king in her old age, was restored
to honour.

410\. SOMADATTA-JĀTAKA [235](j3110.htm#page_235)

How an ascetic was comforted for the loss of a young elephant.

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

411\. SUSĪMA-JĀKATA [237](j3112.htm#page_237)

How a king became an ascetic on being shewn a grey hair by his chief
queen.

412\. KOṬISIMBALI-JĀTAKA [239](j3112.htm#page_239)

How a tree-spirit was frightened by a bird and comforted by a roc-king.

413\. DHŪMAKĀRI-JĀTAKA [241](j3113.htm#page_241)

How a king neglected old friends for new ones: his case illustrated by a
story of a brahmin goatherd and some deer.

414\. JĀGARA-JĀTAKA [243](j3114.htm#page_243)

How an ascetic kept vigil at nights.

415\. KUMMĀSAPIṆḌA-JĀTAKA [244](j3115.htm#page_244)

How a king and queen declared the merits in former births that brought
about their birth in royal rank.

416\. PARANTAPA-JĀTAKA [240](j3113.htm#page_240)

How a prince understood the speech of jackals: and how a king's son
discovered and avenged his father's murder after many years.

417\. KACCĀNI-JĀTAKA [253](j3118.htm#page_253)

How an old woman, expelled from her son's house owing to her
daughter-in-law, thought that Right was dead: and how the whole family
became reconciled.

418\. AṬṬHASADDA-JĀTAKA [256](j3118.htm#page_256)

How eight sounds that had frightened a king were explained to him
harmlessly.

419\. SULASĀ-JĀTAKA [260](j3119.htm#page_260)

How a man who would have killed his wife was killed by her.

420\. SUMAṄGALA-JĀTAKA [263](j3120.htm#page_263)

How a king would not decide a case till his anger was over.

421\. GAṄGAMĀLA-JĀTAKA [266](j3122.htm#page_266)

How a willing servant was reborn as a king: how he shared his kingdom
for a time with a poor water-carrier who had shown himself an honest
fellow: how a barber got from the king the explanation of his birth in
the kingly rank, and became a paccekabuddha, honoured by the king.

422\. CETIYA-JĀTAKA [271](j3122.htm#page_271)

How a king, who told a lie in the golden age, sank into the earth and so
down to Hell.

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

423\. INDRIYA-JĀTAKA [276](j3123.htm#page_276)

How a tempted ascetic was warned by the story of a miserable hunter.

424\. ĀDITTA-JĀTAKA [280](j3125.htm#page_280)

How seven paccekabuddhas came and received gifts from a king.

425\. AṬṬHĀNA-JĀTAKA [282](j3125.htm#page_282)

How an ascetic repulsed a woman who had once behaved harshly to him.

426\. DĪPI-JĀTAKA [285](j3127.htm#page_285)

How a panther ate a she-goat for all her politeness.

427\. GIJJHA-JĀTAKA [287](j3128.htm#page_287)

How a vulture perished, through attempting too bold a flight.

428\. KOSAMBĪ-JĀTAKA [289](j3129.htm#page_289)

(Imperfect—with a reference to the story in No. 371.)

429\. MAHĀSUKA-JĀTAKA [291](j3129.htm#page_291)

How a grateful parrot refused to leave a barren fig-tree.

430\. CULLASUKA-JĀTAKA [294](j3131.htm#page_294)

The same story as the preceding one.

431\. HĀRITA-JĀTAKA [295](j3132.htm#page_295)

Of an ascetic who would not tell a lie to conceal his sin.

432\. PADAKUSALAMĀṆAVA-JATAKA [298](j3133.htm#page_298)

A boy receives, as a gift from a goblin mother, the power of recognizing
footsteps even in the air, and a king, to test the boy's skill, steals
his own jewels and then sets the boy to catch the thief. When the boy by
a number of pointed stories convicts him of theft, the king is put to
death by his own subjects and the boy becomes king.

433\. LOMASAKASSAPA-JĀTAKA [306](j3133.htm#page_306)

How a king promised his daughter in marriage to an ascetic, if he would
offer a living sacrifice, and how the ascetic resisted the temptation.

434\. CAKKAVĀKA-JĀTAKA [309](j3134.htm#page_309)

How a crow, through his greediness, could not attain to the beauty of
the ruddy goose.

435\. HALIDDIRĀGA-JĀTAKA [311](j3135.htm#page_311)

A youth, who was being led astray by female seductions, is rescued by
the sage counsels of his father.

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

436\. SAMUGGA-JĀTAKA [313](j3136.htm#page_313)

How a demon, who swallowed his wife and carried her about in his belly,
even so failed to keep her virtuous.

437\. PŪTIMAṀSA-JĀTAKA [316](j3137.htm#page_316)

How a wise she-goat outwitted the jackal that was plotting to kill her.

438\. TITTIRA-JĀTAKA [319](j3138.htm#page_319)

How a wicked ascetic killed a learned partridge, and how a lion and a
tiger avenged the death of the partridge.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 301.: Cullakāliṅga-Jātaka](j3002)

</div>
