<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j3014)  [Next](j3016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. III*, tr. by H.T. Francis and R.A. Neil, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. 314.

#### LOHAKUMBHI-JĀTAKA. <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

*"Due share of wealth," etc.*—This story the Master, while living at
Jetavana, told concerning a king of Kosala. The king of Kosala of those
days, they say, one night heard a cry uttered by four inhabitants of
Hell—the syllables *du, sa, na, so,* one from each of the four. In a
previous existence, tradition says, they had been princes in Sāvatthi,
and had been guilty of adultery. After misconducting themselves with
their neighbours' wives, however carefully guarded they might be, and
indulging their amorous propensities, their evil life had been cut short
by the Wheel of Death, near Sāvatthi. They came to life again in Four
Iron Cauldrons. After being tortured for sixty thousand years they had
come up to the top, and on seeing the edge of the Cauldron's mouth they
thought to themselves, "When shall we escape from this misery?" And then
all four uttered a loud cry, one after another. The king was terrified
to death at the noise, and sat waiting for break of day, unable to stir.

At dawn the brahmins came and inquired after his health. The king
replied, "How, my Masters, can I be well, \[44\] who to-day have heard
four such terrible cries." The brahmins waved their hands. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22) "What is it, my Masters?" said the king.
The brahmins assure him that the sounds are ominous of great violence.
"Do they admit of remedy, or not?" said the king. "You might say not,"
said the brahmins, "but we are well-trained in these matters, Sire." "By
what means," said the king, "will you avert these evils?" "Sire," they
replied, "there is one great remedy in our power, and by offering the
fourfold sacrifice <span id="fr_23"></span>[3](#fn_23) of every living
creature we will avert all evil." "Then be quick," said the king, "and
take all living creatures by fours—men, bulls, horses, elephants, down
to quails and other birds—and by this fourfold sacrifice restore my
peace of mind." The brahmins consented, and taking whatever they
required, they dug a sacrificial pit and fastened their numerous victims
to their stakes, and were highly excited at the thought of the dainties
they were to eat, and the wealth they would gain, and went about
backwards and forwards, saying, "Sir, I must have so and so."

The queen Mallikā came and asked the king, why the brahmins went about
so delighted and smiling. The king said, "My queen, what have you to do
with this? You are intoxicated with your own glory, and you do not know
how wretched I am." "How so, Sire?" she replied. "I have heard such
awful noises, my queen, and when I asked the brahmins what would be the
result of

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

my hearing these cries, they told me I was threatened with danger to my
kingdom or my property or my life, but by offering the fourfold
sacrifice they would restore my peace of mind, and now in obedience to
my command, they have dug a sacrificial pit and are gone to fetch
whatever victims they require." The queen said, "Have you, my lord,
consulted the chief brahmin in the Deva-world as to the origin of these
cries?" "Who, lady," said the king, "is the chief brahmin in the
Deva-world?" "The Great Gotama," she replied, "the Supreme Buddha."
"Lady," he said, "I have not consulted the Supreme Buddha." "Then go,"
she answered, "and consult him."

The king hearkened to the words of the queen and after his morning meal
he mounted his state chariot and drove to Jetavana. Here after saluting
the Master he thus addressed him: "Reverend Sir, in the night season I
heard four cries and consulted the brahmins about it. \[45\] They
undertook to restore my peace of mind, by the fourfold sacrifice of
every kind of victim, and are now busy preparing a sacrificial pit. What
does the hearing of these cries betoken to me?"

"Nothing whatever," said the Master. "Certain beings in Hell, owing to
the agony they suffer, cried aloud. These cries," he added, "have not
been heard by you alone. Kings of old heard the same. And when they too,
after consulting their brahmins, were anxious to offer sacrifices of
slain victims, on hearing what wise men had to say, they refused to do
so. The wise men explained to them the nature of these cries, and bade
them let loose the crowd of victims and thus restored their peace of
mind." And at the request of the king he told a story of bygone days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born in a brahmin family, in a certain village of Kāsi.
And when he was of mature years, renouncing the pleasures of sense and
embracing the ascetic life he developed the supernatural powers of
mystic meditation, and enjoying the delights of Contemplation took up
his abode in a pleasant grove in the Himālaya country.

The king of Benares at this time was fearfully alarmed by hearing those
four sounds uttered by four beings who dwelt in Hell. And when told by
brahmins in exactly the same way that one of three dangers must befall
him, he agreed to their proposal to put a stop to it by the fourfold
sacrifice. The family priest with the help of the brahmins provided a
sacrificial pit, and a great crowd of victims was brought up and
fastened to the stakes. Then the Bodhisatta, guided by a feeling of
charity, regarding the world with his divine eye, when he saw what was
going on, said, "I must go at once and see to the well-being of all
these creatures." And then by his magic power flying up into the air, he
alighted in the garden of the king of Benares, and sat down on the royal
slab of stone, looking like an image of gold. The chief disciple of the
family priest approached his teacher and asked, "Is it not written,
Master, in our Vedas that there is no happiness for those who take the
life of any creature?" The priest replied, "You are to bring here the
king's property, and we shall have abundant dainties to eat. Only hold
your peace." And with these words he drove his pupil away. \[46\] But
the youth thought,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "I will have no
part in this matter," and went and found the Bodhisatta in the king's
garden. After saluting him in a friendly manner he took a seat at a
respectful distance. The Bodhisatta asked him saying, "Young man, does
the king rule his kingdom righteously?" "Yes, Reverend Sir, he does,"
answered the youth, "but he has heard four cries in the night, and on
inquiring of the brahmins, he has been assured by them that they would
restore his peace of mind, by offering up the fourfold sacrifice. So the
king, being anxious to recover his happiness, is preparing a sacrifice
of animals, and a vast number of victims has been brought up and
fastened to the sacrificial stakes. Now is it not right for holy men
like yourself to explain the cause of these noises, and to rescue these
numerous victims from the jaws of death?" "Young man," he replied, "the
king does not know us, nor do we know the king, but we do know the
origin of these cries, and if the king were to come and ask us the
cause, we would resolve his doubts for him." "Then," said the youth,
"just stay here a moment, Reverend Sir, and I will conduct the king to
you."

The Bodhisatta agreed, and the youth went and told the king all about
it, and brought him back with him. The king saluted the Bodhisatta and
sitting on one side asked him if it were true that he knew the origin of
these noises. "Yes, Your Majesty," he said. "Then tell me, Reverend
Sir." "Sire," he answered, "these men in a former existence were guilty
of gross misconduct with the carefully guarded wives of their neighbours
near Benares, and therefore were re-born in Four Iron Cauldrons. Where
after being tortured for thirty thousand years in a thick corrosive
liquid heated to boiling point, they would at one time sink till they
struck the bottom of the cauldron, and at another time rise to the top
like a foam bubble <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24), but after those
years they found the mouth of the cauldron, and looking over the edge
they all four desired to give utterance to four complete stanzas, but
failed to do so. And after getting out just one syllable each, they sank
again in the iron cauldrons. \[47\] Now the one of them that sank after
uttering the syllable *"du"* was anxious to speak as follows:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Due* share of wealth we gave not; an evil life we led:  
We found no sure salvation in joys that now are fled.

</div>

And when he failed to utter it, the Bodhisatta of his own knowledge
repeated the complete stanza. And similarly with the rest. The one that
uttered merely the syllable *"sa"* wanted to repeat the following
stanza:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Sad* fate of those that suffer! ah! when shall come release?  
Still after countless æons, Hell's tortures never cease.

</div>

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

And again in the case of the one that uttered the syllable *"na,"* this
was the stanza he wished to repeat:—

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Nay* endless are the sufferings to which we're doomed by fate;  
The ills we wrought upon the earth ’tis ours to expiate.

</div>

And the one that uttered the syllable *"so"* was anxious to repeat the
following:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Soon* shall I passing forth from hence, attain to human birth,  
And richly dowered with virtue rise to many a deed of worth.

</div>

\[48\] The Bodhisatta, after reciting these verses one by one, said,
"The dweller in Hell, Sire, when he wanted to utter a complete stanza,
through the greatness of his sin, was unable to do it. And when he thus
experienced the result of his wrong-doing he cried aloud. But fear not;
no danger shall come nigh you, in consequence of hearing this cry." Thus
did he reassure the king. And the king proclaimed by beat of his golden
drum that the vast host of victims was to be released, and the
sacrificial pit destroyed. And the Bodhisatta, after thus providing for
the safety of the numerous victims, stayed there a few days, and then
returning to the same place, without any break in his ecstasy, was born
in the world of Brahma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Master, having ended his lesson, identified the Birth: " Sāriputta
at that time was the young priest, I myself was the ascetic."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[29:1](j3015.htm#fr_21) Compare *Buddhaghosha's
Parables,* No. 15: "Story of the Four Thuthe's Sons." King
Pasenadīkosala in this story was meditating the sin of David against
Uriah the Hittite, and was deterred from his purpose by the awful vision
related in this Jātaka. See also Turnour's *Maháwanso,* i. IV. 18. A
king in a dream sees his soul cast into the Lohakumbhī Hell.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[29:2](j3015.htm#fr_22) Possibly to avert the
evil omen.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[29:3](j3015.htm#fr_23) See Colebrooke's
*Essays,* i. 348.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[31:1](j3015.htm#fr_24) See *Milindapañha,* 357.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 315.: Maṁsa-Jātaka.](j3016)

</div>
