<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j3038)  [Next](j3040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. III*, tr. by H.T. Francis and R.A. Neil, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. 338.

#### THUSA-JĀTAKA.

*"With sense so nice," etc.*—This story was told by the Master while
living in the Bamboo Grove, of prince Ajātasattu. At the time of his
conception there arose in his mother, the daughter of the king of
Kosala, a chronic longing to drink blood from the right knee of king
Bimbisāra <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51) (her husband). Being
questioned by her attendant ladies, she told them how it was with her.
The king too hearing of it called his astrologers and said, "The queen
is possessed of such and such a longing. What will be the issue of it?"
The astrologers said, "The child conceived in the womb of the queen will
kill you and seize your kingdom." "If my son," said the king, "should
kill me and seize my kingdom, what is the harm of it?" And then he had
his right knee opened with a sword and letting the blood fall into a
golden dish gave it to the queen to drink. She thought, "If the son that
is born of me should kill his father, what care I for him? " and
endeavoured to bring about a miscarriage. \[122\] The king hearing of it
called her to him and said, "My dear, it is said, my son will slay me
and seize my kingdom.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But I am not
exempt from old age and death: suffer me to behold the face of my child.
Henceforth act not after this manner." But she still went to the garden
and acted as before. The king on hearing of it forbade her visits to the
garden, and when she had gone her full time she gave birth to a son. On
his naming-day, because he had been his father's enemy, while still
unborn, they called him prince Ajātasattu. As he grew up with his
princely surroundings, one day the Master accompanied by five hundred
Brethren came to the king's palace and sat down. The assembly of the
Brethren with Buddha at their head was entertained by the king with
choice food, both hard and soft. And after saluting the Master the king
sat down to listen to the law. At this moment they dressed up the young
prince and brought him to the king. The king welcomed the child with a
strong show of affection and placed him on his lap, and fondling the boy
with the natural love of a father for his child, he did not listen to
the law. The Master observing his inattention said, "Great king,
formerly kings when suspicious of their sons had them kept in a secret
place, and gave orders that at their death they were to be brought forth
and set upon the throne." And at the request of the king he told him a
legend of the olden time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once upon a time when Brahmadatta reigned in Benares, the Bodhisatta was
a far-famed teacher at Takkasilā and trained many young princes and sons
of brahmins in the arts. Now the son of the king of Benares, when he was
sixteen years old, came to him and after he had acquired the three Vedas
and all the liberal arts and was perfect in them, he took leave of his
master. The teacher regarding him by his gift of prognostication
thought, "There is danger coming to this man through his son. By my
magic power I will deliver him from it." And composing four stanzas he
gave them to the young prince and spoke as follows: "My son, after you
are seated on the throne, when your son is sixteen years old, utter the
first stanza while eating your rice; repeat the second stanza at the
time of the great levée; the third, as you are ascending to the palace
roof, standing at the head of the stairs, and the fourth, \[123\] when
entering the royal chamber, as you stand on the threshold."

The prince readily assented to this and saluting his teacher went away.
And after acting as viceroy, on his father's death he ascended the
throne. His son, when he was sixteen years of age, on the king's going
forth to take his pleasure in the garden, observing his father's majesty
and power was filled with a desire to kill him and seize upon his
kingdom, and spoke to his attendants about it. They said, "True, Sir,
what is the good of obtaining power, when one is old? You must by some
means or other kill the king and possess yourself of his kingdom." The
prince said, "I will kill him by putting poison in his food." So he took
some poison and sat down to eat his evening meal with his father. The
king, when the rice was just served in the bowl, spoke the first stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

With sense so nice, the husks from rice  
    Rats keen are to discriminate:  
They cared not much the husks to touch,  
    But grain by grain the rice they ate.

</div>

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

"I am discovered," thought the prince, and not daring to administer the
poison in the bowl of rice, he rose up and bowing to the king went away.
He told the story to his attendants and said, "To-day I am found out.
How now shall I kill him?" From this day forth they lay concealed in the
garden, and consulting together in whispers said, "There is still one
expedient. When it is time to attend the great levée, gird on your
sword, and taking your stand amongst the councillors, when you see the
king off his guard, you must strike him a blow with your sword and kill
him." Thus they arranged it. The prince readily agreed, and at the time
of the great levée, he girt on his sword \[124\] and moving about from
place to place looked out for an opportunity to strike the king. At this
moment the king uttered the second stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The secret counsel taken in the wood  
    By me is understood:  
The village plot soft whispered in the ear  
    That too I hear.

</div>

Thought the prince, "My father knows that I am his enemy," and ran away
and told his attendants. After the lapse of seven or eight days they
said, "Prince, your father is ignorant of your feeling towards him. You
only fancy this in your own mind. Put him to death." So one day he took
his sword and stood at the top of the stairs in the royal closet. The
king standing at the head of the staircase spoke the third stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A monkey once did cruel measures take  
His tender offspring impotent to make.

</div>

Thought the prince, "My father wants to seize me," and in his terror he
fled away and told his attendants he had been threatened by his father.
After the lapse of a fortnight they said, "Prince, if the king knew
this, he would not have put up with it so long a time. Your imagination
suggests this to you. \[125\] Put him to death." So one day he took his
sword and entering the royal chamber on the upper floor of the palace he
lay down beneath the couch, intending to slay the king, as soon as he
came. At the close of the evening meal, the king sent his retinue away,
wishing to lie down, and entering the royal chamber, as he stood on the
threshold, he uttered the fourth stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

    Thy cautious creeping ways  
Like one-eyed goat in mustard field that strays,  
And who thou art that lurkest here below,  
    This too I know.

</div>

Thought the prince, "My father has found me out. Now he will put me to
death." And seized with fear he came out from beneath the couch, and
throwing down his sword at the king's feet and saying, "Pardon me, my
lord," he lay grovelling before him. The king said, "You thought, no

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

one knows what I am about." And after rebuking him he ordered him to be
bound in chains and put into the prison house, and set a guard over him.
Then the king meditated on the virtues of the Bodhisatta. And by and bye
he died. When they had celebrated his funeral rites, they took the young
prince out of prison and set him on the throne.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Master here ended his lesson and said, "Thus, Sire, kings of old
suspected in cases in which suspicion was justified," and related this
incident, \[126\] but the king gave no heed to his words. The Master
thus identified the Birth: "At that time the far-famed teacher at
Takkasilā was I myself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[80:1](j3039.htm#fr_51) Compare *Tibetan Tales*
vi. Prince Jīvaka.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 339.: Bāveru-Jātaka.](j3040)

</div>
