[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070120)  [Next](1070122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.cxix"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.cxix-p1.1"></span>Tractate CXVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p2"></span><span id="iii.cxix-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxix-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIX. 23, 24</span>.

<span id="iii.cxix-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxix-p3.1"></span>The</span> things that were done beside the
Lord’s cross, when at length He was now crucified, we would take up, in
dependence on His help, in the present discourse. “Then the soldiers,
when they had crucified Him, took His garments, and made four parts, to
every soldier a part; and also His coat: now the coat was without seam,
woven from the top throughout. They said therefore among themselves, Let
us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that the
scripture might be fulfilled, which saith, They parted my raiment among
them, and for my vesture they did cast lots.” It was done as the Jews
wished; not that it was they themselves, but the soldiers who obeyed
Pilate, who himself acted as judge, that crucified Jesus: and yet if we
reflect on their wills, their plots, their endeavors, their delivering
up, and, lastly, on their extorting clamors, it was the Jews certainly,
more than any else, who crucified Jesus.

<span id="iii.cxix-p4"></span>2. But we must not speak in a mere cursory
way of the partition and dividing by lot of His garments. For although
all the four evangelists make mention thereof, yet the others do so more
briefly than John: and their notice of it is obscure, while his is in
the plainest manner possible. For Matthew says, “And after they
crucified Him, they parted His garments, casting lots.” <span
id="fr_1881"></span>[1882](#fn_1881) Mark: “And they crucified Him, and
parted His garments, casting lots upon them, what every man should
take.” <span id="fr_1882"></span>[1883](#fn_1882) Luke: “And they parted
His raiment, and cast lots.” <span id="fr_1883"></span>[1884](#fn_1883)
But John has told us also how many parts they made of His garments,
namely, four, that they might take one part apiece. From which it is
apparent that there were four soldiers, who obeyed the governor’s orders
in crucifying Him. For he plainly says: “Then the soldiers, when they
had crucified Him, took His garments, and made four parts, to every
soldier a part; and likewise the coat,” where there is understood, they
took: so that the meaning is, they took His garments, and made four
parts, to every soldier a part; and they took also His coat. And he so
spake, that we might see that there was no lot cast on His other
garments; but His coat, which they took along with the others, they did
not similarly divide. For in regard to it he proceeds to explain, “Now
the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.” And then
telling us why they cast lots on it, he says, “They said therefore among
themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall
be.” Hence it is clear that in the case of the other garments they had
equal parts, so that there was no need to cast lots: but that as regards
this one, they could not have had a part each without rending it, and
thereby possessing themselves only of useless fragments of it; to
prevent which, they preferred letting it come to one of them by lot. The
account given by this evangelist is also in harmony with the testimony
of prophecy, which he likewise immediately subjoins, saying, “That the
scripture might be fulfilled which saith, They parted my raiment among
them, and for my vesture they did cast lots.” For He says not, they cast
lots, but “they parted:” nor does He say, casting lots they parted; but
while making no mention whatever of the lot in regard to the rest of the
garments, He afterwards said, “and for my vesture they did cast lots,”
in reference solely to the coat that remained. On which I shall speak as
He Himself enables me, after I have first refuted the calumny, which may
possibly arise, as if the evangelists disagreed with one another, by
showing that the words of none of the others are inconsistent with the
narrative of John.

<span id="iii.cxix-p8"></span>3. For Matthew, in saying, “They parted
His garments, casting lots,” wished it to be <span id="page_431">p.
431</span> <span id="iii.cxix-Page_431"></span>understood, that in the
whole affair of parting the garments, the coat was also included, on
which they cast lots; for in course of parting all the garments, of
which it also was one, on it alone they cast lots. To the same purpose
also are the words of Luke: “Parting His garments, they cast lots;” for
in the process of parting they came to the coat whereon the lot was
cast, that the entire parting of His garments among them might be
completed. And what difference is there whether it is said, “Parting
they cast lots,” according to Luke; or, “They parted, casting the lot,”
according to Matthew: unless it be that Luke, in saying “lots,” used the
plural for the singular number,—a form of speech that is not unusual in
the Holy Scriptures, although some copies are found to have “lot,” <span
id="fr_1884"></span>[1885](#fn_1884) and not “lots”? Mark, therefore, is
the only one who seems to have introduced any kind of difficulty; for in
saying, “Casting the lot upon them, what every man should take,” his
words seem to imply, as if the lot was cast on all the garments, and not
on the coat alone. But here also brevity is the cause of the obscurity;
for the words, “Casting the lot upon them,” are as if it were said,
Casting the lot when they were in the process of division; which was
also the case. For the partition of all His garments would not have been
complete, had it not been declared by lot which of them also should get
possession of the coat, so as thereby to bring any contention on the
part of the dividers to an end, or rather prevent any such from arising.
In saying, therefore, “What every man should take,” so far as that has
to do with the lot, we must not take it as referring to all the garments
that were divided; for the lot was cast, who should take the coat:
whereof having omitted to describe the particular form, and how, in the
equal division that was made of the parts, it remained by itself, in
order, without being rent, to be awarded by lot, he therefore made use
of the expression, “what every man should take,” in other words, who it
was that should take it: as if the whole were thus expressed, They
parted His garments, casting the lot upon them, who should take the
coat, which had remained over in addition to their equal shares of the
rest.

<span id="iii.cxix-p10"></span>4. Some one, perhaps, may inquire what is
signified by the division that was made of His garments into so many
parts, and of the casting of lots for the coat. The raiment of the Lord
Jesus Christ parted into four, symbolized His quadripartite Church, as
spread abroad over the whole world, which consists of four quarters, and
equally, that is to say, harmoniously, distributed over all these
quarters. On which account He elsewhere says, that He will send His
angels to gather His elect from the four winds: <span
id="fr_1885"></span>[1886](#fn_1885) and what is that, but from the four
quarters of the world, east, west, north, and south? But the coat, on
which lots were cast, signifies the unity of all the parts, which is
contained in the bond of charity. And when the apostle is about to speak
of charity, he says, “I show you a more excellent way;” <span
id="fr_1886"></span>[1887](#fn_1886) and in another place, “To know also
the love of Christ, which far excelleth knowledge;” <span
id="fr_1887"></span>[1888](#fn_1887) and still further elsewhere, “And
above all these things charity which is the bond of perfectness.” <span
id="fr_1888"></span>[1889](#fn_1888) If, then, charity both has a more
excellent way, and far excelleth knowledge, and is enjoined above all
things, it is with great propriety that the garment, by which it is
signified, is represented as woven from the top. <span
id="fr_1889"></span>[1890](#fn_1889) And it was without seam, that its
sewing might never be separated; and came into the possession of one
man, because He gathereth all into one. Just as in the case of the
apostles, who formed the exact number of twelve, in other words, were
divisible into four parts of three each, when the question was put to
all of them, Peter was the only one that answered, “Thou art the Christ,
the Son of the living God;” and to whom it was said, “I will give unto
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven,” <span
id="fr_1890"></span>[1891](#fn_1890) as if he alone received the power
of binding and loosing: seeing, then, that one so spake in behalf of
all, and received the latter along with all, as if personifying the
unity itself; therefore one stands for all, because there is unity in
all. Whence, also, after here saying, “woven from the top,” he added,
“throughout.” <span id="fr_1891"></span>[1892](#fn_1891) And this also,
if referred to its meaning, implies that no one is excluded from a share
thereof, who is discovered to belong to the whole: from which whole, as
the Greek language indicates, the Church derives her name of Catholic.
And by the casting of lots, what else is commended but the grace of God?
For in this way in the person of one it reached to all, since the lot
satisfied them all, because the grace of God also in its unity reacheth
unto all; and when the lot is cast, the award is decided, not by the
merits of each individual, but by the secret judgment of God.

<span id="iii.cxix-p18"></span>5. And yet let no one say that such
things had no good signification because they were done by the bad, that
is to say, not by those who followed Christ, but by those who perse
<span id="page_432">p. 432</span> <span
id="iii.cxix-Page_432"></span>cuted Him. For what could we have to say
of the cross itself, which every one knows was in like manner made and
fastened to Christ by enemies and sinners? And yet it is to it we may
rightly understand the words of the apostle to be applicable, “what is
the breadth, and the length, and the height, and the depth.” <span
id="fr_1892"></span>[1893](#fn_1892) For its breadth lies in the
transverse beam, on which the hands of the Crucified are extended; and
signifies good works in all the breadth of love: its length extends from
the transverse beam to the ground, and is that whereto the back and feet
are affixed; and signifies perseverance through the whole length of time
to the end: its height is in the summit, which rises upwards above the
transverse beam; and signifies the supernal goal, to which all works
have reference, since all things that are done well and perseveringly,
in respect of their breadth and length, are to be done also with due
regard to the exalted character of the divine rewards: its depth is
found in the part that is fixed into the ground; for there it is both
concealed and invisible, and yet from thence spring up all those parts
that are outstanding and evident to the senses; just as all that is good
in us proceeds from the depths of the grace of God, which is beyond the
reach of human comprehension and judgment. But even though the cross of
Christ signified no more than what was said by the apostle, “And they
who are Jesus Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the passions and
lusts,” <span id="fr_1893"></span>[1894](#fn_1893) how great a good it
is! And yet it does not this, unless the good spirit be lusting against
the flesh, seeing that it was the opposing, or, in other words, the evil
spirit that constructed the cross of Christ. And lastly, as every one
knows, what else is the sign of Christ but the cross of Christ? For
unless that sign be applied, whether it be to the foreheads of
believers, or to the very water out of which they are regenerated, or to
the oil with which they receive the anointing chrism, or to the
sacrifice that nourishes them, none of them is properly administered.
How then can it be that no good is signified by that which is done by
the wicked, when by the cross of Christ, which the wicked made, every
good thing is sealed to us in the celebration of His sacraments? But
here we stop; and what follows we shall consider at another time in the
course of dissertation, as God shall grant us assistance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1881"></span>[430:1882](1070121.htm#fr_1881) <span
id="iii.cxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p5"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035)<span id="iii.cxix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1882"></span>[430:1883](1070121.htm#fr_1882) <span
id="iii.cxix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p6"></span> [Mark xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#024)<span id="iii.cxix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1883"></span>[430:1884](1070121.htm#fr_1883) <span
id="iii.cxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p7"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="iii.cxix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1884"></span>[431:1885](1070121.htm#fr_1884) <span
id="iii.cxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p9"></span> As it now is in the Greek \[*Textus
receptus*\], <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.cxix-p9.1"></span>
κλῆρον</span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxix-p9.2"></span>Migne</span>.

<span id="fn_1885"></span>[431:1886](1070121.htm#fr_1885) <span
id="iii.cxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p11"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031)<span id="iii.cxix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1886"></span>[431:1887](1070121.htm#fr_1886) <span
id="iii.cxix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p12"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)<span id="iii.cxix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1887"></span>[431:1888](1070121.htm#fr_1887) <span
id="iii.cxix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p13"></span> [Eph. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#019)<span id="iii.cxix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1888"></span>[431:1889](1070121.htm#fr_1888) <span
id="iii.cxix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p14"></span> [Col. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014)<span id="iii.cxix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1889"></span>[431:1890](1070121.htm#fr_1889) <span
id="iii.cxix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p15"></span> *Desuper*.

<span id="fn_1890"></span>[431:1891](1070121.htm#fr_1890) <span
id="iii.cxix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p16"></span> [Matt.
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span id="iii.cxix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1891"></span>[431:1892](1070121.htm#fr_1891) <span
id="iii.cxix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p17"></span> *Per totum*.

<span id="fn_1892"></span>[432:1893](1070121.htm#fr_1892) <span
id="iii.cxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p19"></span> [Eph. iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018)<span id="iii.cxix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1893"></span>[432:1894](1070121.htm#fr_1893) <span
id="iii.cxix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxix-p20"></span> [Gal. v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024)<span id="iii.cxix-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate CXIX](1070122)
