[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070056)  [Next](1070058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lv"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lv-p1.1"></span>Tractate LIV.</span>

<span id="iii.lv-p2"></span><span id="iii.lv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lv-p2.2"></span>Chapter XII. 44–50</span>

<span id="iii.lv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lv-p3.1"></span>Whilst</span> our Lord Jesus Christ was speaking
among the Jews, and giving so many miraculous signs, some believed who
were foreordained to eternal life, and whom He also called His sheep;
but some did not believe, and could not believe, because that, by the
mysterious yet not unrighteous judgment of God, they had been blinded
and hardened, because forsaken of Him who resisteth the proud, but
giveth grace unto the humble.  <span
id="fr_1103"></span>[1104](#fn_1103) But of those who believed, there
were some whose confession went so far, that they took branches of palm
trees, and met Him as He approached, turning in their joy that very
confession into a service of praise: while there were others, belonging
to the chief rulers, who had not the boldness to confess their faith,
lest they should be put out of the synagogue; and whom the evangelist
has branded with the words, that “they loved the praise of men more than
the praise of God “([John 12.43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043)<span
id="iii.lv-p4.2"></span>). Of those also who did not believe, there were
some who would afterwards believe, and whom He foresaw, when He said,
“When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye acknowledge that I
am He:” <span id="fr_1104"></span>[1105](#fn_1104) but there were some
who would remain in the same unbelief, and be imitated by the Jewish
nation of the <span id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span
id="iii.lv-Page_296"></span>present day, which, being shortly afterwards
crushed in war, according to the prophetic testimony which was written
concerning Christ, has since been scattered almost through the whole
world.

<span id="iii.lv-p6"></span>2. While matters were in this state, and His
own passion was now at hand, “Jesus cried, and said,” as our lesson
to-day commences, “He that believeth on me, believeth not on me, but on
Him that sent me; and he that seeth me, seeth Him that sent me.” He had
already said in a certain place, “My doctrine is not mine, but His that
sent me.” <span id="fr_1105"></span>[1106](#fn_1105) Where we understood
that He called His doctrine just what He is Himself, the Word of the
Father; and in saying, “My doctrine is not mine, but His that sent me,”
implied this, that He was not of Himself, but had His being from
another. <span id="fr_1106"></span>[1107](#fn_1106) For He was God of
God, the Son of the Father: but the Father is not God of God, but God,
the Father of the Son. And now when He says, “He that believeth on me,
believeth not on me, but on Him that sent me,” how else are we to
understand it, but that He appeared as man to men, while He remained
invisible as God? And that none might think that He was no more than
what they saw of Him, He indicated His wish to be believed on, as equal
in character and rank with the Father, when He said, “He that believeth
on me, believeth not on me,” that is, merely on what he seeth of me,
“but on Him that sent me,” that is, on the Father. But he that believeth
on the Father, must believe that He is the Father; and he that believeth
on Him as the Father, must believe that He has a Son; and in this way,
he that believeth on the Father, must believe on the Son. But let no one
believe about the only-begotten Son just what they believe about those
who are called the sons of God by grace and not by nature, as the
evangelist says, “He gave them power to become the sons of God,” <span
id="fr_1107"></span>[1108](#fn_1107) and according to what the Lord
Himself also mentioned, as declared in the law, “I said, Ye are gods;
and all of you children of the Most High:” <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[1109](#fn_1108) because He said, “He that believeth
on me, believeth not on me,” to show that the whole extent of our faith
in Christ should not be limited by His manhood. He therefore, He saith,
believeth on me, who doth not believe on me merely according to what he
seeth of me, but on Him that sent me: so that, believing thus on the
Father, he may believe that He has a Son co-equal with Himself, and then
attain to a true faith in me. For if one should think that He has sons
only according to grace, who are certainly no more than His creatures,
and not the Word, but those made by the Word, and that He has no Son
co-equal and co-eternal with Himself, ever born, alike incommutable, in
nothing dissimilar and inferior, then he believes not on the Father who
sent Him, for the Father who sent Him is no such conception as this.

<span id="iii.lv-p11"></span>3. And, accordingly, after saying, “He that
believeth on me, believeth not on me, but on Him that sent me,” that it
might not be thought that He would have the Father so understood, as if
He were the Father only of many sons regenerated by grace, and not of
the only-begotten Word, His own co-equal, He immediately added, “And he
that seeth me, seeth Him that sent me.” Does He say here, He that seeth
me, seeth not me, but Him that sent me, as He had said, “He that
believeth me, believeth not on me, but on Him that sent me”? For He
uttered the former of these words, that He might not be believed on
merely as He then appeared, that is, as the Son of man; and the latter,
that He might be believed on as the equal of the Father. He that
believeth on me, believeth not merely on what He sees of me, but
believeth on Him that sent me. Or, when he believeth on the Father, who
begat me, His own co-equal, let him believe on me, not as he seeth me,
but as \[he believeth\] on Him that sent me; for so far does the truth,
that there is no distance between Him and me, reach, that He who seeth
me, seeth Him that sent me. Certainly, Christ the Lord Himself sent His
apostles, as their name implies: for as those who in Greek are called
*angeli* are in Latin called *nuntii* \[messengers\], so the Greek
*<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.lv-p11.1"></span>apostoli</span>*
\[apostles\] becomes the Latin *missi* \[persons sent\]. But never would
any of the apostles have dared to say, “He that believeth on me,
believeth not on me, but on Him that sent me;” for in no sense whatever
would he say, “He that believeth on me.” We believe an apostle, but we
do not believe on him; for it is not an apostle that justifieth the
ungodly. But to him that believeth on Him that justifieth the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness. <span
id="fr_1109"></span>[1110](#fn_1109) An apostle might say, He that
receiveth me, receiveth Him that sent me; or, He that heareth me,
heareth Him that sent me; for the Lord tells them so Himself: “He that
receiveth you, receiveth me; and he that receiveth me, receiveth Him
that sent me.” <span id="fr_1110"></span>[1111](#fn_1110) For the master
is honored in the servant, and the father in the son: but then the
father is as it were in the son, and the master as it were in <span
id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span id="iii.lv-Page_297"></span>the
servant. But the only-begotten Son could rightly say, “Believe on God,
and believe on me;” <span id="fr_1111"></span>[1112](#fn_1111) as also
what He saith here, “He that believeth on me, believeth not on me, but
on Him that sent me.” He did not turn away the faith of the believer
from Himself, but only would not have the believer continue in the form
of a servant: because every one who believeth in the Father that sent
Him, straightway believeth on the Son, without whom he knoweth that the
Father hath no existence as such, and thus reacheth in his faith to the
belief of His equality with the Father, in conformity with the words
that follow, “And he that seeth me, seeth Him that sent me.”

<span id="iii.lv-p15"></span>4. Attend to what follows: “I am come a
light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me should not abide in
darkness.” He said in a certain place to His disciples, “Ye are the
light of the world. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. Neither
do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick;
that it may give light to all that are in the house: so let your light
shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father who is in heaven:” <span id="fr_1112"></span>[1113](#fn_1112) but
He did not say to them, Ye are come a light into the world, that
whosoever believeth on you should not abide in darkness. Such a
statement, I maintain, can nowhere be met with. All the saints,
therefore, are lights, but they are illuminated by Him through faith;
and every one that becomes separated from Him will be enveloped in
darkness. But that Light, which enlightens them, cannot become separated
from itself; for it is altogether beyond the reach of change. We
believe, then, the light that has thus been lit, as the prophet or
apostle: but we believe him for this end, that we may not believe on
that which is itself enlightened, but, with him, on that Light which has
given him light; so that we, too, may be enlightened, not by him, but,
along with him, by the same Light as he. And when He saith, “That
whosoever believeth on me may not abide in darkness,” He makes it
sufficiently manifest that all have been found by Him in a state of
darkness: but that they may not abide in the darkness wherein they have
been found, they ought to believe on that Light which hath come into the
world, for thereby was the world created.

<span id="iii.lv-p17"></span>5. “And if any man,” He says, “hear my
words, and keep them not, I judge him not.” Remember what I know you
have heard in former lessons; and if any of you have forgotten, recall
it: and those of you who were absent then, but are present now, hear how
it is that the Son saith, “I judge him not,” while in another place He
says, “The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto
the Son;” <span id="fr_1113"></span>[1114](#fn_1113) namely, that
thereby we are to understand, It is not now that I judge him. And why
not now? Listen to the sequel: “For I am not come,” He says, “to judge
the world, but to save the world;” that is, to bring the world into a
state of salvation. Now, therefore, is the season of mercy, afterwards
will be the time for judgment: for He says, “I will sing to Thee, O
Lord, of mercy and judgment.” <span id="fr_1114"></span>[1115](#fn_1114)

<span id="iii.lv-p20"></span>6. But see also what He says of that future
judgment in the end: “He that despiseth me, and receiveth not my words,
hath one that judgeth him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall
judge him in the last day.” He says not, He that despiseth me, and
receiveth not my words, I judge him not at the last day; for had He said
so, I do not see how it could have been else than contradictory of that
other statement, when He says, “The Father judgeth no man, but hath
committed all judgment unto the Son.” But when He said, “He that
despiseth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one to judge him,” and,
for the information of those who were waiting to hear who that one was,
went on to add, “The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him
in the last day,” He made it sufficiently manifest that He Himself would
then be the judge. For it was of Himself He spake, Himself He announced,
and Himself He set forth as the gate whereby He entered as the Shepherd
to His sheep. In one way, therefore, will those be judged who have never
heard that word, in another way those who have heard and despised. “For
as many as have sinned without law,” says the apostle, “shall also
perish without law; and as many as have sinned in the law, shall be
judged by the law.” <span id="fr_1115"></span>[1116](#fn_1115)

<span id="iii.lv-p22"></span>7. “For I have not,” He says, “spoken of
myself.” He says that He has not spoken of Himself, because He is not of
Himself. Of this we have frequently discoursed already; so that now,
without any more instruction, we have simply to remind you of it as a
truth with which you are familiar. “But the Father who sent me, He gave
me a commandment what I should say, and what I should speak.” We would
not stay to elaborate this, did we know that we were now speaking with
those with whom we have spoken on former occasions, and of these, not
with all, but such only whose memories <span id="page_298">p. 298</span>
<span id="iii.lv-Page_298"></span>have retained what they heard: but
because there are perhaps some now present who did not hear, and some in
a similar condition who have forgotten what they heard, on their account
let those who remember what they have heard bear with our delay. How
giveth the Father a commandment to His only Son? With what words doth He
speak to the Word, seeing that the Son Himself is the only-begotten
Word? Could it be by an angel, seeing that by Him the angels were
created? Was it by means of a cloud, which, when it gave forth its sound
to the Son, gave it not on His account, as He Himself also tells us
elsewhere, but for the sake of others who were needing to hear it ([John
12.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#029)<span id="iii.lv-p22.1"></span>)?
Could it be by any sound issuing from the lips, where bodily form was
wanting, and where there is no such local distance separating the Son
from the Father as to admit of any intervening air, to give effect, by
its percussion, to the voice, and render it audible? Let us put away all
such unworthy notions of that incorporeal and ineffable subsistence. The
only Son is the Word and the Wisdom of the Father, and therein *are* all
the commandments of the Father. For there was no time that the Son knew
not the Father’s commandment, so as to make it necessary for Him to
possess in course of time what He possessed not before. For what He has
received from the Father, He received in being born, and was given it in
being begotten. For the life He is, and life He certainly received in
being born, while yet there was no antecedent time when life was wanting
to His personal existence. For, on the one hand, the Father *has* life,
and *is* what He has: and yet He received it not, because He is not of
any one. But the Son received life as the Father’s gift, of whom He is:
and so He Himself is what He has; for He has life, and is the life.
Listen to Himself when He says, “As the Father hath life in Himself, so
hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself.” <span
id="fr_1116"></span>[1117](#fn_1116) Could He give it to one who was in
being, and yet hitherto was destitute thereof? On the contrary, in the
very begetting it was given by Him who begat the life, and so life begat
the life. And to show that He begat the life equal, and not inferior to
Himself, it was said, “As *He* hath life in Himself, so hath He also
given to the Son to have life in Himself.” He gave life; for in
begetting the life, what was it He gave Him, save to be the life? And as
His nativity is itself eternal, there never was a time without that Son
who is the life, and never was there a time when the Son Himself was
without the life; and as His nativity is eternal, so He, who was thus
born, is eternal life. And so the Father gave not to the Son a
commandment which He had not already; but, as I said, in the Wisdom of
the Father, that is, in the word of the Father, are laid up all the
Father’s commandments. And yet the commandment is said to have been
given Him, because He, to whom it is thus given, is not of Himself: and
to give that to the Son which He never was without, is the same in
meaning as to beget that Son who never was without existence.

<span id="iii.lv-p24"></span>8. There follow the words: “And I know that
His commandment is life everlasting.” If, then, the Son Himself is
eternal life, and the Father’s commandment the same, what else is
expressed than this, I am the Father’s commandment? And in like manner,
in what He proceeds to say, “Whatsoever I speak, even as the Father said
unto me, so I speak,” let us not be taking the “said unto me” as if the
Father used words in speaking to the only Word, or that the Word of God
needed words from God. The Father spake to the Son in the same way as He
gave life to the Son; not that He knew not the one, or had not the
other, but just because He was the *Son*. What, then, do the words mean,
“Even as He said unto me, so I speak;” but just, I speak the truth? So
the former said as the Truthful One <span
id="fr_1117"></span>[1118](#fn_1117) what the latter thus spake as the
Truth. The Truthful begat the Truth. What, then, could He now say to the
Truth? For the Truth had no imperfection to be supplied by additional
truth. He spake, therefore, to the Truth, because He begat the Truth.
And in like manner the Truth Himself speaks what has been said to Him;
but only to those who have understanding, and who are taught by Him as
the God-begotten Truth. But that men might believe what they had not yet
capacity to understand, words that were audible issued from His human
lips; sounds passing rapidly away broke on the ear, and speedily
completed the little term of their duration: but the truths themselves,
of which the sounds are but signs, passed, as it were, into the memory
of those who heard them, and have come down to us also by means of
written characters as signs addressed to the eye. But it is not thus
that the Truth speaks; He speaks inwardly to the souls of the
intelligent; He needs no sound to instruct, but floods the mind with the
light of understanding. And he, then, who in that light is able to
behold the eternity of His birth, himself hears in the same way the
Truth speaking, as He <span id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span
id="iii.lv-Page_299"></span>heard the Father telling Him what He should
speak. He has awakened in us a great longing for that sweet experience
of His presence within; but it is by daily growth that we acquire it; it
is by walking that we grow, and it is by forward efforts we walk, so as
to be able at last to attain it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[295:1104](1070057.htm#fr_1103) <span
id="iii.lv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p4"></span> [Jas. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="iii.lv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[295:1105](1070057.htm#fr_1104) <span
id="iii.lv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p5"></span> [John
8.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028)<span id="iii.lv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[296:1106](1070057.htm#fr_1105) <span
id="iii.lv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p7"></span> [John
7.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016)<span id="iii.lv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[296:1107](1070057.htm#fr_1106) <span
id="iii.lv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p8"></span> Tract. XXIX., *haberet a quo esset*.

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[296:1108](1070057.htm#fr_1107) <span
id="iii.lv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p9"></span> [John
1.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="iii.lv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[296:1109](1070057.htm#fr_1108) <span
id="iii.lv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p10"></span> [John
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034), [Ps.
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="iii.lv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[296:1110](1070057.htm#fr_1109) <span
id="iii.lv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p12"></span> [Rom. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="iii.lv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[296:1111](1070057.htm#fr_1110) <span
id="iii.lv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p13"></span> [Matt. x.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)<span id="iii.lv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[297:1112](1070057.htm#fr_1111) <span
id="iii.lv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p14"></span> [John
14.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)<span id="iii.lv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[297:1113](1070057.htm#fr_1112) <span
id="iii.lv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p16"></span> [Matt. v.
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="iii.lv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[297:1114](1070057.htm#fr_1113) <span
id="iii.lv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p18"></span> [John
5.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="iii.lv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[297:1115](1070057.htm#fr_1114) <span
id="iii.lv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p19"></span> [Ps. ci.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span id="iii.lv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[297:1116](1070057.htm#fr_1115) <span
id="iii.lv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p21"></span> [Rom. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="iii.lv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[298:1117](1070057.htm#fr_1116) <span
id="iii.lv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p23"></span> [John
5.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span id="iii.lv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[298:1118](1070057.htm#fr_1117) <span
id="iii.lv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lv-p25"></span> *Verax*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LV](1070058)
