[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070149)  [Next](1070151) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii"></span> <span id="page_533">p. 533</span> <span
id="v.ii-Page_533"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>Preface to Soliloquies.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii-p2.1"></span>The</span> two books of the *Soliloquia* were, by
the statement of the author himself (Lib. I. 17), written in his
thirty-third year. They were therefore written immediately after his
baptism, evidently in the rural retreat of Cassiacum, in Upper Italy,
belonging to his friend Verecundus, to which we know that he retreated
for awhile after he had been received into the Church. It is therefore
his earliest Christian work. And as it is early, so it is raw. His
new-found faith struggles to justify itself through an intricate course
of reasoning, in which he confuses helplessly the forms of logic with
the substance of truth. However, though crude, his essential
characteristics appear distinctly in it; his power of reasoning, his
wide observation of fundamental facts, and of mental processes and
experiences, his love of his friends, and above all of Alypius, his
ardent aspirations after supernal light, his deep devotion, which,
however, has not availed to subdue the artificialities of rhetoric into
childlike simplicity.

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span>He expresses in the work a longing for
continued support to his tender faith from Ambrose, who, however, is
described as having temporarily withdrawn into some Trans-alpine
seclusion, where Augustin complains that he hardly knows how to reach
him even by a letter.

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span>He appears in the work as yet undetermined as
to the form and course of his future life. The vast services he was to
render the Church do not appear even to glimmer on his mind. Indeed, the
life of leisure, devoted only, with some chosen friends, to the abstract
contemplation of God, which forms his ideal, shows how very faintly
penetrated he yet was by the Christian idea of serviceableness, as, in
fact, there is in the *Soliloquia* very little that is distinctively
Christian, either in doctrine or experience. But all the greatness of
his following life lies shut up in his pliancy to the will of God, here
expressed, and in his conviction that the God whom Christ reveals is the
one true God.

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span>In his *Retractationes* he recalls a few
sentences of this work, one, which he seems to regard as inadvertently
so expressed as to be capable of a Sabellian turn; another, which he
regards as savoring too much of a Gnostic or Neo-Platonic abhorrence of
matter; and another, in which he treats the effects of mental discipline
as Plato does, supposing it to bring out into distinctness knowledge
already possessed and forgotten. In the *Retractationes* he gives the
true explanation, namely, that the mind is so constituted, that by the
light of the Eternal Reason present in it, it is capable according to
its measure of apprehending truths of which it had never before laid
hold.

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span>I have endeavored, in the rendering, to avail
myself, wherever requisite, of the elder idioms of our tongue, which
appear more germane, both to the matter and manner of St. Augustin, than
the unmellowed English of the nineteenth century.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](1070151)
