[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070133)  [Next](1070135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Homily III.</span>

<span id="iv.vi-p2"></span><span id="iv.vi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iv.vi-p2.2"></span>1 John II. 18</span>–<span
class="c10"><span id="iv.vi-p2.3"></span>27</span>

<span id="iv.vi-p3"></span>“Children, it is the last hour: and as ye
have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many
antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last hour. They went out
from us, but they were not of us: if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made
manifest that they were not all of us. But ye have an unction from the
Holy One, and know all things. <span
id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131) I write unto you, not because ye
know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the
truth. Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? \[He
is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son.\] <span
id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132) Whosoever denieth the Son, the same
hath neither the Father nor the Son: and he that acknowledgeth the Son
hath both the Father and the Son. Let that therefore abide in you, which
ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the
beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in
the Father. And this is the promise that He hath promised us, even
eternal life. These things have I written unto you concerning them that
seduce you; that ye may know that ye have an unction, and that the
unction which ye have received of him may abide in you. And ye need not
that any man teach you; because His unction teacheth you of all things.”

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span> <span id="iv.vi-Page_476"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p6"></span>1. “<span class="c10"><span
id="iv.vi-p6.1"></span>Children</span>, <span
id="fr_2133"></span>[2134](#fn_2133) it is the <span
id="fr_2134"></span>[2135](#fn_2134) last hour.” In this lesson he
addresses the children that they may make haste to grow, because “it is
the last hour.” Age or stature <span
id="fr_2135"></span>[2136](#fn_2135) of the body is not at one’s own
will. A man does not grow in respect of the flesh when he will, any more
than he is born when he will: but where the being born rests with the
will, the growth also rests with the will. No man is “born of water and
the Spirit,” <span id="fr_2136"></span>[2137](#fn_2136) except he be
willing. Consequently if he will, he grows or makes increase: if he
will, he decreases. What is it to grow? To go onward <span
id="fr_2137"></span>[2138](#fn_2137) by proficiency. What is it to
decrease? To go backward <span id="fr_2138"></span>[2139](#fn_2138) by
deficiency. Whoso knows that he is born, let him hear that he is an
infant; let him eagerly cling to the breasts of his mother, and he grows
apace. Now his mother is the Church; and her breasts are the two
Testaments of the Divine Scriptures. Hence let him suck the milk of all
the things that as signs of spiritual truths were done in time for our
eternal salvation, <span id="fr_2139"></span>[2140](#fn_2139) that being
nourished and strengthened, he may attain to the eating of solid meat,
which is, “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God.” <span id="fr_2140"></span>[2141](#fn_2140) Our milk
is Christ in His humility; our meat, the selfsame Christ equal with the
Father. With milk He nourisheth thee, that He may feed thee with bread:
for with the heart spiritually to touch Christ is to know that He is
equal with the Father.

<span id="iv.vi-p15"></span>2. Therefore it was that He forbade Mary to
touch Him, and said to her, “Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended
unto the Father.” <span id="fr_2141"></span>[2142](#fn_2141) What is
this? He gave Himself to be handled by the disciples, and did He shun
Mary’s touch? Is not He the same that said to the doubting disciple,
“Reach hither thy fingers, and feel the scars”? <span
id="fr_2142"></span>[2143](#fn_2142) Was He at that time ascended to the
Father? Then why doth He forbid Mary, and saith, “Touch me not; for I am
not yet ascended to the Father?” Or are we to say, that He feared not to
be touched by men, and feared to be touched by women? The touch of Him
cleanseth all flesh. To whom He willed first to be manifested, by them
feared He to be handled? Was not His resurrection announced by women to
the men, that so the serpent should by a sort of counterplot be
overcome? For because he first by the woman announced death to man,
therefore to men was also life announced by a woman. Then why was He
unwilling to be touched, but because He would have it to be understood
of that spiritual touch? The spiritual touch takes place from a pure
heart. That person does of a pure heart reach Christ with his touch who
understands Him coequal with the Father. But whoso does not yet
understand Christ’s Godhead, that person reaches but unto the flesh,
reaches not unto the Godhead. Now what great matter is it, to reach only
unto that which the persecutors reached unto, who crucified Him? But
that is the great thing, to understand the Word God with God, in the
beginning, by whom all things were made: such as He would have Himself
to be known when He said to Philip, “Am I so long time with you, and
have ye not known me, Philip? He that seeth me, seeth also the
Father.” <span id="fr_2143"></span>[2144](#fn_2143)

<span id="iv.vi-p19"></span>3. But lest any be sluggish to go forward,
let him hear: “Children, it is the last hour.” Go forward, run, grow;
“it is the last hour.” This same last hour is long; yet it is the last.
For he has put “hour” for “the last time;” because it is in the last
times that our Lord Jesus Christ is to come. <span
id="fr_2144"></span>[2145](#fn_2144) But some will say, How the last
times? how the last hour? Certainly antichrist will first come, and then
will come the day of judgment. John perceived these thoughts: lest
people should in a manner become secure, and think it was not the last
hour because antichrist was to come, he said to them, “And as ye have
heard that antichrist is to come, now are there come many antichrists.”
Could it have many antichrists, except it were “the last hour”?

<span id="iv.vi-p21"></span>4. Whom has he called antichrists? He goes
on and expounds. “Whereby we know that it is the last hour.” By what?
Because “many antichrists are come. They went out from us;” see the
antichrists! “They went out from us:” therefore we bewail the loss. Hear
the consolation. “But they were not of us.” All heretics, all
schismatics went out from us, that is, they go out from the Church; but
they would not go out, if they were of us. Therefore, before they went
out they were not of us. If before they went out they were not of us,
many are within, are not gone out, but yet are antichrists. We dare to
say this: and why, but that each one while he is within may not be an
antichrist? For he is about to describe and mark the antichrists, and we
shall see them now. And each person ought to question his own
conscience, whether he be an antichrist. For antichrist in our tongue
means, contrary to <span id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span
id="iv.vi-Page_477"></span>Christ. <span
id="fr_2145"></span>[2146](#fn_2145) Not, as some take it, that
antichrist is to be so called because he is to come *ante Christum*,
before Christ, *i.e.* Christ to come after him: it does not mean this,
neither is it thus written, but *Antichristus, i.e.* contrary to Christ.
Now who is contrary to Christ ye already perceive from the apostle’s own
exposition, and understand that none can go out but antichrists; whereas
those who are not contrary to Christ, can in no wise go out. For he that
is not contrary to Christ holds fast in His body, and is counted
therewith as a member. The members are never contrary one to another.
The entire body consists of all the members. And what saith the apostle
concerning the agreement of the members? “If one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it; and if one member be glorified, all the members
rejoice with it.” <span id="fr_2146"></span>[2147](#fn_2146) If then in
the glorifying of a member the other members rejoice with it, and in its
suffering all the members suffer, the agreement of the members hath no
antichrist. And there are those who inwardly are in such sort in the
body of our Lord Jesus Christ—seeing His body is yet under cure, and the
soundness will not be perfect save in the resurrection of the dead—are
in such wise in the body of Christ, as bad humors. When these are
vomited up, the body is relieved: so too when bad men go out, then the
Church is relieved. And one says, when the body vomits and casts them
out, These humors went out of me, but they were not of me. How were not
of me? Were not cut out of my flesh, but oppressed my breast while they
were in me.

<span id="iv.vi-p27"></span>5. “They went out from us; but,” be not sad,
“they were not of us.” How provest thou this? If they had been of us,
they would doubtless have continued with us. Hence therefore ye may see,
that many who are not of us, receive with us the Sacraments, receive
with us baptism. receive with us what the faithful know they receive,
Benediction, the Eucharist, <span id="fr_2147"></span>[2148](#fn_2147)
and whatever there is in Holy Sacraments: the communion of the very
altar they receive with us, and are not of us. Temptation proves that
they are not of us. When temptation comes to them as if blown by a wind
they fly abroad; because they were not grain. But all of them will fly
abroad, as we must often tell you, when once the fanning of the Lord’s
threshing-floor shall begin in the day of judgment. “They went out from
us, but they were not of us; if they had been of us, they would no doubt
have continued with us.” For would ye know, beloved, how most certain
this saying is, that they who haply have gone out and return, are not
antichrists, are not contrary to Christ? Whoso are not antichrists, it
cannot be that they should continue without. But of his own will is each
either an antichrist or in Christ. Either we are among the members, or
among the bad humors. He that changeth himself for the better, is in the
body, a member: but he that continues in his badness, is a bad humor;
and when he is gone out, then they who were oppressed will be relieved.
“They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of
us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but (they went out),
that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.” That he
has added, “that they might be made manifest,” is, because even when
they are within they are not of us; yet they are not manifest, but by
going out are made manifest. “And ye have an unction from the Holy One,
that ye may be manifest to your own selves.” <span
id="fr_2148"></span>[2149](#fn_2148) The spiritual unction is the Holy
Spirit Himself, of which <span id="page_478">p. 478</span> <span
id="iv.vi-Page_478"></span>the Sacrament is in the visible
unction. <span id="fr_2149"></span>[2150](#fn_2149) Of this unction of
Christ he saith, that all who have it know the bad and the good; and
they need not to be taught, because the unction itself teacheth them.

<span id="iv.vi-p31"></span>6. “I write unto you not because ye know not
the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the
truth.” <span id="fr_2150"></span>[2151](#fn_2150) Behold, we are
admonished how we may know antichrist. What is Christ? Truth. Himself
hath said “I am the Truth.” <span id="fr_2151"></span>[2152](#fn_2151)
But “no lie is of the truth.” Consequently, all who lie are not yet of
Christ. He hath not said that some lie is of the truth, and some lie not
of the truth. Mark the sentence. Do not fondle yourselves, do not
flatter yourselves, do not deceive yourselves, do not cheat yourselves:
“No lie is of the truth.” Let us see then how antichrists lie, because
there is more than one kind of lying. “Who is a liar, but he that
denieth that Jesus is the Christ?” One is the meaning of the word
“Jesus,” another the meaning of the word “Christ:” though it be one
Jesus Christ our Saviour, yet “Jesus” is His proper name. Just as Moses
was so called by his proper name, as Elias, as Abraham: so as His proper
name our Lord hath the name “Jesus:” but “Christ” is the name of
His <span id="fr_2152"></span>[2153](#fn_2152) sacred character. As when
we say, Prophet, as when we say, Priest; so by the name Christ we are
given to understand the Anointed, in whom should be the redemption of
the whole people. The coming of this Christ was hoped for by the people
of the Jews: and because He came in lowliness, He was not acknowledged;
because the stone was small, they stumbled at it and were broken. But
“the stone grew, and became a great mountain;” <span
id="fr_2153"></span>[2154](#fn_2153) and what saith the Scripture?
“Whosoever shall stumble at this stone shall be broken; <span
id="fr_2154"></span>[2155](#fn_2154) and on whomsoever this stone shall
come, it will grind him to powder.” We must mark the difference of the
words: it saith, he that stumbleth shall be broken; but he on whom it
shall come, shall be ground to powder. At the first, because He came
lowly, men stumbled at Him: because He shall come lofty to judgment, on
whomsoever He shall come, He will grind him to powder. But not that man
will He grind to powder at His future coming, whom He broke not when He
came. He that stumbled not at the lowly, shall not dread the lofty.
Briefly ye have heard it, brethren: he that stumbled not at the lowly,
shall not dread the lofty. For to all bad men is Christ a stone of
stumbling; whatever Christ saith is bitter to them.

<span id="iv.vi-p37"></span>7. For hear and see. Certainly all who go
out from the Church, and are cut off from the unity of the Church, are
antichrists; let no man doubt it: for the apostle himself hath marked
them, “They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us.” Therefore,
whoso continue not with us, but go out from us, it is manifest that they
are antichrists. And how are they proved to be antichrists? By lying.
“And who is a liar, but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ?” <span
id="fr_2155"></span>[2156](#fn_2155) Let us ask the heretics: where do
you find a heretic that denies that Jesus is the Christ? See now, my
beloved, a great mystery. <span id="fr_2156"></span>[2157](#fn_2156)
Mark what the Lord God may have inspired us withal, and what I would
fain work into your minds. Behold, they went out from us, and turned
Donatists: we ask them whether Jesus be the Christ; they instantly
confess that Jesus is the Christ. If then that person is an antichrist,
who denies that Jesus is the Christ, neither can they call us
antichrists, nor we them; therefore, neither they went out from us, nor
we from them. If then we have not gone out one from another, we are in
unity: if we be in unity, what means it that there are two altars in
this city? what, that there are divided houses, divided marriages? that
there is a common bed, and a divided Christ? He admonishes us, he would
have us confess what is the truth:—either they went out from us, or we
from them. But let it not be imagined that we have gone out from them.
For we have the testament of the Lord’s inheritance, we recite it, and
there we find, “I will give Thee the nations for Thine inheritance, and
for Thy possessions the ends of the earth.” <span
id="fr_2157"></span>[2158](#fn_2157) We hold fast Christ’s inheritance;
they hold it not, for they do not communicate with the whole earth, do
not communicate with the <span id="fr_2158"></span>[2159](#fn_2158)
universal body redeemed by the blood of the Lord. We have the Lord
Himself rising from the dead, who presented Himself to be felt by the
hands of the doubting disciples: and while they yet doubted, He said to
them, “It behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third
day: and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in His
name” <span id="fr_2159"></span>[2160](#fn_2159) —Where? which way? to
what persons?—“through all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.” Our minds
are set at rest concerning the unity of the inheritance! Whoso does not
communicate with this inheritance, is gone out.

<span id="iv.vi-p43"></span>8. But let us not be made sad: “They <span
id="page_479">p. 479</span> <span id="iv.vi-Page_479"></span>went out
from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would
no doubt have continued with us.” <span
id="fr_2160"></span>[2161](#fn_2160) If then they went out from us, they
are antichrists; if they are antichrists, they are liars; if they are
liars, they deny that Jesus is the Christ. Once more we come back to the
difficulty of the question. Ask them one by one; they confess that Jesus
is the Christ. The difficulty that hampers us comes of our taking what
is said in the Epistle in too narrow a sense. At any rate ye see the
question; this question puts both us and them to a stand, if it be not
understood. Either we are antichrists, or they are antichrists; they
call us antichrists, and say that we went out from them; we say the like
of them. But now this epistle has marked out the antichrists by this
cognizance: “Whosoever denies that Jesus is the Christ,” that same “is
an antichrist.” Now therefore let us enquire who denies; and let us mark
not the tongue, but the deeds. For if all be asked, all with one mouth
confess that Jesus is the Christ. Let the tongue keep still for a little
while, ask the life. If we shall find this, if the Scripture itself
shall tell us that denial is a thing done not only with the tongue, but
also with the deeds, then assuredly we find many antichrists, who with
the mouth profess Christ, and in their manners dissent from Christ.
Where find we this in Scripture? Hear Paul the Apostle; speaking of
such, he saith, “For they confess that they know God, but in their deeds
deny Him.” <span id="fr_2161"></span>[2162](#fn_2161) We find these also
to be antichrists: whosoever in his deeds denies Christ, is an
antichrist. I listen not to what he says, but I look what life he leads.
Works speak, and do we require words? For where is the bad man that does
not wish to talk well? But what saith the Lord to such? “Ye hypocrites,
how can ye speak good things, while ye are evil?” <span
id="fr_2162"></span>[2163](#fn_2162) Your voices ye bring into mine
ears: I look into your thoughts. I see an evil will there, and ye make a
show of false fruits. I know what I must gather, and whence; I do not
“gather figs of thistles,” I do not gather “grapes of thorns;” for
“every tree is known by its fruit.” <span
id="fr_2163"></span>[2164](#fn_2163) A more lying antichrist is he who
with his mouth professes that Jesus is the Christ, and with his deeds
denies Him. A liar in this, that he speaks one thing, and does another.

<span id="iv.vi-p48"></span>9. Now therefore, brethren, if deeds are to
be questioned, not only do we find many antichrists gone out; but many
not yet maninfest, who have not gone out at all. For as many as the
Church hath within it that are perjured, defrauders, <span
id="fr_2164"></span>[2165](#fn_2164) addicted to black arts, consulters
of fortune-tellers, adulterers, drunkards, usurers, boy-stealers, <span
id="fr_2165"></span>[2166](#fn_2165) and all the other vices that we are
not able to enumerate; these things are contrary to the doctrine of
Christ, are contrary to the word of God. Now the Word of God is Christ:
whatever is contrary to the Word of God is in Antichrist. For Antichrist
means, “contrary to Christ.” And would ye know how openly these resist
Christ? Sometimes it happens that they do some evil, and one begins to
reprove them; because they dare not blaspheme Christ, they blaspheme His
ministers by whom they are reproved: but if thou show them that thou
speakest Christ’s words, not thine own, they endeavor all they can to
convict thee of speaking thine own words, not Christ’s: if however it is
manifest that thou speakest Christ’s words, they go even against Christ,
they begin to find fault with Christ: “How,” say they, “and why did He
make us such as we are?” Do not persons say this every day, when they
are convicted of their deeds? Perverted by a depraved will, they accuse
their Maker. Their Maker cries to them from heaven, (for the same made
us, who new-made us:) What made I thee? I made man, not avarice; I made
man, not robbery; I made man, not adultery. Thou hast heard that my
works praise me. Out of the mouth of the Three Children, it was the hymn
itself that kept them from the fires.” <span
id="fr_2166"></span>[2167](#fn_2166) The works of the Lord praise the
Lord, the heaven, the earth, the sea, praise Him; praise Him all things
that are in the heaven, praise Him angels, praise Him stars, praise Him
lights, praise Him whatever swims, whatever flies, whatever walks,
whatever creeps; all these praise the Lord. Hast thou heard there that
avarice praises the Lord? Hast thou heard that drunkenness praises the
Lord? That luxury praises, that frivolity praises Him? Whatever thou
hearest not in that hymn give praise to the Lord, the Lord made not that
thing. Correct what thou hast made, that what God made in thee may be
saved. But if thou wilt not, and lovest and embracest thy sins, thou art
contrary to Christ. Be thou within, be thou without, thou art an
antichrist; be thou within, be thou without, thou art chaff. But why art
thou not without? Because thou hast not fallen in with a wind to carry
thee away.

<span id="iv.vi-p52"></span>10. These things are now manifest, my
brethren. Let no man say, I do not worship <span id="page_480">p.
480</span> <span id="iv.vi-Page_480"></span>Christ, but I worship God
His Father. “Every one that denieth the Son, hath neither the Son nor
the Father; and he that confesseth the Son, hath both the Son and the
Father.” <span id="fr_2167"></span>[2168](#fn_2167) He speaks to you
that are grain: and let those who were chaff, hear, and become grain.
Let each one, looking well to his own conscience, if he be a lover of
the world, be changed; let him become a lover of Christ, that he be not
an antichrist. If one shall tell him that he is an antichrist, he is
wroth, he thinks it a wrong done to him; perchance, if he is told by him
that strives with him <span id="fr_2168"></span>[2169](#fn_2168) that he
is an antichrist, he threatens an action at law. <span
id="fr_2169"></span>[2170](#fn_2169) Christ saith to him, Be patient; if
thou hast been falsely spoken of, rejoice with me, because I also am
falsely spoken of by the antichrists: but if thou art truly spoken of,
come to an understanding with thine own conscience; and if thou fear to
be called this, fear more to be it.

<span id="iv.vi-p56"></span>11. “Let that therefore abide in you, which
ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the
beginning shall abide in you, ye also shall abide in the Son, and in the
Father. And this is the promise that He hath promised us.” <span
id="fr_2170"></span>[2171](#fn_2170) For haply thou mightest ask about
the wages, and say, Behold, “that which I have heard from the beginning
I keep safe in me, I comply therewith; perils, labors, temptations, for
the sake of this continuance, I bear up against them all: with what
fruit? what wages? what will He hereafter give me, since in this world I
see that I labor among temptations? I see not here that there is any
rest: mere mortality weigheth down the soul, and the corruptible body
presseth it down to lower things: but I bear all things, that “that
which I have heard from the beginning” <span
id="fr_2171"></span>[2172](#fn_2171) may “remain” in me; and that I may
say to my God, “Because of the words of Thy lips have I kept hard
ways.” <span id="fr_2172"></span>[2173](#fn_2172) Unto what wages then?
Hear, and faint not. If thou wast fainting in the labors, upon the
promised wages be strong. Where is the man that shall work in a
vineyard, and shall let slip out of his heart the reward he is to
receive? Suppose him to have forgotten, his hands fail. The remembrance
of the promised wages makes him persevering in the work: and yet he that
promised it is a man who can deceive thine expectation. How much more
strong oughtest thou to be in God’s field, when He that promised is the
Truth, Who can neither have any successor, nor die, nor deceive him to
whom the promise was made! And what is the promise? Let us see what He
hath promised. Is it gold which men here love much, or silver? Or
possessions, for which men lavish gold, however much they love gold? Or
pleasant lands, spacious houses, many slaves, numerous beasts? Not these
are the wages, so to say, for which he exhorts us to endure in labor.
What are these wages called? “eternal life.” Ye have heard, and in your
joy ye have cried out: love that which ye have heard, and ye are
delivered from your labors into the rest of eternal life. Lo, this is
what God promises; “eternal life.” <span
id="fr_2173"></span>[2174](#fn_2173) Lo, this what God threatens;
eternal fire. What to those set on the right hand? “Come, ye blessed of
my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of
the world.” <span id="fr_2174"></span>[2175](#fn_2174) To those on the
left, what? “Go into eternal fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels.” Thou dost not yet love that: at least fear this.

<span id="iv.vi-p62"></span>12. Remember then, my brethren, that Christ
hath promised us eternal life: “This,” saith he, “is the promise which
He hath promised us, even eternal life. These things have I written to
you concerning them which seduce you.” <span
id="fr_2175"></span>[2176](#fn_2175) Let none seduce you unto death:
desire the promise of eternal life. What can the world promise? Let it
promise what you will, it makes the promise perchance to one that
tomorrow shall die. And with what face wilt thou go hence to Him that
abideth for ever? “But a powerful man threatens me, so that I must do
some evil.” What does he threaten? Prisons, chains, fires, torments,
wild beasts: aye, but not eternal fire? Dread that which One Almighty
threatens; love that which One Almighty promises; and all the world
becomes vile in our regard, whether it promise or terrify. “These things
have I written unto you concerning them which seduce you; that ye may
know that ye have an unction, and the unction which we have received
from Him may abide in you.” <span id="fr_2176"></span>[2177](#fn_2176)
In the unction we have the sacramental sign \[of a thing unseen\], the
virtue itself is invisible; <span id="fr_2177"></span>[2178](#fn_2177)
the invisible unction <span id="page_481">p. 481</span> <span
id="iv.vi-Page_481"></span>is the Holy Ghost; the invisible unction is
that charity, which, in whomsoever it be, shall be as a root to him:
however burning the sun, he cannot wither. All that is rooted is
nourished by the sun’s warmth, not withered.

<span id="iv.vi-p66"></span>13. “And ye have no need that any man teach
you, because His <span id="fr_2178"></span>[2179](#fn_2178) unction
teacheth you concerning all things.” <span
id="fr_2179"></span>[2180](#fn_2179) Then to what purpose is it that
“we,” my brethren, teach you? If “His unction teacheth you concerning
all things,” it seems we labor without a cause. And what mean we, to cry
out as we do? Let us leave you to His unction, and let His unction teach
you. But this is putting the question only to myself: I put it also to
that same apostle: let him deign to hear a babe that asks of him: to
John himself I say, Had those the unction to whom thou wast speaking?
Thou hast said, “His unction teacheth you concerning all things.” To
what purpose hast thou written an Epistle like this? what teaching didst
“thou” give them? what instruction? what edification? See here now,
brethren, see a mighty mystery. <span
id="fr_2180"></span>[2181](#fn_2180) The sound of our words strikes the
ears, the Master is within. Do not suppose that any man learns ought
from man. We can admonish by the sound of our voice; if there be not One
within that shall teach, vain is the noise we make. Aye, brethren, have
ye a mind to know it? Have ye not all heard this present discourse? and
yet how many will go from this place untaught! I, for my part, have
spoken to all; but they to whom that Unction within speaketh not, they
whom the Holy Ghost within teacheth not, those go back untaught. The
teachings of the master from without are a sort of aids and admonitions.
He that teacheth the hearts, hath His chair in heaven. Therefore saith
He also Himself in the Gospel: “Call no man your master upon earth; One
is your Master, even Christ.” <span id="fr_2181"></span>[2182](#fn_2181)
Let Him therefore Himself speak to you within, when not one of mankind
is there: for though there be some one at thy side, there is none in
thine heart. Yet let there not be none in thine heart: <span
id="fr_2182"></span>[2183](#fn_2182) let Christ be in thine heart: let
His unction be in the heart, lest it be a heart thirsting in the
wilderness, and having no fountains to be watered withal. There is then,
I say, a Master within that teacheth: Christ teacheth; His inspiration
teacheth. Where His inspiration and His unction is not, in vain do words
make a noise from without. So are the words, brethren, which we speak
from without, as is the husbandman to the tree: from without he worketh,
applieth water and diligence of culture; let him from without apply what
he will, does he form the apples? does he clothe the nakedness of the
wood with a shady covering of leaves? does he do any thing like this
from within? But whose doing is this? Hear the husbandman, the apostle:
both see what we are, and hear the Master within: “I have planted,
Apollos hath watered; but God gave the increase: neither he that
planteth is any thing, neither he that watereth, but He that giveth the
increase, even God.”  <span id="fr_2183"></span>[2184](#fn_2183) This
then we say to you: whether we plant, or whether we water, by speaking
we are not any thing; but He that giveth the increase, even God: that
is, “His unction which teacheth you concerning all things.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[475:2132](1070134.htm#fr_2131) <span
id="iv.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p4"></span> See sec. 5, note.

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[475:2133](1070134.htm#fr_2132) <span
id="iv.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p5"></span> Omitted in the Exposition.

<span id="fn_2133"></span>[476:2134](1070134.htm#fr_2133) <span
id="iv.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p7"></span> *Pueri*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p7.1"></span> παιδία</span>.

<span id="fn_2134"></span>[476:2135](1070134.htm#fr_2134) <span
id="iv.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p8"></span> \[Or “a,” Westcott.—J.H.M.\]

<span id="fn_2135"></span>[476:2136](1070134.htm#fr_2135) <span
id="iv.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p9"></span> *Aetas*.

<span id="fn_2136"></span>[476:2137](1070134.htm#fr_2136) <span
id="iv.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p10"></span> [John iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005)<span id="iv.vi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2137"></span>[476:2138](1070134.htm#fr_2137) <span
id="iv.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p11"></span> *Proficere*.

<span id="fn_2138"></span>[476:2139](1070134.htm#fr_2138) <span
id="iv.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p12"></span> *Deficere*.

<span id="fn_2139"></span>[476:2140](1070134.htm#fr_2139) <span
id="iv.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p13"></span> *Omnium sacramentorum temporaliter pro
æterna salute nostra gestorum*: *i.e.* of the historical facts of both
Testaments understood in their inward and spiritual relation to Christ.

<span id="fn_2140"></span>[476:2141](1070134.htm#fr_2140) <span
id="iv.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p14"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.vi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2141"></span>[476:2142](1070134.htm#fr_2141) <span
id="iv.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p16"></span> *Supra*, Hom. cxxi. and xxvi.

<span id="fn_2142"></span>[476:2143](1070134.htm#fr_2142) <span
id="iv.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p17"></span> [John
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027)<span id="iv.vi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2143"></span>[476:2144](1070134.htm#fr_2143) <span
id="iv.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p18"></span> [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="iv.vi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2144"></span>[476:2145](1070134.htm#fr_2144) <span
id="iv.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p20"></span> Epist. 199, *de fine Sæc.*, sec. 17.

<span id="fn_2145"></span>[477:2146](1070134.htm#fr_2145) <span
id="iv.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p22"></span> So <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p22.1"></span>ἀντικείμενος</span> [2 Thess.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)<span id="iv.vi-p22.2"></span>, and
so the word seems to be interpreted by Tertull. *de Præscr. Hær*. 4,
*Antichristi—Christi rebelles*. And this is alleged by Theophylact as
the traditional interpretation of the Greek Church: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p22.3"></span>πάντως ὁ ψεύστης ἐναντίος ὢν
τῇ ἀληθείᾳ ἤτοι τῷ Χριστῷ ἀντίχριστός ἐστι</span>. “Certainly
‘Antichrist’ is the Liar opposed to the Truth, *i.e.* to Christ.” So
Œcumenius. But by earlier authorities it is taken in the sense of
“false-Christ,” or, one that gives himself out for Christ with denial of
Jesus Christ. Thus in the *Acta Martyrum: Dicit autem Apostolus: Si
Satanus*, &c. *Unde et Antichristus Quasi-Christus*. “The Apostle saith:
If Satan be transfigured as an angel of light, it is no great matter if
his ministers be transfigured.” Whence also “Antichrist” means
“seeming-Christ.” And St. Hippolyt. *Portuensis de Antichristo*, 6,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p22.4"></span>κατὰ πάντα
ἐξομοιοῦσθαι βούλεται ὁ πλάνος τῷ υἱῷ τοῦ Θεοῦ</span>. “In all things
the deceiver will needs make himself like the Son of God.” See Mr.
Greswell’s *Exposition of the Parables*, i. p. 372. ff.

<span id="iv.vi-p23"></span>\[*Antichrist*.—Huther confirms (Meyer, Com.
on N.T., 14th part, 4th (German edition) Augustin’s definition. “That
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p23.1"></span> ἀντι</span> expresses
not substitution but antagonism is now generally and justly
acknowledged;” but he adds “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p23.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p23.3"></span> άιτίχριστος</span> does not mean the enemy of
Christ, in general, but the one opposed to Christ, or the ‘*opposition
Christ*,’ *i.e.* the enemy of Christ, who, under the lying pretense of
being the true Christ, endeavors to destroy the work of Christ.” “One
who assuming the guise of Christ, opposes Christ.” (Westcott.)

<span id="iv.vi-p24"></span>When Huther remarks in reference to the view
held by Neander and others, who distinguish, in the apostle’s
representations of Antichrist, *form and idea*, viz :—that evil will
gradually increase more and more in its contest against Christ, until it
has reached its summit, when it will be completely vanquished by the
power of Christ; and, as regards *form*, that this highest energy of
evil will appear in *one person*; “of this distinction Scripture gives
no suggestion;” yet, as there appears an intimation of distinct and
successive Antichrists ([1 John 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022), [2 John.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#007)<span id="iv.vi-p24.1"></span>.),
and the Antichrist of whom the Apostle’s readers “had heard,” had not
yet come personally, Westcott’s interpretation of [1 John
2.18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018)<span id="iv.vi-p24.2"></span>,
seems not unreasonable: “Antichrist may be the personification of the
principle shown in different Antichrists; or, the person whose
appearance is prepared by these particular forms of evil.”

<span id="iv.vi-p25"></span>Whatever may be thought of Augustin’s
application of the apostle’s description to separatists in his day, that
there have been many Antichrists, 1st and 2nd John teach very plainly:
and most important, is St. John’s description of the “master falsehood,”
the “denial of true manhead and true Godhead in Christ” which involves
the denial of the essential relations of Fatherhood and Sonship in the
Divine Nature.—J.H.M.\]

<span id="fn_2146"></span>[477:2147](1070134.htm#fr_2146) <span
id="iv.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p26"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#026)<span id="iv.vi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2147"></span>[477:2148](1070134.htm#fr_2147) <span
id="iv.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p28"></span> Two <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.vi-p28.1"></span>mss.</span> *Benedictionem Eucharistiæ*, “the
Benediction of the Eucharist.”—<span class="c10"><span
id="iv.vi-p28.2"></span>Ben.</span> (So Bodl. 242 and 455,—and 813 by
correction.)

<span id="fn_2148"></span>[477:2149](1070134.htm#fr_2148) <span
id="iv.vi-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p29"></span> *Ut ipsi vobis manifesti sitis*. As there
is no trace of this reading in either the Greek or Latin authorities it
is perhaps not meant to stand as part of the text, though represented as
such by the Benedictines. In the following clause Aug. seems to
recognize the reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p29.1"></span>οἴδατε πάντες</span>, *dicit omnes cognoscere
bonos et malos*.

<span id="fn_2149"></span>[478:2150](1070134.htm#fr_2149) <span
id="iv.vi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p30"></span> *Infra*, sec. 12.

<span id="fn_2150"></span>[478:2151](1070134.htm#fr_2150) <span
id="iv.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p32"></span> [1 John ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#021)<span id="iv.vi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2151"></span>[478:2152](1070134.htm#fr_2151) <span
id="iv.vi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p33"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="iv.vi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2152"></span>[478:2153](1070134.htm#fr_2152) <span
id="iv.vi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p34"></span> *Sacramenti*.

<span id="fn_2153"></span>[478:2154](1070134.htm#fr_2153) <span
id="iv.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p35"></span> [Dan. ii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035)<span id="iv.vi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2154"></span>[478:2155](1070134.htm#fr_2154) <span
id="iv.vi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p36"></span> *Conquassabitur*.

<span id="fn_2155"></span>[478:2156](1070134.htm#fr_2155) <span
id="iv.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p38"></span> [1 John ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022)<span id="iv.vi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2156"></span>[478:2157](1070134.htm#fr_2156) <span
id="iv.vi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p39"></span> *Magnum sacramentum*, sec. 13, note 3.

<span id="fn_2157"></span>[478:2158](1070134.htm#fr_2157) <span
id="iv.vi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p40"></span> [Ps. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="iv.vi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2158"></span>[478:2159](1070134.htm#fr_2158) <span
id="iv.vi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p41"></span> *Universitate*.

<span id="fn_2159"></span>[478:2160](1070134.htm#fr_2159) <span
id="iv.vi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p42"></span> [Luke
24:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#046),
[47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)<span id="iv.vi-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2160"></span>[479:2161](1070134.htm#fr_2160) <span
id="iv.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p44"></span> [1 John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span id="iv.vi-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2161"></span>[479:2162](1070134.htm#fr_2161) <span
id="iv.vi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p45"></span> [Tit. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016)<span id="iv.vi-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2162"></span>[479:2163](1070134.htm#fr_2162) <span
id="iv.vi-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p46"></span> [Matt. xii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034)<span id="iv.vi-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2163"></span>[479:2164](1070134.htm#fr_2163) <span
id="iv.vi-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p47"></span> [Matt.
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#007),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#016)<span id="iv.vi-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2164"></span>[479:2165](1070134.htm#fr_2164) <span
id="iv.vi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p49"></span> *Maleficos*.

<span id="fn_2165"></span>[479:2166](1070134.htm#fr_2165) <span
id="iv.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p50"></span> *Mangones*.

<span id="fn_2166"></span>[479:2167](1070134.htm#fr_2166) <span
id="iv.vi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p51"></span> Song of the Three Holy Children. *Ex ore
trium puerorum ipse hymnus erat qui ab ignibus defendebat*.

<span id="fn_2167"></span>[480:2168](1070134.htm#fr_2167) <span
id="iv.vi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p53"></span> [1 John ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#023)<span id="iv.vi-p53.1"></span>.
*Omnis qui negat Filium, nec Filium nec Patrem habet: et qui confitetur
Filium, Filium et Patrem habet*. St. Cyprian, *Testimon. adv. Jud*. ii.
27. *Qui negat Filium, neque Patrem habet: qui confitetur Filium, et
Filium et Patrem habet*: and just so St. Hilar. *de Trin*. vi. 42. For
the Greek, the clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p53.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p53.3"></span>ὁμολογῶν τὸν υἱὸν καὶ τὸν πατέρα žχει</span> is
abundantly authenticated by numerous <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.vi-p53.4"></span>mss.</span>, Vers. Syr. and Aeth., St. Cyril,
*Al. in Joann*. ix. sec. 40: and the mission by some <span
class="c10"><span id="iv.vi-p53.5"></span>mss.</span> and *Œcumen.
Theophyl.* is sufficiently explained by the similar ending of this and
the former clause. The addition *et Filium* in the latter clause seems
to be peculiar to the Latin, and *nec Filium* in the former to
Augustin’s copies.

<span id="fn_2168"></span>[480:2169](1070134.htm#fr_2168) <span
id="iv.vi-p53.6"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p54"></span> *Litigante*.

<span id="fn_2169"></span>[480:2170](1070134.htm#fr_2169) <span
id="iv.vi-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p55"></span> *Inscriptionem*.

<span id="fn_2170"></span>[480:2171](1070134.htm#fr_2170) <span
id="iv.vi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p57"></span> [1 John
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#025)<span id="iv.vi-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2171"></span>[480:2172](1070134.htm#fr_2171) <span
id="iv.vi-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p58"></span> [Wisd. ix.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span id="iv.vi-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2172"></span>[480:2173](1070134.htm#fr_2172) <span
id="iv.vi-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p59"></span> [Ps. xvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#004)<span id="iv.vi-p59.1"></span>, LXX.
and Vulg.

<span id="fn_2173"></span>[480:2174](1070134.htm#fr_2173) <span
id="iv.vi-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p60"></span> [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="iv.vi-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2174"></span>[480:2175](1070134.htm#fr_2174) <span
id="iv.vi-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p61"></span> [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="iv.vi-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2175"></span>[480:2176](1070134.htm#fr_2175) <span
id="iv.vi-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p63"></span> [1 John
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#026)<span id="iv.vi-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2176"></span>[480:2177](1070134.htm#fr_2176) <span
id="iv.vi-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p64"></span> [1 John
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027)<span id="iv.vi-p64.1"></span>. *Ut
sciatis quia unctionem habetis, et unctio quam accepimus ab eo permaneat
in nobis*. This reading, which is not found in the Greek copies, may
have originated in the attempt to explain a difficult construction. The
Vulgate keeps close to the Greek: *Et vos unctionem quam accepistis ab
eo maneat in vobis*.

<span id="fn_2177"></span>[480:2178](1070134.htm#fr_2177) <span
id="iv.vi-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p65"></span> *Unctionis sacramentum est, virtus ipsa
invisibilis*: *i.e.* the unction or chrism which we receive is a
*sacramentum*, a thing in which, as Aug. defines the term, “*aliud
videtur, aliud intelligitur*, one thing is seen, another understood.”
“*Aliud est sacramentum, aliud virtus sacramenti*,” *supra* Hom. xxvi.
11.

<span id="fn_2178"></span>[481:2179](1070134.htm#fr_2178) <span
id="iv.vi-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p67"></span> *Unctio ipsius*, Vulg. *ejus*, representing
the reading <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi-p67.1"></span>τὸ αὐτοῦ
χρίσμα</span>: but the truer reading, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p67.2"></span>τὸ αὐτὸ χρίσμα</span>, seems to be recognized in
the opening of Hom. iv., *ipsa unctio docet vos de omnibus*.

<span id="fn_2179"></span>[481:2180](1070134.htm#fr_2179) <span
id="iv.vi-p67.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p68"></span> [1 John ii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027)<span id="iv.vi-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2180"></span>[481:2181](1070134.htm#fr_2180) <span
id="iv.vi-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p69"></span> *Jam hic videte magnum sacramentum*: as
above, sec. 7; meaning in both places, that whereas the apostle’s words
seem at first sight to be contradicted by facts, his true meaning lies
deeper and involves a spiritual truth of great importance.

<span id="fn_2181"></span>[481:2182](1070134.htm#fr_2181) <span
id="iv.vi-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p70"></span> [Matt.
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#009)<span id="iv.vi-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2182"></span>[481:2183](1070134.htm#fr_2182) <span
id="iv.vi-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p71"></span> *Et non sit nullus in corde tuo*. Three
<span class="c10"><span id="iv.vi-p71.1"></span>mss.</span> *et non sit
ullus in corde tuo* \[“and let there not be any in thine heart, (only)
let Christ be in thine heart”\]. One <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.vi-p71.2"></span>ms.</span>: *et nullus in corde tuo*; another:
*et nullus sit in corde tuo* \[with the same meaning\]. <span
class="c10"><span id="iv.vi-p71.3"></span>Ben.</span> Bodl. <span
class="c10"><span id="iv.vi-p71.4"></span>mss.</span> vary, no two
reading alike. One, “*et ne sit ullus*.” The reading most like St. Aug.
would be, “*et ne sit nullus*,” “and lest there be none.”

<span id="fn_2183"></span>[481:2184](1070134.htm#fr_2183) <span
id="iv.vi-p71.5"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p72"></span> [1 Cor.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="iv.vi-p72.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily IV](1070135)
