[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070113)  [Next](1070115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.cxii"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.cxii-p1.1"></span>Tractate CXI.</span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p2"></span><span id="iii.cxii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxii-p2.2"></span>Chapter XVII. 24–26</span>.

<span id="iii.cxii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxii-p3.1"></span>The</span> Lord Jesus raises up His people to
a great hope, than which there could not possibly be a greater. Listen
and rejoice in hope, that, since the present is not a life to be loved,
but to be tolerated, you may have the power of patient endurance amid
all its tribulation. <span id="fr_1776"></span>[1777](#fn_1776) Listen,
I say, and weigh well to what it is that our hopes are exalted. Christ
Jesus saith, The Son of God, the Only-begotten, who is co-eternal and
equal with the Father, saith: He, who for our sakes became man, but
became not, like every man besides, a liar, <span
id="fr_1777"></span>[1778](#fn_1777) saith: the Way, the Life, the Truth
saith: <span id="fr_1778"></span>[1779](#fn_1778) He who overcame the
world, saith of those for whom He overcame it: listen, believe, hope,
desire what He saith: “Father,” He says, “I will that they also whom
Thou hast given me be with me where I am.” Who are these who He says
were given Him by the Father? Are they not those of whom He says in
another place, “No man cometh unto me, unless the Father, who hath sent
me, draw him”? <span id="fr_1779"></span>[1780](#fn_1779) We already
know if we have made any beneficial progress in this Gospel, how it is
that the things which He says the Father doeth, He Himself doeth
likewise along with the Father. They are those, therefore, whom He has
received from the Father, whom He Himself has also chosen out of the
world, and chosen that they may be no more of the world, even as He also
is not of the world; and yet that they also may be a world that
believeth and knoweth that Christ has been sent by God the Father that
the world might be delivered from the world, and so, as a world that was
to be reconciled unto God, might not be condemned with the world that
lieth in enmity. For so He says in the beginning of this prayer: “Thou
hast given Him power over all flesh,” that is, over every man, “that He
should give eternal life to as many as Thou hast given Him.” Here He
makes it clear that He has indeed received power over all men, that, as
the future Judge of quick and dead, He may deliver whom He pleases, and
condemn whom He pleases; but that these were given Him that to all of
them He should give eternal life. For so He <span id="page_413">p.
413</span> <span id="iii.cxii-Page_413"></span>says: “That He should
give eternal life to as many as Thou hast given Him.” Accordingly they
were not given Him that from them He should withhold eternal life;
although over them also the power has been given Him, inasmuch as He has
received it over all flesh, in other words, over every man. In this way
the world that has been reconciled will be delivered from the hostile
world, when He putteth into exercise His power over it, to send it away
into death eternal; but the other He maketh His own that He may give it
everlasting life. Accordingly, to every one, without fail, of His own
sheep the Good Shepherd, as to every one of His members the great Head,
hath promised this reward, that where He is, there also we shall be with
Him; nor can that be otherwise which the omnipotent Son declared to be
His will to the omnipotent Father. For there also is the Holy Spirit,
equally eternal, equally God, the one Spirit of the two, the substance
of the will of both. For the words that we read of Him as uttering on
the eve of His passion, “Yet not, Father, as I will, but as Thou
wilt,” <span id="fr_1780"></span>[1781](#fn_1780) as if the Father has
or had one will, and the Son another, are the echo of our infirmity,
however faith-pervaded, which our Head transfigured in His own person,
when He likewise bare our iniquities. But that the will of the Father
and the Son is one, of both of whom also there is but one Spirit, by
including whom we come to the knowledge of the Trinity, let piety
believe, even though our infirmity meanwhile permitteth us not to
understand.

<span id="iii.cxii-p9"></span>2. But as we have already, in a way
proportionate to the brevity of our discourse, spoken of the objects of
the promise, and of its own stability; let us now look at this one
point, as far as we are able, what it is that He was pleased to promise
when He said, “I will that they also whom Thou hast given me be with me
where I am.” As far as pertains to the creaturehood wherein He was made
of the seed of David according to the flesh,  <span
id="fr_1781"></span>[1782](#fn_1781) not even He Himself was yet where
He would afterwards be: but He could say in this way, “where I am,” to
let us understand that He was soon to ascend into heaven, so that He
spake of Himself as being already there, where He was presently to be.
He could do so also in the same way as He had said on a former occasion,
when speaking to Nicodemus, “No man ascendeth into heaven, save He that
came down from heaven, even the Son of man who is in heaven.”  <span
id="fr_1782"></span>[1783](#fn_1782) For there also He did not say, Will
be, but “is,” because of the oneness of person, wherein God is at once
man, and man God. He promised, therefore, that we should be in heaven;
for thither the servant-form, which He received of the Virgin, has been
elevated, and set at the right hand of the Father. Because of the same
blessed hope the apostle also says: “But God, who is rich in mercy, for
His great love wherewith He loved us, even when we were dead in sins,
hath quickened us together with Christ; by whose grace we are saved; and
hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places
in Christ Jesus.” <span id="fr_1783"></span>[1784](#fn_1783) And so
accordingly we may understand the Lord to have said, “That where I am,
there they may be also.” He, indeed, said of Himself that He was there
already; but of us He merely declared that He wished us to be there with
Him, without any indication that we were there already. But what the
Lord said that He wished to be done, the apostle spake of as already
accomplished. For he said not, He will yet raise us up, and make us sit
in heavenly places; but, “hath raised us up, and made us sit in heavenly
places:” for it is not without good grounds, but in believing assurance,
that he reckons as already done what he is certain will yet be done. But
if it is in respect of the form of God, wherein He is equal to the
Father, that we would be inclined to understand His words, “I will that
they also be with me, where I am,” let our mind get quit of every
thought of material images: whatever the soul has had presented to it,
that is endowed with length, or breadth, or thickness, tinted by the
light with any sort of bodily hue, or diffused through local space of
any kind, whether finite or infinite, let it, as far as possible, turn
away from all such notions the glance of its contemplation on the inward
bent of its thoughts. And let us not be making inquiries as to where the
Son, the Father’s co-equal, is, since no one has yet found out where He
is not. But if any one would inquire, let him inquire rather how he may
be with Him; not everywhere as He is, but wherever He may be. For when
He said to the man that was expiating his crimes on the tree, and making
confession unto salvation, “Today shalt thou be with me in
paradise,” <span id="fr_1784"></span>[1785](#fn_1784) in respect to His
human nature His own soul was on that very day to be in hell, <span
id="fr_1785"></span>[1786](#fn_1785) His flesh in the sepulchre; but as
respected His Godhead He was certainly also in paradise. And therefore
the soul of the thief, absolved from his by-gone crimes, and already in
the blessed enjoyment of His grace, although it could not be everywhere
as He was, yet could on that very day be also with Him in paradise, from
which He, who is always everywhere, had not <span id="page_414">p.
414</span> <span id="iii.cxii-Page_414"></span>withdrawn. On this
account, doubtless, it was not enough for Him to say, “I will that they
also be where I am;” but He added, “with me.” For to be with Him is the
chief good. For even the miserable can be where He is, since wheresoever
any are, there is He also; but the blessed only are with Him, because it
is only of Him that they can be blessed. Was it not truly said to God,
“If I ascend into heaven, Thou art there; and if I go down into hell,
Thou art present?” <span id="fr_1786"></span>[1787](#fn_1786) or is not
Christ after all that Wisdom of God which “penetrateth everywhere
because of its purity”? <span id="fr_1787"></span>[1788](#fn_1787) But
the light shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it
not. <span id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788) And similarly, to take a
kind of illustration from what is visible, although greatly unlike, as
the blind man, even though he be where the light is, is yet not himself
with the light, but is really absent from that which is present; so the
unbeliever and profane, or even the believer and pious, because not yet
competent to gaze on the light of wisdom, although he cannot be anywhere
that Christ is not there likewise, yet is not himself with Christ, I
mean in actual sight. For we cannot doubt that the true believer is with
Christ by faith; because in reference to this He saith, “He that is not
with me is against me.” <span id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789) But
when He said to God the Father, “I will that they also whom Thou hast
given me be with me where I am,” He spake exclusively of that sight
wherein we shall see Him as He is. <span
id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790)

<span id="iii.cxii-p20"></span>3. Let no one disturb the clearness of
the meaning by any cloudy contradiction; but let what follows furnish
its testimony to the words that precede. For after saying, “I will that
they also be with me where I am,” He went on immediately to add, “That
they may behold my glory, which Thou gavest me: for Thou lovedst me
before the foundation of the world.” “That they may behold,” He said;
not, that they may believe. This is faith’s wages,  <span
id="fr_1791"></span>[1792](#fn_1791) not faith itself. For if faith has
been correctly defined in the Epistle to the Hebrews as “the assurance
\[conviction\] of things that are not seen,” <span
id="fr_1792"></span>[1793](#fn_1792) why may not the wages of faith be
defined, the beholding of things which were hoped for in faith? For when
we shall see the glory which the Father hath given the Son, even though
we may understand what is spoken of in this passage, not as that
\[glory\] which the Father gave His co-equal Son in begetting Him, but
as that which He gave Him, when become the Son of man, after the death
of the cross;—when, I say, we shall see that glory of the Son, then of a
certainty shall take place the judgment of the quick and the dead, and
then shall the wicked be taken away that he may not behold the glory of
the Lord; <span id="fr_1793"></span>[1794](#fn_1793) and what \[glory\],
save that of His Godhead? For blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God: <span id="fr_1794"></span>[1795](#fn_1794) and because
the wicked are not pure in heart, therefore they shall not see. Then
shall they go away into everlasting punishment; for so shall the wicked
be taken away, that he may not behold the glory of the Lord: but the
righteous shall go into life eternal. <span
id="fr_1795"></span>[1796](#fn_1795) And what is life eternal? “That
they may know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast
sent” ([John 17.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span
id="iii.cxii-p25.2"></span>): not, indeed, as those knew Him, who
although impure in heart, yet were able to see Him as He sat in judgment
in His glorified servant-form; but as He is yet to be known by the pure
in heart, as the only true God, the Son along with the Father and Holy
Spirit, because the Trinity itself is the only true God. If, then, it is
in reference to His Godhead as the Son of God, equal and co-eternal with
the Father, that we take the words, “I will that they also be with me
where I am,” we shall be with Christ in the Father; but He in His own
way, we in ours, wherever we may be in body. For if localities are to be
understood, and such as contain incorporeal beings, and everything has a
place where it is, the eternal place of Christ where He always is, is
the Father Himself, and the place of the Father is the Son; for “I,” He
said, “am in the Father, and the Father in me;” <span
id="fr_1796"></span>[1797](#fn_1796) and in this prayer, “As Thou,
Father, art in me, and I in Thee:” and they are our place, because there
follows, “That they also may be one in us:” and we are God’s place,
inasmuch as we are His temple; even as He, who died for us and liveth
for us, also prayeth for us, that we may be one in them; because “His
\[dwelling\] place was made in peace, <span
id="fr_1797"></span>[1798](#fn_1797) and His habitation in Zion,” <span
id="fr_1798"></span>[1799](#fn_1798) which we are. But who is qualified
to think on such places or what is in them, apart from the idea of
space-defined capacities and material masses? Yet no little progress is
made, if at least, when any such idea presents itself to the eye of the
mind, it is denied, rejected, and reprobated: and a certain kind of
light is, as far as possible, thought of, in which such things are
perceived as deserving only to be denied, rejected, and reprobated; and
the certainty of that light is known and loved, so that from thence an
upward movement is begun in us, and an effort made <span
id="page_415">p. 415</span> <span id="iii.cxii-Page_415"></span>to reach
into places farther within: and when the mind through its own infirmity
and still inferior purity has failed to penetrate them it is driven back
again, not without the sighings of love and the tears of ardent longing,
and continues to bear in patience until it is purified by faith, and
prepared by the holiness of the inward life to be able to take up its
abode therein.

<span id="iii.cxii-p29"></span>4. How, then, shall we not be with Christ
where He is, when we shall be with Him in the Father in whom He is? On
this, also, the apostle is not without something to say to us, although
we are not yet in possession of the reality, but only cherishing the
hope. For he says, “If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which
are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God: set your
affections on things above, not on things on the earth. For ye have
died,” he adds, “and your life is hid with Christ in God.” Here, you
see, our life is meanwhile in faith and hope with Christ, where He is;
because it is with Christ in God. That, you see, is as if already
accomplished for which He prayed, when He said, “I will that they also
be with me where I am;” but now only by faith. And when will it be
accomplished by actual sight? “When Christ,” he says, “\[who is\] your
life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with Him in glory.”  <span
id="fr_1799"></span>[1800](#fn_1799) Then shall we appear as that which
we then shall be; for it shall then be apparent that it was not without
good grounds that we believed and hoped we should become so, before it
actually took place. He will do this, to whom the Son, after saying,
“That they may behold my glory, which Thou gavest me,” immediately
added, “For Thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.” For in
Him He loved us also before the foundation of the world, and then
foreordained what He was to do in the end of the world.

<span id="iii.cxii-p31"></span>5. “O righteous Father,” He saith, “the
world hath not known Thee.” Just because Thou art righteous it hath not
known Thee. It is as that world which has been predestined to
condemnation really deserved, that it hath not known Him; while the
world which He hath reconciled unto Himself through Christ hath known
Him not of merit, but by grace. For what else is the knowing of Him, but
eternal life which, while He undoubtedly withheld it from the condemned
world, He bestowed on the reconciled. On that very account, therefore,
the world hath not known Thee, because Thou art righteous, and hast
rendered unto it according to its deserts, that it should not know Thee:
while on the same account the reconciled world hath known Thee, because
Thou art merciful, and, not for any merit of its own, but by grace, hast
supplied it with the needed help to know Thee. And then there follows,
“But I have known Thee.” He is the Fountain of grace, who is by nature
God, and, by grace ineffable, man also of the Holy Spirit and the
Virgin: and then on His own behalf, because the grace of God is through
Jesus Christ our Lord, He adds, “And these have known that Thou hast
sent me.” Such is the reconciled world. But it is because Thou hast sent
me that they have known: by grace, therefore, have they known.

<span id="iii.cxii-p32"></span>6. “And I have made known to them,” He
says, “Thy name, and will make it known.” I have made it known by faith,
I will make it known by sight: I have made it known to those whose
present sojourn in a strange land has its appointed end, I will make it
known to those whose reign as kings shall be endless. “That the love,”
He adds, “wherewith \[literally, which\] Thou hast loved me, <span
id="fr_1800"></span>[1801](#fn_1800) may be in them, and I in them. (The
form of speech is unusual, “the love, *which Thou hast loved* me, may be
in them, and I in them;” for the common way of speaking is, the love
wherewith thou hast loved me. Here, of course, it is a translation from
the Greek: but there are similar forms also in Latin; as we say, He
served a faithful service, He served as a soldier a strenuous
soldier-service; when apparently we ought to have said, He served with a
faithful service, he served as a soldier with a strenuous
soldier-service. But such as the form of expression is, “the love which
Thou hast loved me;” one similar to it is also used by the apostle, “I
have fought a good fight;” <span id="fr_1801"></span>[1802](#fn_1801) he
does not say, *in* a good fight, which would be the more usual and
perhaps correcter form of expression.) But how else is the love
wherewith the Father loved the Son in us also, but because we are His
members and are loved in Him, since He is loved in the totality of His
person, as both Head and members? Therefore He added, “and I in them;”
as if saying, Since I am also in them. For in one sense He is in us as
in His temple; but in another, because we are also Himself, seeing that,
in accordance with His becoming man, that He might be our Head, we are
His body. The Saviour’s prayer is finished, His passion begins; let us,
therefore, also finish the present discourse, that we may treat of His
passion, as He granteth us grace, in others to follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1776"></span>[412:1777](1070114.htm#fr_1776) <span
id="iii.cxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p4"></span> [Rom. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)<span id="iii.cxii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1777"></span>[412:1778](1070114.htm#fr_1777) <span
id="iii.cxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p5"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)<span id="iii.cxii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1778"></span>[412:1779](1070114.htm#fr_1778) <span
id="iii.cxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p6"></span> [John
14.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="iii.cxii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1779"></span>[412:1780](1070114.htm#fr_1779) <span
id="iii.cxii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p7"></span> [John
6.44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)<span id="iii.cxii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1780"></span>[413:1781](1070114.htm#fr_1780) <span
id="iii.cxii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p8"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span id="iii.cxii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1781"></span>[413:1782](1070114.htm#fr_1781) <span
id="iii.cxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p10"></span> [Rom. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span id="iii.cxii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1782"></span>[413:1783](1070114.htm#fr_1782) <span
id="iii.cxii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p11"></span> [John
3.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)<span id="iii.cxii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1783"></span>[413:1784](1070114.htm#fr_1783) <span
id="iii.cxii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p12"></span> [Eph. ii.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004)<span id="iii.cxii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1784"></span>[413:1785](1070114.htm#fr_1784) <span
id="iii.cxii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p13"></span> [Luke xxiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043)<span id="iii.cxii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1785"></span>[413:1786](1070114.htm#fr_1785) <span
id="iii.cxii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p14"></span> *In inferno*.

<span id="fn_1786"></span>[414:1787](1070114.htm#fr_1786) <span
id="iii.cxii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p15"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008)<span id="iii.cxii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1787"></span>[414:1788](1070114.htm#fr_1787) <span
id="iii.cxii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p16"></span> [Wisd. vii.
24](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#024)<span id="iii.cxii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[414:1789](1070114.htm#fr_1788) <span
id="iii.cxii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p17"></span> [John
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span id="iii.cxii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[414:1790](1070114.htm#fr_1789) <span
id="iii.cxii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p18"></span> [Matt. xii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#030)<span id="iii.cxii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[414:1791](1070114.htm#fr_1790) <span
id="iii.cxii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p19"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="iii.cxii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1791"></span>[414:1792](1070114.htm#fr_1791) <span
id="iii.cxii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p21"></span> *Merces*.

<span id="fn_1792"></span>[414:1793](1070114.htm#fr_1792) <span
id="iii.cxii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p22"></span> [Heb. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)<span id="iii.cxii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1793"></span>[414:1794](1070114.htm#fr_1793) <span
id="iii.cxii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p23"></span> [Isa. xxvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#010)<span id="iii.cxii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1794"></span>[414:1795](1070114.htm#fr_1794) <span
id="iii.cxii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p24"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="iii.cxii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1795"></span>[414:1796](1070114.htm#fr_1795) <span
id="iii.cxii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p25"></span> [Matt. xxv.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046)<span id="iii.cxii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1796"></span>[414:1797](1070114.htm#fr_1796) <span
id="iii.cxii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p26"></span> [John
14.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="iii.cxii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1797"></span>[414:1798](1070114.htm#fr_1797) <span
id="iii.cxii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p27"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002)<span id="iii.cxii-p27.1"></span>:
*in pace*, <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.cxii-p27.2"></span>םל”שָבְ</span>; rather as in English version,
“in Salem” (Jerusalem).—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxii-p27.3"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1798"></span>[414:1799](1070114.htm#fr_1798) <span
id="iii.cxii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p28"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002)<span id="iii.cxii-p28.1"></span>:
*in pace*, <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.cxii-p28.2"></span>םל”שָבְ</span>; rather as in English version,
“in Salem” (Jerusalem).—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxii-p28.3"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1799"></span>[415:1800](1070114.htm#fr_1799) <span
id="iii.cxii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p30"></span> [Col. iii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span id="iii.cxii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1800"></span>[415:1801](1070114.htm#fr_1800) <span
id="iii.cxii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p33"></span> *Quam dilexisti me*. The part which
follows, which we have enclosed within parentheses, may be omitted by
the English reader, as it only deals with the Latin idiom.—<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxii-p33.1"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1801"></span>[415:1802](1070114.htm#fr_1801) <span
id="iii.cxii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxii-p34"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007)<span id="iii.cxii-p34.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate CXII](1070115)
