[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070131)  [Next](1070133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>Homily I.</span>

<span id="iv.iv-p2"></span><span id="iv.iv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iv.iv-p2.2"></span>1 John I. 1</span>–<span
class="c10"><span id="iv.iv-p2.3"></span>II. 11</span>

<span id="iv.iv-p3"></span>“That which was from the beginning, which we
have heard, and which we have seen with our eyes, and our hands have
handled, of the Word of life: and the life was manifested, and we have
seen, and bear witness, and show unto you that eternal life, which was
with the Father, and was manifested unto us: the things which we have
seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship
with us: and that our fellowship may be  <span
id="fr_1990"></span>[1991](#fn_1990) with the Father, and with His Son
Jesus Christ. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be
full. This then is the message which we have heard of Him, and declare
unto you, that God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all. If we say
that we have fellowship with Him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do
not the truth: if we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son shall
cleanse  <span id="fr_1991"></span>[1992](#fn_1991) us from all sin. If
we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not
in us. If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say that we have
not sinned, we make Him a liar, and His word is not in us. My little
children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous:
and He is the propitiation for our sins: not for our’s only, but also
for the sins of the whole world. And in this we do know Him, if we keep
His commandments. He that saith he knoweth Him, and keepeth not His
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. But whoso keepeth
His word, in him verily is the love of God perfected. In this we know
that we are in Him, if in Him we be perfect. He that saith he abideth in
Him ought himself also so to walk, even as He walked. Beloved, I write
no new commandment unto you, but an old commandment which ye had from
the beginning. The old commandment is the word which ye have heard.
Again, a new commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in Him
and in you: because the darkness is past, and the true light now
shineth. He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in
darkness even until now. He that loveth his brother abideth in the
light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him. For he that
hateth his brother is in darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth
not whither he goeth, because the darkness hath blinded his eyes.”

<span id="iv.iv-p6"></span>1. “That which was from the beginning, which
we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, <span
id="fr_1992"></span>[1993](#fn_1992) and our hands have handled, of the
word of life.” Who is he that with hands doth handle the Word, except
because “The Word was made flesh, and dwelt in us”? Now this Word which
was made flesh that it might be handled, began to be flesh, of the
Virgin Mary: but not then began the Word, for the Apostle saith, “That
which was from the beginning.” See whether his epistle does not bear
witness to his gospel, where ye lately heard, “In the beginning was
<span id="page_462">p. 462</span> <span id="iv.iv-Page_462"></span>the
Word, and the Word was with God.” <span
id="fr_1993"></span>[1994](#fn_1993) Perchance, “Concerning the word of
life” one may take as a sort of expression concerning Christ, not the
very body of Christ which was handled with hands. See what follows: “And
the Life was manifested.” Christ therefore is “the word of life.” And
whereby manifested? For it was “from the beginning,” only not manifested
to men: but it was manifested to angels, who saw it and fed on it as
their bread. But what saith the Scripture? “Man did eat angels’ bread.”
 <span id="fr_1994"></span>[1995](#fn_1994) Well then “the Life was
manifested” in the flesh; because it exhibited in manifestation, that
that which can be seen by the heart only, should be seen by the eyes
also, that it might heal the hearts. For only by the heart is the Word
seen: but the flesh is seen by the bodily eyes also. We had wherewith to
see the flesh, but had not wherewith to see the Word: “the Word was made
flesh,” which we might see, that so that in us might be healed wherewith
we might see the Word.

<span id="iv.iv-p10"></span>2. “And we have seen and are
witnesses.” <span id="fr_1995"></span>[1996](#fn_1995) Perhaps some of
the brethren who are not acquainted with the Greek do not know what the
word “witnesses” is in Greek: and yet it is a term much used by all, and
had in religious reverence; for what in our tongue we call “witnesses,”
in Greek are “martyrs.” Now where is the man that has not heard of
martyrs, or where the Christian in whose mouth the name of martyrs
dwelleth not every day and would that it so dwelt in the heart also,
that we should imitate the sufferings of the martyrs, not persecute them
with our cups! <span id="fr_1996"></span>[1997](#fn_1996) Well then, “We
have seen and are witnesses,” is as much as to say, We have seen and are
martyrs. For it was for bearing witness of that which they had seen, and
bearing witness of that which they had heard from them who had seen,
that, while their testimony itself displeased the men against whom it
was delivered, the martyrs suffered all that they did suffer. The
martyrs are God’s witnesses. It pleased God to have men for His
witnesses, that men also may have God to be their witness. “We have
seen,” saith he, “and are witnesses.” Where have they seen? In the
manifestation. What meaneth, in the manifestation? In the sun, that is,
in this light of day. And how should He be seen in the sun who made the
sun, except as “in the sun He hath set His tabernacle; and Himself as a
bridegroom going forth out of his chamber, exulted as a giant to run His
course?” <span id="fr_1997"></span>[1998](#fn_1997) He before the
sun, <span id="fr_1998"></span>[1999](#fn_1998) who made the sun, He
before the day-star, before all the stars, before all angels, the true
Creator, (“for all things were made by Him, and without Him was nothing
made,”) that He might be seen by eyes of flesh which see the sun, set
His very tabernacle in the sun, that is, showed His flesh in
manifestation of this light of day: and that Bridegroom’s chamber was
the Virgin’s womb, because in that virginal womb were joined the two,
the Bridegroom and the bride, the Bridegroom the Word, and the bride the
flesh; because it is written, “And they twain shall be one flesh;” <span
id="fr_1999"></span>[2000](#fn_1999) and the Lord saith in the Gospel,
“Therefore they are no more twain but one flesh. <span
id="fr_2000"></span>[2001](#fn_2000) And Esaias remembers right well
that they are two: for speaking in the person of Christ he saith, “He
hath set a mitre upon me as upon a bridegroom, and adorned me with an
ornament as a bride.” <span id="fr_2001"></span>[2002](#fn_2001) One
seems to speak, yet makes Himself at once Bridegroom and Bride; because
“not two, but one flesh:” because “the Word was made flesh, and dwelt in
us.” To that flesh the Church is joined, and so there is made the whole
Christ, Head and body.

<span id="iv.iv-p18"></span>3. “And we are witnesses, and show unto you
that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto
us:” *i.e.*, manifested among us: which might be more plainly expressed,
manifested to us. “The things,” therefore, “which we have seen and
heard, declare we unto you.” <span id="fr_2002"></span>[2003](#fn_2002)
Those saw the Lord Himself present in the flesh, and heard words from
the mouth of the Lord, and told them to us. Consequently we also have
heard, but have not seen. Are we then less happy than those who saw and
heard? And how does he add, “That ye also may have fellowship with us”?
Those saw, we have not seen, and yet we are fellows; because we hold the
faith in common. For there was one who did not believe even upon seeing,
and would needs handle, and so believe, and said, “I will not believe
except I thrust my fingers into the place of the nails, and touch His
scars.” <span id="fr_2003"></span>[2004](#fn_2003) And He did give
Himself for a time to be handled by the hands of men, who always giveth
Himself to be seen by the sight of the angels; and that disciple did
handle, and exclaimed, “My Lord, and my <span id="page_463">p.
463</span> <span id="iv.iv-Page_463"></span>God!” Because he touched the
Man, he confessed the God. And the Lord, to console us who, now that He
sitteth in heaven, cannot touch Him with the hand, but only reach Him
with faith, said to him, “Because thou hast seen, thou hast believed;
blessed are they that have not seen, and yet believe.” We are here
described, we designated. Then let the blessedness take place in us, of
which the Lord predicted that it should take place; let us firmly hold
that which we see not; because those tell us who have seen. “That ye
also,” saith he, “may have fellowship with us.” And what great matter is
it to have fellowship with men? Do not despise it; see what he adds:
“and our fellowship may be  <span id="fr_2004"></span>[2005](#fn_2004)
with God the Father, and Jesus Christ His Son. And these things,” saith
he, “we write unto you, that your joy may be full.” <span
id="fr_2005"></span>[2006](#fn_2005) Full joy he means in that
fellowship, in that charity, in that unity.

<span id="iv.iv-p23"></span>4. “And this is the message which we have
heard of Him, and declare unto you.” <span
id="fr_2006"></span>[2007](#fn_2006) What is this? Those same have seen,
have handled with their hands, the Word of life: He “was from the
beginning,” and for a time was made visible and palpable, the
Only-begotten Son of God. For what thing did He come, or what new thing
did He tell us? What was it His will to teach? Wherefore did He this
which He did, that the Word should be made flesh, that “God over all
things” <span id="fr_2007"></span>[2008](#fn_2007) should suffer
indignities from men, that He should endure to be smitten upon the face
by the hands which Himself had made? What would He teach? What would He
show? What would He declare? Let us hear: for without the fruit of the
precept the hearing of the story, how Christ was born, and how Christ
suffered, is a mere pastime of the mind, not a strengthening of it. What
great thing hearest thou? With what fruit thou hearest, see to that.
What would He teach? What declare? Hear. That “God is light,” saith he,
“and there is no darkness in Him at all.” <span
id="fr_2008"></span>[2009](#fn_2008) Hitherto, he hath named indeed the
light, but the words are dark: good is it for us that the very light
which he hath named should enlighten our hearts, and we should see what
he hath said. This it is that we declare, that “God is light, and there
is no darkness in Him at all.” Who would dare to say that there is
darkness in God? Or what is the light? Or what darkness? Lest haply he
speaks of such things as pertain to these eyes of ours. “God is light.”
Saith some man, “The sun also is light, and the moon also is light, and
a candle is light.” It ought to be something far greater than these, far
more excellent, and far more surpassing. How much God is distant from
the creature, how much the Maker from the making, how much Wisdom from
that which is made by Wisdom, far beyond all things must this light
needs be. And haply we shall be near to it, if we get to know what this
light is, and apply ourselves unto it, that by it we may be enlightened;
because in ourselves we are darkness, and only when enlightened by it
can we become light, and not be put to confusion by it, being put to
confusion by ourselves. Who is he that is put to confusion by himself?
He that knows himself to be a sinner. Who is he that by it is not put to
confusion? He who by it is enlightened. What is it to be enlightened by
it? He that now sees himself to be darkened by sins, and desires to be
enlightened by it, draws near to it: whence the Psalm saith, “Draw near
unto Him, and be ye enlightened; and your faces shall not be
ashamed.” <span id="fr_2009"></span>[2010](#fn_2009) But thou shalt not
be shamed by it, if, when it shall show thee to thyself that thou art
foul, thine own foulness shall displease thee, that thou mayest perceive
its beauty. This it is that He would teach.

<span id="iv.iv-p31"></span>5. And may it be that we say this
over-hastily? Let the apostle himself make this plain in what follows.
Remember what was said at the outset of our discourse, that the present
epistle commendeth charity: “God is light,” saith he, “and in Him is no
dark <span id="page_464">p. 464</span> <span
id="iv.iv-Page_464"></span>ness at all.” And what said he above? “That
ye may have fellowship with us, and our fellowship may be with God the
Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ.” But moreover, if “God be light,
and in Him is no darkness at all, and we *must* have fellowship with
Him,” then from us also must the darkness be driven away, that there may
be light created in us, for darkness cannot have fellowship with light.
To this end, see what follows: “If we say that we have fellowship with
Him, and walk in darkness, we lie.” <span
id="fr_2010"></span>[2011](#fn_2010) Thou hast also the Apostle Paul
saying, “Or what fellowship hath light with darkness?” <span
id="fr_2011"></span>[2012](#fn_2011) Thou sayest thou hast fellowship
with God, and thou walkest in darkness; “and God is light, and in Him is
no darkness at all:” then how should there be fellowship between light
and darkness? At this point therefore a man may say to himself, What
shall I do? how shall I be light? I live in sins and iniquities. There
steals upon him, as it were, a desperation and sadness. There is no
salvation save in the fellowship of God. “God is light, and in Him is no
darkness at all.” But sins are darkness, as the Apostle saith of the
devil and his angels, that they are “rulers of this darkness.” <span
id="fr_2012"></span>[2013](#fn_2012) He would not call them of darkness,
save as rulers of sins, having lordship over the wicked. Then what are
we to do, my brethren? Fellowship <span
id="fr_2013"></span>[2014](#fn_2013) with God must be had, other hope of
life eternal is none; now “God is Light, and in Him is no darkness at
all:” now iniquities are darkness; by iniquities we are pressed down,
that we cannot have fellowship with God: what hope have we then? Did I
not promise to speak something during these days, that shall cause
gladness? Which if I make not good, this is sadness. “God is Light, and
in Him is no darkness at all;” sins are darkness: what shall become of
us? Let us hear, whether peradventure He will console, lift up, give
hope, that we faint not by the way. For we are running, and running to
our own country; and if we despair of attaining, by that very despair we
fail. But He whose will it is that we attain, that He may keep us safe
in our own land, feedeth us in the way. Hear we then: “If we say that we
have fellowship with Him and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the
truth.” Let us not say that we have fellowship with Him, if we walk in
darkness. “If we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another.” <span id="fr_2014"></span>[2015](#fn_2014)
Let us walk in the light, as He is in the light, that we may be able to
have fellowship with Him. And what are we to do about our sins? Hear
what follows, “And the blood of Jesus Christ His Son shall purge <span
id="fr_2015"></span>[2016](#fn_2015) us from all sin.” <span
id="fr_2016"></span>[2017](#fn_2016) Great assurance hath God given!
Well may we celebrate the Passover, wherein was shed the blood of the
Lord, by which we are cleansed “from all sin!” Let us be assured: the
“handwriting which was against us,” <span
id="fr_2017"></span>[2018](#fn_2017) the bond of our slavery, the devil
held, but by the blood of Christ it is blotted out. “The blood,” saith
he, “of His Son shall purge us from all sin.” What meaneth, “from all
sin”? Mark: lo even now, in the name of Christ whom these <span
id="fr_2018"></span>[2019](#fn_2018) here have now confessed, who are
called infants, <span id="fr_2019"></span>[2020](#fn_2019) have all
their sins been cleansed. They came in old, they went out new. How, came
in old, went out new? Old men they came in, infants they went out. For
the old life is old age with all its dotage, but the new life is the
infancy of regeneration. But what are we to do? The past sins are
pardoned, not only to these but to us; and after the pardon and
abolition of all sins, by living in this world in the midst of
temptations, some haply have been contracted. Therefore what he can, let
man do; let him confess himself to be what he is, that he may be cured
by Him who always is what He is: for He always was and is; we were not
and are.

<span id="iv.iv-p44"></span>6. For see what He saith; “If we say that we
have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.” <span
id="fr_2020"></span>[2021](#fn_2020) Consequently, if thou hast
confessed thyself a sinner, the truth is in thee: for the Truth itself
is light. Thy life hath not yet shone in perfect brightness, because
there are sins in thee; but yet thou hast already begun to be
enlightened, because there is in thee the confession of sins. For see
what follows: “If we confess our sins, <span
id="fr_2021"></span>[2022](#fn_2021) He is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, and to purge us from all iniquity.” <span
id="fr_2022"></span>[2023](#fn_2022) Not <span id="page_465">p.
465</span> <span id="iv.iv-Page_465"></span>only the past, but haply if
we have contracted any from this life; because a man, so long as he
bears the flesh, cannot but have some at any rate light sins. But these
which we call light, do not thou make light of. If thou make light of
them when thou weighest them, be afraid when thou countest them. Many
light make one huge sin: many drops fill the river; many grains make the
lump. And what hope is there? Before all, confession: lest any think
himself righteous, and, before the eyes of God who seeth that which is,
man, that was not and is, lift up the neck. Before all, then,
confession; then, love: for of charity what is said? “Charity covereth a
multitude of sins.” <span id="fr_2023"></span>[2024](#fn_2023) Now let
us see whether he commendeth charity in regard of the sins which
subsequently overtake us: because charity alone extinguisheth sins.
Pride extinguisheth charity: therefore humility strengtheneth charity;
charity extinguisheth sins. Humility goes along with confession, the
humility by which we confess ourselves sinners: this is humility, not to
say it with the tongue, as if only to avoid arrogancy, lest we should
displease men if we should say that we are righteous. This do the
ungodly and insane: “I know indeed that I am righteous, but what shall I
say before men? If I shall call myself righteous, who will bear it, who
tolerate? let my righteousness be known unto God: I however will say
that I am a sinner, but only that I may not be found odious for
arrogancy.” Tell men what thou art, tell God what thou art. Because if
thou tell not God what thou art, God condemneth what He shall find in
thee. Wouldest thou not that He condemn thee? Condemn thou. Wouldest
thou that He forgive? do thou acknowledge, that thou mayest be able to
say unto God, “Turn Thy face from my sins.” <span
id="fr_2024"></span>[2025](#fn_2024) Say also to Him those words in the
same Psalm, “For I acknowledge mine iniquity.” “If we confess our sins,
He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to purge us from all
iniquity. If we say that we have not sinned, we make Him a liar, and His
word is not in us.” <span id="fr_2025"></span>[2026](#fn_2025) If thou
shalt say, I have not sinned, thou makest Him a liar, while thou wishest
to make thyself true. How is it possible that God should be a liar, and
man true, when the Scripture saith the contrary, “Every man a liar, God
alone true”? <span id="fr_2026"></span>[2027](#fn_2026) Consequently,
God true through Himself, thou true through God; because through
thyself, a liar.

<span id="iv.iv-p52"></span>7. And lest haply he should seem to have
given impunity for sins, in that he said, “He is faithful and just to
cleanse us from all iniquity;” and men henceforth should say to
themselves, Let us sin, let us do securely what we will, Christ purgeth
us, is faithful and just, purgeth us from all iniquity: He taketh from
thee an evil security, and putteth in an useful fear. To thine own hurt
thou wouldest be secure; thou must be solicitous. For “He is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins,” provided thou always displease
thyself, and be changing until thou be perfected. Accordingly, what
follows? “My little children, these things I write unto you, that ye sin
not.” <span id="fr_2027"></span>[2028](#fn_2027) But perchance sin
overtakes us from our mortal life: what shall be done then? What? shall
there be now despair? Hear: “And if any man sin, we have an advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and He is the propitiator
for our sins.” <span id="fr_2028"></span>[2029](#fn_2028) He then is the
advocate; do thou thine endeavor not to sin: if from the infirmity of
this life sin shall overtake thee, see to it straightway, straightway be
displeased, straightway condemn it; and when thou hast condemned, thou
shalt come assured unto the Judge. There hast thou the advocate: fear
not to lose thy cause in thy confession. For if oft-times in this life a
man commits his cause to an eloquent tongue, and is not lost; thou
committest thyself to the Word, and shalt thou be lost? Cry, “We have an
advocate with the Father.”

<span id="iv.iv-p55"></span>8. See John himself observing humility.
Assuredly he was a righteous and a great man, who from the Lord’s bosom
drank in the secrets of His mysteries; he, the man who by drinking from
the Lord’s bosom indited <span id="fr_2029"></span>[2030](#fn_2029) of
His Godhead, “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God:”
he, being such a man as this, saith not, Ye have an advocate with the
Father; but, “If any man sin, an advocate,” saith he, “have we.” He
saith not, ye have; nor saith, ye have me; nor saith, ye have Christ
Himself: but he puts Christ, not himself, and saith, also, “We have,”
not, ye have. He chose rather to put himself in the number of sinners
that he might have Christ for his advocate, than to put himself in
Christ’s stead as advocate, and to be found among the proud that shall
be condemned. Brethren, Jesus Christ the righteous, even Him have we for
our advocate with the Father; “He,” even He, “is the propitiation for
our sins.” This whoso hath held fast, hath made no heresy; this whoso
hath held fast, hath made no schism. For whence came schisms? When men
say, “we” are righteous, when men say, “we” sanctify the unclean, “we”
<span id="page_466">p. 466</span> <span
id="iv.iv-Page_466"></span>justify the ungodly; “we” ask, “we” obtain.
But what saith John? “And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.” But some man will say: then do the
saints not ask for us? Then do bishops and rulers not ask for the
people? Yea, but mark the Scriptures, and see that rulers also commend
themselves to the prayers of the people. Thus the apostle saith to the
congregation, “Praying withal for us also.”  <span
id="fr_2030"></span>[2031](#fn_2030) The apostle prayeth for the people,
the people prayeth for the apostle. We pray for you, brethren: but do ye
also pray for us. Let all the members pray one for another; let the Head
intercede for all. Therefore it is no marvel that he here goes on and
shuts the mouths of them that divide the Church of God. For he that has
said, “We have Jesus Christ the righteous, and He is the propitiation
for our sins:” having an eye to those who would divide themselves, and
would say, “Lo, here is Christ, lo, there;” <span
id="fr_2031"></span>[2032](#fn_2031) and would show Him in a part who
bought the whole and possesses the whole, he forthwith goes on to say,
“Not our sins only, but also the sins of the whole world.” What is this,
brethren? Certainly “we have found it in the fields of the woods,” <span
id="fr_2032"></span>[2033](#fn_2032) we have found the Church in all
nations. Behold, Christ “is the propitiation for our sins; not ours
only, but also the sins of the whole world.” Behold, thou hast the
Church throughout the whole world; do not follow false justifiers who in
truth are cutters off. Be thou in that mountain which hath filled the
whole earth: because “Christ is the propitiation for our sins; not only
ours, but also the sins of the whole world,” which He hath bought with
His blood.

<span id="iv.iv-p60"></span>9. “And in this,” saith he, “we do know
Him, <span id="fr_2033"></span>[2034](#fn_2033) if we keep His
commandments.” <span id="fr_2034"></span>[2035](#fn_2034) What
commandments? “He that saith, I know Him, and keepeth not His
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.” But still thou
askest, What commandments? “But whoso,” saith he, “keepeth His word, in
him verily is the love of God perfected.” <span
id="fr_2035"></span>[2036](#fn_2035) Let us see whether this same
commandment be not called love. For we were asking, what commandments,
and he saith, “But whoso keepeth His word, in him verily is the love of
God perfected.” Mark the Gospel, whether this be not the commandment: “A
new commandment,” saith the Lord, “give I unto you, that ye love one
another. <span id="fr_2036"></span>[2037](#fn_2036) —In this we know
that we are in Him, if in Him we be perfected.” <span
id="fr_2037"></span>[2038](#fn_2037) Perfected in love, he calls them:
what is perfection of love? To love even enemies, and love them for this
end, that they may be brethren. For not a carnal love ought ours to be.
To wish a man temporal weal, is good; but though that fail, let the soul
be safe. Dost thou wish life to any that is thy friend? Thou doest well.
Dost thou rejoice at the death of thine enemy? Thou doest ill. But haply
both to thy friend the life thou wishest him is not for his good, and to
thine enemy the death thou rejoicest at hath been for his good. It is
uncertain whether this present life be profitable to any man or
unprofitable: but the life which is with God without doubt is
profitable. So love thine enemies as to wish them to become thy
brethren; so love thine enemies as that they may be called into thy
fellowship. For so loved He who, hanging on the cross, said, “Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do.” <span
id="fr_2038"></span>[2039](#fn_2038) For he did not say, Father let them
live long, me indeed they kill, but let them live. He was casting out
from them the death which is for ever and ever, by His most merciful
prayer, and by His most surpassing might. Many of them believed, and the
shedding of the blood of Christ was forgiven them. At first they shed it
while they raged; now they drank it while they believed. “In this we
know that we are in Him, if in Him we be made perfect.” Touching the
very perfection of love of enemies, the Lord admonishing, saith, “Be ye
therefore perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect. <span
id="fr_2039"></span>[2040](#fn_2039) He,” therefore, “that saith he
abideth in Him, ought himself also so to walk, even as He walked.” <span
id="fr_2040"></span>[2041](#fn_2040) How, brethren? what doth he advise
us? “He that saith he abideth in Him,” *i.e.*, in Christ, “ought himself
also so to walk even as He walked.” Haply the advice is this, that we
should walk on the sea? That be far from us! It is this then, that we
walk in the way of righteousness. In what way? I have already mentioned
it. He was fixed upon the cross, and yet was He walking in this very
way: this way is the way of charity, “Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do.” If, therefore, thou have learned to pray for
thine enemy, thou walkest in the way of the Lord.

<span id="iv.iv-p69"></span>10. “Dearly beloved, I write unto you no new
commandment, but the old commandment which ye had from the
beginning.” <span id="fr_2041"></span>[2042](#fn_2041) What commandment
calls he “old? Which <span id="page_467">p. 467</span> <span
id="iv.iv-Page_467"></span>ye had,” saith he, “from the beginning. Old”
then, in this regard, that ye have already heard it: otherwise he will
contradict the Lord, where He saith, “A new commandment give I unto you,
that ye love one another.” <span id="fr_2042"></span>[2043](#fn_2042)
But why an “old” commandment? Not as pertaining to the old man. But why?
“Which ye had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word which
ye have heard.” Old then, in this regard, that ye have already heard it.
And the selfsame he showeth to be new, saying, “Again, a new commandment
write I unto you.” <span id="fr_2043"></span>[2044](#fn_2043) Not
another, but the selfsame which he hath called old, the same is also
new. Why? “Which thing is true in Him and in you.” Why old, ye have
already heard: *i.e.*, because ye knew it already. But why new? “Because
the darkness is past, and the true light now shineth.” Lo, whence it is
new: because the darkness pertains to the old man, but the light to the
new man. What saith the Apostle Paul? “Put ye off the old man, and put
ye on the new.”  <span id="fr_2044"></span>[2045](#fn_2044) And again
what saith he? “Ye were sometime darkness, but now light in the
Lord.” <span id="fr_2045"></span>[2046](#fn_2045)

<span id="iv.iv-p75"></span>11. “He that saith he is in the light”—now
he is making all clear that he has been saying—“he that saith he is in
the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkness even until now.” <span
id="fr_2046"></span>[2047](#fn_2046) What! my brethren, how long shall
we say to you, “Love your enemies”? <span
id="fr_2047"></span>[2048](#fn_2047) See whether, what is worse, ye do
not hate your brethren. If ye loved only your brethren, ye would be not
yet perfect: but if ye hate <span id="fr_2048"></span>[2049](#fn_2048)
your brethren, what are ye, where are ye? Let each look to his own
heart: let him not keep hatred against his brother for any hard word; on
account of earthly contention let him not become earth. For whoso hates
his brother, let him not say that he walks in the light. “He that saith
he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkness even until
now.” Thus, some man who was a pagan has become a Christian; mark well:
behold he was in darkness, while he was a pagan: now is he made
henceforth a Christian; thanks be to God, say all joyfully; the apostle
is read, where he saith joyfully, “For ye were sometime darkness, but
now light in the Lord.” <span id="fr_2049"></span>[2050](#fn_2049) Once
he worshipped idols, now he worships God; once he worshipped the things
he made, now he worships Him that made him. He is changed: thanks be to
God, say all Christians with joyful greeting. Why? Because henceforth he
is one that adores the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost; one that
detests demons and idols. Yet still is John solicitous about our
convert: while many greet him with joy, by him he is still looked upon
with apprehension. Brethren, let us gladly welcome a mother’s
solicitude. Not without cause is the mother solicitous about us when
others rejoice: by the mother, I mean charity: for she dwelt in the
heart of John, when he spake these words. Wherefore, but because there
is something he fears in us, even when men now hail us with joy? What is
it that he fears? “He that saith he is in the light”—What is this? He
that saith now he is a Christian,—“and hateth his brother, is in
darkness even until now.” Which there is no need to expound: but to be
glad of it, if it be not so, or to bewail it, if it be.

<span id="iv.iv-p80"></span>12. “He that loveth his brother abideth
(*manet*) in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in
him.” <span id="fr_2050"></span>[2051](#fn_2050) —I beseech you by
Christ: God is feeding us, we are about to refresh our bodies in the
name of Christ; they both are in some good measure refreshed, and are to
be refreshed: let the mind be fed. Not that I am going to speak for a
long time, do I say this; for behold, the lesson is now coming to an
end: but lest haply of weariness we should hear less attentively than we
ought that which is most necessary.—“He that loveth his brother abideth
in the light, and there is no scandal,” or “none occasion of stumbling,
in him.” Who are they that take scandal or make scandal? They that are
offended in Christ, and in the Church. They that are offended in Christ,
are as if burnt by the sun, those in the Church as by the moon. But the
Psalm saith, “The sun shall not burn thee by day, neither the moon by
night: <span id="fr_2051"></span>[2052](#fn_2051) *i.e.,* if thou hold
fast charity, neither in Christ shalt thou have occasion of falling, nor
in the Church; neither Christ shalt thou forsake, nor the Church. For he
that forsakes the Church, how is he in Christ who is not in the members
of Christ? How is he in Christ who is not in the body of Christ? Those
therefore take scandal, or, occasion of falling, who forsake Christ or
the Church. Whence do we understand that the Psalm in saying, “By day
shall the sun not burn thee, nor the moon by night,” saith it of this,
that the burning means scandal, or occasion of stumbling? In the first
place mark the similitude itself. Just as the person whom something is
burning saith, I cannot bear it, I cannot away with it, and draws back;
so those persons <span id="page_468">p. 468</span> <span
id="iv.iv-Page_468"></span>who cannot bear some things in the Church,
and withdraw themselves either from the name of Christ or from the
Church, are taking scandal. For see how those took scandal as from the
sun, those carnal ones to whom Christ preached of His flesh, saying, “He
that eateth not the flesh of the Son of Man and drinketh His blood,
shall have no life in him.” <span id="fr_2052"></span>[2053](#fn_2052)
Some seventy persons <span id="fr_2053"></span>[2054](#fn_2053) said,
“This is an hard saying,” and went back from Him, and there remained the
twelve. All those the sun burnt, and they went back, not being able to
bear the force of the Word. There remained therefore the twelve. And
lest haply men should imagine that they confer a benefit upon Christ by
believing on Christ, and not that the benefit is conferred by Him upon
them; when the twelve were left, the Lord said to them, “Will ye also
go?” That ye may know that I am necessary to you, not ye to me. But
those whom the sun had not burnt, answered by the voice of Peter: “Lord,
Thou hast the word <span id="fr_2054"></span>[2055](#fn_2054) of eternal
life; whither shall we go?” But who are they that the Church as the moon
burneth by night? They that have made schisms. Hear the very word used
in the apostle: “Who is offended, and I burn not?” <span
id="fr_2055"></span>[2056](#fn_2055) In what sense then is it, that
there is no scandal or occasion of stumbling in him that loveth his
brother? Because he that loveth his brother, beareth all things for
unity’s sake; because it is in the unity of charity that brotherly love
exists. Some one, I know not who, offendeth thee: whether it be a bad
man, or as thou supposest a bad man, or as thou pretendest a bad man:
and dost thou desert so many good men? What sort of brotherly love is
that which hath appeared in these <span
id="fr_2056"></span>[2057](#fn_2056) persons? While they accuse the
Africans, they have deserted the whole world! What, were there no saints
in the whole world? Or was it possible they should be condemned by you
unheard? But oh! if ye loved your brethren, there would be none occasion
of stumbling in you. Hear thou the Psalm, what it saith: “Great peace
have they that love Thy law, and there is to them none occasion of
stumbling.” <span id="fr_2057"></span>[2058](#fn_2057) Great peace it
saith there is for them that love the law of God, and that is why there
is to them none occasion of stumbling. Those then who take scandal, or,
occasion of stumbling, destroy peace. And of whom saith he that they
take not and make not occasion of stumbling? They that love God’s law.
Consequently they are in charity. But some man will say, “He said it of
them that love God’s law, not of the brethren.” Hear thou what the Lord
saith: “A new commandment give I unto you that ye love one
another.” <span id="fr_2058"></span>[2059](#fn_2058) What is the Law but
commandment? Moreover, how is it they do not take occasion of stumbling,
but because they forbear one another? As Paul saith, “Forbearing one
another in love, studying to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace.” <span id="fr_2059"></span>[2060](#fn_2059) And to show that this
is the law of Christ, hear the same apostle commending this very law.
“Bear ye one another’s burdens,” saith he, “and so shall ye fulfill the
law of Christ.” <span id="fr_2060"></span>[2061](#fn_2060)

<span id="iv.iv-p92"></span>13. “For he that hateth his brother is in
darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he
goeth.” <span id="fr_2061"></span>[2062](#fn_2061) A great thing, my
brethren: mark it, we beseech you. “He that hateth his brother walketh
in darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because the darkness hath
blinded his eyes.” What so blind as these who hate their brethren? For
that ye may know that they are blind, they have stumbled at a Mountain.
I say the same things often, that they may not slip out of your memory.
The Stone which was “cut out of the Mountain without hands,” is it not
Christ, who came of the kingdom of the Jews, without the work of
man? <span id="fr_2062"></span>[2063](#fn_2062) Has not that Stone
broken in pieces all the kingdoms of the earth, that is, all the
dominations of idols and demons? Has not that Stone grown, and become a
great mountain, and filled the whole earth? Do we point with the finger
to this Mountain in like manner as the moon on its third day <span
id="fr_2063"></span>[2064](#fn_2063) is pointed out to men? For example,
when they wish people to see the new moon, they say, Lo, the moon! lo,
where it is! and if there be some there who are not sharp-sighted, and
say, Where? then the finger is put forth that they may see it. Sometimes
when they are ashamed to be thought blind, <span id="page_469">p.
469</span> <span id="iv.iv-Page_469"></span>they say they have seen what
they have not seen. Do we in this way point out the Church, my brethren?
Is it not open? Is it not manifest? Has it not possessed all nations? Is
not that fulfilled which so many years before was promised to Abraham,
that in his seed should all nations be blessed? <span
id="fr_2064"></span>[2065](#fn_2064) It was promised to one believer,
and the world is filled with thousands of believers. Behold here the
mountain filling the whole face of the earth! Behold the city of which
it is said, “A city set upon a mountain cannot be hid!” <span
id="fr_2065"></span>[2066](#fn_2065) But those stumble at the mountain,
and when it is said to them, Go up; “There is no mountain,” say they,
and dash their heads against it sooner than seek a habitation there.
Esaias was read yesterday; whosoever of you was awake not with his eyes
only but with his ear, and not the ear of the body but the ear of the
heart, noted this; “In the last days shall the mountain of the house of
the Lord be manifest, prepared upon the top of the mountains.”  <span
id="fr_2066"></span>[2067](#fn_2066) What so manifest as a mountain? But
there are even mountains unknown, because they are situated in one part
of the earth. Which of you knows Mount Olympus? Just as the people who
dwell there do not know our Giddaba. These mountains are in different
parts of the earth. But not so that Mountain, for it hath filled the
whole face of the earth, and of it is said, “Prepared upon the top of
the mountains.” It is a Mountain above the tops of all mountains. “And,”
saith he, “to it shall be gathered all nations.” Who can fail to be
aware of this Mountain? Who breaks his head by stumbling against it? Who
is ignorant of the city set upon a mountain? But marvel not that it is
unknown by these who hate the brethren, because they walk in darkness
and know not whither they go, because the darkness hath blinded their
eyes. They do not see the Mountain: I would not have thee marvel; they
have no eyes. How is it they have no eyes? Because the darkness hath
blinded them. How do we prove this? Because they hate the brethren, in
that, while they are offended at Africans, they separate themselves from
the whole earth: in that they do not tolerate for the peace of Christ
those whom they defame, and do tolerate for the sake of Donatus <span
id="fr_2067"></span>[2068](#fn_2067) those whom they condemn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1990"></span>[461:1991](1070132.htm#fr_1990) <span
id="iv.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p4"></span> \[“Our fellowship is.”— J.H.M.\]

<span id="fn_1991"></span>[461:1992](1070132.htm#fr_1991) <span
id="iv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p5"></span> \[Gr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv-p5.1"></span> καθαρίζει</span>, cleanses.— J.H.M.\]

<span id="fn_1992"></span>[461:1993](1070132.htm#fr_1992) <span
id="iv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv-p7.1"></span>῝Ο</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv-p7.2"></span> ἐθεασάμεθα</span>. “Which we have looked upon.”
Vulg . *quod perspeximus*. Aug, *om*.

<span id="fn_1993"></span>[462:1994](1070132.htm#fr_1993) <span
id="iv.iv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p8"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1994"></span>[462:1995](1070132.htm#fr_1994) <span
id="iv.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p9"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#025)<span id="iv.iv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1995"></span>[462:1996](1070132.htm#fr_1995) <span
id="iv.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p11"></span> [1 John i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1996"></span>[462:1997](1070132.htm#fr_1996) <span
id="iv.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p12"></span> Edd. *Non calcibus persequamur*: “not
virtually trample upon, or kick at them, persecuting the martyrs afresh
by turning their festivals into luxurious orgies;” or “not merely walk
after them.” Morel. *Elem. Crit*. p. 208, cited by Ed. Par, proposes
*calicibus persequamur*: Complaining of these excesses. S. Aug. says,
*Enarr. in Psa*. 69, sec. 2: *Adhuc illi inimici martyrum quia voce et
ferro non possunt, eos sua luxuria persequuntur. Atque utinam Paganos
tantum doleremus!…Videmus etiam portantes in fronte signum Ejus, simul
in ipsa fronte portare impudentiam luxuriarum, diebusque et
solemnitatibus martyrum non exultare, sed insultare*. On [Ps.
59](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv-p12.1"></span> (al.
60) sec 15, he has, *modò eos ebriosi calicibus persequuntur*, and one
Oxford <span class="c10"><span id="iv.iv-p12.2"></span>ms.</span> reads
so here. Compare *infra*, Hom. iv. 4.

<span id="fn_1997"></span>[462:1998](1070132.htm#fr_1997) <span
id="iv.iv-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p13"></span> [Ps.
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1998"></span>[462:1999](1070132.htm#fr_1998) <span
id="iv.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p14"></span> *Ante luciferum*. [Ps. cx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1999"></span>[462:2000](1070132.htm#fr_1999) <span
id="iv.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p15"></span> [Gen. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span id="iv.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2000"></span>[462:2001](1070132.htm#fr_2000) <span
id="iv.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p16"></span> [Matt. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2001"></span>[462:2002](1070132.htm#fr_2001) <span
id="iv.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p17"></span> [Isa. lxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv-p17.1"></span>.
*Enarr. in Ps*. ci. sec. 2.

<span id="fn_2002"></span>[462:2003](1070132.htm#fr_2002) <span
id="iv.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p19"></span> [1 John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2003"></span>[462:2004](1070132.htm#fr_2003) <span
id="iv.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p20"></span> [John xx.
25-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025)<span id="iv.iv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2004"></span>[463:2005](1070132.htm#fr_2004) <span
id="iv.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p21"></span> *Et societas nostra sit*. So Vulg. Mill
cites one <span class="c10"><span id="iv.iv-p21.1"></span>ms.</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv-p21.2"></span>ᾖ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv-p21.3"></span>μετὰ τοῦ πατρός</span>.

<span id="fn_2005"></span>[463:2006](1070132.htm#fr_2005) <span
id="iv.iv-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p22"></span> [1 John i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2006"></span>[463:2007](1070132.htm#fr_2006) <span
id="iv.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p24"></span> [1 John i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2007"></span>[463:2008](1070132.htm#fr_2007) <span
id="iv.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p25"></span> [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv-p25.1"></span>. *Deus
super omnia*: so *de Trin*. ii. 23, c. Faust. iii. 3, 6, *Propos. ex Ep.
ad Rom. Exp.* 59*, super omnes Deus*. S. Aug. constantly refers this
clause to Christ. So S. Iren. iii. 18 (*D. super omnes*), Tertull. adv.
Prax. 13, 15; Origen (Lat.) *Comm. in Ep. ad Rom*. vii. 13; St. Cypr.
*adv. Jud*. ii. 6; St. Hilar. *de Trin*. viii. 37; St. Ambros de *Sp.
Sa*. i. 3, sec. 39; in all these it is *De super omnia* or *super omnia
Deus*.

<span id="fn_2008"></span>[463:2009](1070132.htm#fr_2008) <span
id="iv.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p26"></span> [1 John i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv-p26.1"></span>.
\[*God is Light; God is Love*.—The Apostle gives in these two great
words indications of the Divine essence, so far as it can be conveyed or
suggested in human language. He had before said ([John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="iv.iv-p26.2"></span>),
narrating the words of the Lord Jesus, “*God is spirit*” (not, *a*
spirit). In this epistle he declares to us that *God is light*, and *God
is love*.

<span id="iv.iv-p27"></span>*God is light*, not “*a* light” (Luther) or
even “the light,” but “light” in the most absolute sense. In the text,
Augustin forcibly employs this language in reference to sins; they, he
says, are “our darkness.” In the phrase of the apostle we may recognize
a declaration altogether unrestricted and absolute with respect to the
essence of God. Surely, He cannot be fully or adequately apprehended by
man. Yet, He communicates Himself. He is revealed in His works; in them
“the invisible things” of Him are clearly seen. His pure and glorious
light shines; darkness confines; light is diffusive, without limit: by
the light emanating from Him, alone, is God seen (Philo).

<span id="iv.iv-p28"></span>But God, adds the apostle, is *love*. Love
has its source in God. It belongs to His essence, to His very nature.
Like light it is diffusive; in its self-communication it begets love.
Love discloses to us the personality of God. His love meets with returns
from personal beings to whom it comes and whom it enters; he that loveth
is born of God and knoweth God. Apart from creation God is love, and
before creation He had in Himself the perfect object of love; in the
unity of the One God, in the communion of the Father and the Son, and
the perfect response of love in and by the Holy Spirit (the activity of
love is affirmed in Scripture of each person of the Holy Trinity),
uniting both in the society and fellowship of love.

<span id="iv.iv-p29"></span>Such love, manifested in the Gospel,
encourages us to draw nigh in confidence to Him who is Love, and who may
be loved.—J.H.M.\]

<span id="fn_2009"></span>[463:2010](1070132.htm#fr_2009) <span
id="iv.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p30"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2010"></span>[464:2011](1070132.htm#fr_2010) <span
id="iv.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p32"></span> [1 John i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2011"></span>[464:2012](1070132.htm#fr_2011) <span
id="iv.iv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p33"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2012"></span>[464:2013](1070132.htm#fr_2012) <span
id="iv.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p34"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2013"></span>[464:2014](1070132.htm#fr_2013) <span
id="iv.iv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p35"></span> \[*Fellowship*.—The primary object of the
apostle’s communication in this epistle ([1 John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv-p35.1"></span>), is
that his readers may have fellowship with the apostolic body, and, in
connection with them, fellowship with the Father and with His Son, Jesus
Christ.

<span id="iv.iv-p36"></span>St. John’s message contemplates both a human
and a Divine fellowship. The union among believers is described and
emphasized, and he points also to the manifold blessings that flow from
the Divine fellowship. The fruits of this revelation—of the disclosures
of the love of God,—the apostle intimates are not for that age only, but
for all who should afterwards believe; a thought which Augustin brings
out in the text by adducing the history of Thomas ([John xx.
24-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#024)<span id="iv.iv-p36.1"></span>),
and the consolation administered to him by the Lord, with the wider
comfort for all His disciples: “Blessed are they that have not seen, and
yet believe.”

<span id="iv.iv-p37"></span>The life, “even the life eternal,” is
manifested in this joyous fellowship, which is set forth by St. John in
different forms of expression; it is reciprocal. “Hereby we know that we
abide in Him and He in us” ([1 John iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv-p37.1"></span>).
Again, it is presented as the abiding of man in God: “By this we know
that we are in Him” ([1 John 2.5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv-p37.2"></span>). “We know that the Son of God hath come, and
we are in Him is true” ([1 John
5.20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020)<span id="iv.iv-p37.3"></span>).
Again, the twofold fellowship (human and Divine), is represented as the
abiding of God (or Christ) in man. “If we love one another, God abideth
in us” ([1 John 4.12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv-p37.4"></span>). Among the results of this Divine-human
fellowship, the apostle names, *confidence, growing purity* and *love*
([1 John 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028), [1 John
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#003),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv-p37.5"></span>).—J.H.M.\]

<span id="fn_2014"></span>[464:2015](1070132.htm#fr_2014) <span
id="iv.iv-p37.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p38"></span> [1 John i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2015"></span>[464:2016](1070132.htm#fr_2015) <span
id="iv.iv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p39"></span> \[Gr. present, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv-p39.1"></span> καθαρίξει</span>, cleanseth.\]

<span id="fn_2016"></span>[464:2017](1070132.htm#fr_2016) <span
id="iv.iv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p40"></span> *Delicto*.

<span id="fn_2017"></span>[464:2018](1070132.htm#fr_2017) <span
id="iv.iv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p41"></span> [Col. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2018"></span>[464:2019](1070132.htm#fr_2018) <span
id="iv.iv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p42"></span> The newly baptized.

<span id="fn_2019"></span>[464:2020](1070132.htm#fr_2019) <span
id="iv.iv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p43"></span> Neophytes.

<span id="fn_2020"></span>[464:2021](1070132.htm#fr_2020) <span
id="iv.iv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p45"></span> [1 John i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2021"></span>[464:2022](1070132.htm#fr_2021) <span
id="iv.iv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p46"></span> *Delicta*.

<span id="fn_2022"></span>[464:2023](1070132.htm#fr_2022) <span
id="iv.iv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p47"></span> [1 John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2023"></span>[465:2024](1070132.htm#fr_2023) <span
id="iv.iv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p48"></span> [1 Pet. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2024"></span>[465:2025](1070132.htm#fr_2024) <span
id="iv.iv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p49"></span> [Ps.
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2025"></span>[465:2026](1070132.htm#fr_2025) <span
id="iv.iv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p50"></span> [1 John
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2026"></span>[465:2027](1070132.htm#fr_2026) <span
id="iv.iv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p51"></span> [Rom. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2027"></span>[465:2028](1070132.htm#fr_2027) <span
id="iv.iv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p53"></span> [1 John ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2028"></span>[465:2029](1070132.htm#fr_2028) <span
id="iv.iv-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p54"></span> [1 John
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2029"></span>[465:2030](1070132.htm#fr_2029) <span
id="iv.iv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p56"></span> *Ructavit*.

<span id="fn_2030"></span>[466:2031](1070132.htm#fr_2030) <span
id="iv.iv-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p57"></span> [Col. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2031"></span>[466:2032](1070132.htm#fr_2031) <span
id="iv.iv-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p58"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023)<span id="iv.iv-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2032"></span>[466:2033](1070132.htm#fr_2032) <span
id="iv.iv-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p59"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2033"></span>[466:2034](1070132.htm#fr_2033) <span
id="iv.iv-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p61"></span> *In hoc cognoscimus eum; si*: but all the
Greek copies, <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv-p61.1"></span>ἐν τούτῳ
γινώσκομεν ὅτι ἐγνώκαμεν αὐτόν, ἐάν</span>. Vulg. *In hoc scimus quoniam
cognovimus eum, si.*

<span id="fn_2034"></span>[466:2035](1070132.htm#fr_2034) <span
id="iv.iv-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p62"></span> [1 John
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2035"></span>[466:2036](1070132.htm#fr_2035) <span
id="iv.iv-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p63"></span> [1 John ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2036"></span>[466:2037](1070132.htm#fr_2036) <span
id="iv.iv-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p64"></span> [John xiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034)<span id="iv.iv-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2037"></span>[466:2038](1070132.htm#fr_2037) <span
id="iv.iv-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p65"></span> [1 John ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv-p65.1"></span>. *Si
in ipso perfecti fuerimus*. Augustin and two or three Latin <span
class="c10"><span id="iv.iv-p65.2"></span>mss.</span>: an addition
unknown to the Greek and to the other copies of the Latin.

<span id="fn_2038"></span>[466:2039](1070132.htm#fr_2038) <span
id="iv.iv-p65.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p66"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="iv.iv-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2039"></span>[466:2040](1070132.htm#fr_2039) <span
id="iv.iv-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p67"></span> [Matt. v.
48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#048)<span id="iv.iv-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2040"></span>[466:2041](1070132.htm#fr_2040) <span
id="iv.iv-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p68"></span> [1 John ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2041"></span>[466:2042](1070132.htm#fr_2041) <span
id="iv.iv-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p70"></span> [1 John ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2042"></span>[467:2043](1070132.htm#fr_2042) <span
id="iv.iv-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p71"></span> [John xiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034)<span id="iv.iv-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2043"></span>[467:2044](1070132.htm#fr_2043) <span
id="iv.iv-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p72"></span> [1 John ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2044"></span>[467:2045](1070132.htm#fr_2044) <span
id="iv.iv-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p73"></span> [Col.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2045"></span>[467:2046](1070132.htm#fr_2045) <span
id="iv.iv-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p74"></span> [Eph. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2046"></span>[467:2047](1070132.htm#fr_2046) <span
id="iv.iv-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p76"></span> [1 John ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2047"></span>[467:2048](1070132.htm#fr_2047) <span
id="iv.iv-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p77"></span> [Matt. v.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="iv.iv-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2048"></span>[467:2049](1070132.htm#fr_2048) <span
id="iv.iv-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p78"></span> *Si autem oditis*. So ed. Erasm. and four
<span class="c10"><span id="iv.iv-p78.1"></span>mss.</span> cited in ed.
Louvain, which however has in the text *oderitis*. One <span
class="c10"><span id="iv.iv-p78.2"></span> ms.</span> cited *ibid*. has,
*Si autem odistis*. Edd. Lugd. and Ven. have *si autem auditis*, “if ye
are called brethren.” Four Oxf. <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iv-p78.3"></span>mss.</span> *oditis*.

<span id="fn_2049"></span>[467:2050](1070132.htm#fr_2049) <span
id="iv.iv-p78.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p79"></span> [Eph. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2050"></span>[467:2051](1070132.htm#fr_2050) <span
id="iv.iv-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p81"></span> [1 John ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2051"></span>[467:2052](1070132.htm#fr_2051) <span
id="iv.iv-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p82"></span> [Ps. cxxi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2052"></span>[468:2053](1070132.htm#fr_2052) <span
id="iv.iv-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p83"></span> [John vi.
54-69](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#054)<span id="iv.iv-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2053"></span>[468:2054](1070132.htm#fr_2053) <span
id="iv.iv-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p84"></span> So in Epist. 173, sec. 30, Augustin writes,
*Attendis enim et sæpe repetis, sicut audio, quod in Evangelio scriptum
est recessisse a Domino septuaginta discipules.…cæterisque duodecim qui
remanserant fuisse responsum, Numquid et vos vultis abire*? The notion
entertained by some of the Ancients and, as it seems, by St. Augustin,
that the disciples who took offense at our Lord’s discourse in the
synagogue of Capernaum were the Seventy, may have been derived from the
Hypotyposes of St. Clem. Alex. (comp. Euseb. H. E. i. 12) or one of the
Clementines. (Thus S. Epiphanius *Hær*. 51, p. 186, 188, relates from
some such authority, that the Evangelists Mark and Luke were of the
number of the Seventy, and of those who were offended; and that they
were reclaimed to the faith, the one by St. Peter, the other by St.
Paul.) But the notion, from whatever quarter it came, seems to have no
foundation in Scripture, since it is sufficiently evident that the
mission of the Seventy, [Luke x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv-p84.1"></span>, was
subsequent to the first miracle of feeding, [John
6:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#000), [Luke
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv-p84.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2054"></span>[468:2055](1070132.htm#fr_2054) <span
id="iv.iv-p84.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p85"></span> *Verbum*.

<span id="fn_2055"></span>[468:2056](1070132.htm#fr_2055) <span
id="iv.iv-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p86"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span id="iv.iv-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2056"></span>[468:2057](1070132.htm#fr_2056) <span
id="iv.iv-p86.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p87"></span> Donatists.

<span id="fn_2057"></span>[468:2058](1070132.htm#fr_2057) <span
id="iv.iv-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p88"></span> [Ps. cxix.
165](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#165)<span id="iv.iv-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2058"></span>[468:2059](1070132.htm#fr_2058) <span
id="iv.iv-p88.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p89"></span> [John xiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034)<span id="iv.iv-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2059"></span>[468:2060](1070132.htm#fr_2059) <span
id="iv.iv-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p90"></span> [Eph.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2060"></span>[468:2061](1070132.htm#fr_2060) <span
id="iv.iv-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p91"></span> [Gal. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2061"></span>[468:2062](1070132.htm#fr_2061) <span
id="iv.iv-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p93"></span> [1 John ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2062"></span>[468:2063](1070132.htm#fr_2062) <span
id="iv.iv-p93.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p94"></span> *Supra*, Hom. in Ev. iv. 4; [Dan.
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035)<span id="iv.iv-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2063"></span>[468:2064](1070132.htm#fr_2063) <span
id="iv.iv-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p95"></span> *Luna tertia*; i.e. the moon at its first
appearance: for the first phasis in Africa as in Egypt usually took
place on the third day after conjunction. See the passages cited from
Geminus in the *Uranolog*. vii. 39, B. Horapoll, *Hieroglyph*. i. 66, in
Mr. Greswell’s *Dissertations on the Harmony of the Gospels*, vol. i. p.
323, note.

<span id="fn_2064"></span>[469:2065](1070132.htm#fr_2064) <span
id="iv.iv-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p96"></span> [Gen. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span id="iv.iv-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2065"></span>[469:2066](1070132.htm#fr_2065) <span
id="iv.iv-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p97"></span> [Matt. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2066"></span>[469:2067](1070132.htm#fr_2066) <span
id="iv.iv-p97.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p98"></span> [Isa. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2067"></span>[469:2068](1070132.htm#fr_2067) <span
id="iv.iv-p98.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p99"></span> See on [Ps.
xxxvii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv-p99.1"></span>
Ser. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily II](1070133)
