[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070125)  [Next](1070127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.cxxiv"></span> <span id="page_444">p. 444</span> <span
id="iii.cxxiv-Page_444"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.cxxiv-p1.1"></span>Tractate CXXIII.</span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p2"></span><span id="iii.cxxiv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxxiv-p2.2"></span>Chapter XXI.
12</span>–<span class="c10"><span id="iii.cxxiv-p2.3"></span>19</span>.

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxxiv-p3.1"></span>With</span> this third manifestation of
Himself by the Lord to His disciples after His resurrection, the Gospel
of the blessed Apostle John is brought to a close, of which we have
already lectured through the earlier part as we were able, on to the
place where it is related that an hundred and fifty-three fishes were
taken by the disciples to whom He showed Himself, and for all they were
so large, yet were not the nets broken. What follows we have now to take
into consideration, and to discuss as the Lord enables us, and as the
various points may appear to demand. When the fishing was over, “Jesus
saith unto them, Come \[and\] dine. And none of those who sat down dared
to ask Him, Who art Thou? knowing that it was the Lord.” If, then, they
knew, what need was there to ask? and if there was no need, wherefore is
it said, “they dared not,” as if there were need, but, from some fear or
other, they dared not? The meaning here, therefore, is: so great was the
evidence of the truth that Jesus Himself had appeared to these
disciples, that not one of them dared not merely to deny, but even to
doubt it; for had any of them doubted it, he ought certainly to have
asked. In this sense, therefore, it was said, “No one dared to ask Him,
Who art Thou?” as if it were, No one dared to doubt that it was He
Himself.

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p4"></span>2. “And Jesus cometh, and taketh bread,
and giveth them, and fish likewise.” We are likewise told here, you see,
on what they dined; and of this dinner we also will say something that
is sweet and salutary, if we, too, are made by Him to partake of the
food. It is related above that these disciples, when they came to the
land, “saw a fire of coals laid, and a fish laid thereon, and bread.”
Here we are not to understand that the bread also was laid upon the
coals, but only to supply, *They saw*. And if we repeat this verb in the
place where it ought to be supplied, the whole may read thus: They saw
coals laid, and fish laid thereon, and they saw bread. Or rather in this
way: They saw coals laid, and fish laid thereon; they saw also bread. At
the Lord’s command they likewise brought of the fishes which they
themselves had caught; and although their doing so might not be actually
stated by the historian, yet there has been no silence in regard to the
Lord’s command. For He says, “Bring of the fishes which ye have now
caught.” And when we have such certainty that He gave the order, will
any suppose that they failed to obey it? Of this, therefore, the Lord
prepared the dinner for these His seven disciples, namely, of the fish
which they had seen laid upon the coals, with an addition thereto from
those which they had caught, and of the bread which we are told with
equal distinctness that they had seen. The fish roasted is Christ having
suffered; He Himself also is the bread that cometh down from
heaven. <span id="fr_1949"></span>[1950](#fn_1949) With Him is
incorporated the Church, in order to the participation in everlasting
blessedness. For this reason is it said, “Bring of the fish which ye
have now caught,” that all of us who cherish this hope may know that we
ourselves, through that septenary number of disciples whereby our
universal community may in this passage be understood as symbolized,
partake in this great sacrament, and are associated in the same
blessedness. This is the Lord’s dinner with His own disciples, and
herewith John, although having much besides that he might say of Christ,
brings his Gospel, with profound thought and an eye to important
lessons, to a close. For here the Church, such as it will be hereafter
among the good alone, is signified by the draught of an hundred and
fifty-three fishes; and to those who so believe, and hope, and love,
there is demonstrated by this dinner their participation in such
super-eminent blessedness.

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p6"></span>3. “This was now,” he says, “the third
time that Jesus showed Himself to His disciples after that He was risen
from the dead.” And this we are to refer not to the manifestations
themselves, but to the days (that is to say, taking the first day when
He rose again, and the \[second\] eight days after, when the disciple
Thomas saw and believed, and \[the third\] on this day when He so acted
in connection with the fishes, although how many days afterwards it was
that He did so we are not told); for on that first day He was seen more
than once, as is shown by the collated testimonies of all the
evangelists: but, as we have said, it is in accordance with the days
that His manifestations are to be calculated, <span id="page_445">p.
445</span> <span id="iii.cxxiv-Page_445"></span>making this the third;
for that \[manifestation\] is to be reckoned the first, and all one and
the same, as included in one day, however often and to however many He
showed Himself on the day of His resurrection; the second eight days
afterwards, and this the third, and thereafter as often as He pleased on
to the fortieth day, when He ascended into heaven, although all of them
have not been recorded in Scripture.

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p7"></span>4. “So when they had dined, He saith to
Simon Peter, Simon, \[son\] of John, lovest thou me more than these? He
saith unto Him, Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee. He saith unto
him, Feed my lambs. He saith to him again, Simon, \[son\] of John,
lovest thou me? He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love
Thee. He saith unto Him, Feed my lambs. He saith unto him the third
time, Simon, \[son\] of John, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved because
He said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? And he said unto Him,
Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou knowest that I love Thee. He saith
unto him, Feed my sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast
young thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but
when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another
shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wilt not. And this spake
He, signifying by what death he should glorify God.” Such was the end
reached by that denier and lover; elated by his presumption, prostrated
by his denial, cleansed by his weeping, approved by his confession,
crowned by his suffering, this was the end he reached, to die with a
perfected love for the name of Him with whom, by a perverted
forwardness, he had promised to die. He would do, when strengthened by
His resurrection, what in his weakness he promised prematurely. For the
needful order was that Christ should first die for Peter’s salvation,
and then that Peter should die for the preaching of Christ. The boldness
thus begun by human temerity was an utter inversion of the order that
had been instituted by the Truth. Peter thought to lay down his life for
Christ, <span id="fr_1950"></span>[1951](#fn_1950) the one to be
delivered in behalf of the Deliverer, seeing that Christ had come to lay
down His life for all His own, including Peter also, which, you see, was
now done. Now and henceforth a true, because graciously bestowed,
strength of heart may be assumed for incurring death itself for the name
of the Lord, and not a false one presumptuously usurped through an
erroneous estimate of ourselves. Now there is no need that we should any
more fear the passage out of the present life, because in the Lord’s
resurrection we have a foregoing illustration of the life to come. Now
thou hast cause, Peter, to be no longer afraid of death, because He
liveth whom thou didst mourn when dead, and whom in thy carnal love thou
didst try to hinder from dying in our behalf. <span
id="fr_1951"></span>[1952](#fn_1951) Thou didst dare to step in before
the Leader, and thou didst tremble before His persecutor: now that the
price has been paid for thee, it is thy duty to follow the Buyer, and
follow Him even to the death of the cross. Thou hast heard the words of
Him whom thou hast already proved to be truthful; He Himself hath
foretold thy suffering, who formerly foretold thy denial.

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p10"></span>5. But first the Lord asks what He knew,
and that not once, but a second and a third time, whether Peter loved
Him; and just as often He has the same answer, that He is loved, while
just as often He gives Peter the same charge to feed His sheep. To the
threefold denial there is now appended a threefold confession, that his
tongue may not yield a feebler service to love than to fear, and
imminent death may not appear to have elicited more from the lips than
present life. Let it be the office of love to feed the Lord’s flock, if
it was the signal of fear to deny the Shepherd. Those who have this
purpose in feeding the flock of Christ, that they may have them as their
own, and not as Christ’s, are convicted of loving themselves, and not
Christ, from the desire either of boasting, or wielding power, or
acquiring gain, and not from the love of obeying, serving, and pleasing
God. Against such, therefore, there stands as a wakeful sentinel this
thrice inculcated utterance of Christ, of whom the apostle complains
that they seek their own, not the things that are Jesus Christ’s. <span
id="fr_1952"></span>[1953](#fn_1952) For what else mean the words,
“Lovest thou me? Feed my sheep,” than if it were said, If thou lovest
me, think not of feeding thyself, but feed my sheep as mine, and not as
thine own; seek my glory in them, and not thine own; my dominion, and
not thine; my gain, and not thine; lest thou be found in the fellowship
of those who belong to the perilous times, lovers of their own selves,
and all else that is joined on to this beginning of evils? For the
apostle, after saying, “For men shall be lovers of their own selves,”
proceeded to add, “Lovers of money, boastful, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, wicked, irreligious, without
affection, false accusers, incontinent, implacable, with <span
id="page_446">p. 446</span> <span id="iii.cxxiv-Page_446"></span>out
kindness, traitors, heady, blinded; <span
id="fr_1953"></span>[1954](#fn_1953) lovers of pleasures more than of
God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.” <span
id="fr_1954"></span>[1955](#fn_1954) All these evils flow from that as
their fountain which he stated first, “lovers of their own selves.” With
great propriety, therefore, is Peter addressed, “Lovest thou me?” and
found replying, “I love Thee:” and the command applied to him, “Feed my
lambs,” and this a second and a third time. We have it also demonstrated
here that love and liking are one and the same thing; for the Lord also
in the last question said not *Diligis me*? but, *Amas me*? Let us,
then, love not ourselves, but Him; and in feeding His sheep, let us be
seeking the things which are His, not the things which are our own. For
in some inexplicable way, I know not what, every one that loveth
himself, and not God, loveth not himself; and whoever loveth God, and
not himself, he it is that loveth himself. For he that cannot live by
himself will certainly die by loving himself; he therefore loveth not
himself who loves himself to his own loss of life. But when He is loved
by whom life is preserved, a man by not loving himself only loveth the
more, when it is for this reason that he loveth not himself \[namely\]
that he may love Him by whom he lives. Let not those, then, who feed
Christ’s sheep be “lovers of their own selves,” lest they feed them as
if they were their own, and not His, and wish to make their own gain of
them, as “lovers of money;” or to domineer over them, as “boastful;” or
to glory in the honors which they receive at their hands, as “proud;” or
to go the length even of originating heresies, as “blasphemers;” and not
to give place to the holy fathers, as those who are “disobedient to
parents;” and to render evil for good to those who wish to correct them,
because unwilling to let them perish, as “unthankful;” to slay their own
souls and those of others, as “wicked;” to outrage the motherly bowels
of the Church, as “irreligious;” to have no sympathy with the weak, as
those who are “without affection;” to attempt to traduce the character
of the saints, as “false accusers;” to give loose reins to the basest
lusts, as “incontinent;” to make lawsuits their practice, as
“implacable;” to know nothing of loving service, as those who are
“without kindness;” to make known to the enemies of the godly what they
are well aware ought to be kept secret, as “traitors;” to disturb human
modesty by shameless discussions, as “heady;” to understand neither what
they say nor whereof they affirm, <span
id="fr_1955"></span>[1956](#fn_1955) as “blinded;” and to prefer carnal
delights to spiritual joys, as those who are “lovers of pleasures more
than lovers of God.” For these and such like vices, whether all of them
meet in a single individual, or whether some dominate in one and others
in another, spring up in some form or another from this one root, when
men are “lovers of their own selves.” A vice which is specially to be
guarded against by those who feed Christ’s sheep, lest they be seeking
their own, not the things that are Jesus Christ’s, and be turning those
to the use of their own lusts for whom the blood of Christ was shed.
Whose love ought, in one who feedeth His sheep, to grow up unto so great
a spiritual fervor as to overcome even the natural fear of death, that
makes us unwilling to die even when we wish to live with Christ. For the
Apostle Paul also says that he had a desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ, <span id="fr_1956"></span>[1957](#fn_1956) and yet he
groans, being burdened, and wishes not to be unclothed, but clothed
upon, that mortality may be swallowed up of life. <span
id="fr_1957"></span>[1958](#fn_1957) And so to His present lover the
Lord said, “When thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands,
and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.
For this He said to him, signifying by what death he should glorify
God.” “Thou shalt stretch forth thy hands,” He said; in other words,
thou shalt be crucified. But that thou mayest come to this, “another
shall gird thee, and carry thee,” not whither thou wouldest, but
“whither thou wouldest not.” He told him first what would happen, and
then how it should come to pass. For it was not after being crucified,
but when actually about to be crucified, that he was carried whither he
would not; for after being crucified he went his way, not whither he
would not, but rather whither he would. And though when set free from
the body he wished to be with Christ, yet, were it only possible, he had
a desire for eternal life apart from the grievousness of death, to which
grievous experience he was unwillingly carried, but from it \[when all
was over\] he was willingly carried away; unwillingly he came to it, but
willingly he conquered it, and left this feeling of infirmity behind
that makes every one unwilling to die,—a feeling so permanently natural,
that even old age itself was unable to set the blessed Peter free from
its influence, even as it was said unto him, “When thou shalt be old,”
thou shall be led “whither thou wouldest not.” For our consolation the
Saviour Himself transfigured also the same feeling in His own person
when He <span id="page_447">p. 447</span> <span
id="iii.cxxiv-Page_447"></span>said, “Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me;” <span id="fr_1958"></span>[1959](#fn_1958) and
He certainly had come to die without having any necessity, but only the
willingness to die, with power to lay down His life, and with power to
take it again. But however great be the grievousness of death, it ought
to be overcome by the power of that love which is felt to Him who, being
our life, was willing to endure even death in our behalf. For if there
were no grievousness, even of the smallest kind, in death, the glory of
the martyrs would not be so great. But if the good Shepherd, who laid
down His own life for His sheep, <span
id="fr_1959"></span>[1960](#fn_1959) has raised up so many martyrs for
Himself out of the very sheep, how much more ought those to contend to
death for the truth, and even to blood against sin, who are entrusted by
Him with the feeding, that is, with the teaching and governing of these
very sheep? And on this account, along with the preceding example of His
own passion, who can fail to see that the shepherds ought all the more
to set themselves closely to imitate the Shepherd, if He was so imitated
even by many of the sheep under whom, as the one Shepherd and in the one
flock, the shepherds themselves are likewise sheep? For He made all
those His sheep for \[all of\] whom He died, because He Himself also
became a sheep that He might suffer for all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1949"></span>[444:1950](1070126.htm#fr_1949) <span
id="iii.cxxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p5"></span> [John
6.41](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#041)<span id="iii.cxxiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1950"></span>[445:1951](1070126.htm#fr_1950) <span
id="iii.cxxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p8"></span> [John
13.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#037)<span
id="iii.cxxiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1951"></span>[445:1952](1070126.htm#fr_1951) <span
id="iii.cxxiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p9"></span> [Matt.
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022)<span id="iii.cxxiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1952"></span>[445:1953](1070126.htm#fr_1952) <span
id="iii.cxxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p11"></span> [Phil. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="iii.cxxiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1953"></span>[446:1954](1070126.htm#fr_1953) <span
id="iii.cxxiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p12"></span> *Cœcati*.

<span id="fn_1954"></span>[446:1955](1070126.htm#fr_1954) <span
id="iii.cxxiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p13"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)<span id="iii.cxxiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1955"></span>[446:1956](1070126.htm#fr_1955) <span
id="iii.cxxiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p14"></span> [1 Tim. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#007)<span id="iii.cxxiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1956"></span>[446:1957](1070126.htm#fr_1956) <span
id="iii.cxxiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p15"></span> [Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span id="iii.cxxiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1957"></span>[446:1958](1070126.htm#fr_1957) <span
id="iii.cxxiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p16"></span> [2 Cor. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span id="iii.cxxiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1958"></span>[447:1959](1070126.htm#fr_1958) <span
id="iii.cxxiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p17"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span id="iii.cxxiv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1959"></span>[447:1960](1070126.htm#fr_1959) <span
id="iii.cxxiv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxiv-p18"></span> [John
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span id="iii.cxxiv-p18.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate CXXIV](1070127)
