[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070040)  [Next](1070042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Tractate XXXVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p2"></span><span id="iii.xxxix-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xxxix-p2.2"></span>Chapter VIII. 21–25</span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xxxix-p3.1"></span>The</span> lesson of the holy Gospel which
preceded to-day’s had concluded thus: that “the Lord spake, teaching in
the treasury,” what it pleased Him, and what you have heard; “and no one
laid hands on Him, for His hour was not yet come.” <span
id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687) Accordingly, on the Lord’s day we made
our subject of discourse what He Himself thought fit to give us. We
indicated to your Charity why it was said, “His hour was not yet come,”
lest any in their impiety should have the effrontery to suspect Christ
as laid under some fatal necessity. For the hour was not yet come when
by His own appointment, in accordance with what was predicted regarding
Him, He should not be forced to die unwillingly, but be ready to be
slain.

<span id="iii.xxxix-p5"></span>2. But of His own passion itself, which
lay not in any necessity He was under, but in His own power, all that He
said in His discourse to the Jews was, “I go away.” For to Christ the
Lord’s death was His proceeding to the place whence He had come, and
from which He had never departed. “I go away,” said He, “and ye shall
seek me,” not from any longing for me, but in hatred. For after His
removal from human sight, He was sought for both by those who hated Him
and those who loved Him; by the former in a spirit of persecution, by
the latter with the desire of having Him. In the Psalms the Lord Himself
says by the prophet, “A place of refuge hath failed me, and there is
none that seeketh after my life;” <span
id="fr_688"></span>[689](#fn_688) and again He says in another place in
the Psalms, “Let them be confounded and ashamed who seek after my
life.” <span id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689) He blamed the former for
not seeking, He condemned the latter because they did. For it is wrong
not to seek the life of Christ, that is, in the way the disciples sought
it; and it is wrong to seek the life of Christ, that is, in the way the
Jews sought it: for the former sought to possess it, these latter to
destroy it. Accordingly, because these men sought it thus in a wrong
way, with a perverted heart, what next did He add? “Ye shall seek me,
and”—not to let you suppose that ye will seek me for good—“ye <span
id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span id="iii.xxxix-Page_218"></span>shall
die in your sin.” This comes of seeking Christ wrongly, to die in one’s
sin; this of hating Him, through whom alone salvation could be found.
For, while men whose hope is in God ought not to render evil even for
evil, these men were rendering evil for good. The Lord therefore
announced to them beforehand, and in His foreknowledge uttered the
sentence, that they should die in their sin. And then He adds, “Whither
I go, ye cannot come.” He said the same to the disciples also in another
place; and yet He said not to them, “Ye shall die in your sin.” But what
did He say? The same as to these men: “Whither I go, ye cannot
come.” <span id="fr_690"></span>[691](#fn_690) He did not take away
hope, but foretold delay. For at the time when the Lord spake this to
the disciples, they were not able to come whither He was going, yet were
they to come afterwards; but these men never, to whom in His
foreknowledge He said, “Ye shall die in your sin.”

<span id="iii.xxxix-p9"></span>3. But on hearing these words, as is
usual with those whose thoughts are carnal, who judge after the flesh,
and hear and apprehend everything in a carnal way, they said, “Will he
kill himself because he said, Whither I go ye cannot come.” Foolish
words, and overflowing with stupidity! For why could they not go whither
He would have proceeded had He killed Himself? Were not they themselves
to die? What, then, means, “Will he kill himself because he said,
Whither I go ye cannot come?” If He spake of man’s death, what man is
there that does not die? Therefore, by “whither I go” He meant, not the
going to death, but whither He was going Himself after death. Such,
then, was their answer, because they did not understand.

<span id="iii.xxxix-p10"></span>4. And what said the Lord to those who
savored of the earth? “And He said unto them, Ye are from beneath.” For
this cause ye savor of the earth, because ye lick dust like serpents. Ye
eat earth! What does it mean? Ye feed on earthly things, ye delight in
earthly things, ye gape after earthly things, ye have no heart for what
is above. “Ye are from beneath: I am from above. Ye are of this world: I
am not of this world.” For how could He be of the world, by whom the
world was made? All that are of the world come after the world, because
the world preceded; and so man is of the world. But Christ was first,
and then the world; and since Christ was before the world, before Christ
there was nothing: because “In the beginning was the Word; all things
were made by Him.” <span id="fr_691"></span>[692](#fn_691) He,
therefore, was of that which is above. But of what that is above? Of the
air? Perish the thought! there the birds wing their flight. Of the sky
that we see? Again I say, Perish the thought! it is there that the stars
and sun and moon revolve. Of the angels? Neither is this to be
understood: by Him who made all things were the angels also made. Of
what, then, above is Christ? Of the Father Himself. Nothing is above
that God who begat the Word equal with Himself, co-eternal with Himself,
only-begotten, timeless, that by Him time’s own foundations should be
laid. Understand, then, Christ as from above, so as in thy thought to
get beyond everything that is made,—the whole creation together, every
material body, every created spirit, everything in any way subject to
change: rise above all, as John rose, in order to reach this: “In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God.”

<span id="iii.xxxix-p12"></span>5. Therefore said He, “I am from above.
Ye are of this world: I am not of this world. I said therefore unto you,
that ye shall die in your sins.” He has explained to us, brethren, what
He wished to be understood by “ye are of this world.” He said therefore
in fact, “Ye are of this world,” because they were sinners, because they
were unrighteous, because they were unbelieving, because they savored of
the earthly. For what is your opinion as regards the holy apostles? What
difference was there between the Jews and the apostles? As great as
between darkness and light, as between faith and unbelief, as between
piety and impiety, as between hope and despair, as between love and
avarice: surely the difference was great. What then, because there was
such a difference, were the apostles not of the world? If thy thoughts
turn to the manner of their birth, and whence they came, inasmuch as all
of them had come from Adam, they were of this world. But what said the
Lord Himself to them? “I have chosen you out of the world.” <span
id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692) Those, then, who were of the world,
became not of the world, and began to belong to Him by whom the world
was made. But these men continued to be of the world, to whom it was
said, “Ye shall die in your sins.”

<span id="iii.xxxix-p14"></span>6. Let none then, brethren, say, I am
not of this world. Whoever thou art as a man, thou art of this world;
but He who made the world came to thee, and delivered thee from this
world. If the world delights thee, thou wishest always to be unclean
(*immundus*); but if this world no longer delight thee, thou art already
clean (*mundus*). And yet, if through <span id="page_219">p. 219</span>
<span id="iii.xxxix-Page_219"></span>some infirmity the world still
delight thee, let Him who cleanseth (*mundat*) dwell in thee, and thou
too shalt be clean. <span id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693) But if thou
art once clean, thou wilt not continue in the world; neither wilt thou
hear what was heard by the Jews, “Ye shall die in your sins.” For we are
all born with sin; we have all in living added to that wherein we were
born, and have since become more of the world than when we were born of
our parents. And where should we be, had He not come, who was wholly
free from sin, to expiate all sin? And so, because in Him the Jews
believed not, they deservedly heard \[the sentence\], “Ye shall die in
your sins;” for in no way could ye, who were born with sin, be without
sin; and yet, said He, if ye believe in me, although it is still true
that ye were born with sin, yet in your sin ye shall not die. The whole
misery, then, of the Jews was just this, not to have sin, but to die in
their sins. From this it is that every Christian ought to seek to
escape; because of this we have recourse to baptism; on this account do
those whose lives are in danger from sickness or any other cause become
anxious for help; for this also is the sucking child carried by his
mother with pious hands to the church, that he may not go out into the
world without baptism, and die in the sin wherein he was born. Most
wretched surely the condition and miserable the lot of these men, who
heard from those truth-speaking lips, “Ye shall die in your sins!”

<span id="iii.xxxix-p16"></span>7. But He explains whence this should
befall them: “For if ye believe not that I am \[He\], ye shall die in
your sins.” I believe, brethren, that among the multitude who listened
to the Lord, there were those also who should yet believe. But against
all, as it were, had that most severe sentence gone forth, “Ye shall die
in your sin;” and thereby even from those who should yet believe had
hope been withdrawn: the others were roused to fury, they to fear; yea,
to more than fear, they were brought now to despair. But He revived
their hope; for He added, “If ye believe not that I am, ye shall die in
your sins.” Therefore if ye do believe that I am, ye shall not die in
your sins. Hope was restored to the desponding, the sleeping were
aroused, their hearts got a fresh awakening; and thereafter very many
believed, as the Gospel itself attests in the sequel. For members of
Christ were there, who had not yet become attached to the body of
Christ; and among that people by whom He was crucified, by whom He was
hanged on a tree, by whom when hanging He was mocked, by whom He was
wounded with the spear, by whom gall and vinegar were given Him to
drink, were the members of Christ, for whose sake He said, “Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do.” And what will a convert
not be forgiven, if the shedding of Christ’s blood is forgiven? What
murderer need despair, if he was restored to hope by whom even Christ
was slain? After this many believed; they were presented with Christ’s
blood as a gift, that they might drink it for their salvation, rather
than be held guilty of shedding it. Who can despair? And if the thief
was saved on the cross,—a murderer shortly before, a little afterwards
accused, convicted, condemned, hanged, delivered,—wonder not. The place
of his conviction was that of his condemnation; while that of his
conversion was the place also of his deliverance.  <span
id="fr_694"></span>[695](#fn_694) Among this people, then, to whom the
Lord was speaking, were those who should yet die in their sin: there
were those also who should yet believe on Him who spake, and find
deliverance from all their sin.

<span id="iii.xxxix-p18"></span>8. But look at this which is said by
Christ the Lord: “If ye believe not that I am, ye shall die in your
sins.” What is this, “If ye believe not that I am?” “I am” what? There
is nothing added; and because He added nothing, He left much to be
inferred. For He was expected to say what He was, and yet He said it
not. What was He expected to say? Perhaps, “If ye believe not that I am”
Christ; “if ye believe not that I am” the Son of God; “if ye believe not
that I am” the Word of the Father; “if ye believe not that I am” the
founder of the world; “if ye believe not that I am” the former and
re-former, the creator and re-creator, the maker and re-maker of
man;—“if ye believe not that I am” this, “ye shall die in your sins.”
There is much implied in His only saying “I am;” for so also had God
said to Moses, “I am who am.” Who can adequately express what that <span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xxxix-p18.1"></span>am</span> means? God by
His angel sent His servant Moses to deliver His people out of Egypt (you
have read and know what you now hear; but I recall it to your minds); He
sent him trembling, self-excusing, but obedient. And while thus excusing
himself, he said to God, whom he understood to be speaking in the person
of the angel: If the people say to me, And who is the God that hath sent
thee? what shall I say to them? And the Lord answered him, “I am who
am;” and added, “Thou shalt <span id="page_220">p. 220</span> <span
id="iii.xxxix-Page_220"></span>say to the children of Israel, He who is
hath sent me to you.” There also He says not, I am God; or, I am the
framer of the world; or, I am the creator of all things; or, I am the
multiplier of the very people to be delivered: but only this, “I am who
am;” and, “Thou shall say to the children of Israel, He who is.” He
added not, Who is your God, who is the God of your fathers; but said
only this: “He who is hath sent me to you.” Perhaps it was too much even
for Moses himself, as it is too much for us also, and much more so for
us, to understand the meaning of such words, “I am who am;” and, “He who
is hath sent me to you.” And supposing that Moses comprehended it, when
would those to whom he was sent comprehend it? The Lord therefore put
aside what man could not comprehend, and added what he could; for He
said also besides, “I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob.” <span id="fr_695"></span>[696](#fn_695) This thou
canst comprehend; for “I am who am,” what mind can comprehend?

<span id="iii.xxxix-p20"></span>9. What then of us? Shall we venture to
say anything on such words, “I am who am;” or rather on this, that you
have heard the Lord saying, “If ye believe not that I am, ye shall die
in your sins”? Shall I venture with these feeble and scarcely existing
powers of mine to discuss the meaning of that which Christ the Lord hath
said, “If ye believe not that I am”? I shall venture to ask the Lord
Himself. Listen to me as one asking rather than discussing, inquiring
rather than assuming, learning rather than teaching, and fail not
yourselves also to be asking with me or through me. The Lord Himself,
who is everywhere, is also at hand. Let Him hear the feeling that
prompts to ask, and grant the fruit of understanding. For in what words,
even were it so that I comprehend something, can I convey to your hearts
what I comprehend? What voice is adequate? what eloquence sufficient?
what powers of intelligence? what faculty of utterance?

<span id="iii.xxxix-p21"></span>10. I shall speak, then, to our Lord
Jesus Christ; I shall speak and may He be pleased to hear me. I believe
He is present, I am fully assured of it; for He Himself has said, “Lo, I
am with you even to the end of the world.” <span
id="fr_696"></span>[697](#fn_696) O Lord our God, what is that which
Thou saidst, “If ye believe not that I am”? For what is there that
belongs not to the things Thou hast made? Does not heaven so belong?
Does not the earth? Does not everything in earth and heaven? Does not
man himself to whom Thou speakest? Does not the angel whom Thou sendest?
If all these are things made by Thee, what is that existence <span
id="fr_697"></span>[698](#fn_697) Thou hast retained as something
exclusively Thine own, which Thou hast given to none besides, that Thou
mightest be such Thyself alone? For how do I hear “I am who am,” as if
there were none besides? and how do I hear “If ye believe not that I
am”? For had they no existence who heard Him? Yea, though they were
sinners, they were men. What then can I do? What that existence is, let
Him tell my heart, let Him tell, let Him declare it within; let the
inner man hear, the mind apprehend this true existence; for such
existence is always unvarying in character. <span
id="fr_698"></span>[699](#fn_698) For a thing, anything whatever (I have
begun as it were to dispute, and have left off inquiring. Perhaps I wish
to speak what I have heard. May He grant enlargement to my hearing, and
to yours, while I speak);—for anything, whatever in short be its
excellence, if it is changeable, does not truly exist; for there is no
true existence wherever non-existence has also a place. For whatever can
be changed, so far as changed, it is not that which was: if it is no
longer what it was, a kind of death has therein taken place; something
that was there has been eliminated, and exists no more. Blackness has
died out in the silvery locks of the patriarch, comeliness in the body
of the careworn and crooked old man, strength in the body of the
languishing, the \[previous\] standing posture in the body of one
walking, walking in the body of one standing, walking and standing in
the body of one reclining, speech in the tongue of the silent;—whatever
changes, and is what it was not, I see there a kind of life in that
which is, and death in that which was. In fine, when we say of one
deceased, Where is that person? we are answered, He was. O Truth, it is
thou \[alone\] that truly art! For in all actions and movements of ours,
yea, in every activity of the creature, I find two times, the past and
the future. I seek for the present, nothing stands still: what I have
said is no longer present; what I am going to say is not yet come: what
I have done is no longer present; what I am going to do is not yet come:
the life I have lived is no longer present; the life I have still to
live is not yet come. Past and future I find in every creature-movement:
in truth, which is abiding, past and future I find not, but the present
alone, and that unchangeably, which has no place in the creature. Sift
the mutations of things, thou wilt find <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xxxix-p24.1"></span>was</span> and <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xxxix-p24.2"></span>will be</span>: <span id="page_221">p.
221</span> <span id="iii.xxxix-Page_221"></span>think on God, thou wilt
find the <span class="c10"><span id="iii.xxxix-p24.3"></span>is</span>,
where <span class="c10"><span id="iii.xxxix-p24.4"></span>was</span> and
<span class="c10"><span id="iii.xxxix-p24.5"></span>will</span> be
cannot exist. To be so then thyself, rise beyond the boundaries of time.
But who can transcend the powers of his being? May He raise us thither
who said to the Father, “I will that they also be with me where I am.”
And so, in making this promise, that we should not die in our sins, the
Lord Jesus Christ, I think, said nothing else by these words, “If ye
believe not that I am;” yea, by these words I think He meant nothing
else than this, “If ye believe not that I am” God, “ye shall die in your
sins.” Well, God be thanked that He said, “If ye believe not,” and did
not say, If ye comprehend not. For who can comprehend this? Or is it so,
since I have ventured to speak and you have seemed to understand, that
you have indeed comprehended somewhat of a subject so unspeakable? If
then thou comprehendest not, faith sets thee free. Therefore also the
Lord said not, If ye comprehend not that I am; but said what they were
capable of attaining, “If ye believe not that I am, ye shall die in your
sins.”

<span id="iii.xxxix-p25"></span>11. And savoring as these men always did
of the earth, and ever hearing and answering according to the flesh,
what did they say to Him? “Who art thou?” For when thou saidst, “If ye
believe not that I am,” thou didst not tell us what thou wert. Who art
thou, that we may believe? He answered “The Beginning.” Here is the
existence that \[always\] is. The beginning cannot be changed: the
beginning is self-abiding and all-originating; that is, the beginning,
to which it has been said, “But thou Thyself art the same, and Thy years
shall not fail.” <span id="fr_699"></span>[700](#fn_699) “The
beginning,” He said, “for so I also speak to you.” Believe me \[to be\]
the beginning, that ye may not die in your sins. For just as if by
saying, “Who art thou?” they had said nothing else than this, What shall
we believe thee to be? He replied, “The beginning;” that is, Believe me
\[to be\] the “beginning.” For in the Greek expression we discern what
we cannot in the Latin. For in Greek the word “beginning” (*principium*,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxxix-p26.2"></span>ἀρχή</span>), is
of the feminine gender, just as with us “law” (*lex*) is of the feminine
gender, while it is of the masculine (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxxix-p26.3"></span>νόμος</span>) with them; or as “wisdom”
(*sapientia*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxxix-p26.4"></span>σοφία</span>) is of the feminine gender with
both. It is the custom of speech, therefore, in different languages to
vary the gender of words, because in things themselves there is no place
for the distinction of sex. For wisdom is not really female, since
Christ is the Wisdom of God, <span id="fr_700"></span>[701](#fn_700) and
Christ is termed of the masculine gender, wisdom of the feminine. When
then the Jews said, “Who art thou?” He, who knew that there were some
there who should yet believe, and therefore had said, Who art thou? that
so they might come to know what they ought to believe regarding Him,
replied, “The beginning:” not as if He said, I am the beginning; but as
if He said, Believe me \[to be\] the beginning. Which, as I said, is
quite evident in the Greek language, where beginning (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxxix-p27.2"></span>ἀρχή</span>) is of the
feminine gender. <span id="fr_701"></span>[702](#fn_701) Just as if He
had wished to say that He was the Truth, and to their question, “Who art
thou?” had answered, *Veritatem* <span id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702)
\[the Truth\]; when to the words, “Who art thou?” He evidently ought to
have replied, *Veritas* <span id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703) \[the
Truth\]; that is, I am the Truth. But His answer had a deeper meaning,
when He saw that they had put the question, “Who art thou?” in such a
way as to mean, Having heard from thee, “If ye believe not that I am,”
what shall we believe thee to be? To this He replied, “The beginning:”
as if He said, Believe me to be the beginning. And He added “for \[as
such\] I also speak to you;” that is, having humbled myself on your
account, I have condescended to such words. For if the beginning as it
is in itself had remained so with the Father, as not to receive the form
of a servant and speak as man with men; how could they have believed in
Him, since their weak hearts could not have heard the Word intelligently
without some voice that would appeal to their senses? Therefore, said
He, believe me to be the beginning; for, that you may believe, I not
only am, but also speak to you. <span id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704)
But on this subject I have still much to say to you; may it therefore
please your Charity that we reserve what remains, and by His gracious
aid deliver it tomorrow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_687"></span>[217:688](1070041.htm#fr_687) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p4"></span> [John
8.20](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxxix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[217:689](1070041.htm#fr_688) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p6"></span> [Ps. cxlii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxxix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[217:690](1070041.htm#fr_689) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p7"></span> [Ps. xl.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxxix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[218:691](1070041.htm#fr_690) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p8"></span> [John
13.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#033)<span
id="iii.xxxix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[218:692](1070041.htm#fr_691) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p11"></span> [John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxxix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[218:693](1070041.htm#fr_692) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p13"></span> [John
15.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019)<span
id="iii.xxxix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[219:694](1070041.htm#fr_693) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p15"></span> There is a play here on the words
*mundus*, the world, and *mundus*, clean, with its compound *immundus*,
and its cognate verb *mundare*. Such plays are frequent in St.
Augustin.—<span class="c10"><span id="iii.xxxix-p15.1"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[219:695](1070041.htm#fr_694) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p17"></span> [Luke xviii.
34-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#034)<span
id="iii.xxxix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[220:696](1070041.htm#fr_695) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p19"></span> [Ex. iii.
13-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xxxix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[220:697](1070041.htm#fr_696) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p22"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxxix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[220:698](1070041.htm#fr_697) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p23"></span> *Esse*.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[220:699](1070041.htm#fr_698) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p24"></span> *Eodem modo*.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[221:700](1070041.htm#fr_699) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p26"></span> [Ps. cii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027)<span id="iii.xxxix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[221:701](1070041.htm#fr_700) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p26.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p27"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="iii.xxxix-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[221:702](1070041.htm#fr_701) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p28"></span> The Greek is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxxix-p28.1"></span>τὴν ἀρχή;ν</span>, which to some has here
the sound of an adverb, like the Latin *principio* and *primum*. So at
least it sounded to Chrysostom. But Augustin’s interpretation is favored
by Ambrose, Bernard, etc.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[221:703](1070041.htm#fr_702) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p29"></span> In the accusative case.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[221:704](1070041.htm#fr_703) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p30"></span> In the nominative case.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[221:705](1070041.htm#fr_704) <span
id="iii.xxxix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p31"></span> Augustin here makes Christ’s
speaking—His use of human language—the means whereby they should be able
to know and believe Him to be the beginning, the Eternal Alpha. Had He
not become man and spoken to them, but remained always hidden with the
Father, and *silent*, they could never have had the means of knowing
that *He* personally was the beginning, or believing *Him* such.—<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xxxix-p31.1"></span>Tr</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate XXXIX](1070042)
