[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070089)  [Next](1070091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lxxxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p1.1"></span>Tractate LXXXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p2.1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p2.2"></span>Chapter XV. 17–19</span>.

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p3.1"></span>In</span> the Gospel lesson which precedes
this one, the Lord had said: “Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you, and appointed you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and
\[that\] your fruit should remain; that whatsoever ye shall ask of the
Father in my name, He may give it you.” On these words you remember that
we have already discoursed, as the Lord enabled us. But here, that is,
in the succeeding lesson which you have heard read, He says: “These
things I command you, that ye love one another.” And thereby we are to
understand that this is our fruit, of which He had said, “I have chosen
you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and \[that\] your fruit
should remain.” And what He subjoined, “That whatsoever ye shall ask of
the Father in my name, He may give it you,” He will certainly give us if
we love one another; seeing that this very thing He has also given us,
in choosing us when we had no fruit, because we had chosen Him not; and
appointing us that we should bring forth fruit,—that is, that we should
love one another,—a fruit that we cannot have apart from Him, just as
the branches can do nothing apart from the vine. Our fruit, therefore,
is charity, which the apostle explains to be, “Out of a pure heart, and
a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.” <span
id="fr_1450"></span>[1451](#fn_1450) So love we one another, and so love
we God. For it would be with no true love that we loved one another, if
we loved not God. For every one loves his neighbor as himself if he
loves God; and if he loves not God, he loves not himself. For on these
two commandments of love hang all the law and the prophets: <span
id="fr_1451"></span>[1452](#fn_1451) this is our fruit. And it is in
reference, therefore, to such fruit that He gives us commandment when He
says, “These things I command you, that ye love one another.” In the
same way also the Apostle Paul, when wishing to commend the fruit of the
Spirit in opposition to the deeds of the flesh, posited this as his
principle, saying, “The fruit of the Spirit is love;” and then, as if
springing from and bound up in this principle, he wove the others
together, which are “joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness,
faith, meekness, temperance.” <span id="fr_1452"></span>[1453](#fn_1452)
For who can truly rejoice who loves not good as the source of his joy?
Who can have true peace, if he have it not with one whom he truly loves?
Who can be long-enduring through persevering continuance in good, save
through fervent love? Who can be kind, if he love not the person he is
aiding? Who can be good, if he is not made so by loving? Who can be
sound in the faith, without that faith which worketh by love? Whose
meekness can be beneficial in character, if not regulated by love? And
who will abstain from that which is debasing, if he love not that which
dignifies? Appropriately, therefore, does the good Master so frequently
commend love, as the only thing needing to be commended, without which
all other good things can be of no avail, and which cannot be possessed
<span id="page_355">p. 355</span> <span
id="iii.lxxxviii-Page_355"></span>without bringing with it those other
good things that make a man truly good.

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p7"></span>2. But alongside of this love we ought
also patiently to endure the hatred of the world. For it must of
necessity hate those whom it perceives recoiling from that which is
loved by itself. But the Lord supplies us with special consolation from
His own case, when, after saying, “These things I command you, that ye
love one another,” He added, “If the world hate you, know that it hated
me before \[it hated\] you.” Why then should the member exalt itself
above the head? Thou refusest to be in the body if thou art unwilling to
endure the hatred of the world along with the Head. “If ye were of the
world,” He says, “the world would love its own.” He says this, of
course, of the whole Church, which, by itself, He frequently also calls
by the name of the world: as when it is said, “God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto Himself.” <span
id="fr_1453"></span>[1454](#fn_1453) And this also: “The Son of man came
not to condemn the world, but that the world through Him might be
saved.” <span id="fr_1454"></span>[1455](#fn_1454) And John says in his
epistle: “We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous: and He is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours
only, but also \[for those\] of the whole world.” <span
id="fr_1455"></span>[1456](#fn_1455) The whole world then is the Church,
and yet the whole world hateth the Church. The world therefore hateth
the world, the hostile that which is reconciled, the condemned that
which is saved, the polluted that which is cleansed.

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p11"></span>3. But that world which God is in
Christ reconciling unto Himself, which is saved by Christ, and has all
its sins freely pardoned by Christ, has been chosen out of the world
that is hostile, condemned, and defiled. For out of that mass, which has
all perished in Adam, are formed the vessels of mercy, whereof that
world of reconciliation is composed, that is hated by the world which
belongeth to the vessels of wrath that are formed out of the same mass
and fitted to destruction. <span id="fr_1456"></span>[1457](#fn_1456)
Finally, after saying, “If ye were of the world, the world would love
its own,” He immediately added, “But because ye are not of the world,
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.”
And so these men were themselves also of that world, and, that they
might no longer be of it, were chosen out of it, through no merit of
their own, for no good works of theirs had preceded; and not by nature,
which through free-will had become totally corrupted at its source: but
gratuitously, that is, of actual grace. For He who chose the world out
of the world, effected for Himself, instead of finding, what He should
choose: for “there is a remnant saved according to the election of
grace. And if by grace,” he adds, “then is it no more of works:
otherwise grace is no more grace.” <span
id="fr_1457"></span>[1458](#fn_1457)

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p14"></span>4. But if we are asked about the love
which is borne to itself by that world of perdition which hateth the
world of redemption; we reply, it loveth itself, of course, with a false
love, and not with a true. And hence, it loves itself falsely, and hates
itself truly. For he that loveth wickedness, hateth his own soul. <span
id="fr_1458"></span>[1459](#fn_1458) And yet it is said to love itself,
inasmuch as it loves the wickedness that makes it wicked; and, on the
other hand, it is said to hate itself, inasmuch as it loves that which
causes it injury. It hates, therefore, the true nature that is in it,
and loves the vice: it hates what it is, as made by the goodness of God,
and loves what has been wrought in it by free-will. And hence also, if
we rightly understand it, we are at once forbidden and commanded to love
it: thus, we are forbidden, when it is said to us, “Love not the
world;” <span id="fr_1459"></span>[1460](#fn_1459) and we are commanded,
when it is said to us, “Love your enemies.” <span
id="fr_1460"></span>[1461](#fn_1460) These constitute the world that
hateth us. And therefore we are forbidden to love in it that which it
loves in itself; and we are enjoined to love in it what it hates in
itself, namely, the workmanship of God, and the various consolations of
His goodness. For we are forbidden to love the vice that is in it, and
enjoined to love the nature, while it loves the vice in itself, and
hates the nature: so that we may both love and hate it in a right
manner, whereas it loves and hates itself perversely.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[354:1451](1070090.htm#fr_1450) <span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p4"></span> [1 Tim. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[354:1452](1070090.htm#fr_1451) <span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p5"></span> [Matt. xxii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#040)<span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1452"></span>[354:1453](1070090.htm#fr_1452) <span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p6"></span> [Gal. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1453"></span>[355:1454](1070090.htm#fr_1453) <span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p8"></span> [2 Cor. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019)<span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1454"></span>[355:1455](1070090.htm#fr_1454) <span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p9"></span> [John iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017)<span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1455"></span>[355:1456](1070090.htm#fr_1455) <span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p10"></span> [1 John
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002)<span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1456"></span>[355:1457](1070090.htm#fr_1456) <span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p12"></span> [Rom.
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023)<span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1457"></span>[355:1458](1070090.htm#fr_1457) <span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p13"></span> [Rom.
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006)<span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1458"></span>[355:1459](1070090.htm#fr_1458) <span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p15"></span> [Ps. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005)<span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p15.1"></span>. See Tract. LXXXIII. sec. 3, note 4.

<span id="fn_1459"></span>[355:1460](1070090.htm#fr_1459) <span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p16"></span> [1 John ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015)<span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[355:1461](1070090.htm#fr_1460) <span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxviii-p17"></span> [Luke vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#027)<span
id="iii.lxxxviii-p17.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LXXXVIII](1070091)
