[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070072)  [Next](1070074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lxxi-p1.1"></span>Tractate LXX.</span>

<span id="iii.lxxi-p2"></span><span id="iii.lxxi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxxi-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIV. 7–10</span>.

<span id="iii.lxxi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxi-p3.1"></span>The</span> words of the holy Gospel, brethren,
are rightly understood only if they are found to be in harmony with
those that precede; for the premises ought to agree with the conclusion,
when it is the Truth that speaks. The Lord had said before, “And if I go
and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto
myself; that where I am, there ye may be also:” and then had added, “And
whither I go ye know, and the way ye know;” and showed that all He said
was that they knew Himself. What, therefore, the meaning was of His
going to Himself by Himself,—for He also lets the disciples see that it
is by Him that they are to come to Him,—we have already told you, as we
could, in our last discourse. When He says, therefore, “That where I am,
there ye may be also,” where else were they to be but in Himself? In
this way is He also in Himself, and they, therefore, are just where He
is, that is, in Himself. Accordingly, He Himself is that eternal life
which is yet to be ours, when He has received us unto Himself; and as He
is that life eternal, so is it in Him, that where He is there shall we
be also, that is to say, in Himself. “For as the Father hath life in
Himself,” and certainly that life which He has is in no wise different
from what He is Himself as its possessor, “so hath He given to the Son
to have life in Himself,” <span id="fr_1284"></span>[1285](#fn_1284)
inasmuch as He is the very life which He hath in Himself. But shall we
then actually be what He is, (namely), the life, when we shall have
begun our existence in that life, that is, in Himself? Certainly not,
for He, by His very existence as the life, hath life, and is Himself
what He hath; and as the life, is in Him, so is He in Himself: but we
are not that life, but partakers of His life, and shall be there in such
wise as to be wholly incapable of being in ourselves what He is, but so
as, while ourselves not the life, to have Him as our life, who has
Himself the life on this very account that He Himself is the life. In
short, He both exists unchangeably in Himself and inseparably in the
Father. But we, when wishing to exist in ourselves, were thrown into
inward trouble regarding ourselves, as is expressed in the words, “My
soul is cast down within me:” <span id="fr_1285"></span>[1286](#fn_1285)
and changing from bad to worse, cannot even remain as we were. But when
by Him we come unto the Father, according to His own words, “No man
cometh unto the Father but by me,” and abide in Him, no one shall be
able to separate us either from the Father or from Him.

<span id="iii.lxxi-p6"></span>2. Connecting, therefore, His previous
words with those that follow, He proceeded to say, “If ye had known me,
ye should certainly have known my Father also.” This conforms to His
previous words, “No man cometh unto the Father but by me.” And then He
adds: “And from henceforth ye know Him, and have seen Him.” But Philip,
one of the apostles, not understanding what he had just heard, said,
“Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth us.” And the <span
id="page_327">p. 327</span> <span id="iii.lxxi-Page_327"></span>Lord
replied to him, “Have I been so long time with you, and yet have ye not
known me, Philip? he that seeth me, seeth also the Father.” Here you see
He complains that He had been so long time with them, and yet He was not
known. But had He not Himself said, “And whither I go ye know, and the
way ye know;” and on their saying that they knew it not, had convinced
them that they did know, by adding the words: “I am the way, and the
truth, and the life”? How, then, says He now, “Have I been so long time
with you, and have ye not known me?” when, in fact, they knew both
whither He went and the way, on no other grounds save that they really
knew Himself? But this difficulty is easily solved by saying that some
of them knew Him, and others did not, and that Philip was one of those
who did not know Him; so that, when He said, “And whither I go ye know,
and the way ye know,” He is understood as having spoken to those that
knew, and not to Philip, who has it said to him, “Have I been so long
time with you, and have ye not known me, Philip?” To such, then, as
already knew the Son, was it now also said of the Father, “And from
henceforth ye know Him, and have seen Him:” for such words were used
because of the all-sided likeness subsisting between the Father and the
Son; so that, because they knew the Son, they might henceforth be said
to know the Father. Already, therefore, they knew the Son, if not all of
them, those at least to whom it is said, “And whither I go ye know, and
the way ye know;” for He is Himself the way. But they knew not the
Father, and so have also to hear, “If ye have known me, ye have known my
Father also;” that is, through me ye have known Him also. For I am one,
and He another. But that they might not think Him unlike, He adds, “And
from henceforth ye know Him, and have seen Him.” For they saw His
perfectly resembling Son, but needed to have the truth impressed on
them, that exactly such as was the Son whom they saw,was the Father also
whom they did not see. And to this points what is afterwards said to
Philip, “He that seeth me, seeth also the Father.” Not that He Himself
was Father and Son, which is a notion of the Sabellians, who are also
called Patripassians, <span id="fr_1286"></span>[1287](#fn_1286)
condemned by the Catholic faith; but that Father and Son are so alike,
that he who knoweth one knoweth both. For we are accustomed to speak in
this way of two who closely resemble each other, to those who are in the
habit of seeing one of them, and wish to know what like the other is, so
that we say, In seeing the one, you have seen the other. In this way,
then, is it said “He that seeth me, seeth also the Father.” Not,
certainly, that He who is the Son is also the Father, but that the Son
in no respect disagrees with the likeness of the Father. For had not the
Father and Son been two persons, it would not have been said, “If ye
have known me, ye have known my Father also.” Such is certainly the case
for “no one,” He says, “cometh unto the Father but by me: if ye have
known me, ye have known my Father also;” because it is I, who am the
only way to the Father, that will lead you to Him, that He also may
Himself become known to you. But as I am in all respects His perfect
image, “from henceforth ye know Him” in knowing me; “and have seen Him,”
if you have seen me with the spiritual eyesight of the soul.

<span id="iii.lxxi-p8"></span>3. Why, then, Philip, dost thou say, “Show
us the Father, and it sufficeth us? Have I been so long time with you,
and yet have ye not known me, Philip? He that seeth me, seeth the Father
also.” If it interests thee much to see this, believe at least what thou
seest not. For “how,” He says, “sayest thou, Show us the Father?” If
thou hast seen me, who am His perfect likeness, thou hast seen Him to
whom I am like. And if thou canst not directly see this, “believest thou
not,” at least, “that I am in the Father, and the Father in me?” But
Philip might say here, “I see Thee indeed, and believe Thy full likeness
to the Father; but is one to be reproved and rebuked because, when he
sees one who bears a likeness to another, he wishes to see that other to
whom he is like? I know, indeed, the image, but as yet I know only the
one without the other; it is not enough for me, unless I know that other
whose likeness he bears. Show us, therefore, the Father, and it
sufficeth us.” But the Master really reproved the disciple because He
saw into the heart of his questioner. For it was with the idea, as if
the Father were somehow better than the Son, that Philip had the desire
to know the Father: and so he did not even know the Son, because
believing that He was inferior to another. It was to correct such a
notion that it was said, “He that seeth me, seeth the Father also. How
sayest thou, Show us the Father?” I see the meaning of thy words: it is
not the original likeness thou seekest to see, but it is that other thou
thinkest the superior. “Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and
the Father in me?” Why desirest thou to dis <span id="page_328">p.
328</span> <span id="iii.lxxi-Page_328"></span>cover some distance
between those who are thus alike? why cravest thou the separate
knowledge of those who cannot be separated? What, after this, He says
not only to Philip, but to all of them together, must not now be thrust
into a corner, in order that, by His help, it may be the more carefully
expounded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[326:1285](1070073.htm#fr_1284) <span
id="iii.lxxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxi-p4"></span> [John
5.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span id="iii.lxxi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[326:1286](1070073.htm#fr_1285) <span
id="iii.lxxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxi-p5"></span> [Ps. xlii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#006)<span id="iii.lxxi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[327:1287](1070073.htm#fr_1286) <span
id="iii.lxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxi-p7"></span> That is, those who ascribed suffering to
the Father; because the Sabellians, denying the distinct personality of
the Son, and regarding Him as only a special revelation of God the
Father, were chargeable, therefore, with holding that it was God the
Father who really suffered and died on the cross.—<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxxi-p7.1"></span>Tr</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LXXI](1070074)
