[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070074)  [Next](1070076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lxxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lxxiii-p1.1"></span>Tractate LXXII.</span>

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p2"></span><span id="iii.lxxiii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxxiii-p2.2"></span>on the same
passage</span>.

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxiii-p3.1"></span>It</span> is no easy matter to comprehend
what is meant by, or in what sense we are to receive, these words of the
Lord, “He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also:”
and then, to this great difficulty in the way of our understanding, He
has added another still more difficult, “And greater things than these
shall he do.” What are we to make of it? We have not found one who did
such works as Christ did; and are we likely to find one who will do even
greater? But we remarked in our last discourse, that it was a greater
deed to heal the sick by the passing of their shadow, as was done by the
disciples, than as the Lord Himself did by the touch of the hem of His
garment; and that more believed on the apostles than on the Lord
Himself, when preaching with His own lips; so that we might suppose
works like these to be understood as greater: not that the disciple was
to be greater than his Master, or the servant than his Lord, or the
<span id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span
id="iii.lxxiii-Page_330"></span>adopted son than the Only-begotten, or
man than God, but that by them He Himself would condescend to do these
greater works, while telling them in another passage, “Without me ye can
do nothing.” <span id="fr_1294"></span>[1295](#fn_1294) While He
Himself, on the other hand, to say nothing of His other works, which are
numberless, made them without any aid from themselves, and without them
made this world; and because He Himself thought meet to become man,
without them He made also Himself. But what have they \[made or done\]
without Him, save sin? And last of all, He straightway also withdrew
from the subject all that could cause us agitation; for after saying,
“He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and
greater works than these shall he do;” He immediately went on to add,
“Because I go unto the Father; and whatsoever ye shall ask in my name,
that will I do.” He who had said, “He will do,” afterwards said, “I will
do;” as if He had said, Let not this appear to you impossible; for he
that believeth on me can never become greater than I am, but it is I who
shall then be doing greater things than now; greater things by him that
believeth on me, than by myself apart from him; yet it is I myself apart
from him, <span id="fr_1295"></span>[1296](#fn_1295) and I myself by him
\[that will do the works\]: and as it is apart from him, it is not he
that will do them; and as, on the other hand, it is by him, although not
by his own self, it is he also that will do them. And besides, to do
greater things by one than apart from one, is not a sign of deficiency,
but of condescension. For what can servants render unto the Lord for all
His benefits towards them? <span id="fr_1296"></span>[1297](#fn_1296)
And sometimes He hath condescended to number this also amongst His other
benefits towards them, namely, to do greater works by them than apart
from them. Did not that rich man go away sad from His presence, when
seeking counsel about eternal life? He heard, and cast it away: and yet
in after days the counsel that fell on his ears was followed, not by
one, but by many, when the good Master was speaking by the disciples; He
was an object of contempt to the rich man, when warned by Himself
directly, and of love to those whom by means of poor men He transformed
from rich into poor. Here, then, you see, He did greater works when
preached by believers, than when speaking Himself to hearers.

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p7"></span>2. But there is still something to
excite thought in His doing such greater works by the apostles; for He
said not, as if merely with reference to them, The works that I do shall
ye do also; and greater works than these shall ye do: but wishing to be
understood as speaking of all that belonged to His family, said, “He
that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater
works than these shall he do.” If, then, he that believeth shall do such
works, he that shall do them not is certainly no believer: just as “He
that loveth me, keepeth my commandments,” <span
id="fr_1297"></span>[1298](#fn_1297) implies, of course, that he who
keepeth them not, loveth not. In another place, also, He says, “He that
heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them, I will liken him unto a
wise man, who buildeth his house upon a rock;” <span
id="fr_1298"></span>[1299](#fn_1298) and he, therefore, who is unlike
this wise man, without doubt either heareth these sayings and doeth them
not, or faileth even to hear them. “He that believeth in me,” He says,
“though he die, yet shall he live;” <span
id="fr_1299"></span>[1300](#fn_1299) and he, therefore, that shall not
live, is certainly no believer now. In a similar way, also, it is said
here, “He that believeth in me shall do \[such works\]:” he is,
therefore, no believer who shall not do so. What have we here, then,
brethren? Is it that one is not to be reckoned among believers in
Christ, who shall not do greater works than Christ? It were hard,
unreasonable, intolerable, to suppose so; that is, unless it be rightly
understood. Let us listen, then, to the apostle, when he says, “To him
that believeth on Him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted
for righteousness.” <span id="fr_1300"></span>[1301](#fn_1300) This is
the work in which we may be doing the works of Christ, for even our very
believing in Christ is the work of Christ. It is this He worketh in us,
not certainly without us. Hear now, then, and understand, “He that
believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also:” I do them first,
and he shall do them afterwards; for I do such works that he may do them
also. And what are the works, but the making of a righteous man out of
an ungodly one?

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p12"></span>3. “And greater works than these shall
he do.” Than what, pray? Shall we say that one is doing greater works
than all that Christ did who is working out his own salvation with fear
and trembling? <span id="fr_1301"></span>[1302](#fn_1301) A work which
Christ is certainly working in him, but not without him; and one which I
might, without hesitation, call greater than the heavens and the earth,
and all in both within the compass of our vision. For both heaven and
earth shall pass away, <span id="fr_1302"></span>[1303](#fn_1302) but
the salvation and justi <span id="page_331">p. 331</span> <span
id="iii.lxxiii-Page_331"></span>fication of those predestinated thereto,
that is, of those whom He foreknoweth, shall continue forever. In the
former there is only the working of God, but in the latter there is also
His image. But there are also in the heavens, thrones, governments,
principalities, powers, archangels, and angels, which are all of them
the work of Christ; and is it, then, greater works also than these that
he doeth, who, with Christ working in him, is a co-worker in his own
eternal salvation and justification? I dare not call for any hurried
decision on such a point: let him who can, understand, and let him who
can, judge whether it is a greater work to create righteous beings than
to make righteous the ungodly. For at least, if there is equal power
employed in both, there is greater mercy in the latter. For “this is the
great mystery of godliness which was manifested in the flesh, justified
in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on
in the world, received up into glory.” <span
id="fr_1303"></span>[1304](#fn_1303) But when He said, “Greater works
than these shall he do,” there is no necessity requiring us to suppose
that all of Christ’s works are to be understood. For He spake, perhaps,
only *of these* He was now doing; and the work He was doing at that time
was uttering the words of faith, and of such works specially had He
spoken just before when He said, “The words that I speak unto you, I
speak not of myself: but the Father, that dwelleth in me, He doeth the
works.” His words, accordingly, were His works. And it is assuredly
something less to preach the words of righteousness, which He did apart
from us, than to justify the ungodly, which He does in such a way in us
that we also are doing it ourselves. It remains for us to inquire how
the words are to be understood, “Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, I
will do it.” Because of the many things His believing ones ask, and
receive not, there is no small question claiming our attention; but as
this discourse must now be concluded, we must allow at least a little
delay for its consideration and discussion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[330:1295](1070075.htm#fr_1294) <span
id="iii.lxxiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p4"></span> [John
15.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)<span
id="iii.lxxiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[330:1296](1070075.htm#fr_1295) <span
id="iii.lxxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p5"></span> That is, here, “without any
self-originating aid of his,” as if he had any independent and
meritorious share in the work. Augustin plays on the prepositions, *per*
(*eum*), and *præter* (*eum*).—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxiii-p5.1"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[330:1297](1070075.htm#fr_1296) <span
id="iii.lxxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p6"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#012)<span id="iii.lxxiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[330:1298](1070075.htm#fr_1297) <span
id="iii.lxxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p8"></span> [John
14.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span
id="iii.lxxiii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[330:1299](1070075.htm#fr_1298) <span
id="iii.lxxiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p9"></span> [Matt. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024)<span id="iii.lxxiii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[330:1300](1070075.htm#fr_1299) <span
id="iii.lxxiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p10"></span> [John
11.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025)<span
id="iii.lxxiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[330:1301](1070075.htm#fr_1300) <span
id="iii.lxxiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p11"></span> [Rom. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="iii.lxxiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[330:1302](1070075.htm#fr_1301) <span
id="iii.lxxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p13"></span> [Phil. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012)<span id="iii.lxxiii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[330:1303](1070075.htm#fr_1302) <span
id="iii.lxxiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p14"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#035)<span id="iii.lxxiii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[331:1304](1070075.htm#fr_1303) <span
id="iii.lxxiii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxiii-p15"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="iii.lxxiii-p15.1"></span>.
On account of the well-known textual controversy among Biblicists, this
passage, as quoted by Augustin, is so far valuable, as it shows us how
he read and understood the point in dispute, namely, whether it is
“<span class="c10"><span id="iii.lxxiii-p15.2"></span>God</span> was
manifested” (as in our English version), or, “<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxiii-p15.3"></span>Who</span> \[which\] was manifested,” as
here by Augustin; in other words, whether the original text read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.lxxiii-p15.4"></span>Θεός</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.lxxiii-p15.5"></span> ὅς</span> before <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.lxxiii-p15.6"></span>ἐφανερώθη</span>. The
evidence is almost equally divided between the two; and the difficulty
is chiefly caused by the circumstance, that in the earliest <span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxxiii-p15.7"></span> mss.</span>, the Uncial,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.lxxiii-p15.8"></span> ΘΕΟΣ</span>
(God) is usually written in a contracted form, consisting of the first
and last letters, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.lxxiii-p15.9"></span>ΘΣ</span>, which differs from the pronoun
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.lxxiii-p15.10"></span>ὅς</span> (who),
written <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.lxxiii-p15.11"></span>ΟΣ</span>, merely by the little line
inside the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.lxxiii-p15.12"></span>Θ</span>, and another line over the
contraction; both of which may have been unintentionally omitted at the
time of copying, or purposely inserted at an after date. To us now, the
question is of less importance, as, if the true reading be <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.lxxiii-p15.13"></span>ὅς</span> (who), its
antecedent can only be <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.lxxiii-p15.14"></span>Χριστός</span> (Christ). \[The R.V., in
accordance with the oldest <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxiii-p15.15"></span>mss</span>. and the best critical edition,
reads: “He who (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.lxxiii-p15.16"></span>ὅς</span>) was manifested”—<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxxiii-p15.17"></span>Tr</span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LXXIII](1070076)
