[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070061)  [Next](1070063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lx"></span>

<span id="iii.lx-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lx-p1.1"></span>Tractate LIX.</span>

<span id="iii.lx-p2"></span><span id="iii.lx-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lx-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIII. 16–20</span>.

<span id="iii.lx-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lx-p3.1"></span>We</span> have just heard in the holy Gospel the
Lord speaking, and saying, “Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant
is not greater than his lord, nor the apostle \[he that is sent\]
greater than he that sent him: if ye know these things, blessed shall ye
be if ye do them.” He said this, therefore, because He had washed the
disciples’ feet, as the Master of humility both by word and example. But
we shall be able, with His help, to handle what is in need of more
elaborate handling, if we linger not at what is perfectly clear.
Accordingly, after uttering these words, the Lord added, “I speak not of
you all: I know whom I have chosen: but, that the Scripture may be
fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me, shall lift up his heel upon
me.” And what is this, but that he shall trample upon me? We know of
whom He speaks: it is Judas, that betrayer of His, who is referred to.
He had not therefore chosen the person whom, by these words, He setteth
utterly apart from His chosen ones. When I say then, He continues,
“Blessed shall ye be if ye do them, I speak not of you all:” there is
one among you who will not be blessed, and who will not do these things.
“I know whom I have chosen.” Whom, but those who shall be blessed in the
doing of what has been commanded and shown as needful to be done, by Him
who alone can make them blessed? The traitor Judas, He says, is not one
of those that have been chosen. What, then, is meant by what He says in
another place, “Have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is a
devil?” <span id="fr_1184"></span>[1185](#fn_1184) Was it that he also
was chosen for some purpose, for which he was really necessary; although
not for the blessedness of <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span
id="iii.lx-Page_308"></span>which He has just been saying, “Blessed
shall ye be if ye do these things”? He speaketh not so of them all; for
He knows whom He has chosen to be associated with Himself in
blessedness. Of such he is not one, who ate His bread in order that he
might lift up his heel upon Him. The bread they ate was the Lord
Himself; he ate the Lord’s bread in enmity to the Lord: they ate life,
and he punishment. “For he that eateth unworthily,” says the apostle,
“eateth judgment unto himself.” <span
id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185) “From this time,” <span
id="fr_1186"></span>[1187](#fn_1186) Christ adds, “I tell you before it
come; that when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am He:” that
is, I am He of whom the Scripture that preceded has just said, “He that
eateth bread with me, shall lift up his heel upon me.”

<span id="iii.lx-p7"></span>2. He then proceeds to say: “Verily, verily,
I say unto you, He that receiveth whomsoever I send, receiveth me; and
he that receiveth me, receiveth Him that sent me.” Did He mean us to
understand that there is as little distance between one sent by Him, and
Himself, as there is between Himself and God the Father? If we take it
in this way, I know not what measurements of distance (which may God
forbid!) we shall be adopting, in the Arian fashion. For they, when they
hear or read these words of the Gospel, have immediate recourse to their
dogmatic measurements, whereby they ascend not to life, but fall
headlong into death. For they straightway say: The Son’s messenger
stands at the same relative distance from the Son, as expressed in the
words, “He that receiveth whomsoever I send, receiveth me,” as that in
which the Son Himself stands from the Father, when He said, “He that
receiveth me, receiveth Him that sent me.” But if thou sayest so, thou
forgettest, heretic, thy measurements. For if, because of these words of
the Lord, thou puttest the Son at as great a distance from the Father as
the messenger \[apostle\] from the Son, where dost thou purpose to place
the Holy Spirit? Has it escaped thee, that ye are wont to place Him
after the Son? He will therefore come in between the messenger and the
Son; and much greater, then, will be the distance between the Son and
His messenger, than between the Father and His Son. Or perhaps, to
preserve that distinction between the Son and His messenger, and between
the Father and His Son, at their equality of distance, will the Holy
Spirit be equal to the Son? But as little will ye allow this. And where,
then, do ye think of placing Him, if ye place the Son as far beneath the
Father, as ye place the messenger beneath the Son? Restrain, therefore,
your foolhardy presumption; and do not be seeking to find in these words
the same distance between the Son and His messenger as between the
Father and His Son. But listen rather to the Son Himself, when He says,
“I and my Father are one.” <span id="fr_1187"></span>[1188](#fn_1187)
For there the Truth hath left you no shadow of distance between the
Begetter and the Only-begotten; there Christ Himself hath erased your
measurements, and the rock hath broken your staircase to pieces.

<span id="iii.lx-p9"></span>3. But now that the heretical slander has
been disposed of, in what sense are we to understand these words of the
Lord: “He that receiveth whomsoever I send, receiveth me; and he that
receiveth me, receiveth Him that sent me”? For if we were inclined to
understand the words, “He that receiveth me, receiveth Him that sent
me,” as expressing the oneness in nature of the Father and the Son; the
sequence from the similar arrangement of words in the other clause, “He
that receiveth whomsoever I send, receiveth me,” would be the unity in
nature of the Son and His messenger. And there might, indeed, be no
impropriety in so understanding it, seeing that a twofold substance
belongeth to the strong man, who hath rejoiced to run the race; <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[1189](#fn_1188) for the Word was made flesh, <span
id="fr_1189"></span>[1190](#fn_1189) that is, God became man. And
accordingly He might be supposed to have said, “He that receiveth
whomsoever I send, receiveth me,” with reference to His human nature;
“and he that receiveth me” as God, “receiveth Him that sent me.” But in
so speaking, He was not commending the unity of nature, but the
authority of the Sender in Him who is sent. Let every one, therefore, so
receive Him that is sent, that in His person he may give heed to Him who
sent Him. If, then, thou lookest for Christ in Peter, thou wilt find the
disciple’s instructor; and if thou lookest for the Father in the Son,
thou wilt find the Begetter of the Only-begotten: and so in Him who is
sent, thou art not mistaken in receiving the Sender. What follows in the
Gospel cannot be compressed within the shortness of the time remaining.
And therefore, dearly beloved, let what has been said, if thought
sufficient, be received in a healthful way, as pasture for the holy
sheep; and if it is somewhat scanty, let it be ruminated over with
ardent desire for more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[307:1185](1070062.htm#fr_1184) <span
id="iii.lx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lx-p4"></span> [John
6.70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070)<span id="iii.lx-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[308:1186](1070062.htm#fr_1185) <span
id="iii.lx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lx-p5"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)<span id="iii.lx-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[308:1187](1070062.htm#fr_1186) <span
id="iii.lx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lx-p6"></span> *A modo*; Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.lx-p6.1"></span>’Απ’ ἄρτι</span>; margin of English Bible, “From
henceforth.”—<span class="c10"><span id="iii.lx-p6.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[308:1188](1070062.htm#fr_1187) <span
id="iii.lx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lx-p8"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="iii.lx-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[308:1189](1070062.htm#fr_1188) <span
id="iii.lx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lx-p10"></span> [Ps. xix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005)<span id="iii.lx-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[308:1190](1070062.htm#fr_1189) <span
id="iii.lx-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lx-p11"></span> [John
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="iii.lx-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LX](1070063)
