[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070122)  [Next](1070124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.cxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.cxxi-p1.1"></span>Tractate CXX.</span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p2"></span><span id="iii.cxxi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxxi-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIX. 31</span>–<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxxi-p2.3"></span>42,</span> and <span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxxi-p2.4"></span>XX. 1-9</span>.

<span id="iii.cxxi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxxi-p3.1"></span>After</span> that the Lord Jesus had
accomplished all that He foreknew required accomplishment before His
death, and had, when it pleased Himself, given up the ghost, what
followed thereafter, as related by the evangelist, let us now consider.
“The Jews therefore,” he says, “because it was the preparation
(*parasceve*), that the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the
Sabbath-day (for that Sabbath-day was an high day), besought Pilate that
their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away.” Not that
their legs might be taken away, but the persons themselves whose legs
were broken for the purpose of effecting their death, and permitting
them to be detached from the tree, lest their continuing to hang on the
crosses should defile the great festal day by the horrible spectacle of
their day-long torments.

<span id="iii.cxxi-p4"></span>2. “Then came the soldiers, and brake the
legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with Him. But when
they came to Jesus, and saw that He was dead already, they brake not His
legs: but one of the soldiers with a spear laid open <span
id="fr_1908"></span>[1909](#fn_1908) His side, and forthwith came there
out blood and water.” A suggestive <span
id="fr_1909"></span>[1910](#fn_1909) word was made use of by the
evangelist, in not saying pierced, or wounded His side, or anything
else, but “opened;” <span id="fr_1910"></span>[1911](#fn_1910) that
thereby, in a sense, the gate of life might be thrown open, from whence
have flowed forth the sacraments of the Church, without which there is
no entrance to the life which is the true life. That blood was shed for
the remission of sins; that water it is that makes up the health-giving
cup, and supplies at once the laver of baptism and water for drinking.
This was announced beforehand, when Noah was commanded to make a door in
the side of the ark,  <span id="fr_1911"></span>[1912](#fn_1911) whereby
the animals might enter which were not destined to perish in the flood,
and by which the Church was prefigured. Because of this, the first woman
was formed from the side of the man when asleep, <span
id="fr_1912"></span>[1913](#fn_1912) and was called Life, and the mother
of all living. <span id="fr_1913"></span>[1914](#fn_1913) Truly it
pointed to a great good, prior to the <span id="page_435">p. 435</span>
<span id="iii.cxxi-Page_435"></span>great evil of the transgression (in
the guise of one thus lying asleep). <span
id="fr_1914"></span>[1915](#fn_1914) This second Adam bowed His head and
fell asleep on the cross, that a spouse might be formed for Him from
that which flowed from the sleeper’s side. O death, whereby the dead are
raised anew to life! What can be purer than such blood? What more
health-giving than such a wound?

<span id="iii.cxxi-p12"></span>3. “And he that saw it,” he says, “bare
record, and his record is true; and he knoweth that he saith true, that
ye also might believe.” He said not, That ye also might know, but “that
ye might believe;” for he knoweth who hath seen, that he who hath not
seen might believe his testimony. And believing belongs more to the
nature of faith than seeing. For what else is meant by believing than
giving to faith a suitable reception? “For these things were done,” he
adds, “that the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of Him ye shall
not break. And again, another scripture saith, They shall look on Him
whom they pierced.” He has furnished two testimonies from the Scriptures
for each of the things which he has recorded as having been done. For to
the words, “But when they came to Jesus, and saw that He was dead
already, they brake not His legs,” belongeth the testimony, “A bone of
Him ye shall not break:” an injunction which was laid upon those who
were commanded to celebrate the passover by the sacrifice of a sheep in
the old law, which went before as a shadow of the passion of Christ.
Whence “our passover has been offered, even Christ,” <span
id="fr_1915"></span>[1916](#fn_1915) of whom the prophet Isaiah also had
predicted, “He shall be led as a lamb to the slaughter.” <span
id="fr_1916"></span>[1917](#fn_1916) In like manner to the words which
he subjoined, “But one of the soldiers laid open His side with a spear,”
belongeth the other testimony, “They shall look on Him whom they
pierced;” where Christ is promised in the very flesh wherein He was
afterwards to come to be crucified.

<span id="iii.cxxi-p15"></span>4. “And after this, Joseph of Arimathea
(being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews) besought
Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus: and Pilate gave him
leave. He came therefore, and took the body of Jesus. And there came
also Nicodemus, who came to Jesus by night at first, bringing a mixture
of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight.” We are not to
explain the meaning by saying, “first bringing a mixture of myrrh,” but
by attaching the word “first” to the preceding clause. For Nicodemus had
at first come to Jesus by night, as recorded by this same John in the
earlier portions of his Gospel. <span
id="fr_1917"></span>[1918](#fn_1917) By the statement given us here,
therefore, we are to understand that Nicodemus came to Jesus, not then
only, but then for the first time; and that he was a regular comer
afterwards, in order by hearing to become a disciple; which is
certified, nowadays at least, to almost all nations in the revelation of
the body of the most blessed Stephen. <span
id="fr_1918"></span>[1919](#fn_1918) “Then took they the body of Jesus,
and wound it in linen clothes with the spices, as the manner of the Jews
is to bury.” The evangelist, I think, was not without a purpose in so
framing his words, “as the manner of the Jews is to bury;” for in this
way, unless I am mistaken, he has admonished us that, in duties of this
kind, which are observed to the dead, the customs of every nation ought
to be preserved.

<span id="iii.cxxi-p18"></span>5. “Now in the place where He was
crucified there was a garden; and in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein
was never man yet laid.” As in the womb of the Virgin Mary no one was
conceived before Him, and no one after Him, so in this sepulchre there
was no one buried before Him, and no one after Him. “There laid they
Jesus therefore, because of the Jews’ preparation; for the sepulchre was
nigh at hand.” He would have us to understand that the burial was
hurried, lest the evening should overtake them; when it was no longer
permitted to do any such thing, because of the preparation, which the
Jews among us are more in the habit of calling in Latin, *cœna pura*
(the pure meal).

<span id="iii.cxxi-p19"></span>6. “And on the first of the week came
Mary Magdalene early, when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and saw
the stone taken away from the sepulchre.” The first of the week <span
id="fr_1919"></span>[1920](#fn_1919) is what Christian practice now
calls the Lord’s day, because of the resurrection of the Lord. <span
id="fr_1920"></span>[1921](#fn_1920) “She ran, therefore, and came to
Simon Peter and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and saith unto
them, They have taken the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not
where they have laid Him.” Some of the Greek codices have, “They have
taken my Lord,” which may likely enough have been said by the stronger
than ordinary affection of love and handmaid relationship; but we have
not found it in the several codices to which we have had access.

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span> <span id="iii.cxxi-Page_436"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p22"></span>7. “Peter therefore went forth, and that
other disciple, and came to the sepulchre. So they ran both together:
and that other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the
sepulchre.” The repetition here is worthy of notice and of commendation
for the way in which a return is made to what had previously been
omitted, and yet is added just as if it followed in due order. For after
having already said, “they came to the sepulchre,” he goes back to tell
us how they came, and says, “so they ran both together,” etc. Where he
shows that, by outrunning his companion, there came first to the
sepulchre that other disciple, by whom he means himself, while he
relates all <span id="fr_1921"></span>[1922](#fn_1921) as if speaking of
another.

<span id="iii.cxxi-p24"></span>8. “And he stooping down,” he says, “saw
the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in. Then cometh Simon Peter
following him, and went into the sepulchre, and saw the linen clothes
lying, and the napkin, which had been about His head, not lying with the
linen clothes, but folded up in one place by itself.” Do we suppose
these things have no meaning? I can suppose no such thing. But we hasten
on to other points, on which we are compelled to linger by the need
there is for investigation, or some other kind of obscurity. For in such
things as are self-manifest, the inquiry into the meaning even of
individual details is, indeed, a subject of holy delight, but only for
those who have leisure, which is not the case with us.

<span id="iii.cxxi-p25"></span>9. “Then went in also that other disciple
who had come first to the sepulchre.” He came first, and entered last.
This also of a certainty is not without a meaning, but I am without the
leisure needful for its explanation. “And he saw, and believed.” Here
some, by not giving due attention, suppose that John believed that Jesus
had risen again; but there is no indication of this from the words that
follow. For what does he mean by immediately adding, “For as yet they
knew not the scripture, that He must rise again from the dead”? He could
not then have believed that He had risen again, when he did not know
that it behoved Him to rise again. What then did he see? what was it
that he believed? What but this, that he saw the sepulchre empty, and
believed what the woman had said, that He had been taken away from the
tomb? “For as yet they knew not the scripture, that He must rise again
from the dead.” Thus also when they heard of it from the Lord Himself,
although it was uttered in the plainest terms, yet from their custom of
hearing Him speaking by parables, they did not understand, and believed
that something else was His meaning. But we shall put off what follows
till another discourse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1908"></span>[434:1909](1070123.htm#fr_1908) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p5"></span> *Aperuit*.

<span id="fn_1909"></span>[434:1910](1070123.htm#fr_1909) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p6"></span> *Vigilans*.

<span id="fn_1910"></span>[434:1911](1070123.htm#fr_1910) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p7"></span> *Aperuit*.

<span id="fn_1911"></span>[434:1912](1070123.htm#fr_1911) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p8"></span> [Gen. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#016)<span id="iii.cxxi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1912"></span>[434:1913](1070123.htm#fr_1912) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p9"></span> [Gen. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#022)<span id="iii.cxxi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1913"></span>[434:1914](1070123.htm#fr_1913) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p10"></span> [Gen. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#020)<span id="iii.cxxi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1914"></span>[435:1915](1070123.htm#fr_1914) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p11"></span> This last clause is found only in three
of the Augustinian <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxxi-p11.1"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_1915"></span>[435:1916](1070123.htm#fr_1915) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p13"></span> [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span id="iii.cxxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1916"></span>[435:1917](1070123.htm#fr_1916) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p14"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="iii.cxxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1917"></span>[435:1918](1070123.htm#fr_1917) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p16"></span> [John
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#002)<span id="iii.cxxi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1918"></span>[435:1919](1070123.htm#fr_1918) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p17"></span> This revelation, whereby the body of
Nicodemus was discovered, is referred to the close of the year 415, by
those who trust in the authority of the Presbyter Lucian, in a small
book written on the subject.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxxi-p17.1"></span>Migne</span>.

<span id="fn_1919"></span>[435:1920](1070123.htm#fr_1919) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p20"></span> *Una Sabbati*.

<span id="fn_1920"></span>[435:1921](1070123.htm#fr_1920) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p21"></span> Augustin here adds, *quem Matthæus solus
in Evangelistis primam Sabbati nominavit* ([Matt. xxviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001)<span id="iii.cxxi-p21.1"></span>)
contrasting *primam* with *una*.

<span id="fn_1921"></span>[436:1922](1070123.htm#fr_1921) <span
id="iii.cxxi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxi-p23"></span> Some editions here insert into the text,
*More sanctæ Scripturæ*, “after the manner of Holy Scripture.” Others
enclose it within brackets.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxxi-p23.1"></span>Migne</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate CXXI](1070124)
