[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070137)  [Next](1070139) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.x-p1.1"></span>Homily VII.</span>

<span id="iv.x-p2"></span><span id="iv.x-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iv.x-p2.2"></span>1 John IV. 4</span>–<span
class="c10"><span id="iv.x-p2.3"></span>12</span>

<span id="iv.x-p3"></span>“Now are ye of God, little children, and have
overcome him: because greater is He that is in you, than he that is in
this world. They are of the world: therefore speak they of the world,
and the world heareth them. We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth
us; he that is not of God heareth not us. From this know we the spirit
of truth, and \[the spirit\] of error. Dearly, beloved, let us love one
another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God,
and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. In
this was manifested the love of God in us, that God sent His
only-begotten Son into this world, that we may live through Him. Herein
is love, not that we loved, but that He loved us, and sent His Son to be
the Atoner <span id="fr_2349"></span>[2350](#fn_2349) for our sins.
Dearly beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.
No man hath seen God at any time.”

<span id="iv.x-p5"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.x-p5.1"></span>So</span> is this world to all the faithful
seeking their own country, as was the desert to the people Israel. They
wandered indeed as yet, and were seeking their own country: but with God
for their guide they could not wander astray. Their way was God’s
bidding. <span id="fr_2350"></span>[2351](#fn_2350) For where they went
about during forty years, the journey itself is made up of a very few
stations, and is known to all. They were retarded because they were in
training, not because they were forsaken. That therefore which God
promiseth us is ineffable sweetness and a good, <span
id="fr_2351"></span>[2352](#fn_2351) as the Scripture saith, and as ye
have often heard by us rehearsed, which “eye hath not seen, nor ear
heard, neither hath entered into the heart of man.” <span
id="fr_2352"></span>[2353](#fn_2352) But by temporal labors we are
exercised, and by temptations of this present life are trained. Howbeit,
if ye would not die of thirst in this wilderness, drink charity. It is
the fountain which God has been pleased to place here that we faint not
in the way: and we shall more abundantly drink thereof, when we are come
to our own land. The Gospel has just been read; now to speak of the very
words with which the lesson ended, what other thing heard ye but
concerning charity? For we have made an agreement with our God in
prayer, that if we would that He should forgive us our sins, we also
should forgive the sins which may have been committed against us. <span
id="fr_2353"></span>[2354](#fn_2353) Now that which forgiveth is none
other than charity. Take away charity from the heart; hatred possesseth
it, it knows not how to forgive. Let charity be there, and she
fearlessly forgiveth, not being straitened. And this whole epistle which
we have undertaken to expound to you, see whether it commendeth aught
else than this one thing, charity. Nor need we fear lest by much
speaking thereof it come to be hateful. For what is there to love, if
charity come to be hateful? It is by charity that other things come to
be rightly loved; then how must <span id="page_502">p. 502</span> <span
id="iv.x-Page_502"></span>itself be loved! Let not that then which ought
never to depart from the heart, depart from the tongue.

<span id="iv.x-p10"></span>2. “Now,” saith he, “are ye of God little
children, and have overcome him:” <span
id="fr_2354"></span>[2355](#fn_2354) whom but Antichrist? For above he
had said, “Whosoever unmaketh <span id="fr_2355"></span>[2356](#fn_2355)
Jesus Christ and denieth that He is come in the flesh is not of God.”
Now we expounded, if ye remember, that all those who violate charity
deny Jesus Christ to have come in the flesh. For Jesus had no need to
come but because of charity: as indeed the charity we are commending is
that which the Lord Himself commendeth in the Gospel, “Greater love than
this can no man have, that a man lay down his life for his
friends.” <span id="fr_2356"></span>[2357](#fn_2356) How was it possible
for the Son of God to lay down His life for us without putting on flesh
in which He might die? Whosoever therefore violates charity, let him say
what he will with his tongue, his life denies that Christ is come in the
flesh; and this is an antichrist, wherever he may be, whithersoever he
have come in. But what saith the apostle to them who are citizens of
that country for which we sigh? “Ye have overcome him.” And whereby have
they overcome? “Because greater is He that is in you, than he that is in
this world.” Lest they should attribute the victory to their own
strength, and by arrogance of pride should be overcome, (for whomsoever
the devil makes proud, he overcomes,) wishing them to keep humility,
what saith he? “Ye have overcome him.” Every man now, at hearing this
saying, “Ye have overcome,” lifts up the head, lifts up the neck, wishes
himself to be praised. Do not extol thyself; see who it is that in thee
hath overcome. Why hast thou overcome? “Because greater is He that is in
you, than he that is in the world.” Be humble, bear thy Lord; be thou
the beast for Him to sit on. Good is it for thee that He should rule,
and He guide. For if thou have not Him to sit on thee, thou mayest lift
up the neck, mayest strike out the heels: but woe to thee without a
ruler, for this liberty sendeth thee among the wild beasts to be
devoured!

<span id="iv.x-p14"></span>3. “These are of the world.” <span
id="fr_2357"></span>[2358](#fn_2357) Who? The antichrists. Ye have
already heard who they be. And if ye be not such, ye know them, but
whosoever is such, knows not. “These are of the world: therefore speak
they of the world, and the world heareth them.” Who are they that “speak
of the world”? Mark who are against charity. Behold, ye have heard the
Lord saying, “If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father
will forgive you also your trespasses. But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.” <span
id="fr_2358"></span>[2359](#fn_2358) It is the sentence of Truth: or if
it be not Truth that speaks, gainsay it. If thou art a Christian and
believest Christ, He hath said, “I am the truth.” This sentence is true,
is firm. Now hear men that “speak of the world.” “And wilt thou not
avenge thyself? And wilt thou let him say that he has done this to thee?
Nay: let him feel that he has to do with a man.” Every day are such
things said, They that say such things, “of the world speak they, and
the world heareth them.” None say such things but those that love the
world, and by none are such things heard but by those who love the
world. And ye have heard that to love the world and neglect charity is
to deny that Jesus came in the flesh. Or say if the Lord Himself in the
flesh did that? if, being buffeted, He willed to be avenged? if, hanging
on the cross, He did not say, “Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do”? <span id="fr_2359"></span>[2360](#fn_2359) But if He
threatened not, who had power; why dost thou threaten, why art thou
inflated with anger, who art under power of another? He died because it
was His will to die, yet He threatened not; thou knowest not when thou
shalt die, and dost thou threaten?

<span id="iv.x-p18"></span>4. “We are of God.” <span
id="fr_2360"></span>[2361](#fn_2360) Let us see why; see whether it be
for any other thing than charity. “We are of God: he that knoweth God
heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the
spirit of truth, and of error:” namely by this, that he that heareth us
hath the spirit of truth; he that heareth not us, hath the spirit of
error. Let us see what he adviseth, and let us choose rather to hear him
advising in the spirit of truth, and not antichrists, not lovers of the
world, not the world. If we are born of God, “beloved,” <span
id="fr_2361"></span>[2362](#fn_2361) he goes on—see above from what: “We
are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God
heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and of error:” aye,
now, he makes us eagerly attentive: to be told that he who knows God,
hears; but he who knows not, hears not; and that this is the discerning
between the spirit of truth and the spirit of error: well then, let us
see what he is about to advise; in what we must hear him—“Beloved, let
us love one another.” <span id="fr_2362"></span>[2363](#fn_2362) Why?
because a man adviseth? “Because love is of God.” Much hath he commended
love, in that he hath said, “Is of <span id="page_503">p. 503</span>
<span id="iv.x-Page_503"></span>God:” but he is going to say more; let
us eagerly hear. At present he hath said, “Love is of God; and every one
that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth
not God.” <span id="fr_2363"></span>[2364](#fn_2363) Why? “For God is
love” \[Love is God\]. <span id="fr_2364"></span>[2365](#fn_2364) What
more could be said, brethren? If nothing were said in praise of love
throughout the pages of this epistle, if nothing whatever throughout the
other pages of the Scriptures, and this one only thing were all we were
told by the voice of the Spirit of God, “For Love is God;” nothing more
ought we to require.

<span id="iv.x-p24"></span>5. Now see that to act against love is to act
against God. Let no man say, “I sin against man when I do not love my
brother, (mark it!) and sin against man is a thing to be taken easily;
only let me not sin against God.” How sinnest thou not against God, when
thou sinnest against love? “Love is God.” Do “we” say this? If we said,
“Love is God,” haply some one of you might be offended and say, What
hath he said? What meant he to say, that “Love is God”? God “gave” love,
as a gift God bestowed love. “Love is of God: Love <span
class="c10"><span id="iv.x-p24.1"></span>IS</span> God.” Look, here have
ye, brethren, the Scriptures of God: this epistle is canonical;
throughout all nations it is recited, it is held by the authority of the
whole earth, it hath edified the whole earth. Thou art here told by the
Spirit of God, “Love is God.” Now if thou dare, go against God, and
refuse to love thy brother!

<span id="iv.x-p25"></span>6. In what sense then was it said a while
ago, “Love is of God;” and now, “Love <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.x-p25.1"></span> IS</span> God?” For God is Father and Son and
Holy Ghost: the Son, God of God, the Holy Ghost, God of God; and these
three, one God, not three Gods. If the Son be God, and the Holy Ghost
God, and that person loveth in whom dwelleth the Holy Ghost: therefore
“Love is God;” but “<span class="c10"><span
id="iv.x-p25.2"></span>IS</span> God,” because “Of God.” For thou hast
both in the epistle; both, “Love is of God,” and, “Love is God.” Of the
Father alone the Scripture hath it not to say, that He is “of God:” but
when thou hearest that expression, “Of God,” either the Son is meant, or
the Holy Ghost. Because while the apostle saith, “The love of God is
shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given unto
us:” <span id="fr_2365"></span>[2366](#fn_2365) let us understand that
He who subsisteth in love is the Holy Ghost. For it is even this Holy
Spirit, whom the bad cannot receive, even He is that Fountain of which
the Scripture saith, “Let the fountain of thy water be thine own, and
let no stranger partake with thee.” <span
id="fr_2366"></span>[2367](#fn_2366) For all who love not God, are
strangers, are antichrists. And though they come to the churches, they
cannot be numbered among the children of God; not to them belongeth that
Fountain of life. To have baptism is possible even for a bad man; to
have prophecy is possible even for a bad man. We find that king Saul had
prophecy: he was persecuting holy David, yet was he filled with the
spirit of prophecy, and began to prophesy. <span
id="fr_2367"></span>[2368](#fn_2367) To receive the sacrament of the
body and blood of the Lord is possible even for a bad man: for of such
it is said, “He that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh
judgment to himself.” <span id="fr_2368"></span>[2369](#fn_2368) To have
the name of Christ is possible even for a bad man; *i.e.* even a bad man
can be called a Christian: as they of whom it is said, “They polluted
the name of their God.” <span id="fr_2369"></span>[2370](#fn_2369) I
say, to have all these sacraments is possible even for a bad man; but to
have charity, and to be a bad man, is not possible. This then is the
peculiar gift, this the “Fountain” that is singly one’s “own.” To drink
of this the Spirit of God exhorteth you, to drink of Himself the Spirit
of God exhorteth you.

<span id="iv.x-p31"></span>7. “In this was manifested the love of God in
us.” <span id="fr_2370"></span>[2371](#fn_2370) Behold, in order that we
may love God, we have exhortation. Could we love Him, unless He first
loved us? If we were slow to love, let us not be slow to love in return.
He first loved us; not even so do we love. He loved the unrighteous, but
He did away the unrighteousness: He loved the unrighteous, but not unto
unrighteousness did He gather them together: He loved the sick, but He
visited them to make them whole. “Love,” then, “is God.” “In this was
manifested the love of God in us, because that God sent His
only-begotten Son into the world, that we may live through Him.” As the
Lord Himself saith: “Greater love than this can no man have, that a man
lay down his life for his friends:” <span
id="fr_2371"></span>[2372](#fn_2371) and there was proved the love of
Christ towards us, in that He died for us: how is the love of the Father
towards us proved? In that He “sent His only Son” to die for us: so also
the apostle Paul saith: “He that spared not His own Son, but delivered
Him up for us all, how hath He not with Him also freely given us all
<span id="page_504">p. 504</span> <span
id="iv.x-Page_504"></span>things?” <span
id="fr_2372"></span>[2373](#fn_2372) Behold the Father delivered up
Christ; Judas delivered Him up; does it not seem as if the thing done
were of the same sort? Judas is “*traditor*,” one that delivered up,
\[or, a traitor\]: is God the Father that? God forbid! sayest thou. I do
not say it, but the apostle saith, “He that spared not His own Son, but
“*tradidit Eum*” delivered Him up for us all.” Both the Father delivered
Him up, and He delivered up Himself. The same apostle saith: “Who loved
me, and delivered Himself up for me.” <span
id="fr_2373"></span>[2374](#fn_2373) If the Father delivered up the Son;
and the Son delivered up Himself, what has Judas done? There was a
“*traditio*” (delivering up) by the Father; there was a “*traditio*” by
the Son; there was a “*traditio*” by Judas: the thing done is the same,
but what is it that distinguishes the Father delivering up the Son, the
Son delivering up Himself, and Judas the disciple delivering up his
Master? This: that the Father and the Son did it in love, but Judas did
this <span id="fr_2374"></span>[2375](#fn_2374) in treacherous betrayal.
Ye see that not what the man does is the thing to be considered; but
with what mind and will he does it. We find God the Father in the same
deed in which we find Judas; the Father we bless, Judas we detest. Why
do we bless the Father, and detest Judas? We bless charity, detest
iniquity. How great a good was conferred upon mankind by the delivering
up of Christ! Had Judas this in his thoughts, that therefore he
delivered Him up? God had in His thoughts our salvation by which we were
redeemed; Judas had in his thoughts the price for which he sold the
Lord. The Son Himself had in His thoughts the price He gave for us,
Judas in his the price he received to sell Him. The diverse intention
therefore makes the things done diverse. Though the thing be one, yet if
we measure it by the diverse intentions, we find the one a thing to be
loved, the other to be condemned; the one we find a thing to be
glorified, the other to be detested. Such is the force of charity. See
that it alone discriminates, it alone distinguishes the doings of men.

<span id="iv.x-p37"></span>8. This we have said in the case where the
things done are similar. In the case where they are diverse, we find a
man by charity made fierce; <span id="fr_2375"></span>[2376](#fn_2375)
and by iniquity made winningly gentle. A father beats a boy, and a
boy-stealer caresses. If thou name the two things, blows and caresses,
who would not choose the caresses, and decline the blows? If thou mark
the persons, it is charity that beats, iniquity that caresses. See what
we are insisting upon; that the deeds of men are only discerned by the
root of charity. For many things may be done that have a good
appearance, and yet proceed not from the root of charity. For thorns
also have flowers: some actions truly seem rough, seem savage; howbeit
they are done for discipline at the bidding of charity. Once for all,
then, a short precept is given thee: Love, and do what thou wilt:
whether thou hold thy peace, through love hold thy peace; whether thou
cry out, through love cry out; whether thou correct, through love
correct; whether thou spare, through love do thou spare: let the root of
love be within, of this root can nothing spring but what is good.

<span id="iv.x-p39"></span>9. “In this is love—in this was manifested
the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only-begotten Son
into this world, that we may live through Him.—In this is love, not that
we loved God, but that He loved us:” <span
id="fr_2376"></span>[2377](#fn_2376) we did not love Him first: for to
this end loved He us, that we may love Him: “And sent His Son to be the
Atoner for our sins: “*litatorem*,” *i.e.* one that sacrifices. He
sacrificed for our sins. Where did He find the sacrifice? Where did He
find the victim which he would offer pure? Other He found none; His own
self He offered. “Beloved, if God so loved us we ought also to love one
another. <span id="fr_2377"></span>[2378](#fn_2377) Peter,” saith He,
“lovest thou me?” And he said, “I love.” “Feed my sheep.”

<span id="iv.x-p42"></span>10. “No man hath seen God at any time:” <span
id="fr_2378"></span>[2379](#fn_2378) He is a thing invisible; not with
the eye but with the heart must He be sought. But just as if we wished
to see the sun, we should purge the eye of the body; wishing to see God,
let us purge the eye by which God can be seen. Where is this eye? Hear
the Gospel: “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God.” <span id="fr_2379"></span>[2380](#fn_2379) But let no man imagine
God to himself according to the lust of his eyes. For so he makes unto
himself either a huge form, or a certain incalculable magnitude which,
like the light which he sees with the bodily eyes, he makes extend
through all directions; field after field of space he gives it all the
bigness he can; or, he represents to himself like as it were an old man
of venerable form. None of these things do thou imagine. There is
something thou mayest imagine, if thou wouldest see God; “God is love.”
What sort of face hath love? what form hath it? what stature? what feet?
what hands hath it? no man can say. And yet it hath feet, for these
carry men to church: it hath hands; for these reach forth to the poor:
it hath eyes; for thereby we consider the <span id="page_505">p.
505</span> <span id="iv.x-Page_505"></span>needy: “Blessed is the man,”
it is said, “who considereth the needy and the poor.” <span
id="fr_2380"></span>[2381](#fn_2380) It hath ears, of which the Lord
saith, “He that hath ears to hear let him hear.” <span
id="fr_2381"></span>[2382](#fn_2381) These are not members distinct by
place, but with the understanding he that hath charity sees the whole at
once. Inhabit, and thou shalt be inhabited; dwell, and thou shalt be
dwelt in. For how say you, my brethren? who loves what he does not see?
Now why, when charity is praised, do ye lift up your hands, make
acclaim, praise? What have I shown you? What I produced, was it a gleam
of colors? What I propounded, was it gold and silver? Have I dug out
jewels from hid treasures? What of this sort have I shown to your eyes?
Is my face changed while I speak? I am in the flesh; I am in the same
form in which I came forth to you; ye are in the same form in which ye
came hither: charity is praised, and ye shout applause. Certainly ye see
nothing. But as it pleases you when ye praise, so let it please you that
ye may keep it in your heart. For mark well what I say brethren; I
exhort you all, as God enables me, unto a great treasure. If there were
shown you a beautiful little vase, embossed, <span
id="fr_2382"></span>[2383](#fn_2382) inlaid with gold, curiously
wrought, and it charmed your eyes, and drew towards it the eager desire
of your heart, and you were pleased with the hand of the artificer, and
the weight of the silver, and the splendor of the metal; would not each
one of you say, “O, if I had that vase!” And to no purpose ye would say
it, for it would not rest with you to have it. Or if one should wish to
have it, he might think of stealing it from another’s house. Charity is
praised to you; if it please you, have it, possess it: no need that ye
should rob any man, no need that ye should think of buying it; it is to
be had freely, without cost. Take it, clasp it; there is nothing
sweeter. If such it be when it is but spoken of, what must it be when
one has it?

<span id="iv.x-p48"></span>11. If any of you perchance wish to keep
charity, brethren, above all things do not imagine it to be an abject
and sluggish thing; nor that charity is to be preserved by a sort of
gentleness, nay not gentleness, but tameness and listlessness. <span
id="fr_2383"></span>[2384](#fn_2383) Not so is it preserved. Do not
imagine that thou then lovest thy servant when thou dost not beat him,
or that thou then lovest thy son when thou givest him not discipline, or
that thou then lovest thy neighbor when thou dost not rebuke him: this
is not charity, but mere feebleness. Let charity be fervent to correct,
to amend: but if there be good manners, let them delight thee; if bad,
let them be amended, let them be corrected. Love not in the man his
error, but the man: for the man God made, the error the man himself
made. Love that which God made, love not that which the man himself
made. When thou lovest that, thou takest away this: when thou esteemest
that, thou amendest this. But even if thou be severe <span
id="fr_2384"></span>[2385](#fn_2384) at any time, let it be because of
love, for correction. For this cause was charity betokened by the Dove
which descended upon the Lord. <span
id="fr_2385"></span>[2386](#fn_2385) That likeness of a dove, the
likeness in which came the Holy Ghost, by whom charity should be shed
forth into us: wherefore was this? The dove hath no gall: yet with beak
and wings she fights for her young; hers is a fierceness without
bitterness. And so does also a father; when he chastises his son, for
discipline he chastises him. As I said, the kidnapper, in order that he
may sell, inveigles the child with bitter endearments; a father, that he
may correct, does without gall chastise. Such be ye to all men. See
here, brethren, a great lesson, a great rule: each one of you has
children, or wishes to have; or if he has altogether determined to have
no children after the flesh, at least spiritually he desires to have
children:—what father does not correct his son? what son does not his
father discipline? And yet he seems to be fierce <span
id="fr_2386"></span>[2387](#fn_2386) with him. It is the fierceness of
love, the fierceness of charity: a sort of fierceness without gall after
the manner of the dove, not of the raven. Whence it came into my mind,
my brethren, to tell you, that those violaters of charity are they that
have made the schism: as they hate charity itself, so they hate also the
dove. But the dove convicts them: it comes forth from heaven, the
heavens open, and it abideth on the head of the Lord. Wherefore this?
That John may hear, “This is He that baptizeth.” <span
id="fr_2387"></span>[2388](#fn_2387) Away, ye robbers; away, ye invaders
of the possession of Christ! On your own possessions, where ye will
needs be lords, ye have dared to fix the titles of the great Owner. He
recognizes His own titles; He vindicates to Himself His own possession.
He does not cancel the titles, but enters in and takes possession. So in
one that comes to the Catholic Church, his baptism is not cancelled,
that the title of the commander <span
id="fr_2388"></span>[2389](#fn_2388) be not cancelled: but what is done
in the Catholic Church? The title is acknowledged; the Owner enters in
under His own titles, where the robber was entering in under titles not
his own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2349"></span>[501:2350](1070138.htm#fr_2349) <span
id="iv.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p4"></span> *Litatorem*.

<span id="fn_2350"></span>[501:2351](1070138.htm#fr_2350) <span
id="iv.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p6"></span> *Jussio Dei*: so the <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.x-p6.1"></span>mss.</span> but the printed copies, *visio Dei*.
<span class="c10"><span id="iv.x-p6.2"></span>Ben.</span> (Bodl. 455,
and Laud. 116, “*visio*;” Bodl. 813, so with “*jussio*” over the line;
the rest “*jussio*.”)

<span id="fn_2351"></span>[501:2352](1070138.htm#fr_2351) <span
id="iv.x-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p7"></span> [Isa. lxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004)<span id="iv.x-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2352"></span>[501:2353](1070138.htm#fr_2352) <span
id="iv.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p8"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="iv.x-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2353"></span>[501:2354](1070138.htm#fr_2353) <span
id="iv.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p9"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="iv.x-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2354"></span>[502:2355](1070138.htm#fr_2354) <span
id="iv.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p11"></span> [1 John iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#004)<span id="iv.x-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2355"></span>[502:2356](1070138.htm#fr_2355) <span
id="iv.x-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p12"></span> *Solvit*.

<span id="fn_2356"></span>[502:2357](1070138.htm#fr_2356) <span
id="iv.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p13"></span> [John xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013)<span id="iv.x-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2357"></span>[502:2358](1070138.htm#fr_2357) <span
id="iv.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p15"></span> [1 John iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#005)<span id="iv.x-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2358"></span>[502:2359](1070138.htm#fr_2358) <span
id="iv.x-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p16"></span> [Matt.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#015)<span id="iv.x-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2359"></span>[502:2360](1070138.htm#fr_2359) <span
id="iv.x-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p17"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="iv.x-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2360"></span>[502:2361](1070138.htm#fr_2360) <span
id="iv.x-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p19"></span> [1 John iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#006)<span id="iv.x-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2361"></span>[502:2362](1070138.htm#fr_2361) <span
id="iv.x-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p20"></span> [1 John iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007)<span id="iv.x-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2362"></span>[502:2363](1070138.htm#fr_2362) <span
id="iv.x-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p21"></span> [1 John iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007)<span id="iv.x-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2363"></span>[503:2364](1070138.htm#fr_2363) <span
id="iv.x-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p22"></span> [1 John
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#008)<span id="iv.x-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2364"></span>[503:2365](1070138.htm#fr_2364) <span
id="iv.x-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p23"></span> *Deus dilectio est*: Augustin here expounds
it, “Love is God;” it is “of God” and “is God,” (as “the Word was *with
God* and *was God*:”) this is clear from sec. 6 and Hom viii. 14, “For
He has not hesitated to say, *Deus charitas est*, Charity is God.” In
the theological exposition *de Trin*. xv. 27, he takes it in the usual
sense, “God is Love” (as “God is Spirit”). In the Greek the proposition
is not convertible, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x-p23.1"></span>ἀγάπη</span> being marked as the predicate by the
absence of the article while <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x-p23.2"></span> θεὸς</span> has it: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x-p23.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x-p23.4"></span>θεὸς ἀγάπη ἐστιν</span>.

<span id="fn_2365"></span>[503:2366](1070138.htm#fr_2365) <span
id="iv.x-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p26"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="iv.x-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2366"></span>[503:2367](1070138.htm#fr_2366) <span
id="iv.x-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p27"></span> [Prov.
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#017)<span id="iv.x-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2367"></span>[503:2368](1070138.htm#fr_2367) <span
id="iv.x-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p28"></span> [1 Sam.
xix](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#000)<span id="iv.x-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2368"></span>[503:2369](1070138.htm#fr_2368) <span
id="iv.x-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p29"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)<span id="iv.x-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2369"></span>[503:2370](1070138.htm#fr_2369) <span
id="iv.x-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p30"></span> [Ezek. xxxvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#020)<span id="iv.x-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2370"></span>[503:2371](1070138.htm#fr_2370) <span
id="iv.x-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p32"></span> [1 John iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#009)<span id="iv.x-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2371"></span>[503:2372](1070138.htm#fr_2371) <span
id="iv.x-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p33"></span> [John xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013)<span id="iv.x-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2372"></span>[504:2373](1070138.htm#fr_2372) <span
id="iv.x-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p34"></span> [Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="iv.x-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2373"></span>[504:2374](1070138.htm#fr_2373) <span
id="iv.x-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p35"></span> [Gal. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span id="iv.x-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2374"></span>[504:2375](1070138.htm#fr_2374) <span
id="iv.x-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p36"></span> *In proditione*.

<span id="fn_2375"></span>[504:2376](1070138.htm#fr_2375) <span
id="iv.x-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p38"></span> *Sævientem*.

<span id="fn_2376"></span>[504:2377](1070138.htm#fr_2376) <span
id="iv.x-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p40"></span> [1 John
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010)<span id="iv.x-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2377"></span>[504:2378](1070138.htm#fr_2377) <span
id="iv.x-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p41"></span> [1 John iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#011)<span id="iv.x-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2378"></span>[504:2379](1070138.htm#fr_2378) <span
id="iv.x-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p43"></span> [1 John iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#012)<span id="iv.x-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2379"></span>[504:2380](1070138.htm#fr_2379) <span
id="iv.x-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p44"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="iv.x-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2380"></span>[505:2381](1070138.htm#fr_2380) <span
id="iv.x-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p45"></span> [Ps. xli.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001)<span id="iv.x-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2381"></span>[505:2382](1070138.htm#fr_2381) <span
id="iv.x-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p46"></span> [Luke viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#008)<span id="iv.x-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2382"></span>[505:2383](1070138.htm#fr_2382) <span
id="iv.x-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p47"></span> *Anaglyphum*.

<span id="fn_2383"></span>[505:2384](1070138.htm#fr_2383) <span
id="iv.x-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p49"></span> Ep. cliii. 17<span id="iv.x-p49.1"></span>,
c. litt.; Petil. ii. 67: Serm. clxxi. 5.

<span id="fn_2384"></span>[505:2385](1070138.htm#fr_2384) <span
id="iv.x-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p50"></span> *Sævis*.

<span id="fn_2385"></span>[505:2386](1070138.htm#fr_2385) <span
id="iv.x-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p51"></span> Hom. in Ev. vi. p. 82; [Matt. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016)<span id="iv.x-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2386"></span>[505:2387](1070138.htm#fr_2386) <span
id="iv.x-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p52"></span> *Sævire*.

<span id="fn_2387"></span>[505:2388](1070138.htm#fr_2387) <span
id="iv.x-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p53"></span> [John i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033)<span id="iv.x-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2388"></span>[505:2389](1070138.htm#fr_2388) <span
id="iv.x-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p54"></span> \[“Captain (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x-p54.1"></span>ἀςχήζος</span>) of their salvation.” [Heb. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010)<span
id="iv.x-p54.2"></span>.—J.H.M.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VIII](1070139)
