[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070132)  [Next](1070134) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>Homily II.</span>

<span id="iv.v-p2"></span><span id="iv.v-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iv.v-p2.2"></span>1 John II. 12</span>–<span
class="c10"><span id="iv.v-p2.3"></span>17</span>

<span id="iv.v-p3"></span>“I write unto you, little children, because
your sins are forgiven through His name. I write unto you, fathers,
because ye have known Him that is from the beginning. I write unto you,
young men, because ye have overcome the wicked one. I write unto you,
children, because ye have known the Father. I write <span
id="fr_2068"></span>[2069](#fn_2068) unto you, fathers, because ye have
known Him that is from the beginning. I write unto you, young men,
because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have
overcome the wicked one. Love not the world, neither the things that are
in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not
in him. For all that is in the world, is the lust of the flesh, and the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, which is not of the Father, but
is of the world. And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but
he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever (even as God also abideth
for ever).

<span id="iv.v-p5"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.v-p5.1"></span>All</span> things that are read from the Holy
Scriptures in order to our instruction and salvation, it behoves us to
hear with earnest heed. Yet most of all must those things be commended
to our memory, which are of most force against heretics; whose insidious
designs cease not to circumvent all that are weaker and more negligent.
Remember that our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ both died for us, and
rose again; died, to wit, for our offenses, rose again for our
justification. <span id="fr_2069"></span>[2070](#fn_2069) Even as ye
have just heard concerning the <span id="page_470">p. 470</span> <span
id="iv.v-Page_470"></span>two disciples whom He met with in the way, how
“their eyes were holden that they should not know Him:” <span
id="fr_2070"></span>[2071](#fn_2070) and He found them despairing of the
redemption that was in Christ, and deeming that now He had suffered and
was dead as a man, not accounting that as Son of God He ever liveth; and
deeming too that He was so dead in the flesh as not to come to life
again, but just as one of the prophets: as those of you who were
attentive have just now heard their own words. Then “He opened to them
the Scriptures, beginning at Moses,” and going through all the prophets,
showing them that all He had suffered had been foretold, lest they
should be more staggered if the Lord should rise again, and the more
fail to believe Him, if these things had not been told before concerning
Him. For the firmness of faith is in this, that all things which came to
pass in Christ were foretold. The disciples, then, knew Him not, save
“in the breaking of bread.” And truly he that eateth and drinketh not
judgment to himself in the breaking of bread doth know Christ.  <span
id="fr_2071"></span>[2072](#fn_2071) Afterward also those eleven
“thought they saw a spirit.” He gave Himself to be handled by them, who
also gave Himself to be crucified; to be crucified by enemies, to be
handled by friends: yet the Physician of all, both of the ungodliness of
those, and of the unbelief of these. For ye heard when the Acts of the
Apostles were read, how many thousands of Christ’s slayers
believed. <span id="fr_2072"></span>[2073](#fn_2072) If those believed
afterwards who had killed, should not those believe who for a little
while doubted? And yet even in regard of them, (a thing which ye ought
especially to observe, and to commit to your memory, because that which
shall make us strong against insidious errors, God has been pleased to
put in the Scriptures, against which no man dares to speak, who in any
sort wishes to seem a Christian), when He had given Himself to be
handled by them, that did not suffice Him, but He would also confirm by
means of the Scriptures the heart of them that believe: for He looked
forward to us who should be afterwards; seeing that in Him we have
nothing that we can handle, but have that which we may read. For if
those believed only because they held and handled, what shall we do?
Now, Christ is ascended into heaven; He is not to come save at the end,
to judge the quick and the dead. Whereby shall we believe, but by that
whereby it was His will that even those who handled Him should be
confirmed? For He opened to them the Scriptures and showed them that it
behoved Christ to suffer, and that all things should be fulfilled which
were written of Him in the Law of Moses, and the Prophets, and the
Psalms. He embraced in His discourse the whole ancient text of the
Scriptures. All that there is of those former Scriptures tells of
Christ; but only if it find ears. He also “opened their understanding
that they might understand the Scriptures.” Whence we also must pray for
this, that He would open our understanding.

<span id="iv.v-p10"></span>2. But what did the Lord show written of Him
in the Law of Moses, and the Prophets, and the Psalms? What did He show?
Let Himself say. The evangelist has put this briefly, that we might know
what in all that great compass of the Scriptures we ought to believe and
to understand. Certainly there are many pages, and many books; the
contents of them all is this which the Lord briefly spake to His
disciples. What is this? That “it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise
again the third day.” Thou hast it now concerning the Bridegroom, that
“it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise again:” the Bridegroom has
been set forth to us. Concerning the Bride, let us see what He saith;
that thou, when thou knowest the Bridegroom and the Bride, mayest not
without reason come to the marriage. For every celebration is a
celebration of marriage: the Church’s nuptials are celebrated. The
King’s Son is about to marry a wife, and that King’s Son is Himself a
King: and the guests frequenting the marriage are themselves the Bride.
Not, as in a carnal marriage, some are guests, and another is she that
is married; in the Church they that come as guests, if they come to good
purpose, become the Bride. For all the Church is Christ’s Bride, of
which the beginning and first fruits is the flesh of Christ: there was
the Bride joined to the Bridegroom in the flesh. With good reason when
He would betoken that same flesh, He brake bread, and with good reason
“in the breaking of bread,” the eyes “of the disciples were opened, and
they knew Him.” Well then, what did the Lord say was written of Him in
the Law and Prophets and Psalms? That “it behoved Christ to suffer.” Had
He not added, “and to rise again,” well might those mourn whose eyes
were holden; but “to rise again” is also foretold. And wherefore this?
Why did it behove Christ to suffer and to rise again? Because of that
Psalm which we especially commended to your attention on the fourth day,
the first station, of last week. <span
id="fr_2073"></span>[2074](#fn_2073) Why did it behove <span
id="page_471">p. 471</span> <span id="iv.v-Page_471"></span>Christ to
suffer and to rise again? For this reason: “All the ends of the earth
shall be reminded and converted unto the Lord, and all the kindreds of
the nations shall worship before Him.” <span
id="fr_2074"></span>[2075](#fn_2074) For that ye may know that it
behoved Christ to suffer and to rise again; in this place also what hath
He added, that after setting forth the Bridegroom He might also set
forth the Bride? “And that there be preached,” saith He, “in His name,
repentance and remission of sins throughout all nations, beginning at
Jerusalem.” Ye have heard, brethren; hold it fast. Let no man doubt
concerning the Church, that it is “throughout all nations:” let no man
doubt that it began at Jerusalem, and hath filled all nations. We know
the field where the Vine is planted: but when it is grown we know it
not, because it has taken up the whole. Whence did it begin? “At
Jerusalem.” Whither has it come? To “all nations.” A few remain: it
shall possess all. In the mean time, while it is taking possession of
all, it has seemed good to the Husbandman to cut off some unprofitable
branches, and they have made heresies and schisms. Let not the branches
that are cut off induce you to be cut off: rather exhort ye them that
are cut off that they be grafted in again. It is manifest that Christ
hath suffered, is risen again, and is ascended into heaven: made
manifest also is the Church, because there is “preached in His name
repentance and remission of sins throughout all nations.” Whence did it
begin? “Beginning at Jerusalem.” The man hears this; foolish and vain,
and (how, shall I express it?) worse than blind! so great a mountain,
and he does not see it; a candle set upon a candlestick, and he shuts
his eyes against it!

<span id="iv.v-p13"></span>3. When we say to them, If ye be Catholic
Christians, communicate with that Church from which the Gospel is spread
abroad over the whole earth: communicate with that Jerusalem: <span
id="fr_2075"></span>[2076](#fn_2075) when this we say to them, they make
answer to us, we do not communicate with that city where our King was
slain, where our Lord was slain: as though they hate the city where our
Lord was slain. The Jews slew Him whom they found on earth, these
scorn <span id="fr_2076"></span>[2077](#fn_2076) Him that sitteth in
heaven! Which are the worse; those who despised Him because they thought
Him man, or those who scorn the sacraments of Him whom now they confess
to be God? But they hate, forsooth, the city in which their Lord was
slain! Pious men, and merciful! they much grieve that Christ was slain,
and in men they slay Christ! But He loved that city, and pitied it: from
it He bade the preaching of Him begin, “beginning at Jerusalem.” He made
there the beginning of the preaching of His name: and thou shrinkest
back with horror from having communion with that city! <span
id="fr_2077"></span>[2078](#fn_2077) No marvel that being cut off thou
hatest the root. What said He to His disciples? “Sit ye still in the
city, because I send my promise <span
id="fr_2078"></span>[2079](#fn_2078) upon you.” Behold what the city is
that they hate! Haply they would love it, if Christ’s murderers dwelt in
it. For it is manifest that all Christ’s murderers, *i.e.*, the Jews,
are expelled from that city. <span id="fr_2079"></span>[2080](#fn_2079)
That which had in it them that were fierce against Christ, hath now them
that adore Christ. Therefore do these men hate it, because Christians
are in it. There was it His will that His disciples should tarry, and
there that He should send to them the Holy Ghost. Where had the Church
its commencement, but where the Holy Ghost came from heaven, and filled
the hundred and twenty sitting in one place? That number twelve was made
tenfold. They sat, an hundred and twenty persons, and the Holy Ghost
came, “and filled the whole place, and there came a sound, as it were
the rushing of a mighty wind, and there were cloven tongues like as of
fire.” Ye have heard the Acts of the Apostles: this was the lesson read
today: <span id="fr_2080"></span>[2081](#fn_2080) “They began to speak
with tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance.” And all who were on the
spot, Jews who were come from divers nations, recognised each his own
tongue, and marvelled that those unlearned and ignorant men had on the
sudden learned not one or two tongues, but the tongues of all nations
whatsoever. There, then, where all tongues sounded, there was it
betokened that all tongues should believe. But these men, who much love
Christ, and therefore refuse to communicate with the city which killed
Christ, so honor Christ as to affirm that He is left to two tongues, the
Latin and the Punic, *i.e.* African. Christ possess only two tongues!
For there are but these two tongues on the side of Donatus, more they
have not. Let us awake, my brethren, let us rather see the gift of the
Spirit of God, and let us believe the things spoken before concerning
Him, and let us see fulfilled the things spoken before in the Psalm:
“There are neither speeches nor discourses, <span
id="fr_2081"></span>[2082](#fn_2081) but their voices are heard among
them.” <span id="fr_2082"></span>[2083](#fn_2082) And lest haply the
case <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="iv.v-Page_472"></span>be so that the tongues themselves came to one
place, and not rather that the gift of Christ came to all tongues, hear
what follows: “Into all the earth is their sound gone out, and unto the
ends of the world their words.” Wherefore this? Because “in the sun hath
He set His tabernacle,” *i.e.,* in the open light. His tabernacle, His
flesh: His tabernacle, His Church: “in the sun” it is set; not in the
night, but in the day. But why do those not acknowledge it? Return to
the lesson at the place where it ended yesterday, and see why they do
not acknowledge it: “He that hateth his brother, walketh in darkness,
and knoweth not whither he goeth, because the darkness hath blinded his
eyes.” For us then, let us see what follows, and not be in darkness. How
shall we not be in darkness? If we love the brethren. How is it proved
that we love the brotherhood? By this, that we do not rend unity, that
we hold fast charity.

<span id="iv.v-p22"></span>4. “I write unto you, little children,
because your sins are forgiven you through His name.” <span
id="fr_2083"></span>[2084](#fn_2083) Therefore, “little children,” <span
id="fr_2084"></span>[2085](#fn_2084) because in forgiveness of sins ye
have your birth. But through whose name are sins forgiven? Through
Augustin’s? No, therefore neither through the name of Donatus. Be it thy
concern to see who is Augustin, or who Donatus: no, not through the name
of Paul, not through the name of Peter. For to them that divided unto
themselves the Church, and out of unity essayed to make parties, the
mother charity in the apostle travailing in birth with her little ones,
exposeth her own bowels, with words doth as it were rend her breasts,
bewaileth her children whom she seeth borne out dead, recalleth unto the
one Name them that would needs make them many names, repelleth them from
the love of her that Christ may be loved, and saith, “Was Paul crucified
for you? Or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?” <span
id="fr_2085"></span>[2086](#fn_2085) What saith he? “I would not that ye
be mine, that so ye may be with me: be ye with me; all we are His who
died for us, who was crucified for us”: whence here also it is said,
“Your sins are forgiven you through His name,” not through the name of
any man.

<span id="iv.v-p26"></span>5. “I write unto you, fathers.” <span
id="fr_2086"></span>[2087](#fn_2086) Why first sons? “Because your sins
are forgiven you through His name,” and ye are regenerated into a new
life, therefore sons. Why fathers? “Because ye have known Him that is
from the beginning:” for the beginning hath relation unto fatherhood.
Christ new in flesh, but ancient in Godhead. How ancient think we? how
many years old? Think we, of greater age <span
id="fr_2087"></span>[2088](#fn_2087) than His mother? Assuredly of
greater age than His mother, for “all things were made by Him.” <span
id="fr_2088"></span>[2089](#fn_2088) If all things, then did the Ancient
make the very mother of whom the New should be born. Was He, think we,
before His mother only? Yea, and before His mother’s ancestors is His
antiquity. The ancestor of His mother was Abraham; and the Lord saith,
“Before Abraham I am.” <span id="fr_2089"></span>[2090](#fn_2089) Before
Abraham, say we? The heaven and earth, ere man was, were made. Before
these was the Lord, nay rather also is. For right well He saith, not,
Before Abraham I was, but, “Before Abraham <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.v-p30.2"></span>I Am</span>.” For that of which one says, “was,”
is not; and that of which one says, “will be,” is not yet: He knoweth
not other than to be. As God, He knoweth “to be:” “was,” and “will be,”
He knoweth not. It is one day there, but a day that is for ever and
ever. That day yesterday and tomorrow do not set in the midst between
them: for when the ‘yesterday’ is ended, the ‘to-day’ begins, to be
finished by the coming ‘tomorrow.’ That one day there is a day without
darkness, without night, without spaces, without measure, without hours.
Call it what thou wilt: if thou wilt, it is a day; if thou wilt, a year;
if thou wilt, years. For it is said of this same, “And thy years shall
not fail.”  <span id="fr_2090"></span>[2091](#fn_2090) But when is it
called a day? When it is said to the Lord, “To-day have I begotten
Thee.” <span id="fr_2091"></span>[2092](#fn_2091) From the eternal
Father begotten, from eternity begotten, in eternity begotten: with no
beginning, no bound, no space of breadth; because He is what is, because
Himself is “He that Is.” This His name He told to Moses: “Thou shalt say
unto them, <span class="c10"><span id="iv.v-p32.2"></span>He that
Is</span> hath sent me unto you.” <span
id="fr_2092"></span>[2093](#fn_2092) Why speak then of “before Abraham”?
why, before Noe? why, before Adam? Hear the Scripture: “Before the
day-star have I begotten Thee.” <span
id="fr_2093"></span>[2094](#fn_2093) In fine, before heaven and earth.
Wherefore? Because “all things were made by Him, and without Him was
nothing made.” <span id="fr_2094"></span>[2095](#fn_2094) By this know
ye the “fathers:” for they become fathers by acknowledging “That which
is from the beginning.”

<span id="iv.v-p36"></span>6. “I write unto you, young men.” There are
sons, are fathers, are young men: sons, because begotten; fathers,
because they acknowledge the Beginning; why young men? “Because ye have
overcome the wicked one.” In the sons, birth: in the fathers, antiquity:
in the young men, strength. If the wicked one is “overcome” by the young
men, he <span id="page_473">p. 473</span> <span
id="iv.v-Page_473"></span>fights with us. Fights, but not
conquers. <span id="fr_2095"></span>[2096](#fn_2095) Wherefore? Because
we are strong, or because He is strong in us who in the hands of the
persecutors was found weak? He hath made us strong, who resisted not His
persecutors. “For He was crucified of weakness, but He liveth by the
power of God.” <span id="fr_2096"></span>[2097](#fn_2096)

<span id="iv.v-p39"></span>7. “I write <span
id="fr_2097"></span>[2098](#fn_2097) unto you, <span
id="fr_2098"></span>[2099](#fn_2098) children.” <span
id="fr_2099"></span>[2100](#fn_2099) Whence children? “Because ye have
known the Father. I write unto you fathers:” he enforceth this, and
repeateth, <span id="fr_2100"></span>[2101](#fn_2100) “Because ye have
known Him that is from the beginning.” Remember that ye are fathers: if
ye forget “Him that is from the beginning,” ye have lost your
fatherhood. “I write unto you, young men.” Again and again consider that
ye are young men: fight, that ye may overcome: overcome, that ye may be
crowned: be lowly, that ye fall not in the fight. “I write unto you,
young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you,
and ye have overcome the wicked one.”

<span id="iv.v-p44"></span>8. All these things, my brethren,—“because we
have known That which is from the beginning, because we are strong,
because we have known the Father,”—do all these, while they in a manner
commend <span id="fr_2101"></span>[2102](#fn_2101) knowledge, not
commend charity? If we have known, let us love: for knowledge without
charity saveth not. “Knowledge <span
id="fr_2102"></span>[2103](#fn_2102) puffeth up, charity
edifieth.” <span id="fr_2103"></span>[2104](#fn_2103) If ye have a mind
to confess and not love, ye begin to be like the demons. The demons
confessed the Son of God, and said, “What have we to do with
Thee?” <span id="fr_2104"></span>[2105](#fn_2104) and were repulsed.
Confess and embrace. For those feared for their iniquities; love ye Him
that forgiveth your iniquities. But how can we love God, if we love the
world? He prepareth us therefore to be inhabited by charity. <span
id="fr_2105"></span>[2106](#fn_2105) There are two loves: of the world,
and of God: if the love of the world inhabit, there is no way for the
love of God to enter in: let the love of the world make way, and the
love of God inhabit; let the better have place. Thou lovedst the world:
love not the world: when thou hast emptied thine heart of earthly love,
thou shalt drink in love Divine: and thenceforth beginneth charity to
inhabit thee, from which can nothing of evil proceed. Hear ye therefore
his words, how he goes to work in the manner of one that makes a
clearance. He comes upon the hearts of men as a field that he would
occupy: but in what state does he find it? If he finds a wood, he roots
it up; if he finds the field cleared, he plants it. He would plant a
tree there, charity. And what is the wood he would root up? Love of the
world. Hear him, the rooter up of the wood! “Love not the world,” (for
this comes next,) “neither the things that are in the world; if any man
love the world, the <span id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106) love of
the Father is not in him.” <span id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107)

<span id="iv.v-p52"></span>9. Ye have heard that “if any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him.” Let not any say in his
heart that this is false, brethren: God saith it; by the Apostle the
Holy Ghost hath spoken; nothing more true: “If any man love the world,
the love of the Father is not in him.” Wouldest thou have the Father’s
love, that thou mayest be joint-heir with the Son? Love not the world.
Shut out the evil love of the world, that thou mayest be filled with
 <span id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108) the love of God. Thou art a
vessel; but as yet thou art full. Pour out what thou hast, that thou
mayest receive what thou hast not. Certainly, <span
id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109) our brethren are now born again of
water and of the Spirit: we also some years ago were born again of water
and of the Spirit. Good is it for us that we love not the world, lest
the sacraments remain in us unto damnation, not as means of
strengthening <span id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110) unto salvation.
That which strengthens unto salvation is, to have the root of charity,
to have the “power of godliness,” not “the form” only. <span
id="fr_2111"></span>[2112](#fn_2111) Good is the form, holy the form:
but what avails the form, if it hold not the root? The branch that is
cut off, is it not cast into the fire? Have the form, but in the root.
But in what way are ye rooted so that ye be not rooted up? By holding
charity, as saith the Apostle Paul, “rooted and grounded in
charity.” <span id="fr_2112"></span>[2113](#fn_2112) How shall charity
be rooted there, amid the overgrown wilderness of the love of the world?
Make clear riddance of the woods. A mighty seed ye are about to put in:
let there not be that in the field which shall choke the seed. These are
the uprooting words which he hath said: “Love not the world, neither the
things that <span id="page_474">p. 474</span> <span
id="iv.v-Page_474"></span>are in the world. If any man love the world,
the love of the Father is not in him.” <span
id="fr_2113"></span>[2114](#fn_2113)

<span id="iv.v-p59"></span>10. “For all that is in the world, is <span
id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114) the lust of the flesh, and the lust
of the eyes, and the pride <span id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115) of
life,” <span id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116) three things he hath
said, which <span id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117) are not of the
Father, but are of the world. And the world passeth away, and the lust
thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever, even as He
abideth for ever.” <span id="fr_2118"></span>[2119](#fn_2118) Why am I
not to love what God made? What wilt thou? Whether wilt thou love the
things of time, and pass away with time; or not love the world, and live
to eternity with God? The river of temporal things hurries one along:
but like a tree sprung up beside the river is our Lord Jesus
Christ. <span id="fr_2119"></span>[2120](#fn_2119) He assumed flesh,
died, rose again, ascended into heaven. It was His will to plant
Himself, in a manner, beside the river of the things of time. Art thou
rushing down the stream to the headlong deep? Hold fast the tree. Is
love of the world whirling thee on? Hold fast Christ. For thee He became
temporal, that thou mightest become eternal; because He also in such
sort became temporal, that He remained still eternal. Something was
added to Him from time, not anything went from His eternity. But thou
wast born temporal, and by sin wast made temporal: thou wast made
temporal by sin, He was made temporal by mercy in remitting sins. How
great the difference, when two are in a prison, between the criminal and
him that visits him! For upon a time a person comes to his friend and
enters in to visit him, and both seem to be in prison; but they differ
by a wide distinction. The one, his cause presses down: the other,
humanity has brought thither. So in this our mortal state, we were held
fast by our guiltiness, He in mercy came down: He entered in unto the
captive, a Redeemer not an oppressor. The Lord for us shed His blood,
redeemed us, changed our hope. As yet we bear the mortality of the
flesh, and take the future immortality upon trust: and on the sea we are
tossed by the waves, but we have the anchor of hope already fixed upon
the land.

<span id="iv.v-p66"></span>11. But let us “not love the world, neither
the things that are in the world. For the things that are in the world,
are the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life.” These three are they: lest haply any man say, “The things that
are in the world, God made: *i.e.* heaven and earth, the sea: the sun,
the moon, the stars, all the garniture of the heavens. What is the
garniture of the sea? all creeping things. What of the earth? animals,
trees, flying creatures. These are ‘in the world,’ God made them. Why
then am I not to love what God hath made?” Let the Spirit of God be in
thee, that thou mayest see that all these things are good: but woe to
thee if thou love the things made, and forsake the Maker of them! Fair
are they to thee: but how much fairer He that formed them! Mark well,
beloved. For by similitudes ye may be instructed: lest Satan steal upon
you, saying what he is wont to say, Take your enjoyment in the creature
of God; wherefore made He those things but for your enjoyment? And men
drink themselves drunken, and perish, and forget their own Creator:
while not temperately but lustfully they use the things created, the
Creator is despised. Of such saith the apostle: “They worshipped and
served the creature rather than the Creator, Who is blessed for
ever.” <span id="fr_2120"></span>[2121](#fn_2120) God doth not forbid
thee to love <span id="fr_2121"></span>[2122](#fn_2121) these things,
howbeit, not to <span id="fr_2122"></span>[2123](#fn_2122) set thine
affections upon them for blessedness, but to approve and praise them to
this end, that thou mayest love thy Creator. In the same manner, my
brethren, as if a bridegroom should make a ring for his bride, and she
having received the ring, should love it more than she loves the
bridegroom who made the ring for her: would not her soul be found guilty
of adultery in the very gift of the bridegroom, albeit she did but love
what the bridegroom gave her? By all means let her love what the
bridegroom gave: yet should she say, “This ring is enough for me, I do
not wish to see his face now:” what sort of woman would she be? Who
would not detest such folly? who not pronounce her guilty of an
adulterous mind? Thou lovest gold in place of the man, lovest a ring in
place of the bridegroom: if this be in thee, that thou lovest a ring in
place of thy bridegroom, and hast no wish to see thy bridegroom; that he
has given thee an earnest, serves not to pledge thee to him, but to turn
away thy heart from him! For this the bridegroom gives earnest, that in
his earnest he may himself be loved. Well then, God gave thee all these
things: love Him that made them. There is more that He would fain give
thee, that is, His very Self that made these things. But if thou love
these—what though God made them—and neglect the Creator and love the
world; shall not thy love be accounted adulterous? <span
id="fr_2123"></span>[2124](#fn_2123)

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span> <span id="iv.v-Page_475"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p71"></span>12. For “the world” is the appellation given
not only to this fabric which God made heaven and earth, the sea, things
visible and invisible: but the inhabitants of the world are called the
world, just as we call a “house” both the walls and them that inhabit
therein. And sometimes we praise a house, and find fault with the
inhabitants. For we say, A good house; because it is marbled and
beautifully <span id="fr_2124"></span>[2125](#fn_2124) ceiled: and in
another sense we say, A good house: no man there suffers wrong, no acts
of plunder, no acts of oppression, are done there. Now we praise not the
building, but those who dwell within the building: yet we call it
“house,” both this and that. For all lovers of the world, because by
love they inhabit the world, just as those inhabit heaven, whose heart
is on high while in the flesh they walk on earth: I say then, all lovers
of the world are called the world. The same have only these three
things, “lust of the flesh, lust of the eyes, vain glory of life.” For
they lust to eat, drink, cohabit: to use these pleasures. Not surely,
that there is no allowed measure in these things, or that when it is
said, Love not these things, it means that ye are not to eat, or not to
drink, or not to beget children? This is not the thing said. Only, let
there be measure, because of the Creator, that these things may not bind
you by your loving of them: lest ye love that for enjoyment, which ye
ought to have for use. But ye are not put to the proof except when two
things are propounded to you, this or that: Will thou righteousness or
gains? I have not wherewithal to live, have not wherewithal to eat, have
not wherewithal to drink. But what if thou canst not have these but by
iniquity? Is it not better to love that which thou losest not, than to
lose thyself by iniquity? Thou seest the gain of gold, the loss of faith
thou seest not. This then, saith he to us, is “the lust of the flesh,”
*i.e.* the lusting after those things which pertain to the flesh, such
as food, and carnal cohabitation, and all other such like.

<span id="iv.v-p73"></span>13. “And the lust of the eyes:” by “the lust
of the eyes,” he means all curiosity. Now how wide is the scope of
curiosity! This it is that works in spectacles, in theatres, in
sacraments of the devil, in magical arts, in dealings <span
id="fr_2125"></span>[2126](#fn_2125) with darkness: none other than
curiosity. Sometimes it tempts even the servants of God, so that they
wish as it were to work a miracle, to tempt God whether He will hear
their prayers in working of miracles; it is curiosity: this is “lust of
the eyes;” it “is not of the Father.” If God hath given the power, do
the miracle, for He hath put it in thy way to do it: for think not that
those who have not done miracles shall not pertain to the kingdom of
God. When the apostles were rejoicing that the demons were subject to
them, what said the Lord to them? “Rejoice not in this, but rejoice
because your names are written in heaven.” <span
id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126) In that would He have the apostles
to rejoice, wherein thou also rejoicest. Woe to thee truly if thy name
be not written in heaven! Is it woe to thee if thou raise not the dead?
is it woe to thee if thou walk not on the sea? is it woe to thee if thou
cast not out demons? If thou hast received power to do them, use it
humbly, not proudly. For even of certain false prophets the Lord hath
said that “they shall do signs and prodigies.” <span
id="fr_2127"></span>[2128](#fn_2127) Therefore let there be no “ambition
of the world:” *Ambitio sæculi*, is Pride. The man wishes to make much
of himself in his honors: he thinks himself great, whether because of
riches, or because of some power.

<span id="iv.v-p77"></span>14. These three there are, and thou canst
find nothing whereby human cupidity can be tempted, but either by the
lust of the flesh, or the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life. By
these three was the Lord tempted of the devil. <span
id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128) By the lust of the flesh He was
tempted when it was said to Him, “If thou be the Son of God, speak to
these stones that they become bread,” when He hungered after His fast.
But in what way repelled He the tempter, and taught his soldier how to
fight? Mark what He said to him: “Not by bread alone doth man live, but
by every word of God.” He was tempted also by the lust of the eyes
concerning a miracle, when he said to Him, “Cast thyself down: for it is
written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and in their
hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone.” He resisted the tempter, for to do the miracle, would
only have been to seem either to have yielded, or to have done it from
curiosity; for He wrought when He would, as God, howbeit as healing the
weak. For if He had done it then, He might have been thought to wish
only to do a miracle. But lest men should think this, mark what He
answered; and when the like temptation shall happen to thee, say thou
also the same: “Get thee behind me, Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt
not tempt the Lord thy God:” that is, if I do this I shall tempt God. He
said what He would have thee to say. When the enemy suggests to thee,
“What sort of man, what sort of Christian, art thou? As yet hast thou
done one miracle, or by thy prayers have the dead been raised, or hast
thou healed the fevered? if thou wert truly of any moment, thou wouldest
do some miracle:” answer and say: “It is written, Thou shalt not tempt
the Lord thy God:” therefore I will not tempt God, as if I should belong
to God if I do a miracle, and not belong if I do none: and what becomes
then of His words, “Rejoice, because your names are written in heaven”?
By “pride of life” how was the Lord tempted? When he carried Him up to
an high place, and said to Him, “All these will I give thee, if thou
wilt fall down and worship me.” By the loftiness of an earthly kingdom
he wished to tempt the King of all worlds: but the Lord who made heaven
and earth trod the devil under foot. What great matter for the devil to
be conquered by the Lord? Then what did He in the answer He made to the
devil but teach thee the answer He would have thee to make? “It is,
written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou
serve.” Holding these things fast, ye shall not have the concupiscence
of the world: by not having concupiscence of the world, neither shall
the lust of the flesh, nor the lust of the eyes, nor the pride of life,
subjugate you: and ye shall make place for Charity when she cometh, that
ye may love God. Because if love of the world be there, love of God will
not be there. Hold fast rather the love of God, that as God is for ever
and ever, so ye also may remain for ever and ever: because such is each
one as is his love. Lovest thou earth, thou shalt be earth. Lovest thou
God, what shall I say? thou shalt be a god? I darenot say it of myself,
let us hear the Scriptures: “I have said, Ye are gods, and all of you
sons of the Most High.” <span id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129) If
then ye would be gods and sons of the Most High, “Love not the world,
neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him. For all the things that are in the
world, is the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride
of life, which is not of the Father, but is of the world:” <span
id="fr_2130"></span>[2131](#fn_2130) *i.e.* of men, lovers of the world.
“And the world passeth away, and the lusts thereof: but he that doeth
the will of God abideth for ever, even as God also abideth for ever.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2068"></span>[469:2069](1070133.htm#fr_2068) <span
id="iv.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p4"></span> \[Have written, A.V.\]

<span id="fn_2069"></span>[469:2070](1070133.htm#fr_2069) <span
id="iv.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p6"></span> [Rom. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span id="iv.v-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2070"></span>[470:2071](1070133.htm#fr_2070) <span
id="iv.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p7"></span> [Luke xxiv.
13-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#013)<span id="iv.v-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2071"></span>[470:2072](1070133.htm#fr_2071) <span
id="iv.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p8"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)<span id="iv.v-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2072"></span>[470:2073](1070133.htm#fr_2072) <span
id="iv.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p9"></span> [Acts ii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041)<span id="iv.v-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2073"></span>[470:2074](1070133.htm#fr_2073) <span
id="iv.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p11"></span> Tertull. *de Jejun.*, sec. 14; *de Orat.*
sec. 14.

<span id="fn_2074"></span>[471:2075](1070133.htm#fr_2074) <span
id="iv.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p12"></span> [Ps. xxii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027)<span id="iv.v-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2075"></span>[471:2076](1070133.htm#fr_2075) <span
id="iv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p14"></span> S. Aug. *<span id="iv.v-p14.1"></span>Ep. c.
Donat. de Unit. Eccl.* sec. 26.

<span id="fn_2076"></span>[471:2077](1070133.htm#fr_2076) <span
id="iv.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p15"></span> *Supra*, Hom. in Ev. xi. sec. 13.

<span id="fn_2077"></span>[471:2078](1070133.htm#fr_2077) <span
id="iv.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p16"></span> \[The words, “Jerusalem, the city,” the
preacher appears, in this passage, to use interchangeably and sometimes
confusedly for the Church—*e.g.*, “all Christ’s murderers are expelled
from that city,” meaning that such are not in the Church.—J.H.M.\]

<span id="fn_2078"></span>[471:2079](1070133.htm#fr_2078) <span
id="iv.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p17"></span> [Acts
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015), [Acts
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001)<span id="iv.v-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2079"></span>[471:2080](1070133.htm#fr_2079) <span
id="iv.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p18"></span> Enarr. in [Ps.
lxii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#000)<span id="iv.v-p18.1"></span>
sec. 18; lxiv. sec. 1.

<span id="fn_2080"></span>[471:2081](1070133.htm#fr_2080) <span
id="iv.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p19"></span> The Acts of the Apostles were read in the
seven weeks from Easter to Pentecost. *Supra*, Hom. in Ev. vi. sec. 18.

<span id="fn_2081"></span>[471:2082](1070133.htm#fr_2081) <span
id="iv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p20"></span> *Loquelæ nec sermones*.

<span id="fn_2082"></span>[471:2083](1070133.htm#fr_2082) <span
id="iv.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p21"></span> [Ps. xix.
3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003)<span id="iv.v-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2083"></span>[472:2084](1070133.htm#fr_2083) <span
id="iv.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p23"></span> [1 John ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#012)<span id="iv.v-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2084"></span>[472:2085](1070133.htm#fr_2084) <span
id="iv.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p24"></span> *Filioli*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.v-p24.1"></span> τεκνία</span>.

<span id="fn_2085"></span>[472:2086](1070133.htm#fr_2085) <span
id="iv.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p25"></span> [1 Cor. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)<span id="iv.v-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2086"></span>[472:2087](1070133.htm#fr_2086) <span
id="iv.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p27"></span> [1 John ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013)<span id="iv.v-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2087"></span>[472:2088](1070133.htm#fr_2087) <span
id="iv.v-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p28"></span> *Major*.

<span id="fn_2088"></span>[472:2089](1070133.htm#fr_2088) <span
id="iv.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p29"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="iv.v-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2089"></span>[472:2090](1070133.htm#fr_2089) <span
id="iv.v-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p30"></span> [John viii.
58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058)<span id="iv.v-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2090"></span>[472:2091](1070133.htm#fr_2090) <span
id="iv.v-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p31"></span> [Ps. cii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027)<span id="iv.v-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2091"></span>[472:2092](1070133.htm#fr_2091) <span
id="iv.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p32"></span> [Ps. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="iv.v-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2092"></span>[472:2093](1070133.htm#fr_2092) <span
id="iv.v-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p33"></span> [Ex. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span id="iv.v-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2093"></span>[472:2094](1070133.htm#fr_2093) <span
id="iv.v-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p34"></span> [Ps. cx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span id="iv.v-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2094"></span>[472:2095](1070133.htm#fr_2094) <span
id="iv.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p35"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="iv.v-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2095"></span>[473:2096](1070133.htm#fr_2095) <span
id="iv.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p37"></span> *Pugnat, non expugnat*.

<span id="fn_2096"></span>[473:2097](1070133.htm#fr_2096) <span
id="iv.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p38"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span id="iv.v-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2097"></span>[473:2098](1070133.htm#fr_2097) <span
id="iv.v-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p40"></span> Vulg. *scribo* throughout, but some copies
*scripsi*, representing the true reading in the Greek, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.v-p40.1"></span>žγραψα</span>, in the last
clause of v. 13, and in both clauses of v. 14.

<span id="fn_2098"></span>[473:2099](1070133.htm#fr_2098) <span
id="iv.v-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p41"></span> *Pueri*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.v-p41.1"></span> παιδία</span>.

<span id="fn_2099"></span>[473:2100](1070133.htm#fr_2099) <span
id="iv.v-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p42"></span> [1 John
ii.13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013)<span id="iv.v-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2100"></span>[473:2101](1070133.htm#fr_2100) <span
id="iv.v-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p43"></span> The Benedictine editors remark that the
Vulgate does not repeat this clause, *Scribo vobis, patres—a principio
est*, and that it is absent from the Greek. This remark applies to the
Complutensian Greek text, and the edited Latin Vulgate. Of extant Gr.
<span class="c10"><span id="iv.v-p43.1"></span>mss.</span>, only Mill’s
Cod. Basil, 3 (Wetstein, 4), of the 15th century, omits the clause: and
this, as Wetstein reports, not in v. 14, but in the preceding verse,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.v-p43.2"></span>χράφω ὑμῖν,
πατέρες</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.v-p43.3"></span>ἀρχῆς</span>.

<span id="fn_2101"></span>[473:2102](1070133.htm#fr_2101) <span
id="iv.v-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p45"></span> *Cognitionem*.

<span id="fn_2102"></span>[473:2103](1070133.htm#fr_2102) <span
id="iv.v-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p46"></span> *Scientia*.

<span id="fn_2103"></span>[473:2104](1070133.htm#fr_2103) <span
id="iv.v-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p47"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001)<span id="iv.v-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2104"></span>[473:2105](1070133.htm#fr_2104) <span
id="iv.v-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p48"></span> [Matt. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029)<span id="iv.v-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2105"></span>[473:2106](1070133.htm#fr_2105) <span
id="iv.v-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p49"></span> *Sed quomodo poterimus amare Deum, si amamus
mundum? Parat nos ergo inhabitari charitate*, and so Bodl. 813. The ed.
of Erasmus has,—*separat nos a charitate Dei*: “—if we love the world?
It separates us from the charity of God.” And so 3 Oxf. <span
class="c10"><span id="iv.v-p49.1"></span>mss.</span> Ed. Lugdun., *si
amamus mundum? Si amamus mundum, separat nos a charitate Dei. Parat nos
ergo inhabitare charitatem*: “—if we love the world? If we love the
world, it separates, &c. He prepares us therefore to inhabit
charity.”—<span class="c10"><span id="iv.v-p49.2"></span>Ed. Par.</span>

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[473:2107](1070133.htm#fr_2106) <span
id="iv.v-p49.3"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p50"></span> *Dilectio*.

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[473:2108](1070133.htm#fr_2107) <span
id="iv.v-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p51"></span> [1 John ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015)<span id="iv.v-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[473:2109](1070133.htm#fr_2108) <span
id="iv.v-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p53"></span> *Amore Dei*.

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[473:2110](1070133.htm#fr_2109) <span
id="iv.v-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p54"></span> The newly baptized.

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[473:2111](1070133.htm#fr_2110) <span
id="iv.v-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p55"></span> *Firmamenta*.

<span id="fn_2111"></span>[473:2112](1070133.htm#fr_2111) <span
id="iv.v-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p56"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005)<span id="iv.v-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2112"></span>[473:2113](1070133.htm#fr_2112) <span
id="iv.v-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p57"></span> [Eph. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span id="iv.v-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2113"></span>[474:2114](1070133.htm#fr_2113) <span
id="iv.v-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p58"></span> [1 John ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015)<span id="iv.v-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[474:2115](1070133.htm#fr_2114) <span
id="iv.v-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p60"></span> \[“Is,” better omitted; also “which.”\]

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[474:2116](1070133.htm#fr_2115) <span
id="iv.v-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p61"></span> *Ambitio sæculi*.

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[474:2117](1070133.htm#fr_2116) <span
id="iv.v-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p62"></span> [1 John
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#017)<span id="iv.v-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[474:2118](1070133.htm#fr_2117) <span
id="iv.v-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p63"></span> \[“Is,” better omitted; also “which.”\]

<span id="fn_2118"></span>[474:2119](1070133.htm#fr_2118) <span
id="iv.v-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p64"></span> The last clause, *sicut et Deus manet in
æternum*, is peculiar to the Latin authorities, S. Cyprian *ad Quir.* 3,
11, *quomodo et*, &c. and others in Griesbach. It is not received by the
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_2119"></span>[474:2120](1070133.htm#fr_2119) <span
id="iv.v-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p65"></span> [Ps. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003)<span id="iv.v-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2120"></span>[474:2121](1070133.htm#fr_2120) <span
id="iv.v-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p67"></span> [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="iv.v-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2121"></span>[474:2122](1070133.htm#fr_2121) <span
id="iv.v-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p68"></span> *Amare*.

<span id="fn_2122"></span>[474:2123](1070133.htm#fr_2122) <span
id="iv.v-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p69"></span> *Diligere*.

<span id="fn_2123"></span>[474:2124](1070133.htm#fr_2123) <span
id="iv.v-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p70"></span> *Et amaveris mundum; nonne tuus amor
adulterinus æputabitur?—*<span class="c10"><span
id="iv.v-p70.1"></span>mss.</span> *et amaveris mundum, delinquis* (“and
love the world, thou art delinquent”), (and so four in the Bodl.
Library). Edd. Am. Bad. Er. *et amaveris mundum, amittis Creatorem qui
fecit mundum* (“and love the world, thou lettest go the Creator who made
the world.”)—<span class="c10"><span id="iv.v-p70.2"></span>Ben.</span>

<span id="fn_2124"></span>[475:2125](1070133.htm#fr_2124) <span
id="iv.v-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p72"></span> *Laqueata*.

<span id="fn_2125"></span>[475:2126](1070133.htm#fr_2125) <span
id="iv.v-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p74"></span> *Maleficiis*.

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[475:2127](1070133.htm#fr_2126) <span
id="iv.v-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p75"></span> [Luke x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)<span id="iv.v-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2127"></span>[475:2128](1070133.htm#fr_2127) <span
id="iv.v-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p76"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)<span id="iv.v-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[475:2129](1070133.htm#fr_2128) <span
id="iv.v-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p78"></span> [Matt iv.
1-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)<span id="iv.v-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[475:2130](1070133.htm#fr_2129) <span
id="iv.v-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p79"></span> [Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="iv.v-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2130"></span>[475:2131](1070133.htm#fr_2130) <span
id="iv.v-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p80"></span> [1 John ii.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015)<span id="iv.v-p80.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily III](1070134)
