[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070083)  [Next](1070085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lxxxii"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lxxxii-p1.1"></span>Tractate LXXXI.</span>

<span id="iii.lxxxii-p2"></span><span id="iii.lxxxii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxxxii-p2.2"></span>Chapter XV. 4–7</span>.

<span id="iii.lxxxii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxxii-p3.1"></span>Jesus</span> called Himself the vine, and
His disciples the branches, and His Father the husbandman; whereon we
have already discoursed as we were able. But in the present passage,
while still speaking of Himself as the vine, and of His branches, or, in
other words, of the disciples, He said, “Abide in me, and I in you.”
They are not in Him in the same kind of way that He is in them. And yet
both ways tend to their advantage, and not to His. For the relation of
the branches to the vine is such that they contribute nothing to the
vine, but from it derive their own means of life; while that of the vine
to the branches is such that it supplies their vital nourishment, and
receives nothing from them. And so their having Christ abiding in them,
and abiding themselves in Christ, are in both respects advantageous, not
to Christ, but to the disciples. For when the branch is cut off, another
may spring up from the living root; but that which is cut off cannot
live apart from the root.

<span id="iii.lxxxii-p4"></span>2. And then He proceeds to say: “As the
branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more
can ye, except ye abide in me.” A great encomium on grace, my
brethren,—one that will instruct the souls of the humble, and stop the
mouths of the proud. Let those now answer it, if they dare, who,
ignorant of God’s righteousness, and going about to establish their own,
have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God.  <span
id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388) Let the self-complacent answer it,
who think they have no need of God for the performance of good works.
Fight they not against such a truth, those men of corrupt mind,
reprobate concerning the faith, <span
id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389) whose reply is only full of impious
talk, when they say: It is of God that we have our existence as men, but
it is of ourselves that we are righteous? What is it you say, you who
deceive yourselves, and, instead of establishing freewill, cast it
headlong down from the heights of its self-elevation through the empty
regions of presumption into the depths of an ocean grave? Why, your
assertion that man of himself worketh righteousness, *that* is the
height of your self-elation. But the Truth contradicts you, and
declares, “The branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in
the vine.” Away with you now over your giddy precipices, and, without a
spot whereon to take your stand, vapor away at your windy talk. These
are the empty regions of your presumption. But look well at what is
tracking your steps, and, if you have any sense remaining, let your hair
stand on end. For whoever imagines that he is bearing fruit of himself
is not in the vine, and he that is not in the vine is not in Christ, and
he that is not in Christ is not a Christian. Such are the ocean depths
into which you have plunged.

<span id="iii.lxxxii-p7"></span>3. Ponder again and again what the Truth
has still further to say: “I am the vine,” He adds, “ye are the
branches: he that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth
much fruit; for without me ye can do nothing.” For just to keep any from
supposing that the branch can bear at least some little <span
id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span id="iii.lxxxii-Page_346"></span>fruit
of itself, after saying, “the same bringeth forth much fruit,” His next
words are not, Without me ye can do but little, but “ye can do nothing.”
Whether then it be little or much, without Him it is impracticable; for
without Him nothing can be done. For although, when the branch beareth
little fruit, the husbandman purgeth it that it may bring forth more;
yet if it abide not in the vine, and draw its life from the root, it can
bear no fruit whatever of itself. And although Christ would not have
been the vine had He not been man, yet He could not have supplied such
grace to the branches had He not also been God. And just because such
grace is so essential to life, that even death itself ceases to be at
the disposal of free-will, He adds, “If any one abide not in me, he
shall be cast forth as a branch, and wither; and they shall gather him,
and cast him into the fire, and he is burned.” The wood of the vine,
therefore, is in the same proportion the more contemptible if it abide
not in the vine, as it is glorious while so abiding; in fine, as the
Lord likewise says of them in the prophet Ezekiel, when cut off, they
are of no use for any purpose of the husbandman, and can be applied to
no labor of the mechanic. <span id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390) The
branch is suitable only for one of two things, either the vine or the
fire: if it is not in the vine, its place will be in the fire; and that
it may escape the latter, may it have its place in the vine.

<span id="iii.lxxxii-p9"></span>4. “If ye abide in me,” He says, “and my
words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto
you.” For abiding thus in Christ, is there aught they can wish but what
will be agreeable to Christ? So abiding in the Saviour, can they wish
anything that is inconsistent with salvation? Some things, indeed, we
wish because we are in Christ, and other things we desire because still
in this world. For at times, in connection with this our present abode,
we are inwardly prompted to ask what we know not it would be inexpedient
for us to receive. But God forbid that such should be given us if we
abide in Christ, who, when we ask, only does what will be for our
advantage. Abiding, therefore, ourselves in Him, when His words abide in
us we shall ask what we will, and it shall be done unto us. For if we
ask, and the doing follows not, what we ask is not connected with our
abiding in Him, nor with His words which abide in us, but with that
craving and infirmity of the flesh which are not in Him, and have not
His words abiding in them. For to His words, at all events, belongs that
prayer which He taught, and in which we say, “Our Father, who art in
heaven.” <span id="fr_1391"></span>[1392](#fn_1391) Let us only not fall
away from the words and meaning of this prayer in our petitions, and
whatever we ask, it shall be done unto us. For then only may His words
be said to abide in us, when we do what He has commanded us, and love
what He has promised. But when His words abide only in the memory, and
have no place in the life, the branch is not to be accounted as in the
vine, because it draws not its life from the root. It is to this
distinction that the word of Scripture has respect, “and to those that
remember His commandments to do them.” <span
id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392) For many retain them in their
memory only to treat them with contempt, or even to mock at and assail
them. It is not in such as have only some kind of contact, but no
connection, that the words of Christ abide; and to them, therefore, they
will not be a blessing, but a testimony against them; and because they
are present in them without abiding in them, they are held fast by them
for the very purpose of being judged according to them at last.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[345:1389](1070084.htm#fr_1388) <span
id="iii.lxxxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxii-p5"></span> [Rom. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span id="iii.lxxxii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[345:1390](1070084.htm#fr_1389) <span
id="iii.lxxxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxii-p6"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008)<span id="iii.lxxxii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[346:1391](1070084.htm#fr_1390) <span
id="iii.lxxxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxii-p8"></span> [Ezek. xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#005)<span id="iii.lxxxii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[346:1392](1070084.htm#fr_1391) <span
id="iii.lxxxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxii-p10"></span> [Matt. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009)<span id="iii.lxxxii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[346:1393](1070084.htm#fr_1392) <span
id="iii.lxxxii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxii-p11"></span> [Ps. ciii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#018)<span id="iii.lxxxii-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LXXXII](1070085)
