[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ida01)  [Next](ida03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGNEU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Atlantida (L'Atlantide)*, by Pierre Benoit, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

## ATLANTIDA

<span class="smallcaps">Hassi-Inifel, November</span> 8, 1903.

If the following pages are ever to see the light of day it will be
because they have been stolen from me. The delay that I exact before
they shall be disclosed assures me of that. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

As to this disclosure, let no one distrust my aim when I prepare for it,
when I insist upon it. You may believe me when I maintain that no pride
of authorship binds me to these pages. Already I am too far removed from
all such things. Only it is useless that others should enter upon the
path from which I shall not return.

Four o'clock in the morning. Soon the sun will kindle the hamada with
its pink fire. All about me the bordj is asleep. Through the half-open
door of

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

his room I hear André de Saint-Avit breathing quietly, very quietly.

In two days we shall start, he and I. We shall leave the bordj. We shall
penetrate far down there to the South. The official orders came this
morning.

Now, even if I wished to withdraw, it is too late. André and I asked for
this mission. The authorization that I sought, together with him, has at
this moment become an order. The hierarchic channels cleared, the
pressure brought to bear at the Ministry;—and then to be afraid, to
recoil before this adventure! . . .

To be afraid, I said. I know that I am not afraid! One night in the
Gurara, when I found two of my sentinels slaughtered, with the shameful
cross cut of the Berbers slashed across their stomachs,—then I was
afraid. I know what fear is. Just so now, when I gazed into the black
depths, whence suddenly all at once the great red sun will rise, I know
that it is not with fear that I tremble. I feel surging within me the
sacred horror of this mystery, and its irresistible attraction.

Delirious dreams, perhaps. The mad imaginings of a brain surcharged, and
an eye distraught by mirages. The day will come, doubtless, when I shall
reread these pages with an indulgent smile, as a man of fifty is
accustomed to smile when he rereads old letters.

Delirious dreams. Mad imaginings. But these

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

dreams, these imaginings, are dear to me. "Captain de Saint-Avit and
Lieutenant Ferrières," reads the official dispatch, "will proceed to
Tassili to determine the [stratigraphic](errata.htm#0.md) relation of
Albien sandstone and carboniferous limestone. They will, in addition,
profit by any opportunities of determining the possible change of
attitude of the Axdjers towards our penetration, etc." If the journey
should indeed have to do only with such poor things I think that I
should never undertake it.

So I am longing for what I dread. I shall be dejected if I do not find
myself in the presence of what makes me strangely fearful.

In the depths of the valley of Wadi Mia a jackal is barking. Now and
again, when a beam of moonlight breaks in a silver patch through the
hollows of the heat-swollen clouds, making him think he sees the young
sun, a turtle dove moans among the palm trees.

I hear a step outside. I lean out of the window. A shade clad in
luminous black stuff glides over the hard-packed earth of the terrace of
the fortification. A light shines in the electric blackness. A man has
just lighted a cigarette. He crouches, facing southwards. He is smoking.

It is Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, our Targa guide, the man who in three days is
to lead us across the unknown plateaus of the mysterious Imoschaoch,
across the hamadas of black stones, the great dried oases,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the stretches of silver salt, the tawny hillocks, the flat gold dunes
that are crested over, when the "alizé" blows, with a shimmering haze of
pale sand.

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh! He is the man. There recurs to my mind Duveyrier's
tragic phrase, "At the very moment the Colonel was putting his foot in
the stirrup he was felled by a sabre blow." <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) Cegheir-ben-Cheikh! There he is, peacefully
smoking his cigarette, a cigarette from the package that I gave him. . .
. May the Lord forgive me for it.

The lamp casts a yellow light on the paper. Strange fate, which, I never
knew exactly why, decided one day when I was a lad of sixteen that I
should prepare myself for Saint Cyr, and gave me there André de
Saint-Avit as classmate. I might have studied law or medicine. Then I
should be today a respectable inhabitant of a town with a church and
running water, instead of this cotton-clad phantom, brooding with an
unspeakable anxiety over this desert which is about to swallow me.

A great insect has flown in through the window. It buzzes, strikes
against the rough cast, rebounds against the globe of the lamp, and
then, helpless, its wings singed by the still burning candle, drops on
the white paper.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

It is an African May bug, big, black, with spots of livid gray.

I think of the others, its brothers in France, the golden-brown May
bugs, which I have seen on stormy summer evenings projecting themselves
like little particles of the soil of my native countryside. It was there
that as a child I spent my vacations, and later on, my leaves. On my
last leave, through those same meadows, there wandered beside me a
slight form, wearing a thin scarf, because of the evening air, so cool
back there. But now this memory stirs me so slightly that I scarcely
raise my eyes to that dark corner of my room where the light is dimly
reflected by the glass of an indistinct portrait. I realize of how
little consequence has become what had seemed at one time capable of
filling all my life. This plaintive mystery is of no more interest to
me. If the strolling singers of Rolla came to murmur their famous
nostalgic airs under the window of this bordj I know that I should not
listen to them, and if they became insistent I should send them on their
way.

What has been capable of causing this metamorphosis in me? A story, a
legend, perhaps, told, at any rate by one on whom rests the direst of
suspicions.

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh has finished his cigarette. I hear him returning with
slow steps to his mat, in barrack B, to the left of the guard post

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

Our departure being scheduled for the tenth of November, the manuscript
attached to this letter was begun on Sunday, the first, and finished on
Thursday, the fifth of November, 1903.

<span class="smallcaps">Olivier Ferrières</span>,  
Lt. 3rd Spahis.    

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[3:1](ida02.htm#fr_0.md) This letter, together with
the manuscript which accompanies it, the latter in a separate sealed
envelope, was entrusted by Lieutenant Ferrières, of the 3rd Spahis, the
day of the departure of that officer for the Tassili of the Tuareg
(Central Sahara), to Sergeant Chatelain. The sergeant was instructed to
deliver it, on his next leave, to M. Leroux, Honorary Counsel at the
Court of. Appeals at Riom, and Lieutenant Ferrières' nearest relative.
As this magistrate died suddenly before the expiration of the term of
ten years set for the publication of the manuscript here presented,
difficulties arose which have delayed its publication up to the present
date.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[6:1](ida02.htm#fr_1.md) H. Duveyrier, "The Disaster
of the Flatters Mission." Bull. Geol. Soc., 1881.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. A Southern Assignment](ida03.md)
