[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ida16)  [Next](ida18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGNEU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Atlantida (L'Atlantide)*, by Pierre Benoit, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

### CHAPTER XV

#### THE LAMENT OF TANIT-ZERGA

"Arraôu, arraôu."

I roused myself vaguely from the half sleep to which I had finally
succumbed. I half opened my eyes. Immediately I flattened back.

"*Arraôu*."

Two feet from my face was the muzzle of King Hiram, yellow with a
tracery of black. The leopard was helping me to wake up; otherwise he
took little interest, for he yawned; his dark red jaws, beautiful
gleaming white fangs, opened and closed lazily.

At the same moment I heard a burst of laughter. It was little
Tanit-Zerga. She was crouching on a cushion near the divan where I was
stretched out, curiously watching my close interview with the leopard.

"King Hiram was bored," she felt obliged to explain to me. "I brought
him."

"How nice," I growled. "Only tell me, could he not have gone somewhere
else to be amused?"

"He is all alone now," said the girl. "*They* have

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

sent him away. He made too much noise when he played."

These words recalled me to the events of the previous evening.

"If you like, I will make him go away," said Tanit-Zerga.

"No, let him alone."

I looked at the leopard with sympathy. Our common misfortune brought us
together.

I even caressed his rounded forehead. King Hiram showed his contentment
by stretching out at full length and uncurling his great amber claws.
The mat on the floor had much to suffer.

"Galé is here, too," said the little girl.

"Galé! Who may he be?"

At the same time, I saw on Tanit-Zerga's knees a strange animal, about
the size of a big cat, with flat ears, and a long muzzle. Its pale gray
fur was rough.

It was watching me with queer little pink eyes.

"It is my mongoose," explained Tanit-Zerga.

"Come now," I said sharply, "is that all?"

I must have looked so crabbed and ridiculous that Tanit-Zerga began to
laugh. I laughed, too.

"Galé is my friend," she said when she was serious again. "I saved her
life. It was when she was quite little. I will tell you about it some
day. See how good-natured she is."

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

So saying, she dropped the mongoose on my knees.

"It is very nice of you, Tanit-Zerga," I said, "to come and pay me a
visit." I passed my hand slowly over the animal's back.

"What time is it now?"

"A little after nine. See, the sun is already high. Let me draw the
shade."

The room was in darkness. Galé's eyes grew redder. King Hiram's became
green.

"It is very nice of you," I repeated, pursuing my idea. "I see that you
are free to-day. You never came so early before."

A shade passed over the girl's forehead.

"Yes, I am free," she said, almost bitterly.

I looked at Tanit-Zerga more closely. For the first time I realized that
she was beautiful. Her hair, which she wore falling over her shoulders,
was not so much curly as it was gently waving. Her features were of
remarkable fineness: the nose very straight, a small mouth with delicate
lips, a strong chin. She was not black, but copper colored. Her slender
graceful body had nothing in common with the disgusting thick sausages
which the carefully cared for bodies of the blacks become.

A large circle of copper made a heavy decoration around her forehead and
hair. She had four bracelets, still heavier, on her wrists and anklets,
and, for clothing, a green silk tunic, slashed in points, braided with
gold. Green, bronze, gold.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

"You are a Sonrhaï, Tanit-Zerga?" I asked gently.

She replied with almost ferocious pride:

"I am a Sonrhaï."

"Strange little thing," I thought.

Evidently this was a subject on which Tanit-Zerga did not intend the
conversation to turn. I recalled how, almost painfully, she had
pronounced that "they," when she had told me how they had driven away
King Hiram.

"I am a Sonrhaï," she repeated. "I was born at Gâo, on the Niger, the
ancient Sonrhaï capital. My fathers reigned over the great Mandigue
Empire. You need not scorn me because I am here as a slave."

In a ray of sunlight, Gale, seated on his little haunches, washed his
shining mustaches with his forepaws; and King Hiram, stretched out on
the mat, groaned plaintively in his sleep.

"He is dreaming," said Tanit-Zerga, a finger on her lips.

There was a moment of silence. Then she said: "You must be hungry. And I
do not think that you will want to eat with the others."

I did not answer.

"You must eat," she continued. "If you like, I will go get something to
eat for you and me. I will bring King Hiram's and Galé's dinner here,
too. When you are sad, you should not stay alone."

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

And the little green and gold fairy vanished, without waiting for my
answer.

That was how my friendship with Tanit-Zerga began. Each morning she came
to my room with the two beasts. She rarely spoke to me of Antinea, and
when she did, it was always indirectly. The question that she saw
ceaselessly hovering on my lips seemed to be unbearable to her, and I
felt her avoiding all the subjects towards which I, myself, dared not
direct the conversation.

To make sure of avoiding them, she prattled, prattled, prattled, like a
nervous little parokeet.

I was sick and this Sister of Charity in green and bronze silk tended me
with such care as never was before. The two wild beasts, the big and the
little, were there, each side of my couch, and, during my delirium, I
saw their mysterious, sad eyes fixed on me.

In her melodious voice, Tanit-Zerga told me wonderful stories, and among
them, the one she thought most wonderful, the story of her life.

It was not till much later, very suddenly, that I realized how far this
little barbarian had penetrated into my own life. Wherever thou art at
this hour, dear little girl, from whatever peaceful shores thou watchest
my tragedy, cast a look at thy friend, pardon him for not having
accorded thee, from the very first, the gratitude that thou deservedest
so richly.

"I remember from my childhood," she said, "the

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

vision of a yellow and rose-colored sun rising through the morning mists
over the smooth waves of a great river, 'the river where there is
water,' the Niger, it was. . . But you are not listening to me."

"I am listening to you, I swear it, little Tanit-Zerga."

"You are sure I am not wearying you? You want me to go on?"

"Go on, little Tanit-Zerga, go on."

"Well, with my little companions, of whom I was very fond, I played at
the edge of the river where there is water, under the jujube trees,
brothers of the *zeg-zeg*, the spines of which pierced the head of your
prophet and which we call 'the tree of Paradise' because our prophet
told us that under it would live those chosen of Paradise; <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) and which is sometimes so big, so big,
that a horseman cannot traverse its shade in a century.

"There we wove beautiful garlands with mimosa, the pink flowers of the
caper bush and white cockles. Then we threw them in the green water to
ward off evil spirits; and we laughed like mad things when a great
snorting hippopotamus raised his swollen head and we bombarded him in
glee until he had to plunge back again with a tremendous splash.

"That was in the mornings. Then there fell on Gâo the deathlike lull of
the red siesta. When that

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

was finished, we came back to the edge of the river to see the enormous
crocodiles with bronze goggle-eyes creep along little by little, among
the clouds of mosquitoes and day-flies on the banks, and work their way
traitorously into the yellow ooze of the mud flats.

"Then we bombarded them, as we had done the hippopotamus in the morning;
and to fête the sun setting behind the black branches of the
*douldouls*, we made a circle, stamping our feet, then clapping our
hands, as we sang the Sonrhaï hymn.

"Such were the ordinary occupations of free little girls. But you must
not think that we were only frivolous; and I will tell you, if you like,
how I, who am talking to you, I saved a French chieftain who must be
vastly greater than yourself, to judge by the number of gold ribbons he
had on his white sleeves.

"Tell me, little Tanit-Zerga," I said, my eyes elsewhere.

"You have no right to smile," she said a little aggrieved, "and to pay
no attention to me. But never mind! It is for myself that I tell these
things, for the sake of recollection. Above Gâo, the Niger makes a bend.
There is a little promontory in the river, thickly covered with large
gum trees. It was an evening in August and the sun was sinking. Not a
bird in the forest but had gone to rest, motionless until the morning.
Suddenly we heard an unfamiliar

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

noise in the west, boum-boum, boum-boum, boum-baraboum, boum-boum,
growing louder—boum-boum, boum-baraboum—and, suddenly, there was a great
flight of water birds, aigrettes, pelicans, wild ducks and teal, which
scattered over the gum trees, followed by a column of black smoke, which
was scarcely flurried by the breeze that was springing up.

"It was a gunboat, turning the point, sending out a wake that shook the
overhanging bushes on each side of the river. One could see that the
red, white and blue flag on the stern had drooped till it was dragging
in the water, so heavy was the evening.

"She stopped at the little point of land. A small boat was let down,
manned by two native soldiers who rowed, and three chiefs who soon leapt
ashore.

"The oldest, a French *marabout*, with a great white burnous, who knew
our language marvelously, asked to speak to Sheik Sonni-Azkia. When my
father advanced and told him that it was he, the *marabout* told him
that the commandant of the Club at Timbuctoo was very angry, that a mile
from there the gunboat had run on an invisible pile of logs, that she
had sprung a leak and that she could not so continue her voyage towards
Ansango.

"My father replied that the French who protected the poor natives
against the Tuareg were welcome: that it was not from evil design, but
for fish that they had built the barrage, and that he put all

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

the resources of Gâo, including the forge, at the disposition of the
French chief, for repairing the gunboat.

"While they were talking, the French chief looked at me and I looked at
him. He was already middle-aged, tall, with shoulders a little bent, and
blue eyes as clear as the stream whose name I bear.

"'Come here, little one,' he said in his gentle voice.

"'I am the daughter of Sheik Sonni-Azkia, and I do only what I wish,' I
replied, vexed at his informality.

"'You are right,' he answered smiling, 'for you are pretty. Will you
give me the flowers that you have around your neck?'

"It was a great necklace of purple hibiscus. I held it out to him. He
kissed me. The peace was made.

"Meantime, under the direction of my father, the native soldiers and
strong men of the tribe had hauled the gunboat into a pocket of the
river.

"'There is work there for all day to-morrow, Colonel,' said the chief
mechanic, after inspecting the leaks. 'We won't be able to get away
before the day after to-morrow. And, if we're to do that, these lazy
soldiers mustn't loaf on the job.'

"'What an awful bore,' groaned my new friend.

"But his ill-humor did not last long, so ardently did my little
companions and I seek to distract him.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He listened to our
most beautiful songs; and, to thank us, made us taste the good things
that had been brought from the boat for his dinner. He slept in our
great cabin, which my father gave up to him; and for a long time, before
I went to sleep, I looked through the cracks of the cabin where I lay
with my mother, at the lights of the gunboat trembling in red ripples on
the surface of the dark waves.

 

"That night, I had a frightful dream. I saw my friend, the French
officer, sleeping in peace, while a great crow hung croaking above his
head: 'Caw—caw—the shade of the gum trees of Gâo—caw, caw—will avail
nothing to-morrow night—caw, caw—to the white chief nor to his escort.'

"Dawn had scarcely begun, when I went to find the native soldiers. They
were stretched out on the bridge of the gunboat, taking advantage of the
fact that the whites were still sleeping, to do nothing.

"I approached the oldest one and spoke to him with authority:

"'Listen, I saw the black crow in a dream last night. He told me that
the shade of the gum trees of Gâo would be fatal to your chief in the
coming night! . . .'

"'And, as they all remained motionless, stretched out, gazing at the
sky, without even seeming to have heard, I added:

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

"'And to his escort!'

 

It was the hour when the sun was highest, and the Colonel was eating in
the cabin with the other Frenchmen, when the chief mechanic entered.

"'I don't know what has come over the natives. They are working like
angels. If they keep on this way, Colonel, we shall be able to leave
this evening.'

"'Very good,' said the Colonel, 'but don't let them spoil the job by too
much haste. We don't have to be at Ansango before the end of the week.
It will be better to start in the morning.'

"I trembled. Suppliantly I approached and told him the story of my
dream. He listened with a smile of astonishment; then, at the last, he
said gravely:

"'It is agreed, little Tanit-Zerga. We will leave this evening if you
wish it.'

"And he kissed me.

"The darkness had already fallen when the gunboat, now repaired, left
the harbor. My friend stood in the midst of the group of Frenchmen who
waved their caps as long as we could see them. Standing alone on the
rickety jetty, I waited, watching the water flow by, until the last
sound of the steam-driven vessel, boum-baraboum, had died away into the
night <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16).

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

Tanit-Zerga paused.

"That was the last night of Gâo. While I was sleeping and the moon was
still high above the forest, a dog yelped, but only for an instant. Then
came the cry of men, then of women, the kind of cry that you can never
forget if you have once heard it. When the sun rose, it found me, quite
naked, running and stumbling towards the north with my little
companions, beside the swiftly moving camels of the Tuareg who escorted
us. Behind, followed the women of the tribe, my mother among them, two
by two, the yoke upon their necks. There were not many men. Almost all
lay with their throats cut under the ruins of the thatch of Gâo beside
my father, brave Sonni-Azkia. Once again Gâo had been razed by a band of
Awellimiden, who had come to massacre the French on their gunboat.

"The Tuareg hurried us, hurried us, for they were afraid of being
pursued. We traveled thus for ten days; and, as the millet and hemp
disappeared, the march became more frightful. Finally, near Isakeryen,
in the country of Kidal, the Tuareg sold us to a caravan of Trarzan
Moors who were going from Bamrouk to Rhât. At first, because they went
more slowly, it seemed good fortune. But, before long, the desert was an
expanse of rough pebbles, and the women began to fall. As for the men,
the last of them had died far back under the blows of the stick for
having refused to go farther.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

"I still had the strength to keep going, and even as far in the lead as
possible, so as not to hear the cries of my little playmates. Each time
one of them fell by the way, unable to rise again, they saw one of the
drivers descend from his camel and drag her into the bushes a little way
to cut her throat. But one day, I heard a cry that made me turn around.
It was my mother. She was kneeling, holding out her poor arms to me. In
an instant I was beside her. But a great Moor, dressed in white,
separated us. A red moroccan case hung around his neck from a black
chaplet. He drew a cutlass from it. I can still see the blue steel on
the brown skin. Another horrible cry. An instant later, driven by a
club, I was trotting ahead, swallowing my little tears, trying to regain
my place in the caravan.

"Near the wells of Asiou, the Moors were attacked by a party of Tuareg
of Kel-Tazeholet, serfs of the great tribe of Kel-Rhelâ, which rules
over Ahaggar. They, in their turn, were massacred to the last man. That
is how. I was brought here, and offered as homage to Antinea, who was
pleased with me and ever since has been kind to me. That is why it is no
slave who soothes your fever to-day with stories that you do not even
listen to, but the last descendant of the great Sonrhaï Emperors, of
Sonni-Ali, the destroyer of men and of countries, of Mohammed Azkia, who
made the pilgrimage to Mecca, taking with him fifteen hundred cavaliers
and three

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

hundred thousand *mithkal* of gold in the days when our power stretched
without rival from Chad to Touat and to the western sea, and when Gâo
raised her cupola, sister of the sky, above the other cities, higher
above her rival cupolas than is the tamarisk above the humble plants of
sorghum."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[230:1](ida17.htm#fr_15) The Koran, Chapter 66,
verse 17. (Note by M. Leroux.)

<span id="fn_16"></span>[235:1](ida17.htm#fr_16) Cf. the records and the
*Bulletin de la Société de Géographie de Paris* (1897) for the cruises
on the Niger, made by the *Commandant* of the Timbuctoo region, Colonel
Joffre, Lieutenants Baudry and Bluset, and by Father Hacquart of the
White Fathers. (Note by M. Leroux.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. The Silver Hammer](ida18)
