[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ida18)  [Next](ida20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGNEU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Atlantida (L'Atlantide)*, by Pierre Benoit, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

### CHAPTER XVII

#### THE MAIDENS OF THE ROCKS

<span class="smallcaps">I awakened</span> in my room. The sun, already
at its zenith, filled the place with unbearable light and heat.

The first thing I saw, on opening my eyes, was the shade, ripped down,
lying in the middle of the floor. Then, confusedly, the night's events
began to come back to me.

My head felt stupid and heavy. My mind wandered. My memory seemed
blocked. "I went out with the leopard, that is certain. That red mark on
my forefinger shows how he strained at the leash. My knees are still
dusty. I remember creeping along the wall in the room where the white
Tuareg were playing at dice. That was the minute after King Hiram had
leapt past them. After that . . . oh, Morhange and Antinea. . . . And
then?"

I recalled nothing more. I recalled nothing more. But something must
have happened, something which I could not remember.

I was uneasy. I wanted to go back, yet it seemed

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

as if I were afraid to go. I have never felt anything more painful than
those conflicting emotions.

"It is a long way from here to Antinea's apartments. I must have been
very sound asleep not to have noticed when they brought me back—for they
have brought me back."

I stopped trying to think it out. My head ached too much.

"I must have air," I murmured. "I am roasting here; it will drive me
mad."

I had to see someone, no matter whom. Mechanically, I walked toward the
library.

I found M. Le Mesge in a transport of delirious joy. The Professor was
engaged in opening an enormous bale, carefully sewed in a brown blanket.

"You come at a good time, sir," he cried, on seeing me enter. "The
magazines have just arrived."

He dashed about in feverish haste. Presently a stream of pamphlets and
magazines, blue, green, yellow and salmon, was bursting from an opening
in the bale.

"Splendid, splendid!" he cried, dancing with joy. "Not too late, either;
here are the numbers for October fifteenth. We must give a vote of
thanks to good Ameur."

His good spirits were contagious.

"There is a good Turkish merchant who subscribes to all the interesting
magazines of the two continents. He sends them on by Rhadames to a

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

destination which he little suspects. Ah, here are the French ones."

M. Le Mesge ran feverishly over the tables of contents.

"Internal politics: articles by Francis Charmes, Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu,
d’Haussonville on the Czar's trip to Paris. Look, a study by Avenel of
wages in the Middle Ages. And verse, verses of the young poets, Fernand
Gregh, Edmond Haraucourt. Ah, the resumé of a book by Henry de Castries
on Islam. That may be interesting. . . . Take what you please."

Joy makes people amiable and M. Le Mesge was really delirious with it.

A puff of breeze came from the window. I went to the balustrade and,
resting my elbows on it, began to run through a number of the *Revue des
Deux Mondes*.

I did not read, but flipped over the pages, my eyes now on the lines of
swarming little black characters, now on the rocky basin which lay
shivering, pale pink, under the declining sun.

Suddenly my attention became fixed. There was a strange coincidence
between the text and the landscape.

"In the sky overhead were only light shreds of cloud, like bits of white
ash floating up from burnt-out logs. The sun fell over a circle of rocky
peaks, silhouetting their severe lines against the azure sky.

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> From on high, a
great sadness and gentleness poured down into the lonely enclosure, like
a magic drink into a deep cup. . . ." <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md)

I turned the pages feverishly. My mind seemed to be clearing.

Behind me, M. Le Mesge, deep in an article, voiced his opinions in
indignant growls.

I continued reading:

"On all sides a magnificent view spread out before us in the raw light.
The chain of rocks, clearly visible in their barren desolation which
stretched to the very summit, lay stretched out like some great heap of
gigantic, unformed things left by some primordial race of Titans to
stupefy human beings. Overturned towers . . ."

"It is shameful, downright shameful," the Professor was repeating.

"Overturned towers, crumbling citadels, cupolas fallen in, broken
pillars, mutilated colossi, prows of vessels, thighs of monsters, bones
of titans,—this mass, impassable with its ridges and gullies, seemed the
embodiment of everything huge and tragic. So clear were the distances .
. ."

"Downright shameful," M. Le Mesge kept on saying in exasperation,
thumping his fist on the table.

"So clear were the distances that I could see, as if I had it under my
eyes, infinitely enlarged, every

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

contour of the rock which Violante had shown me through the window with
the gesture of a creator.

Trembling, I closed the magazine. At my feet, now red, I saw the rock
which Antinea had pointed out to me the day of our first interview,
huge, steep, overhanging the reddish brown garden.

"That is my horizon," she had said.

M. Le Mesge's excitement had passed all bounds. "It is worse than
shameful; it is infamous."

I almost wanted to strangle him into silence. He seized my arm.

"Read that, sir; and, although you don't know a great deal about the
subject, you will see that this article on Roman Africa is a miracle of
misinformation, a monument of ignorance. And it is signed . . . do you
know by whom it is signed?"

"Leave me alone," I said brutally.

"Well, it is signed Gaston Boissier. Yes, sir! Gaston Boissier, grand
officer of the Legion of Honor, lecturer at the *Ecole Normale
Supérieure*, permanent secretary of the French Academy, member of the
Academy of Inscriptions and Literature, one of those who once ruled out
the subject of my thesis . . . one of those . . . ah, poor university,
ah, poor France!"

I was no longer listening. I had begun to read again. My forehead was
covered with sweat. But it seemed as if my head had been cleared like a
room

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

when a window is opened; memories were beginning to come back like doves
winging their way home to the dovecote.

"At that moment, an irrepressible tremor shook her whole body; her eyes
dilated as if some terrible sight had filled them with horror.

"'Antonello,' she murmured.

"And for seconds, she was unable to say another word.

"I looked at her in mute anguish and the suffering which drew her dear
lips together seemed also to clutch at my heart. The vision which was in
her eyes passed into mine, and I saw again the thin white face of
Antonello, and the quick quivering of his eyelids, the waves of agony
which seized his long worn body and shook it like a reed."

I threw the magazine upon the table.

"That is it," I said.

To cut the pages, I had used the knife with which M. Le Mesge had cut
the cords of the bale, a short ebony-handled dagger, one of those
daggers that the Tuareg wear in a bracelet sheath against the upper left
arm.

I slipped it into the big pocket of my flannel dolman and walked toward
the door.

I was about to cross the threshold when I heard M. Le Mesge call me.

"Monsieur de Saint Avit! Monsieur de Saint Avit!"

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

"I want to ask you something, please."

"What is it?"

"Nothing important. You know that I have to mark the labels for the red
marble hall. . . ." I walked toward the table.

"Well, I forgot to ask M. Morhange, at the beginning, the date and place
of his birth. After that, I had no chance. I did not see him again. So I
am forced to turn to you. Perhaps you can tell me?"

"I can," I said very calmly.

He took a large white card from a box which contained several and dipped
his pen.

"Number 54 . . . Captain?"

"Captain Jean-Marie-François Morhange." While I dictated, one hand
resting on the table, I noticed on my cuff a stain, a little stain,
reddish brown.

"Morhange," repeated M. Le Mesge, finishing the lettering of my friend's
name. "Born at . . .?" "Villefranche."

"Villefranche, Rhône. What date?"

"The fourteenth of October, 1859."

"The fourteenth of October, 1859. Good. Died at Ahaggar, the fifth of
January, 1897. . . . There, that is done. A thousand thanks, sir, for
your kindness."

"You are welcome."

I left M. Le Mesge.

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

My mind, thenceforth, was well made up; and, as I said, I was perfectly
calm. Nevertheless, when I had taken leave of M. Le Mesge, I felt the
need of waiting a few minutes before executing my decision.

First I wandered through the corridors; then, finding myself near my
room, I went to it. It was still intolerably hot. I sat down on my divan
and began to think.

The dagger in my pocket bothered me. I took it out and laid it on the
floor.

It was a good dagger, with a diamond-shaped blade, and with a collar of
orange leather between the blade and the handle.

The sight of it recalled the silver hammer. I remembered how easily it
fitted into my hand when I struck . . .

Every detail of the scene came back to me with incomparable vividness.
But I did not even shiver. It seemed as if my determination to kill the
instigator of the murder permitted me peacefully to evoke its brutal
details.

If I reflected over my deed, it was to be surprised at it, not to
condemn myself.

"Well," I said to myself, "I have killed this Morhange, who was once a
baby, who, like all the others, cost his mother so much trouble with his
baby sicknesses. I have put an end to his life, I have reduced to
nothingness the monument of love, of

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

tears, of trials overcome and pitfalls escaped, which constitutes a
human existence. What an extraordinary adventure!"

That was all. No fear, no remorse, none of that Shakespearean horror
after the murder, which, today, sceptic though I am and blasé and
utterly, utterly disillusioned, sets me shuddering whenever I am alone
in a dark room.

"Come," I thought. "It's time. Time to finish it up."

I picked up the dagger. Before putting it in my pocket, I went through
the motion of striking. All was well. The dagger fitted into my hand.

I had been through Antinea's apartment only when guided, the first time
by the white Targa, the second time, by the leopard. Yet I found the way
again without trouble. Just before coming to the door with the rose
window, I met a Targa.

"Let me pass," I ordered. "Your mistress has sent for me."

The man obeyed, stepping back.

Soon a dim melody came to my ears. I recognized the sound of a *rebaza*,
the violin with a single string, played by the Tuareg women. It was
Aguida playing, squatting as usual at the feet of her mistress. The
three other women were also squatted about her. Tanit-Zerga was not
there.

Oh! Since that was the last time I saw her, let,

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

oh, let me tell you of Antinea, how she looked in that supreme moment.

Did she feel the danger hovering over her and did she wish to brave it
by her surest artifices? I had in mind the slender, unadorned body,
without rings, without jewels, which I had pressed to my heart the night
before. And now I started in surprise at seeing before me, adorned like
an idol, not a woman, but a queen!

The heavy splendor of the Pharaohs weighted down her slender body. On
her head was the great gold *pschent* of Egyptian gods and kings;
emeralds, the national stone of the Tuareg, were set in it, tracing and
retracing her name in Tifinar characters. A red satin *schenti*,
embroidered in golden lotus, enveloped her like the casket of a jewel.
At her feet, lay an ebony scepter, headed with a trident. Her bare arms
were encircled by two serpents whose fangs touched her armpits as if to
bury themselves there. From the ear pieces of the *pschent* streamed a
necklace of emeralds; its first strand passed under her determined chin;
the others lay in circles against her bare throat.

She smiled as I entered.

"I was expecting you," she said simply.

I advanced till I was four steps from the throne, then stopped before
her.

She looked at me ironically.

"What is that?" she asked with perfect calm.

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

I followed her gesture. The handle of the dagger protruded from my
pocket.

I drew it out and held it firmly in my hand, ready to strike.

"The first of you who moves will be sent naked six leagues into the red
desert and left there to die," said Antinea coldly to her women, whom my
gesture had thrown into a frightened murmuring.

She turned to me.

"That dagger is very ugly and you hold it badly. Shall I send Sydya to
my room to get the silver hammer? You are more adroit with it than with
the dagger."

"Antinea," I said in a low voice, "I am going to kill you."

"Do not speak so formally. You were more affectionate last night. Are
you embarrassed by them?" she said, pointing to the women, whose eyes
were wide with terror.

"Kill me?" she went on. "You are hardly reasonable. Kill me at the
moment when you can reap the fruits of the murder of . . ."

"Did—did he suffer?" I asked suddenly, trembling.

"Very little. I told you that you used the hammer as if you had done
nothing else all your life." "Like little Kaine," I murmured.

She smiled in surprise.

"Oh, you know that story. . . . Yes, like little

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kaine. But at
least Kaine was sensible. You . . . I do not understand."

"I do not understand myself, very well."

She looked at me with amused curiosity.

"Antinea," I said.

"What is it?"

"I did what you told me to. May I in turn ask one favor, ask you one
question?"

"What is it?"

"It was dark, was it not, in the room where he was?"

"Very dark. I had to lead you to the bed where he lay asleep."

"He *was* asleep, you are sure?"

"I said so."

"He—did not die instantly, did he?"

"No. I know exactly when he died; two minutes after you struck him and
fled with a shriek."

"Then surely *he* could not have known?"

"Known what?"

"That it was I who—who held the hammer."

"He might not have known it, indeed," said Antinea. "But he did know."

"How?"

"He did know . . . because I told him," she said, staring at me with
magnificent audacity.

"And," I murmured, "he—he believed it?"

"With the help of my explanation, he recognized your shriek. If he had
not realized that you were

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

his murderer, the affair would not have interested me," she finished
with a scornful little smile.

Four steps, I said, separated me from Antinea. I sprang forward. But,
before I reached her, I was struck to the floor.

King Hiram had leapt at my throat.

At the same moment I heard the calm, haughty voice of Antinea:

"Call the men," she commanded.

A second later I was released from the leopard's clutch. The six white
Tuareg had surrounded me and were trying to bind me.

I am fairly strong and quick. I was on my feet in a second. One of my
enemies lay on the floor, ten feet away, felled by a well-placed blow on
the jaw. Another was gasping under my knee. That was the last time I saw
Antinea. She stood erect, both hands resting on her ebony scepter,
watching the struggle with a smile of contemptuous interest.

Suddenly I gave a loud cry and loosed the hold I had on my victim. A
cracking in my left arm: one of the Tuareg had seized it and twisted
until my shoulder was dislocated.

 

When I completely lost consciousness, I was being carried down the
corridor by two white phantoms, so bound that I could not move a muscle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[256:1](ida19.htm#fr_17.md) Gabrielle d’Annunzio:
*Les Vierges aux Rochers*. Cf. *The Revue des Deux Mondes* of October
15, 1896; page 867.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. The Fire-Flies](ida20.md)
