[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aah02)  [Next](aah04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7H7K/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Love Letters of Abelard and Heloise*, \[1901\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# LETTERS

###### OF

# ABELARD AND HELOISE

### LETTER I

#### Abelard to Philintus

<span class="margnote">Abelard consoles his friend</span>THE last time
we were together, Philintus, you gave me a melancholy account of your
misfortunes; I was sensibly touched with the relation, and like a true
friend bore a share in your griefs. What did I not say to stop your
tears? I laid before you all the reasons philosophy could furnish, which
I thought might anyways soften the strokes of fortune. But all these
endeavours have proved useless; grief, I perceive, has wholly seized
your spirits, and your prudence, far from assisting, seems to have
forsaken you. But my skilful friendship has found out an expedient to
relieve you. Attend to me a moment, hear but the story of my
misfortunes, and yours, Philintus, will be nothing as compared with
those of the loving and unhappy Abelard. Observe, I beseech you, at what
expense I endeavour to serve you; and think this no small mark of my
affection; for I am going to present you with the relation of such
particulars as it is impossible for me to recollect

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

<span class="margnote">He relates his early life</span>without piercing
my heart with the most sensible affliction. You know the place where I
was born, but not, perhaps, that I was born with those complexional
faults which strangers charge upon our nation--an extreme lightness of
temper, and great inconstancy. I frankly own it, and shall be as free to
acquaint you with those good qualities which were observed in me. I had
a natural vivacity and aptness for all the polite arts. My father was a
gentleman and a man of good parts; he loved the wars, but differed in
his sentiments from many who follow that profession. He thought it no
praise to be illiterate, but in the camp he knew how to converse at the
same time with the Muses and Bellona. He was the same in the management
of his family, and took equal care to form his children to the study of
polite learning as to their military exercises. As I was his eldest, and
consequently his favourite son, he took more than ordinary care of my
education. I had a natural genius for study, and made extraordinary
progress in it. Smitten with the love of books, and the praises which on
all sides were bestowed upon me, I aspired to no other reputation than
that of learning. To my brothers I leave the glory of battles and the
pomp of triumphs; nay, more, I yielded them up my birthright and
patrimony. I knew necessity was the great spur to study, and was afraid
I should not merit the title of learned if I distinguished myself from
others by nothing but a more plentiful fortune. Of all the sciences
logic was the most to my taste. Such were the arms I chose to

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="margnote">His youthful struggles</span>profess. Furnished
with the weapons of reasoning I took pleasure in going to public
disputations to win trophies; and wherever I heard that this art
flourished, I ranged, like another Alexander, from province to province,
to seek new adversaries with whom I might try my strength.

The ambition I had to become formidable in logic led me at last to
Paris, the centre of politeness, and where the science I was so smitten
with had usually been in the greatest perfection. I put myself under the
direction of one Champeaux, a professor who had acquired the character
of the most skilful philosopher of his age, but by negative excellencies
only as being the least ignorant! He received me with great
demonstrations of kindness, but I was not so happy as to please him
long; for I was too knowing in the subjects he discoursed upon, and I
often confuted his notions. Frequently in our disputations I pushed a
good argument so home that all his subtlety was not able to elude its
force. It was impossible he should see himself surpassed by his scholar
without resentment. It is sometimes dangerous to have too much merit.

Envy increased against me in proportion to my reputation. My enemies
endeavoured to interrupt my progress, but their malice only provoked my
courage. Measuring my abilities by the jealousy I had raised, I thought
I had no further need for Champeaux's lectures, but rather that I was
sufficiently qualified to read to others. I stood for a post which was
vacant at Melun. My master used all his artifice to defeat my hopes, but
in vain; and on this occasion I triumphed over his

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="margnote">He conquers Champeaux</span>cunning as before I
had done over his learning. My lectures were always crowded, and my
beginnings so fortunate, that I entirely obscured the renown of my
famous master. Flushed with these happy conquests, I removed to Corbeil
to attack the masters there, and so establish my character of the ablest
logician. The rush of travelling threw me into a dangerous distemper,
and not being able to recover my health, my physicians, who perhaps were
in league with Champeaux, advised me to remove to my native air. Thus I
voluntarily banished myself for some years. I leave you to imagine
whether my absence was not regretted by the better sort. At length I
recovered my health, when I received news that my greatest adversary had
taken the habit of a monk; you may think it was an act of penitence for
having persecuted me; quite the contrary, ’twas ambition; he resolved to
raise himself to some church dignity, therefore fell into the beaten
track and took on him the garb of feigned austerity; for this is the
easiest and shortest way to the highest ecclesiastical dignities. His
wishes were successful and he obtained a bishopric; yet did he not quit
Paris and the care of his schools: he went to his diocese to gather in
his revenues, but returned and passed the rest of his time in reading
lectures to those few pupils which followed him. After this I often
engaged with him, and may reply to you as Ajax did to the Greeks:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'If you demand the fortune of that day  
When stak’d on this right hand your honours lay,  
If I did not oblige the foe to yield,  
Yet did I never basely quit the field.'</span>

</div>

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="margnote">He studies divinity</span>About this time my
father, Beranger, who to the age of sixty had lived very agreeably,
retired from the world and shut himself up in a cloister, where he
offered up to Heaven the languid remains of a life he could make no
further use of. My mother, who was yet young, took the same resolution.
She turned a Religious, but did not entirely abandon the satisfactions
of life; her friends were continually at the grate, and the monastery,
when one has an inclination to make it so, is exceedingly charming and
pleasant. I was present when my mother was professed. At my return I
resolved to study divinity, and inquired for a director in that study. I
was recommended to one Anselm, the very oracle of his time, but, to give
you my own opinion, one more venerable for his age and his wrinkles than
for his genius or learning. If you consulted him upon any difficulty,
the sure consequence was to be much more uncertain in the point. They
who only saw him admired him, but those who reasoned with him were
extremely dissatisfied. He was a great master of words and talked much,
but meant nothing. His discourse was a fire, which, instead of
enlightening, obscured everything with its smoke; a tree beautified with
variety of leaves and branches, but barren of fruit. I came to him with
a desire to learn, but found him like the fig tree in the Gospel, or the
old oak to which Lucan compares Pompey. I continued not long underneath
his shadow. I took for my guides the primitive Fathers and boldly
launched into the ocean of the Holy Scriptures. In a short time I had
made such progress that others

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="margnote">Love conquers him</span>chose me for their
director. The number of my scholars was incredible, and the gratuities I
received from them were proportionate to the great reputation I had
acquired. Now I found myself safe in the harbour, the storms were
passed, and the rage of my enemies had spent itself without effect.
Happy had I known to make a right use of this calm! But when the mind is
most easy ’tis most exposed to love, and even security is here the most
dangerous state.

And now, my friend, I am going to expose to you all my weaknesses. All
men, I believe, are under a necessity of paying tribute at some time or
other to Love, and it is vain to strive to avoid it. I was a
philosopher, yet this tyrant of the mind triumphed over all my wisdom;
his darts were of greater force than all my reasonings, and with a sweet
constraint he led me wherever he pleased. Heaven, amidst an abundance of
blessings with which I was intoxicated, threw in a heavy affliction. I
became a most signal example of its vengeance, and the more unhappy
because, having deprived me of the means of accomplishing satisfaction,
it left me to the fury of my criminal desires. I will tell you, my dear
friend, the particulars of my story, and leave you to judge whether I
deserved so severe a correction.

I had always an aversion for those light women whom ’tis a reproach to
pursue; I was ambitious in my choice, and wished to find some obstacles,
that I might surmount them with the greater glory and pleasure.

There was in Paris a young creature (ah, Philintus!) formed in a
prodigality of nature to show

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span class="margnote">He meets Heloise</span>mankind a finished
composition; dear Heloise, the reputed niece of one Fulbert, a canon.
Her wit and her beauty would have stirred the dullest and most
insensible heart, and her education was equally admirable. Heloise was
the mistress of the most polite arts. You may easily imagine that this
did not a little help to captivate me; I saw her, I loved her, I
resolved to make her love me. The thirst of glory cooled immediately in
my heart, and all my passions were lost in this new one. I thought of
nothing but Heloise; everything brought her image to my mind. I was
pensive and restless, and my passion was so violent as to admit of no
restraint. I was always vain and presumptive; I flattered myself already
with the most bewitching hopes. My reputation had spread itself
everywhere, and could a virtuous lady resist a man who had confounded
all the learned of the age? I was young--could she show an insensibility
to those vows which my heart never formed for any but herself? My person
was advantageous enough, and by my dress no one would have suspected me
for a doctor; and dress, you know, is not a little engaging with women.
Besides, I had wit enough to write a *billet-doux*, and hoped, if ever
she permitted my absent self to entertain her, she would read with
pleasure those breathings of my heart.

Filled with these notions I thought of nothing but the means to speak to
her. Lovers either find or make all things easy. By the offices of
common friends I gained the acquaintance of Fulbert; and can you believe
it, Philintus, he allowed me the privilege of his table, and an
apartment in his house?

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="margnote">He teaches her philosophy</span><span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I paid him, indeed, a
considerable sum, for persons of his character do nothing without money.
But what would I not have given! You, my friend, know what love is;
imagine then what a pleasure it must have been to a heart so inflamed as
mine to be always so near the dear object of desire! I would not have
exchanged my happy condition for that of the greatest monarch upon
earth. I saw Heloise, I spoke to her--each action, each confused look
told her the trouble of my soul. And she, on the other side, gave me
ground to hope for everything from her generosity. Fulbert desired me to
instruct her in philosophy; by this means I found opportunities of being
in private with her, and yet I was surely of all men the most timorous
in declaring my passion.

As I was with her one day alone, 'Charming Heloise,' said I, blushing,
'if you know yourself you will not be surprised with the passion you
have inspired me with. Uncommon as it is, I can express it but with the
common terms--I love you, adorable Heloise! Till now I thought
philosophy made us masters of all our passions, and that it was a refuge
from the storms in which weak mortals are tossed and shipwrecked; but
you have destroyed my security and broken this philosophic courage. I
have despised riches; honour and its pageantries could never wake a weak
thought in me, beauty alone has stirred my soul; happy if she who raised
this passion kindly receives this declaration; but if it is an
offence?--'

'No,' replied Heloise, 'she must be very ignorant of your merit who can
be offended at your passion. But for my own repose I wish either that

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

<span class="margnote">And love</span>you had not made this declaration,
or that I were at liberty not to suspect your sincerity.'

'Ah, divine Heloise, said I, flinging myself at her feet, 'I swear by
yourself--' I was going on to convince her of the truth of my passion,
but heard a noise, and it was Fulbert: there was no avoiding it, I had
to do violence to my desire and change the discourse to some other
subject. After this I found frequent opportunities to free Heloise from
those suspicions which the general insincerity of men had raised in her;
and she too much desired that what I said might be true not to believe
it. Thus there was a most happy understanding between us. The same
house, the same love, united our persons and our desires. How many soft
moments did we pass together! We took all opportunities to express to
each other our mutual affection, and were ingenious in contriving
incidents which might give us a plausible occasion of meeting. Pyramus
and Thisbe's discovery of the crack in the wall was but a slight
representation of our love and its sagacity. In the dead of night, when
Fulbert and his domestics were in a sound sleep, we improved the time
proper with the sweets of love; not contenting ourselves, like those
unfortunate lovers, with giving insipid kisses to a wall, we made use of
all the moments of our charming interviews. In the place where we met we
had no lions to fear, and the study of philosophy served us for a blind.
But I was so far from making any advances in the sciences that I lost
all my taste for them, and when I was obliged to go from the sight of my
dear mistress to my philosophical exercises, it was with the utmost
regret and

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="margnote">Her uncle separates them</span>melancholy. Love
is incapable of being concealed; a word, a look, nay, silence, speaks
it. My scholars discovered it first; they saw I had no longer that
vivacity of thought to which all things are easy; I could now do nothing
but write verses to soothe my passion. I quitted Aristotle and his dry
maxims to practise the precepts of the more ingenious Ovid. No day
passed in which I did not compose amorous verses; love was my inspiring
Apollo. My songs were spread abroad and gained me frequent applause.
Those who were in love as I was took a pride in learning them, and by
luckily applying my thoughts and verses they obtained favours which
perhaps they would not otherwise have gained. This gave our amours such
an *éclat* that the lives of Heloise and Abelard were the subject of all
conversations.

The town talk at last reached Fulbert's ears; it was with great
difficulty he gave credit to what he heard, for he loved his niece, and
was prejudiced in my favour; but upon closer examination he began to be
less credulous. He surprised us in one of our more tender conversations.
How fatal sometimes are the consequences of curiosity! The anger of
Fulbert seemed too moderate on this occasion, and I feared in the end
some more heavy revenge. It is impossible to express the grief and
regret which filled my soul when I was obliged to leave the Canon's
house and my dear Heloise. But this separation of our persons the more
firmly united our minds; and the desperate condition we were reduced to
made us capable of attempting anything.

My intrigues gave me but little shame, so

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="margnote">The episode of the maid</span>lovingly did I
regard the occasion; think what the gay young divinities said when
Vulcan caught Mars and the Goddess of Beauty in his net, and impute it
all to me. Fulbert surprised me with Heloise, but what man that had a
soul in him would not have borne any ignominy on the sane conditions?
The next day I provided myself with a private lodging near the loved
house, being resolved not to abandon my prey. I abode some time without
appearing publicly. Ah! how long did those few days seem to me! When we
fall from a state of happiness with what impatience do we bear our
misfortunes!

It being impossible that I could live without seeing Heloise, I
endeavoured to engage her servant, whose name was Agaton, in my
interest. She was brown, well-shaped, and a person superior to her rank;
her features were regular and her eyes sparkling, fit to raise love in
any man whose heart was not prepossessed by another passion. I met her
alone and entreated her to have pity on a distressed lover. She answered
she would undertake anything to serve me, but there was a reward. At
these words I opened my purse and showed the shining metal which puts to
sleep guards, forces a way through rocks, and softens the heart of the
most obdurate fair.

'You are mistaken,' said she, smiling and shaking her head, 'you do not
know me; could gold tempt me, a rich abbot takes his nightly station and
sings under my window; he offers to send me to his abbey, which, he
says, is situated in the most pleasant country in the world. A courtier
offers me a considerable sum and assures

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="margnote">The maid's revenge</span> me I need have no
apprehension, for if our amours have consequences he will marry me to
his gentleman and give him a handsome employment. To say nothing of a
young officer who patrols about here every night and makes his attacks
in all sorts of imaginable forms. It must be love only which could
oblige him to follow me, for I have not, like your great ladies, any
rings or jewels to tempt him. Yet, during all his siege of love, his
feathers and his embroidered coat have not made any breach in my heart.
I shall not quickly be brought to capitulate, I am too faithful to my
first conqueror.'

She looked earnestly at me, and I said I did not understand.

'For a man of sense and gallantry,' she replied, 'you are slow of
apprehension. I am in love with you, Abelard; I know you adore Heloise,
and I do not blame you, I desire only to enjoy the second place in your
affections. I have a tender heart as well as my mistress; you may
without difficulty make returns to my passion. Do not perplex yourself
with scruples; a prudent man should love several at the sane time, then
if one should fail he is not left unprovided.'

You can imagine, Philintus, how much I was surprised at these words: so
entirely did I love Heloise that, without reflecting whether Agaton
spoke reasonably or not, I immediately left her. When I had gone a
little way from her I looked back and saw her biting her nails in a rage
of disappointment; this made me fear some fatal consequences. She
hastened to Fulbert and told him the offer I had made her, but I suppose

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span class="margnote">He carries off Heloise</span>concealed the other
part of the story. The Canon never forgave this affront; I afterwards
perceived he was more deeply concerned for his niece than I had at first
imagined. Let no lover hereafter follow my example, for a woman rejected
is an outrageous creature. Agaton was at her window night and day on
purpose to keep me away from her mistress, and so she gave her gallants
every opportunity to display their abilities.

I was infinitely perplexed what course to take; at last I applied myself
to Heloise's singing-master. The shining metal, which had no effect on
Agaton, charmed him: he was excellently qualified for conveying a
*billet* with the greatest dexterity and secrecy. He delivered one of
mine to Heloise, who, according to my appointment, met me at the end of
the garden, I having scaled the wall with a ladder of ropes. I confess
to you all my failings, Philintus; how would my enemies Champeaux and
Anselm have triumphed had they seen this redoubted philosopher in such a
wretched condition. Well! I met my soul's joy--my Heloise! I shall not
transcribe our transports, they were not long, for the first news
Heloise acquainted me with plunged me into a thousand distractions. A
floating Delos was to be sought for, where she might be safely delivered
of a burden she began already to feel. Without losing much time in
debating, I made her presently quit the Canon's house and at break of
day depart for Brittany; where she, like another goddess, gave the world
another Apollo, which my sister took care of.

This carrying off of Heloise was sufficient revenge on Fulbert. It
filled him with the deepest

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<span class="margnote">Heloise disapproves marriage</span>concern, and
had like to have deprived him of the small share of wits which Heaven
had allowed him. His sorrow and lamentation gave the censorious an
occasion of suspecting him for something more than the uncle of Heloise.

In short, I began to pity his misfortune, and to think this robbery
which love had made me commit was a sort of treason. I endeavoured to
appease his anger by a sincere confession of all that was past, and by
hearty engagements to marry Heloise secretly. He gave me his consent,
and with many protestations and embraces confirmed our reconciliation.
But what dependence can be made on the word of an ignorant devotee? He
was only plotting a cruel revenge, as you will see by what follows.

I took a journey into Brittany in order to bring hack my dear Heloise,
whom I now considered my wife. When I had acquainted her with what had
passed between the Canon and me I found she was of a contrary opinion to
me. She urged all that was possible to divert me from marriage--that it
was a bond always fatal to a philosopher; that the cries of children and
the cares of a family were utterly inconsistent with the tranquillity
and application which study require. She quoted to me all that was
written on the subject by Theophrastus, Cicero, and, above all, insisted
on the unfortunate Socrates, who quitted life with joy because by that
means he left Xanthippe.

'Will it not be more agreeable to me,' said she, 'to see myself your
mistress than your wife? And will not love have more power than marriage
to keep our hearts firmly united? Pleasures

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

<span class="margnote">Lucilla also</span>tasted sparingly and with
difficulty have always a higher relish, whilst everything that is easy
and common grows stale and insipid.'

I was unmoved by all this reasoning, so Heloise prevailed upon my sister
to speak to me. Lucilla (for that was her name) therefore took me aside
and said,--

'What do you intend, brother? Is it possible that Abelard should in
earnest think of marrying Heloise? She seems, indeed, to deserve a
perpetual affection; beauty, youth and learning, all that can make a
person valuable meet in her. You may adore all this if you please, but
not to flatter you, what is beauty but a flower which may be blasted by
the least fit of sickness? When those features with which you have been
so captivated shall be sunk, and those graces lost, you will too late
repent that you have entangled yourself in a chain from which death
alone can free you. I shall see you reduced to the married man's only
hope of survivorship. Do you think that learning makes Heloise more
amiable? I know she is not one of those affected females who are
continually oppressing you with fine speeches, criticising looks, and
deciding upon the merit of authors. When such a one is in the rush of
her discourse, husband, friends and servants all fly before her. Heloise
has not this fault, yet ’tis troublesome not to be at liberty to use the
least improper expression before a wife which you hear with pleasure
from a mistress. But you say you are sure of the affection of Heloise; I
believe it; she has given you no ordinary proofs. But can you be sure
marriage

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="margnote">Fulbert's revenge</span>will not be the tomb of
her love? The name of husband and master is always harsh, and Heloise
will not be the Phoenix you now think her. Will she not be a woman?
Come, come, the head of a philosopher is less secure than those of other
men!'

My sister grew warm in the argument, and was going on to give me a
hundred more reasons of this kind, but I angrily interrupted her,
telling her only that she did not know Heloise.

A few days after we departed together from Brittany and came to Paris,
where I completed my project. It was my intent my marriage should be
kept secret, and therefore Heloise retired among the nuns of Argenteuil.

I now thought Fulbert's anger disarmed; I lived in peace; but alas! our
marriage proved but a weak defence against his revenge. Observe,
Philintus, to what a barbarity he pursued it! He bribed my servants; an
assassin came into my bedchamber by night, with a razor in his hand, and
found me in a deep sleep. I suffered the most shameful punishment that
the revenge of an enemy could invent; in short, without losing my life,
I lost my manhood. So cruel an action escaped not justice, the villain
suffered the same mutilation, poor comfort for so irretrievable an evil.
I confess to you that shame more than any sincere penitence made me
resolve to hide myself from the sight of men, yet could I not separate
myself from my Heloise. Jealousy took possession of my mind, and at the
very expense of her happiness I decreed to disappoint all rivals. Before
I put myself in a cloister I obliged her to take the

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

<span class="margnote">They seek the cloister</span>habit and retire
into the nunnery of Argenteuil. I remember somebody would have opposed
her making such a cruel sacrifice of herself, but she answered in the
words of Cornelia after the death of Pompey the Great,--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'O my loved lord, our fatal marriage draws  
On thee this doom, and I the guilty cause!  
Then whilst thou goest th’ extremes of fate to prove,  
I'll share that fate and expiate thus my love.'</span>

</div>

Speaking these verses she marched up to the altar and took the veil with
a constancy which I could not have expected in a woman who had so high a
taste of pleasures which she might still enjoy. I blushed at my own
weakness, and without deliberating a moment longer I buried myself in a
cloister and resolved to vanquish a useless passion. I now reflected
that God had chastised me thus grievously that He might save me from
that destruction in which I had like to have been swallowed up. In order
to avoid idleness, the unhappy incendiary of those criminal flames which
had ruined me in the world, I endeavoured in my retirement to put those
talents to a good use which I had before so much abused. I gave the
novices rules of divinity agreeable to the holy Fathers and Councils. In
the meanwhile the enemies that my new fame had raised up,--and
especially Alberic and Lotulf, who, after the death of their masters
Champeaux and Anselm, assumed the sovereignty of learning,--began to
attack me. They loaded me with the falsest imputations, and,
notwithstanding all my defence, I had the mortification to see my books
condemned

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

<span class="margnote">He builds the Paraclete</span>by a Council and
burnt. This was a the cutting sorrow, and, believe me, Philintus, former
calamity I suffered by the cruelty of Fulbert was nothing in comparison
to this.

The affront I had newly received and the scandalous debaucheries of the
monks obliged me to banish myself, and retire near to Nogent. I lived in
a desert where I flattered myself I should avoid fame and be secure from
the malice of my enemies. I was again deceived. The desire of being
taught by me drew crowds of auditors even hither. Many left the towns
and their houses, and came and lived in tents; for herbs, coarse fare
and hard lodging, they abandoned the delicacies of a plentiful table and
an easy life. I looked like the prophet in the wilderness attended by
his disciples. My lectures were perfectly clear from all that had been
condemned. Happy had it been if our solitude had been inaccessible to
envy! With the considerable gratuities I received I built a chapel, and
dedicated it to the Holy Ghost by the name of the Paraclete. The rage of
my enemies now awakened again and forced me to quit this retreat. This I
did without much difficulty, but first the Bishop of Troyes gave me
leave to establish there a nunnery, and commit it to the care of my dear
Heloise. When I had settled her there, can you believe it, Philintus, I
left her without taking leave.

I did not wander long without any settled habitation, for the Duke of
Brittany, informed of my misfortunes, named me to the Abbey of St.
Gildas, where I now am, and where I suffer every day fresh persecutions.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="margnote">The interior of a monastery</span>I live in a
barbarous country, the language of which I don't understand; I have no
conversation but with the rudest people. My walks are on the
inaccessible shore of a sea which is always stormy. My monks are known
only for their dissoluteness, and live without any rule or order. Could
you see the abbey, Philintus, you would not recognise it for one: the
doors and walls are without any ornament save the heads of wild boars
and the feet of hinds, which are nailed up, and the hides of frightful
animals. The cells are hung with the skins of deer; the monks have not
so much as a bell to wake them, the cocks and dogs supply that defect.
In short, they pass their time in hunting, and I would to God that were
their greatest fault! Their pleasures do not terminate there, and I try
in vain to recall them to their duty; they all combine against me, and I
only expose myself to continual vexations and dangers. I imagine I see
every moment a naked sword hang over my head. Sometimes they surround me
and load me with infinite abuses; sometimes they abandon me, and I am
left alone to my own tormenting thoughts. I make it my endeavour to
merit by my sufferings and so appease an angry God. Sometimes I grieve
for the loss of the house of the Paraclete and wish to see it again. Ah,
Philintus! does not the love for Heloise yet burn in my heart! I have
not yet triumphed over that unhappy passion. In the midst of my
retirement I sigh, I weep, I pine, I speak the dear name of Heloise, and
delight to hear the sound! I complain of the severity of Heaven; but oh!
let us not deceive ourselves, I

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

<span class="margnote">Love still reigns</span>have not yet made a right
use of grace. I am thoroughly wretched; I have not yet torn from my
heart the deep roots which vice has planted in it, for if my conversion
were sincere, how could I take pleasure in relating my past faults?
Could I not more easily comfort myself in my afflictions; could I not
turn to my advantage those words of God Himself--*If they have
persecuted Me they will also persecute you; if the world hate you, ye
know that it hated Me also*. Come, Philintus, let us make a strong
effort, turn our misfortunes to our advantage, make them meritorious, or
at least wipe out our offences: let us receive without murmuring what
comes from the hand of God, and let us not oppose our will to His.
Adieu; I give you advice which, could I myself follow, I should be
happy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter II. Heloise to Abelard](aah04.md)
