[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aah03)  [Next](aah05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7H7K/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Love Letters of Abelard and Heloise*, \[1901\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### LETTER II

#### Heloise to Abelard

*To her Lord, her Father, her Husband, her Brother; his Servant, his
Child, his Wife, his Sister, and to express all that is humble,
respectful and loving to her Abelard, Heloise writes this*.

<span class="margnote">Mournful remembrances</span>A CONSOLATORY letter
of yours to a friend happened some days since to fall into my hands; my
knowledge of the writing and my love of the hand gave me the curiosity
to open it. In justification of the liberty I took, I flattered myself I
might claim a sovereign privilege over everything which came from you.
Nor was I scrupulous to break through the rules of good breeding when I
was to hear news of Abelard. But how dear did my curiosity cost me! What
disturbance did it occasion, and how surprised I was to find the whole
letter filled with a particular and melancholy account of our
misfortunes! I met with my name a hundred times; I never saw it without
fear, some heavy calamity always followed it. I saw yours too, equally
unhappy. These mournful but dear remembrances put my heart into such
violent motion that I thought it was too much to offer comfort to a
friend for a few slight disgraces, but such extraordinary means as the
representation of our sufferings and revolutions.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="margnote">The sorrows of Abelard</span>What reflections did
I not make! I began to consider the whole afresh, and perceived myself
pressed with the same weight of grief as when we first began to be
miserable. Though length of time ought to have closed up my wounds, yet
the seeing them described by your hand was sufficient to make them all
open and bleed afresh. Nothing can ever blot from my memory what you
have suffered in defence of your writings. I cannot help thinking of the
rancorous malice of Alberic and Lotulf. A cruel Uncle and an injured
Lover will always be present to my aching sight. I shall never forget
what enemies your learning, and what envy your glory raised against you.
I shall never forget your reputation, so justly acquired, torn to pieces
and blasted by the inexorable cruelty of pseudo pretenders to science.
Was not your treatise of Divinity condemned to be burnt? Were you not
threatened with perpetual imprisonment? In vain you urged in your
defence that your enemies imposed upon you opinions quite different from
your meanings. In vain you condemned those opinions; all was of no
effect towards your justification, ’twas resolved you should be a
heretic! What did not those two false prophets accuse you of who
declaimed so severely against you before the Council of Sens? What
scandals were vented on occasion of the name of Paraclete given to your
chapel! What a storm was raised against you by the treacherous monks
when you did them the honour to be called their brother! This history of
our numerous misfortunes, related in so true and moving a manner, made
my heart bleed within me

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="margnote">Heloise weeps</span><span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> My tears, which I could
not refrain, have blotted half your letter; I wish they had effaced the
whole, and that I had returned it to you in that condition; I should
then have been satisfied with the little time I kept it; but it was
demanded of me too soon.

I must confess I was much easier in my mind before I read your letter.
Surely all the misfortunes of lovers are conveyed to them through the
eyes: upon reading your letter I feel all mine renewed. I reproached
myself for having been so long without venting my sorrows, when the rage
of our unrelenting enemies still burns with the same fury. Since length
of time, which disarms the strongest hatred, seems but to aggravate
theirs; since it is decreed that your virtue shall be persecuted till it
takes refuge in the grave--and even then, perhaps, your ashes will not
be allowed to rest in peace!--let me always meditate on your calamities,
let me publish them through all the world, if possible, to shame an age
that has not known how to value you. I will spare no one since no one
would interest himself to protect you, and your enemies are never weary
of oppressing your innocence. Alas! my memory is perpetually filled with
bitter remembrances of passed evils; and are there more to be feared
still? Shall my Abelard never be mentioned without tears? Shall the dear
name never be spoken but with sighs? Observe, I beseech you, to what a
wretched condition you have reduced me; sad, afflicted, without any
possible comfort unless it proceed from you. Be not then unkind, nor
deny me, I beg of you, that little relief which you

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="margnote">She bids Abelard write</span>only can give. Let
me have a faithful account of all that concerns you; I would know
everything, be it ever so unfortunate. Perhaps by mingling my sighs with
yours I may make your sufferings less, for it is said that all sorrows
divided are made lighter.

Tell me not by way of excuse you will spare me tears; the tears of women
shut up in a melancholy place and devoted to penitence are not to be
spared. And if you wait for an opportunity to write pleasant and
agreeable things to us, you will delay writing too long. Prosperity
seldom chooses the side of the virtuous, and fortune is so blind that in
a crowd in which there is perhaps but one wise and brave man it is not
to be expected that she should single him out. Write to me then
immediately and wait not for miracles; they are too scarce, and we too
much accustomed to misfortunes to expect a happy turn. I shall always
have this, if you please, and this will always be agreeable to me, that
when I receive any letter from you I shall know you still remember me.
Seneca (with whose writings you made me acquainted), though he was a
Stoic, seemed to be so very sensible to this kind of pleasure, that upon
opening any letters from Lucilius he imagined he felt the same delight
as when they conversed together.

I have made it an observation since our absence, that we are much fonder
of the pictures of those we love when they are at a great distance than
when they are near us. It seems to me as if the farther they are removed
their pictures grow the more finished, and acquire a greater
resemblance; or

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="margnote">The power of letters</span>at least our
imagination, which perpetually figures them to us by the desire we have
of seeing them again, makes us think so. By a peculiar power love can
make that seem life itself which, as soon as the loved object returns,
is nothing but a little canvas and flat colour. I have your picture in
my room; I never pass it without stopping to look at it; and yet when
you are present with me I scarce ever cast my eyes on it. If a picture,
which is but a mute representation of an object, can give such pleasure,
what cannot letters inspire? They have souls; they can speak; they have
in them all that force which expresses the transports of the heart; they
have all the fire of our passions, they can raise them as much as if the
persons themselves were present; they have all the tenderness and the
delicacy of speech, and sometimes even a boldness of expression beyond
it.

We may write to each other; so innocent a pleasure is not denied us. Let
us not lose through negligence the only happiness which is left us, and
the only one perhaps which the malice of our enemies can never ravish
from us. I shall read that you are my husband and you shall see me sign
myself your wife. In spite of all our misfortunes you may be what you
please in your letter. Letters were first invented for consoling such
solitary wretches as myself. Having lost the substantial pleasures of
seeing and possessing you, I shall in some measure compensate this loss
by the satisfaction I shall find in your writing. There I. shall read
your most sacred thoughts; I shall carry them always about with me, I
shall kiss them every moment; if you can be capable of

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="margnote">His duty to her nuns</span>any jealousy let it be
for the fond caresses I shall bestow upon your letters, and envy only
the happiness of those rivals. That writing may be no trouble to you,
write always to me carelessly and without study; I had rather read the
dictates of the heart than of the brain. I cannot live if you will not
tell me that you still love me; but that language ought to be so natural
to you, that I believe you cannot speak otherwise to me without violence
to yourself. And since by this melancholy relation to your friend you
have awakened all my sorrows, ’tis but reasonable you should allay them
by some tokens of your unchanging love.

I do not however reproach you for the innocent artifice you made use of
to comfort a person in affliction by comparing his misfortune to another
far greater. Charity is ingenious in finding out such pious plans, and
to be commended for using them. But do you owe nothing more to us than
to that friend--be the friendship between you ever so intimate? We are
called your Sisters; we call ourselves your children, and if it were
possible to think of any expression which could signify a dearer
relation, or a more affectionate regard and mutual obligation between
us, we should use it. If we could be so ungrateful as not to speak our
just acknowledgments to you, this church, these altars, these walls,
would reproach our silence and speak for us. But without leaving it to
that, it will always be a pleasure to me to say that you only are the
founder of this house, ’tis wholly your work. You, by inhabiting here,
have given fame and holiness to a place known before only for robberies
and murders. You have in a literal

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="margnote">Woman needs support</span>sense made the den of
thieves into a house of prayer. These cloisters owe nothing to public
charities; our walls were not raised by the usuries of publicans, nor
their foundations laid in base extortion. The God whom we serve sees
nothing but innocent riches and harmless votaries whom . you have placed
here. Whatever this young vineyard is, is owing only to you, and it is
your part to employ your whole care to cultivate and improve it; this
ought to be one of the principal affairs of your life. Though our holy
renunciation, our vows and our manner of life seem to secure us from all
temptation; though our walls and gates prohibit all approaches, yet it
is the outside only, the bark of the tree, that is protected from
injuries; the sap of the original corruption may imperceptibly spread
within, even to the heart, and prove fatal to the most promising
plantation, unless continual care be taken to cultivate and secure it.
Virtue in us is grafted upon nature and the woman; the one is
changeable, the other is weak. To plant the Lord's vineyard is a work of
no little labour; but after it is planted it will require great
application and diligence to dress it. The Apostle of the Gentiles,
great labourer as he was, says he hath planted, Apollos hath watered,
but it is God that gives the increase. Paul had planted the Gospel
amongst the Corinthians, Apollos, his zealous disciple, continued to
cultivate it by frequent exhortations; and the grace of God, which their
constant prayers implored for that church, made the work of both be
fruitful.

This ought to be an example for your conduct towards us. I know you are
not slothful, yet

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="margnote">The friendships of saints</span>your labours are
not directed towards us; your cares are wasted upon a set of men whose
thoughts are only earthly, and you refuse to reach out your hand to
support those who are weak and staggering in their way to heaven, and
who with all their endeavours can scarcely prevent themselves from
falling. You fling the pearls of the Gospel before swine when you speak
to those who are filled with the good things of this world and nourished
with the fatness of the earth; and you neglect the innocent sheep, who,
tender as they are, would yet follow you over deserts and mountains. Why
are such pains thrown away upon the ungrateful, while not a thought is
bestowed upon your children, whose souls would be filled with a sense of
your goodness? But why should I entreat you in the name of your
children? Is it possible I should fear obtaining anything of you when I
ask it in my own name? And must I use any other prayers than my own in
order to prevail upon you? The St. Austins, Tertullians and Jeromes have
written to the Eudoxias, Paulas and Melanias; and can you read those
names, though of saints, and not remember mine? Can it be criminal for
you to imitate St. Jerome and discourse with me concerning the
Scriptures; or Tertullian and preach mortification; or St. Austin and
explain to me the nature of grace? Why should I alone not reap the
advantage of your learning? When you write to me you will write to your
wife; marriage has made such a correspondence lawful, and since you can
without the least scandal satisfy me, why will you not? I am not only
engaged by my vows, but I have the fear

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span class="margnote">Love still lives</span>of my Uncle before me.
There is nothing, then, that you need dread; you need not fly to
conquer. You may see me, hear my sighs, and be a witness of all my
sorrows without incurring any danger, since you can only relieve me with
tears and words. If I have put myself into a cloister with reason,
persuade me to stay in it with devotion. You have been the occasion of
all my misfortunes, you therefore must be the instrument of all my
comfort.

You cannot but remember (for lovers cannot forget) with what pleasure I
have passed whole days in hearing your discourse. How when you were
absent I shut myself from everyone to write to you; how uneasy I was
till my letter had come to your hands; what artful management it
required to engage messengers. This detail perhaps surprises you, and
you are in pain for what may follow. But I am no longer ashamed that my
passion had no bounds for you, for I have done more than all this. I
have hated myself that I might love you; I came hither to ruin myself in
a perpetual imprisonment that I might make you live quietly and at ease.
Nothing but virtue, joined to a love perfectly disengaged from the
senses, could have produced such effects. Vice never inspires anything
like this, it is too much enslaved to the body. When we love pleasures
we love the living and not the dead. We leave off burning with desire
for those who can no longer burn for us. This was my cruel Uncle's
notion; he measured my virtue by the frailty of my sex, and thought it
was the man and not the person I loved. But he has been guilty to no

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="margnote">The liberty of love</span>purpose. I love you
more than ever; and so revenge myself on him. I will still love you with
all the tenderness of my soul till the last moment of my life. If,
formerly, my affection for you was not so pure, if in those days both
mind and body loved you, I often told you even then that I was more
pleased with possessing your heart than with any other happiness, and
the man was the thing I least valued in you.

You cannot but be entirely persuaded of this by the extreme
unwillingness I showed to marry you, though I knew that the name of wife
was honourable in the world and holy in religion; yet the name of your
mistress had greater charms because it was more free. The bonds of
matrimony, however honourable, still bear with them a necessary
engagement, and I was very unwilling to be necessitated to love always a
man who would perhaps not always love me. I despised the name of wife
that I might live happy with that of mistress; and I find by your letter
to your friend you have not forgot that delicacy of passion which loved
you always with the utmost tenderness--and yet wished to love you more!
You have very justly observed in your letter that I esteemed those
public engagements insipid which form alliances only to be dissolved by
death, and which put life and love under the same unhappy necessity. But
you have not added how often I have protested that it was infinitely
preferable to me to live with Abelard as his mistress than with any
other as Empress of the World. I was more happy in obeying you than I
should have been as lawful spouse of the King of the Earth. Riches

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="margnote">The martyrs of marriage</span>and pomp are not
the charm of love. True tenderness makes us separate the lover from all
that is external to him, and setting aside his position, fortune or
employments, consider him merely as himself.

It is not love, but the desire of riches and position which makes a
woman run into the embraces of an indolent husband. Ambition, and not
affection, forms such marriages. I believe indeed they may be followed
with some honours and advantages, but I can never think that this is the
way to experience the pleasures of affectionate union, nor to feel those
subtle and charming joys when hearts long parted are at last united.
These martyrs of marriage pine always for larger fortunes which they
think they have missed. The wife sees . husbands richer than her own,
and the husband wives better portioned than his. Their mercenary vows
occasion regret, and regret produces hatred. Soon they part--or else
desire to. This restless and tormenting passion for gold punishes them
for aiming at other advantages by love than love itself.

If there is anything that may properly be called happiness here below, I
am persuaded it is the union of two persons who love each other with
perfect liberty, who are united by a secret inclination, and satisfied
with each other's merits. Their hearts are full and leave no vacancy for
any other passion; they enjoy perpetual tranquillity because they enjoy
content.

If I could believe you as truly persuaded of my merit as I am of yours,
I might say there has been a time when we were such a pair. Alas! how

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="margnote">Abelard's attractions</span>was it possible I
should not be certain of your mind? If I could ever have doubted it, the
universal esteem would have made me decide in your favour. What country,
what city, has not desired your presence? Could you ever retire but you
drew the eyes and hearts of all after you? Did not everyone rejoice in
having seen you? Even women, breaking through the laws of decorum which
custom had imposed upon them, showed they felt more for you than mere
esteem. I have known some who have been profuse in their husbands'
praises who have yet envied me my happiness. But what could resist you?
Your reputation, which so much attracts the vanity of our sex, your air,
your manner, that light in your eyes which expresses the vivacity of
your mind, your conversation so easy and elegant that it gave everything
you said an agreeable turn; in short, everything spoke for you! Very
different from those mere scholars who with all their learning have not
the capacity to keep up an ordinary conversation, and who with all their
wit cannot win a woman who has much less share of brains than
themselves.

With what ease did you compose verses! And yet those ingenious trifles,
which were but a recreation to you, are still the entertainment and
delight of persons of the best taste. The smallest song, the least
sketch of anything you made for me, had a thousand beauties capable of
making it last as long as there are lovers in the world. Thus those
songs will be sung in honour of other women which you designed only for
me, and those tender and natural expressions which spoke your

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span class="margnote">She is not jealous </span>love will help others
to explain their passion with much more advantage than they themselves
are capable of.

What rivalries did your gallantries of this kind occasion me! How many
ladies lay claim to them? ‘Twas a tribute their self-love paid to their
beauty. How many have I seen with sighs declare their passion for you
when, after some common visit you had made them, they chanced to be
complimented for the Sylvia of your poems. Others in despair and envy
have reproached me that I had no charms but what your wit bestowed on
me, nor in anything the advantage over them but in being beloved by you.
Can you believe me if I tell you, that notwithstanding my sex, I thought
myself peculiarly happy in having a lover to whom I was obliged for my
charms; and took a secret pleasure in being admired by a man who, when
he pleased, could raise his mistress to the character of a goddess.
Pleased with your glory only, I read with delight all those praises you
offered me, and without reflecting how little I deserved, I believed
myself such as you described, that I might be more certain that I
pleased you.

But oh! where is that happy time? I now lament my lover, and of all my
joys have nothing but the painful memory that they are past. Now learn,
all you my rivals who once viewed my happiness with jealous eyes, that
he you once envied me can never more be mine. I loved him; my love was
his crime and the cause of his punishment. My beauty once charmed him;
pleased with each other we passed our brightest days in tranquillity and
happiness. If that were a

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="margnote">She reproaches him for neglect</span>crime, ’tis
a crime I am yet fond of, and I have no other regret save that against
my will I must now be innocent. But what do I say? My misfortune was to
have cruel relatives whose malice destroyed the calm we enjoyed; had
they been reasonable I had now been happy in the enjoyment of my dear
husband. Oh! how cruel were they when their blind fury urged a villain
to surprise you in your sleep! Where was I--where was your Heloise then?
What joy should I have had in defending my lover; I would have guarded
you from violence at the expense of my life. Oh! whither does this
excess of passion hurry me? Here love is shocked and modesty deprives me
of words.

But tell me whence proceeds your neglect of me since my being professed?
You know nothing moved me to it but your disgrace, nor did I give my
consent, but yours. Let me hear what is the occasion of your coldness,
or give me leave to tell you now my opinion. Was it not the sole thought
of pleasure which engaged you to me? And has not my tenderness, by
leaving you nothing to wish for, extinguished your desires? Wretched
Heloise! you could please when you wished to avoid it; you merited
incense when you could remove to a distance the hand that offered it:
but since your heart has been softened and has yielded, since you have
devoted and sacrificed yourself, you are deserted and forgotten! I am
convinced by a sad experience that it is natural to avoid those to whom
we have been too much obliged, and that uncommon generosity causes
neglect rather than gratitude. My heart surrendered too soon to gain

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="margnote">Between God and man</span>the esteem of the
conqueror; you took it without difficulty and throw it aside with ease.
But ungrateful as you are I am no consenting party to this, and though I
ought not to retain a wish of my own, yet I still preserve secretly the
desire to be loved by you. When I pronounced my sad vow I then had about
me your last letters in which you protested your whole being wholly
mine, and would never live but to love me. It is to you therefore I have
offered myself; you had my heart and I had yours; do not demand anything
back. You must bear with my passion as a thing which of right belongs to
you, and from which you can be no ways disengaged.

Alas! what folly it is to talk in this way! I see nothing here but marks
of the Deity, and I speak of nothing but man! You have been the cruel
occasion of this by your conduct, Unfaithful One! Ought you at once to
break off loving me! Why did you not deceive me for a while rather than
immediately abandon me? If you had given me at least some faint signs of
a dying passion I would have favoured the deception. But in vain do I
flatter myself that you could be constant; you have left no vestige of
an excuse for you. I am earnestly desirous to see you, but if that be
impossible I will content myself with a few lines from your hand. Is it
so hard for one who loves to write? I ask for none of your letters
filled with learning and writ for your reputation; all I desire is such
letters as the heart dictates, and which the hand cannot transcribe fast
enough. How did I deceive myself with hopes that you would be wholly
mine when I

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span class="margnote">She confesses her sin</span>took the veil, and
engage myself to live for ever under your laws? For in being professed I
vowed no more than to be yours only, and I forced myself voluntarily to
a confinement which you desired for me. Death only then can make me
leave the cloister where you have placed me; and then my ashes shall
rest here and wait for yours in order to show to the very last my
obedience and devotion to you.

Why should I conceal from you the secret of my call? You know it was
neither zeal nor devotion that brought me here. Your conscience is too
faithful a witness to permit you to disown it. Yet here I am, and here I
will remain; to this place an unfortunate love and a cruel relation have
condemned me. But if you do not continue your concern for me, if I lose
your affection, what have I gained by my imprisonment? What recompense
can I hope for? The unhappy consequences of our love and your disgrace
have made me put on the habit of chastity, but I am not penitent of the
past. Thus I strive and labour in vain. Among those who are wedded to
God I am wedded to a man; among the heroic supporters of the Cross I am
the slave of a human desire; at the head of a religious community I am
devoted to Abelard alone. What a monster am I! Enlighten me, O Lord, for
I know not if my despair or Thy grace draws these words from me! I am, I
confess, a sinner, but one who, far from weeping for her sins, weeps
only for her lover; far from abhorring her crimes, longs only to add to
them; and who, with a weakness unbecoming my state, please myself

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="margnote">But yields to her passion</span>continually with
the remembrance of past delights when it is impossible to renew them.

Good God! What is all this? I reproach myself for my own faults, I
accuse you for yours, and to what purpose? Veiled as I am, behold in
what a disorder you have plunged me! How difficult it is to fight for
duty against inclination. I know what obligations this veil lays upon
me, but I feel more strongly what power an old passion has over my
heart. I am conquered by my feelings; love troubles my mind and
disorders my will. Sometimes I am swayed by the sentiment of piety which
arises within me, and then the next moment I yield up my imagination to
all that is amorous and tender. I tell you to-day what I would not have
said to you yesterday. I had resolved to love you no more; I considered
I had made a vow, taken a veil, and am as it were dead and buried, yet
there rises unexpectedly from the bottom of my heart a passion which
triumphs over all these thoughts, and darkens alike my reason and my
religion. You reign in such inward retreats of my soul that I know not
where to attack you; when I endeavour to break those chains by which I
am bound to you I only deceive myself, and all my efforts but serve to
bind them faster. Oh, for pity's sake help a wretch to renounce her
desires--her self--and if possible even to renounce you! If you are a
lover--a father, help a mistress, comfort a child! These tender names
must surely move you; yield either to pity or to love. If you gratify my
request I shall continue a religious, and without longer profaning my
calling. I am ready to

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="margnote">Further reproaches</span>humble myself with you
to the wonderful goodness of God, Who does all things for our
sanctification, Who by His grace purifies all that is vicious and
corrupt, and by the great riches of His mercy draws us against our
wishes, and by degrees opens our eyes to behold His bounty which at
first we could not perceive.

I thought to end my letter here, but now I am complaining against you I
must unload my heart and tell you all its jealousies and reproaches.
Indeed I thought it somewhat bard that when we had both engaged to
consecrate ourselves to Heaven you should insist upon my doing it first.
'Does Abelard then,' said I, 'suspect that, like Lot's wife, I shall
look back?' If my youth and sex might give occasion of fear that I
should return to the world, could not my behaviour, my fidelity, and
this heart which you ought to know, banish such ungenerous
apprehensions? This distrust hurt me; I said to myself, 'There was a
time when he could rely upon my bare word, and does he now want vows to
secure himself to me? What occasion have I given him in the whole course
of my life to admit the least suspicion? I could meet him at all his
assignations, and would I decline to follow him to the Seats of
Holiness? I, who have not refused to be the victim of pleasure in order
to gratify him, can he think I would refuse to be a sacrifice of honour
when he desired it?' Has vice such charms to refined natures, that when
once we have drunk of the cup of sinners it is with such difficulty we
accept the chalice of saints? Or did you believe yourself to be more
competent to teach vice than virtue,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="margnote">The Purity of her love</span>or me more ready to
learn the first than the latter? No; this suspicion would be injurious
to us both: Virtue is too beautiful not to be embraced when you reveal
her charms, and Vice too hideous not to be abhorred when you display her
deformities. Nay, when you please, anything seems

lovely to me, and nothing is ugly when you are by. I am only weak when I
am alone and unsupported by you, and therefore it depends on you alone
to make me such as you desire. I wish to Heaven you had not such a power
over me! If you had any occasion to fear you would be less negligent.
But what is there for you to fear? I have done too much, and now have
nothing more to do but to triumph over your ingratitude. When we lived
happily together you might have doubted whether pleasure or affection
united me more to you, but the place from whence I write to you must
surely have dissolved all doubt. Even here I love you as much as ever I
did in the world. If I had loved pleasures could I not have found means
to gratify myself? I was not more than twenty-two years old, and there
were other men left though I was deprived of Abelard. And yet I buried
myself alive in a nunnery, and triumphed over life at an age capable of
enjoying it to its full latitude. It is to you I sacrifice these remains
of a transitory beauty, these widowed nights and tedious days; and since
you cannot possess them I take them from you to offer them to Heaven,
and so make, alas! but a secondary oblation of my heart, my days, my
life!

I am sensible I have dwelt too long on this subject; I ought to speak
less to you of your

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="margnote">The strength of her love</span>misfortunes and of
my sufferings. We tarnish the lustre of our most beautiful actions when
we applaud them ourselves. This is true, and yet there is a time when we
may with decency commend ourselves; when we have to do with those whom
base ingratitude has stupefied we cannot too much praise our own
actions. Now if you were this sort of creature this would be a home
reflection on you. Irresolute as I am I still love you, and yet I must
hope for nothing. I have renounced life, and stript myself of
everything, but I find I neither have nor can renounce my Abelard.
Though I have lost my lover I still preserve my love. O vows! O convent!
I have not lost my humanity under your inexorable discipline! You have
not turned me to marble by changing my habit; my heart is not hardened
by my imprisonment; I am still sensible to what has touched me, though,
alas! I ought not to be! Without offending your commands permit a lover
to exhort me to live in obedience to your rigorous rules. Your yoke will
be lighter if that hand support me under it; your exercises will be
pleasant if he show me their advantage. Retirement and solitude will no
longer seem terrible if I may know that I still have a place in his
memory. A heart which has loved as mine cannot soon be indifferent. We
fluctuate long between love and hatred before we can arrive at
tranquillity, and we always flatter ourselves with some forlorn hope
that we shall not be utterly forgotten.

Yes, Abelard, I conjure you by the chains I bear here to ease the weight
of them, and make them as agreeable as I would they were to me.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="margnote">The human or the divine</span><span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Teach me the maxims of
Divine Love; since you have forsaken me I would glory in being wedded to
Heaven. My heart adores that title and disdains any other; tell me how
this Divine Love is nourished, how it works, how it purifies. When we
were tossed on the ocean of the world we could hear of nothing but your
verses, which published everywhere our joys and pleasures. Now we are in
the haven of grace is it not fit you should discourse to me of this new
happiness, and teach me everything that might heighten or improve it?
Show me the same complaisance in my present condition as you did when we
were in the world. Without changing the ardour of our affections let us
change their objects; let us leave our songs and sing hymns; let us lift
up our hearts to God and have no transports but for His glory!

I expect this from you as a thing you cannot refuse me. God has a
peculiar right over the hearts of great men He has created. When He
pleases to touch them He ravishes them, and lets them not speak nor
breathe but for His glory. Till that moment of grace arrives, O think of
me--do not forget me--remember my love and fidelity and constancy: love
me as your mistress, cherish me as your child, your sister, your wife!
Remember I still love you, and yet strive to avoid loving you. What a
terrible saying is this! I shake with horror, and my heart revolts
against what I say. I shall blot all my paper with tears. I end my long
letter wishing you, if you desire it (would to Heaven I could!), for
ever adieu!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter III. Abelard to Heloise](aah05)
