[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aah05)  [Next](aah07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7H7K/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Love Letters of Abelard and Heloise*, \[1901\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### LETTER IV

#### Heloise to Abelard

*To Abelard her well-beloved in Christ Jesus, from Heloise his
well-beloved in the same Christ Jesus*.

<span class="margnote">Ingenious torments</span>I READ the letter I
received from you with great impatience: in spite of all my misfortunes
I hoped to find nothing in it besides arguments of comfort. But how
ingenious are lovers in tormenting themselves. Judge of the exquisite
sensibility and force of my love by that which causes the grief of my
soul. I was disturbed at the superscription of your letter; why did you
place the name of Heloise before that of Abelard? What means this cruel
and unjust distinction? It was your name only--the name of a father and
a husband--which my eager eyes sought for. I did not look for my own,
which I would if possible forget, for it is the cause of all your
misfortunes. The rules of decorum, and your position as master and
director over me, opposed that ceremony in addressing me; and love
commanded you to banish it: alas! you know all this but too well!

Did you address me thus before cruel fortune had ruined my happiness? I
see your heart has forsaken me, and you have made greater advances in
the way of devotion than I could wish. Alas! I am too weak to follow
you; condescend at least to stay for me and animate me with your

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="margnote">of death</span>advice. Can you have the cruelty
to abandon me? The fear of this stabs my heart; the fearful presages you
make at the end of your letter, those terrible images you draw of your
death, quite distract me. Cruel Abelard! you ought to have stopped my
tears and you make them flow. You ought to have quelled the turmoil of
my heart and you throw me into greater disorder.

You desire that after your death I should take care of your ashes and
pay them the last duties. Alas! in what temper did you conceive these
mournful ideas, and how could you describe them to me? Did not the dread
of causing my immediate death make the pen drop from your hand? You did
not reflect, I suppose, upon all those torments to which you were going
to deliver me? Heaven, severe as it has been to me, is not so insensible
as to permit me to live one moment after you. Life without Abelard were
an insupportable punishment, and death a most exquisite happiness if by
that means I could be united to him. If Heaven but hearken to my
continual cry, your days will be prolonged and you will bury me.

Is it not your part to prepare me by powerful exhortation against that
great crisis which shakes the most resolute and stable minds? Is it not
your part to receive my last sighs, superintend my funeral, and give an
account of my acts and my faith? Who but you can recommend us worthily
to God, and by the fervour and merit of your prayers conduct those souls
to Him which you have joined to His worship by solemn vows? We expect
those pious offices from your paternal

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="margnote">Remembrance after death</span>charity. After this
you will be free from those disquietudcs which now molest you, and you
will quit life with ease whenever it shall please God to call you away.
You may follow us content with what you have done, and in a full
assurance of our happiness. But till then write me no more such terrible
things; for we are already sufficiently miserable, nor need to have our
sorrows aggravated. Our life here is but a languishing death; would you
hasten it? Our present disgraces are sufficient to employ our thoughts
continually, and shall we seek in the future new reasons for fear? How
void of reason are men, said Seneca, to make distant evils present by
reflections, and to take pains before death to lose all the joys of
life.

When you have finished your course here below, you said that it is your
desire that your body be borne to the House of the Paraclete, to the
intent that being always before my eyes you may be ever present in my
mind. Can you think that the traces you have drawn on my heart can ever
be worn out, or that any length of time can obliterate the memory we
hold here of your benefits? And what time shall I find for those prayers
you speak of? Alas! I shall then be filled with other cares, for so
heavy a misfortune would leave me no moment's quiet. Can my feeble
reason resist such powerful assaults? When I am distracted and raving
(if I dare say it) even against Heaven itself, I shall not soften it by
my cries, but rather provoke it by my reproaches. How should I pray or
how bear up against my grief? I should be more eager to follow you

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="margnote">The dread of death</span>than to pay you the sad
ceremonies of a funeral. It is for you, for Abelard, that I have
resolved to live, and if you are ravished from me I can make no use of
my miserable days. Alas! what lamentations should I make if Heaven, by a
cruel pity, preserved me for that moment? When I but think of this last
separation I feel all the pangs of death; what should I be then if I
should see this dreadful hour? Forbear therefore to infuse into my mind
such mournful thoughts, if not for love, at least for pity.

You desire me to give myself up to my duty, and to be wholly God's, to
whom I am consecrated. How can I do that, when you frighten me with
apprehensions that continually possess my mind both night and day? When
an evil threatens us, and it is impossible to ward it off, why do we
give up ourselves to the unprofitable fear of it, which is yet even more
tormenting than the evil itself? What have I hope for after the loss of
you? What can confine me to earth when death shall have taken away from
me all that was dear on it? I have renounced without difficulty all the
charms of life, preserving only my love, and the secret pleasure of
thinking incessantly of you, and hearing that you live. And yet, alas!
you do not live for me, and dare not flatter myself even with the hope
that I shall ever see you again. This is the greatest of my afflictions.

Merciless Fortune! hadst thou not persecuted me enough? Thou dost not
give me any respite; thou hast exhausted all thy vengeance upon me, and
reserved thyself nothing whereby thou mayst appear terrible to others.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="margnote">No rise without a fall</span>Thou hast wearied
thyself in tormenting me, and others have nothing to fear from thy
anger. But what use to longer arm thyself against me? The wounds I have
already received leave no room for others, unless thou desirest to kill
me. Or dost thou fear amidst the numerous torments heaped on me, dost
thou fear that such a final stroke would deliver me from all other ills?
Therefore thou preservest me from death in order to make me die daily.

Dear Abelard, pity my despair! Was ever any being so miserable? The
higher you raised me above other women, who envied me your love, the
more sensible am I now of the loss of your heart. I was exalted to the
top of happiness only that I might have the more terrible fall. Nothing
could be compared to my pleasures, and now nothing can equal my misery.
My joys once raised the envy of my rivals, my present wretchedness calls
forth the compassion of all that see me. My Fortune has been always in
extremes; she has loaded me with the greatest favours and then heaped me
with the greatest afflictions; ingenious in tormenting me, she has made
the memory of the joys I have lost an inexhaustible spring of tears.
Love, which being possest was her most delightful gift, on being taken
away is an untold sorrow. In short, her malice has entirely succeeded,
and I find my present afflictions proportionately bitter as the
transports which charmed me were sweet.

But what aggravates my sufferings yet more is, that we began to be
miserable at a time when we seemed the least to deserve it. While we

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="margnote">Man and woman</span>gave ourselves up to the
enjoyment of a guilty love nothing opposed our pleasures; but scarcely
had we retrenched our passion and taken refuge in matrimony, than the
wrath of Heaven fell on us with all its weight. And how barbarous was
your punishment! Ah! what right had a cruel Uncle over us? We were
joined to each other even before the altar, and this should have
protected us from the rage of our enemies. Besides, we were separated;
you were busy with your lectures and instructed a learned audience in
mysteries which the greatest geniuses before you could not penetrate;
and I, in obedience to you, retired to a cloister. I there spent whole
days in thinking of you, and sometimes meditating on holy lessons to
which I endeavoured to apply myself. At this very juncture punishment
fell upon us, and you who were least guilty became the object of the
whole vengeance of a barbarous man. But why should I rave at Fulbert? I,
wretched I, have ruined you, and have been the cause of all your
misfortunes. How dangerous it is for a great man to suffer himself to be
moved by our sex! He ought from his infancy to be inured to
insensibility of heart against all our charms. 'Hearken, my son' (said
formerly the wisest of men), attend and keep my instructions; if a
beautiful woman by her looks endeavour to entice thee, permit not
thyself to be overcome by a corrupt inclination; reject the poison she
offers, and follow not the paths she directs. Her house is the gate of
destruction and death.' I have long examined things, and have found that
death is less dangerous than beauty. It is the shipwreck

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="margnote">Men ruined by women</span>of liberty, a fatal
snare, from which it is impossible ever to get free. It was a woman who
threw down the first man from the glorious position in which Heaven had
placed him; she, who was created to partake of his happiness, was the
sole cause of his ruin. How bright had been the glory of Samson if his
heart had been proof against the charms of Delilah, as against the
weapons of the Philistines. A woman disarmed and betrayed he who had
been a conqueror of armies. He saw himself delivered into the hands of
his enemies; he was deprived of his eyes, those inlets of love into the
soul; distracted and despairing he died without any consolation save
that of including his enemies in his ruin. Solomon, that he might please
women, forsook pleasing God; that king whose wisdom princes came from
all parts to admire, he whom God had chosen to build the temple,
abandoned the worship of the very altars he had raised, and proceeded to
such a pitch of folly as even to burn incense to idols. Job had no enemy
more cruel than his wife; what temptations did he not bear? The evil
spirit who had declared himself his persecutor employed a woman as an
instrument to shake his constancy. And the same evil spirit made Heloise
an instrument to ruin Abelard. All the poor comfort I have is that I am
not the voluntary cause of your misfortunes. I have not betrayed you;
but my constancy and love have been destructive to you. If I have
committed a crime in loving you so constantly I cannot repent it. I have
endeavoured to please you even at the expense of my virtue, and
therefore deserve

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="margnote">Lost enjoyments</span>the pains I feel. As soon
as I was persuaded of your love I delayed scarce a moment in yielding to
your protestations; to be beloved by Abelard was in my esteem so great a
glory, and I so impatiently desired it, not to believe in it
immediately. I aimed at nothing but convincing you of my utmost passion.
I made no use of those defences of disdain and honour; those enemies of
pleasure which tyrannise over our sex made in me but a weak and
unprofitable resistance. I sacrificed all to my love, and I forced my
duty to give place to the ambition of making happy the most famous and
learned person of the age. If any consideration had been able to stop
me, it would have been without doubt my love. I feared lest having
nothing further to offer you your passion might become languid, and you
might seek for new pleasures in another conquest. But it was easy for
you to cure me of a suspicion so opposite to my own inclination. I ought
to have foreseen other more certain evils, and to have considered that
the idea of lost enjoyments would be the trouble of my whole life.

How happy should I be could I wash out with my tears the memory of those
pleasures which I yet think of with delight. At least I will try by
strong endeavour to smother in my heart those desires to which the
frailty of my nature gives birth, and I will exercise on myself such
torments as those you have to suffer from the rage of your enemies. I
will endeavour by this means to satisfy you at least, if I cannot
appease an angry God. For to show you to what a deplorable condition I
am reduced, and how far my repentance is from

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<span class="margnote">Her sin is love</span>being complete, I dare even
accuse Heaven at this moment of cruelty for delivering you over to the
snares prepared for you. My repinings can only kindle divine wrath, when
I should be seeking for mercy.

In order to expiate a crime it is not sufficient to bear the punishment;
whatever we suffer is of no avail if the passion still continues and the
heart is filled with the same desire. It is an easy matter to confess a
weakness, and inflict on ourselves some punishment, but it needs perfect
power over our nature to extinguish the memory of pleasures, which by a
loved habitude have gained possession of our minds. How many persons do
we see who make an outward confession of their faults, yet, far from
being in distress about them, take a new pleasure in relating them.
Contrition of the heart ought to accompany the confession of the mouth,
yet this very rarely happens. I, who have experienced so many pleasures
in loving you, feel, in spite of myself, that I cannot repent them, nor
forbear through memory to enjoy them over again. Whatever efforts I use,
on whatever side I turn, the sweet thought still pursues me, and every
object brings to my mind what it is my duty to forget. During the quiet
night, when my heart ought to be still in that sleep which suspends the
greatest cares, I cannot avoid the illusions of my heart. I dream I am
still with my dear Abelard. I see him, I speak to him and hear him
answer. Charmed with each other we forsake our studies and give
ourselves up to love. Sometimes too I seem to struggle with your
enemies; I oppose their fury, I break into piteous

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="margnote">She loves her sin</span>cries, and in a moment I
awake in tears. Even into holy places before the altar I carry the
memory of our love, and far from lamenting for having been seduced by
pleasures, I sigh for having lost them.

I remember (for nothing is forgot by lovers) the time and place in which
you first declared your passion and swore you would love me till death.
Your words, your oaths, are deeply graven in my heart. My stammering
speech betrays to all the disorder of my mind; my sighs discover me, and
your name is ever on my lips. O Lord! when I am thus afflicted why dost
not Thou pity my weakness and strengthen me with Thy grace? You are
happy, Abelard, in that grace is given you, and your misfortune has been
the occasion of your finding rest. The punishment of your body has cured
the deadly wounds of your soul. The tempest has driven you into the
haven. God, who seemed to deal heavily with you, sought only to help
you; He was a Father chastising and not an Enemy revenging--a wise
Physician putting you to some pain in order to preserve your life. I am
a thousand times more to be pitied than you, for I have still a thousand
passions to fight. I must resist those fires which love kindles in a
young heart. Our sex is nothing but weakness, and I have the greater
difficulty in defending myself because the enemy that attacks me pleases
me; I doat on the danger which threatens; how then can I avoid yielding?

In the midst of these struggles I try at least to conceal my weakness
from those you have entrusted

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="margnote">Her virtue is mere semblance</span>to my care.
All who are about me admire my virtue, but could their eyes penetrate,
into my heart what would they not discover? My passions there are in
rebellion; I preside over others but cannot rule myself. I have a false
covering, and this seeming virtue is a real vice. Men judge me
praiseworthy, but I am guilty before God; from His all-seeing eye
nothing is hid, and He views through all their windings the secrets of
the heart. I cannot escape His discovery. And yet it means great effort
to me merely to maintain this appearance of virtue, so surely this
troublesome hypocrisy is in some sort commendable. I give no scandal to
the world which is so easy to take bad impressions; I do not shake the
virtue of those feeble ones who are under my rule. With my heart full of
the love of man, I teach them at least to love only God. Charmed with
the pomp of worldly pleasures, I endeavour to show them that they are
all vanity and deceit. I have just strength enough to conceal from them
my longings, and I look upon that as a great effect of grace. If it is
not enough to make me embrace virtue, ’tis enough to keep me from
committing sin.

And yet it is in vain to try and separate these two things: they must be
guilty who are not righteous, and they depart from virtue who delay to
approach it. Besides, we ought to have no other motive than the love of
God. Alas! what can I then hope for? I own to my confusion I fear more
to offend a man than to provoke God, and I study less to please Him than
to please you. Yes, it was your command only, and not a

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="margnote">False piety brings no peace</span>sincere
vocation, which sent me into these cloisters; I sought to give you ease
and not to sanctify myself. How unhappy am I! I tear myself from all
that pleases me; I bury myself alive; I exercise myself with the most
rigid fastings and all those severities the cruel laws impose on us; I
feed myself with tears and sorrows; and notwithstanding this I merit
nothing by my penance. My false piety has long deceived you as well as
others; you have thought me at peace when I was more disturbed than
ever. You persuaded yourself I was wholly devoted to my duty, yet I had
no business but love. Under this mistake you desire my prayers--alas! I
need yours! Do not presume upon my virtue and my care; I am wavering,
fix me by your advice; I am feeble, sustain and guide me by your
counsel.

What occasion had you to praise me? Praise is often hurtful for those on
whom it is bestowed: a secret vanity springs up in the heart, blinds us,
and conceals from us the wounds that are half healed. A seducer flatters
us, and at the same time destroys us. A sincere friend disguises nothing
from us, and far from passing a light hand over the wound, makes us feel
it the more intensely by applying remedies. Why do you not deal after
this manner with me? Will you be esteemed a base, dangerous flatterer?
or if you chance to see anything commendable in me, have you no fear
that vanity, which is so natural to all women, should quite efface it?
But let us not judge of virtue by outward appearances, for then the
reprobate as well as the elect may lay claim to it. An artful impostor
may by his address gain

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="margnote">She craves his severity</span>more admiration
than is given to the zeal of a saint.

The heart of man is a labyrinth whose windings are very difficult to
discover. The praises you give me are the more dangerous because I love
the person who bestows them. The more I desire to please you the readier
am I to believe the merit you attribute to me. Ah! think rather how to
nerve my weakness by wholesome remonstrances! Be rather fearful than
confident of my salvation; say our virtue is founded upon weakness, and
that they only will be crowned who have fought with the greatest
difficulties. But I seek not the crown which is the reward of victory I
am content if I can avoid danger. It is easier to keep out of the way
than to win a battle. There are several degrees in glory, and I am not
ambitious of the highest; I leave them to those of greater courage who
have often been victorious. I seek not to conquer for fear I should be
overcome; happiness enough for me to escape shipwreck and at last reach
port. Heaven commands me to renounce my fatal passion for you, but oh!
my heart will never be able to consent to it. Adieu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter V.--Heloise to Abelard](aah07.md)
