[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2607) 
[Next](sbe2609) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2">3:2:2</span></span>

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:1">3:2:2:1</span></span>1. He
maintains silence; and silently he remains seated till sunset. The
reason why he maintains silence is this:

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:2">3:2:2:2</span></span>2. By
means of the sacrifice the gods gained that supreme authority which they
now wield. They spake, 'How can this (world) of ours be made
unattainable to men?' They sipped the sap of the sacrifice, even as bees
would suck out honey; and having drained the sacrifice and scattered it
by means of the sacrificial post, they disappeared: and because they
scattered (yopaya, viz. the sacrifice) therewith, therefore it is called
yûpa (post) <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_100).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:3">3:2:2:3</span></span>3. Now
this was heard by the *Ri*shis. They collected the sacrifice. As that
sacrifice was collected (prepared) <span
id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_101), so does he who is consecrated collect
the sacrifice (by keeping his speech within him),--for the sacrifice is
speech.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:4">3:2:2:4</span></span>4. When
the sun has set, he breaks silence. Now Pra*g*âpati is the year, since
the sacrifice is Pra*g*âpati; and the year is day and night, since these
two revolving produce it. He has been consecrated during the day, and he
has gained the night: as great as the sacrifice is, as great as is its
extent, to that extent has he gained it before he breaks silence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:5">3:2:2:5</span></span>5. Some,
however, make him break his silence on seeing the (first) start <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_102), arguing that then the sun has actually
set. But let him not do so, for what would become of them if it were
cloudy? Let him therefore break silence as soon as he thinks the sun has
set.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:6">3:2:2:6</span></span>6. Now,
some make him break silence by the formula, 'Earth! ether! sky!' arguing
that thereby they strengthen the sacrifice, they heal, the sacrifice.
But let him not do so; for he who breaks silence with that (formula)
does not strengthen the sacrifice, does not heal the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:7">3:2:2:7</span></span>7. Let
him rather break silence with this one (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 11), 'Prepare ye
the fast-food! prepare ye the fast-food! \[prepare ye the fast-food!\]
Agni is the Brahman, Agni is the sacrifice; the tree is meet for the
sacrifice.' For this indeed is his sacrifice, this is his havis-offering
at this (rite of consecration), even as the Agnihotra was
heretofore <span id="fr_104"></span>[2](#fn_103). In thus preparing the
(Soma) sacrifice by means of the sacrifice, he establishes the sacrifice

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

in the sacrifice, and carries on the sacrifice by means of the
sacrifice; for (the partaking of) that fast-food is indeed carried on by
him till the pressing of the Soma. Thrice he pronounces (the first
words <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_104)), for threefold is the
sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:8">3:2:2:8</span></span>8.
Moreover, he breaks silence, after turning round towards the fire. He,
on the other hand, who breaks silence with any other (formula) but
this <span id="fr_106"></span>[2](#fn_105), does not strengthen the
sacrifice, does not heal the sacrifice. In pronouncing the first (part
of the formula) <span id="fr_107"></span>[3](#fn_106) he utters the
truth of speech <span id="fr_108"></span>[4](#fn_107).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:9">3:2:2:9</span></span>9. 'Agni
is the Brahman' (neut.), he says, for Agni is indeed the Brahman
(sacerdotium);--'Agni is the sacrifice,' for Agni is indeed the
sacrifice;--'the tree is meet for the sacrifice,' for trees <span
id="fr_109"></span>[5](#fn_108) are indeed meet for the sacrifice, since
men could not sacrifice, if there were no trees: therefore he says, 'the
tree is meet for the sacrifice.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:10">3:2:2:10</span></span>10.
Thereupon they cook the fast-food for him. For he who is consecrated
draws nigh to the gods and becomes one of the deities. But the
sacrificial food of the gods must be cooked, and not uncooked: hence
they cook it, and he partakes of that fast-milk

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (vrata) and does
not offer it in the fire. The reason why he eats the fast-food and does
not offer it in the fire is this:

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:11">3:2:2:11</span></span>11. By
means of the sacrifice the gods gained that supreme authority which they
now wield. They spake, 'How can this (world) of ours be made
unattainable to men?' They sipped the sap of the sacrifice, even as bees
would suck out honey; and having drained the sacrifice and scattered it
by means of the sacrificial post, they disappeared. And because they
scattered (yopaya) therewith, therefore it is called yûpa (post).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:12">3:2:2:12</span></span>12. Now
this was heard by the *Ri*shis. They collected the sacrifice. As that
sacrifice was collected, so does he who is consecrated now become the
sacrifice, for it is he that carries it on, that produces it. And
whatever (sap) of the sacrifice was sucked out and drained, that he now
restores again by sipping the fast-milk and not offering it in the fire;
for, assuredly, were he to offer it in the fire, he would not replenish
(the sacrifice). But let him, nevertheless, think (that he does so)
sacrificing and not the reverse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:13">3:2:2:13</span></span>13.
For, verily, these vital airs are born of the mind, endowed with
mind <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_109), of intelligent power <span
id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_110): Agni is speech; Mitra and Varu*n*a are
the out-breathing and the in-breathing; Âditya (the sun) is the eye; and
the All-gods are the ear,--it is unto these deities that offering is
thereby made by him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:14">3:2:2:14</span></span>14.
Now, some add both rice and barley to the first (day's) fast-milk,
arguing,--"By means of these two substances (rasa) we restore what part
of the sacrifice was sucked out and drained; and, should

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

the vrata-cow yield no milk, he may prepare his fast-food of whichever
of these (cereals) he pleases; and thus both the rice and the barley are
'taken hold of' by him." But let him not do this; for he who adds both
rice and barley (to the milk) neither replenishes the sacrifice nor
heals it. Let him therefore add only the one or the other (cereal). Both
the rice and barley doubtless form his (havis) material for offering (at
the New and Full-moon Sacrifice), and when they do so become his
material for offering, then they are also 'taken hold of <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_111)' by him. Should the vrata, cow yield no
milk, let him prepare the fast-food of whichever of them he pleases.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:15">3:2:2:15</span></span>15.
Some, again, add to the first (day's) fast-food (vrata) all manner of
vegetables and fragrant (seasoning), arguing,--'If disease were to
befall him, he might cure it by whatever thereof he pleases, as if he
cured it by the fast-milk <span id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_112).' But
let him not

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

do this, lest he should do what is inauspicious to the sacrifice; for
those people do at the sacrifice what is a human act, and inauspicious
to the sacrifice assuredly is that which is human. If any disease were
to befall him who is consecrated, let him cure it wherewith he pleases;
for completion is proper <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_113).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:16">3:2:2:16</span></span>16. He
(the Adhvaryu) hands the fast-food to him, after letting the ordinary
(meal-)time pass,--viz. the evening-milk in the latter part of the
night, and the morning-milk in the afternoon,--for the sake of
distinction: he thereby distinguishes the divine from the human.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:17">3:2:2:17</span></span>17. And
when he is about to hand the fast-food to him he makes him touch
water <span id="fr_115"></span>[2](#fn_114), with the text, 'For
protection we direct our thoughts to divine devotion, the source of
supreme mercy <span id="fr_116"></span>[3](#fn_115), the bestower of
glory and the bearer of sacrifices <span
id="fr_117"></span>[4](#fn_116): may it prosper our ways, according to
our desire!' Heretofore, indeed, it was for a human meal that he
cleansed himself, but now it is for the sake of divine devotion:
therefore he says, 'For the sake of assistance we turn our thoughts to
divine devotion, the source of supreme mercy, the bestower of glory, the
bearer of sacrifices: may it

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

prosper our ways, according to our desire!' Whenever, being about to
take the fast-food, he touches water, let him touch it with this same
(formula).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:18">3:2:2:18</span></span>18.
Thereupon he drinks the fast-food, with the text, 'May the gods favour
us, they who are born of the mind, and endowed with mind <span
id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_117), and of intelligent power! may they
protect us! Hail to them!' Thus that (fast-food) comes to be for him (by
means of the Svâhâ) as an oblation consecrated by the Vasha*t*.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:19">3:2:2:19</span></span>19.
Having drank the fast-food, he touches his navel <span
id="fr_119"></span>[2](#fn_118), with the text (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 12), 'Ye
waters that have been drank, may ye become palatable and auspicious
within us! may they prove agreeable to us, freeing us from disease and
weakness and sin,--they the divine, the immortal, the holy!' Now, he who
is consecrated draws nigh to the gods and becomes one of the deities;
but the sacrificial food of the gods is not increased (with other
material): hence, if in handing the fast-food (to the consecrated) he
increases it (with other milk), he commits a fault and breaks the fast.
This (formula), however, is the atonement for that (transgression), and
thus that fault is not committed by him, and he does not break the fast
(or  vow): therefore he says, 'Ye waters . . . !' Whenever, after
drinking the fast-food, he touches his navel, let him touch it with this
(formula); for who

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

knows whether (or not) he who hands the fast-food (to the consecrated)
increases it (with other milk) <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_119)!

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:20">3:2:2:20</span></span>20.
When he intends to pass urine, he takes up a clod of earth or some other
object by means of the deer's horn, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 13),
'This (O Earth) is thy covering meet for worship.' For this earth truly
is divine, and serves as a place for the worship of the gods: it must
not be defiled by him who is consecrated. Having lifted up this its
sacrificially pure covering <span id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_120), he
now relieves himself on its impure body, with the formula, 'I discharge
not offspring, but waters,'--for so indeed he does <span
id="fr_122"></span>[3](#fn_121); 'delivering from trouble, and
consecrated by Svâhâ,'--for they do indeed deliver from trouble what is
pressed together inside: therefore he says, 'delivering from
trouble,'--'consecrated by Svâhâ, enter ye the earth!' whereby he means
to say, 'Having become offerings, do ye enter the earth, appeased!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:21">3:2:2:21</span></span>21.
Thereupon he throws the clod of earth down again, with the text, 'Unite
with the earth!' for truly this earth is divine, and serves as a place
for the worship of the gods: it must not be defiled by him who is
consecrated. Having lifted up this its

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

sacrificially pure covering, he has relieved himself on its impure body,
and now restores to it this its pure covering: therefore he says, 'Unite
with the earth!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:22">3:2:2:22</span></span>22. He
then gives himself up to Agni (the fire) for protection and lies down to
sleep. For he who is consecrated draws nigh to the gods and becomes one
of the deities; but the gods do not sleep, while to him sleeplessness is
not vouchsafed; and Agni being Lord of vows to the gods, it is to him
that he now commits himself and lies down to sleep, with the text
(Vâ*g*. S. IV, 14), 'O Agni, be thou a good waker: may we thoroughly
refresh ourselves!' whereby he says, 'O Agni, wake thou: we are going to
sleep!'--'Guard us unremittingly!' whereby he means to say, 'protect us
heedfully!'--'Make us awake again!' whereby he means to say, 'Order so
that, having rested here, we may awake safely.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:23">3:2:2:23</span></span>23. And
when he has slept and does not wish to fall asleep again, (the Adhvaryu)
makes him mutter the text (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 15), 'Thought and life have
come back to me, breath and soul have come back to me, eye and ear have
come back to me;' for all these depart from him when he sleeps; the
breath alone does not; and after he has slept he again unites with them:
therefore he says, 'Thought and life have come back to me . . .'--'May
Agni Vai*s*vânara, the unassailable preserver of lives, preserve us from
mishap and shame!' whereby he means to say, 'May Agni save us from
whatever mistake (may be committed) on this occasion, either by sleep or
otherwise:' this is why he says, 'May Agni Vai*s*vânara, the
unassailable preserver of lives, preserve us from mishap and shame!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:24">3:2:2:24</span></span>24.
For, when he who is consecrated utters anything

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

that is foreign to the vow, or when he becomes angry, he commits a fault
and breaks his vow, since suppression of anger behoves him who is
consecrated. Now, Agni is the Lord of vows among the gods,--it is to him
therefore that he resorts (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 16; Rig-veda VIII, II, 7):
'Thou, O Agni, art the divine guardian of vows among men, to whom praise
is due at the sacrifices.' This, then, is his atonement for that
(transgression); and thus that fault is not committed by him, and he
does not break his vow: therefore he says, 'Thou, O Agni, art the divine
guardian of vows among men, to whom praise is due at the sacrifices.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:25">3:2:2:25</span></span>25. And
whatever (gift) people offer to him <span
id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_122), thereon he (the Adhvaryu) makes him
pronounce the text, 'Bestow this much, O Soma, bring more!' for Soma
indeed it is that appropriates for the consecrated whatever people offer
to him: when he says, 'Bestow this much, O Soma,' he means to say,
'Bestow this much on us, O Soma;' and by 'Bring more,' he means to say,
'Fetch more for us!'--'The divine Savit*ri*, the bestower of wealth,
hath bestowed wealth on us;' whereby that (gift) comes to be impelled by
Savit*ri* with a view to (further) gifts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:26">3:2:2:26</span></span>26.
Before sunset he (the Adhvaryu) says, 'Consecrated, restrain thy
speech!' and after sunset he releases speech. Before sunrise he says,
'Consecrated, restrain thy speech!' and after sunrise he releases

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

his speech,--for the sake of continuity: with the night he continues the
day, and with the day the night.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:27">3:2:2:27</span></span>27. Let
not the sun set on him while abiding elsewhere (than the hall); nor let
the sun rise on him while asleep. For were the sun to set on him while
abiding elsewhere, he (the sun) would cut him off from the night; and
were the sun to rise on him while asleep, he would cut him off from the
day: there is no atonement for this, hence it must by all means be
avoided. Prior to the purificatory bath he should not enter water, nor
should it rain upon him; for it is improper that he should enter water,
or that it should rain upon him, before the purificatory bath. Moreover,
he speaks his speech falteringly, and not effusively after the manner of
ordinary speech <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_123). The reason why he
speaks his speech falteringly and not after the manner of ordinary
speech is this:

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:28">3:2:2:28</span></span>28. By
means of the sacrifice the gods gained that supreme authority which they
now wield. They spake, 'How can this (world) of ours be made
unattainable to men?' They sipped the sap of the sacrifice, even as bees
would suck out honey; and having drained the sacrifice and scattered it
by means of the sacrificial post, they disappeared. And because they
scattered (yopaya) therewith, therefore it is called yûpa (post).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:29">3:2:2:29</span></span>29. Now
this was heard by the *Ri*shis. They collected the sacrifice; and as
that sacrifice was collected, so does he who is consecrated now collect
the sacrifice (by keeping back his speech),--for the sacrifice is
speech. And whatever part of the sacrifice

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

was then sucked out and drained, that he now restores again by speaking
his speech falteringly and not effusively after the manner of ordinary
speech. For were he to speak effusively after the manner of ordinary
speech, he would not restore (the sap of the sacrifice): therefore he
speaks his speech falteringly and not effusively after the manner of
ordinary speech.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:2:30">3:2:2:30</span></span>30. He
verily anoints himself,--it is for speech that he anoints himself <span
id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_124), since he anoints himself for the
sacrifice, and the sacrifice is speech. Dhîkshita (the anointed)
doubtless is the same as dîkshita (the consecrated).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_100"></span>[36:1](sbe2608.htm#fr_101) Professor Whitney
(American Journal of Philology, III, p. 402) proposes to take yopaya
here in the sense of 'to set up an obstacle, to block or bar the way.'
He remarks, 'How the setting up of a post should operate to "efface
traces" cannot easily be made to appear.' I am not aware that any one
has supposed that it was by the 'setting up' of the post that the traces
of the sacrifice were obliterated. From what follows--'They collected
the sacrifice '--it seems to me pretty clear that our author at any rate
connects 'yopaya' with the root yu, to mix, stir about, and hence to
efface the traces by mixing with the ground, or by scattering about.
This causative was evidently no longer a living form, but resorted to
for etymological purposes.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[36:2](sbe2608.htm#fr_102) Or, perhaps, They
collected the sacrifice in the same way as this (present) sacrifice has
been collected. See, however, the corresponding passage [III, 2, 2,
29](sbe2608.htm#3:2:2:29); [4, 3, 16](sbe2617.htm#3:4:3:16). The Kâ*n*va
text is clearer: Ta*m* yathâ yatharshayo ya*gñ*a*m* samabhara*m*s
tathâya*m* ya*gñ*a*h* sambh*ri*to yatho vai tad *ri*shayo ya*gñ*am
samabharann evam u vâ esha etad ya*gñ*a*m* sambharati yo dîkshate.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[37:1](sbe2608.htm#fr_103) 'After pointing out
(some) stars \[nakshatrâ*n*i dar*s*ayitvâ\],' Kâ*n*va recension. Cf.
Taitt. S. VI, 1, 4, 4, 'when the stars have risen, he breaks silence
with "Prepare the fast-food!"'

<span id="fn_103"></span>[37:2](sbe2608.htm#fr_104) That is to say, the
eating of the fast-food, consisting chiefly of milk, takes, as it were,
the place of the Agnihotra, or evening and morning sacrifice, which he
is not allowed to perform during the time of his consecration.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[38:1](sbe2608.htm#fr_105) Viz. the injunction
'Prepare ye the fast-food!' which is indeed read thrice in the Kâ*n*va
text, where the arrangement of these paragraphs is much clearer.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[38:2](sbe2608.htm#fr_106) Thus Sây. 'ato
’nyena, bhûr bhuva*h* suvar ityanena' (MS. I. O. 657). Dr. Lindner makes
ata*h* refer to Agni. The Kâ*n*va text begins the passage, corresponding
to paragraphs 7 and 8: 'So ’gnim îkshamâ*n*o vis*rig*ate vrata*m*
kri*n*uta (thrice) etad vâ etasya havir esha ya*gñ*o yad vratam.'

<span id="fn_106"></span>[38:3](sbe2608.htm#fr_107) That is, the words
'Agni is the Brahman.'

<span id="fn_107"></span>[38:4](sbe2608.htm#fr_108) Viz. because 'the
Brahman (neut.) is the truth (or essence, satyam),' Sây.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[38:5](sbe2608.htm#fr_109) Viz. trees from
which sacrificial implements, fire-wood, the sacrificial stake, &c., are
obtained.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[39:1](sbe2608.htm#fr_110) Manoyu*g* (?),
'mind-yoked,' i.e. having thoughts for their team.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[39:2](sbe2608.htm#fr_111) Cf. [paragraph
18](sbe2608.htm#3:2:2:18).

<span id="fn_111"></span>[40:1](sbe2608.htm#fr_112) Anvârabdha has here
the usual sacrificial meaning of 'taken hold of (from behind),' with
perhaps something of that of 'taken (as medicine = einnehmen).' Thus at
the invocation of the I*d*â, the sacrificer has to touch (anv-ârabh) the
i*d*â from behind, thereby keeping up his connection, and identifying
himself, with the sacrifice. Cf. part i, p. 228, note 1; and [III, 2, 4,
15](sbe2610.htm#3:2:4:15). Hence the author, making use of the term
suggested by those he criticises, argues that as both kinds of material
have already been used and therefore touched (anvârabdha) by him at the
New and Full-moon Sacrifice (Sâya*n*a), they have therefore been taken
possession of by him. It is possible, though scarcely likely, that the
verb may have reference here to the anvârambha*n*îyâ ish*t*i,--or
preliminary ceremony of the first performance of the New and Full-moon
Sacrifice,--with which the present use of these cereals would, in that
case, be identified, as that of the vrata-milk was with the Agnihotra
(cf. [paragraph 7](sbe2608.htm#3:2:2:7) above). The Kâ*n*va text has the
verb â-rabh instead, yathâ havishârabdhena bhisha*g*yed ity evam etat.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[40:2](sbe2608.htm#fr_113) That is to say,
though the restoration might be due to the medicinal properties of some
of those ingredients, it could be ascribed to the milk.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[41:1](sbe2608.htm#fr_114) Sâya*n*a takes this
to mean, that, as above all the consummation of the sacrifice is
desirable, one should in case of disease cure it by any of those drugs
without their being taken (anvârabdha) sacrificially, or as part of the
sacrificial performance.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[41:2](sbe2608.htm#fr_115) According to the
Kâ*n*va text, the sacrificer first washes himself (nenikte) and then
sips water (â*k*âmati); and having drunk the fast-milk, he touches water
(apa upasp*ris*ati).

<span id="fn_115"></span>[41:3](sbe2608.htm#fr_116) Or, perhaps, we
meditate on the divine intelligence, the most merciful.'

<span id="fn_116"></span>[41:4](sbe2608.htm#fr_117) Ya*gñ*avâhasam
('bringing, or bearing, worship'); thus also Taitt. S. I, 2, 2. The
Kâ*n*va text reads vi*s*vadhâyasam, 'all-nourishing, all-sustaining.'

<span id="fn_117"></span>[42:1](sbe2608.htm#fr_118) See [p.
39](#page_39), note [2](#fn_110). The Kâ*n*va text here again identifies
the divinities referred to in the text with the vital airs.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[42:2](sbe2608.htm#fr_119) Having eaten and
touched water, he strokes his belly (udaram abhim*ris*ate), Kâ*n*v. The
Kâ*n*va text renders the meaning quite clear: Uta vai tîvra*m* vratam
bhavati tat kshudrataram asad iti vopotsi*ñk*aty, alpa*m* vâ bhavati tad
bhûyaskâmyopotsi*ñk*ati.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[43:1](sbe2608.htm#fr_120) No other fresh milk
is to be added to that obtained by one milking of the vratadughâ
(fast-milk) cow (Kâty. VII, 4, 29); but the preceding formula is to be
muttered in order to obviate any evil consequences arising from a
possible secret breach of this rule, on the part of him who hands the
milk to the sacrificer. Dr. Lindner takes upotsi*k* in the sense of 'to
spill,' but I find no authority for this rendering, which neither the
prep. upa, nor abhi (in the equivalent abhyutsi*k*) would seem to admit
of.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[43:2](sbe2608.htm#fr_121) See [p.
10](sbe2604.htm#page_10), note [4](sbe2604.htm#fn_40).

<span id="fn_121"></span>[43:3](sbe2608.htm#fr_122) 'Ubhaya*m* vâ ata
ety âpa*s* *k*a reta*s* *k*a; sa etad apa eva mu*ñk*ati na pra*g*âm.'

<span id="fn_122"></span>[45:1](sbe2608.htm#fr_123) 'And if they were to
bring him either a garment or a cow, let him address it with the
text--.' Kâ*n*va text. According to some authorities the Dîkshita is to
go about for twelve days begging his means of subsistence, and whatever
he obtains he is to touch and consecrate by the above text. Kâty. VII,
5, 3, comm.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[46:1](sbe2608.htm#fr_124) Literally,
'Falteringly (i.e. hesitatingly, cautiously) he speaks speech, not human
effusive (speech).'

<span id="fn_124"></span>[47:1](sbe2608.htm#fr_125) Dhîkshate,
apparently the desiderative of dih (Weber, in St. Petersb. Dict. s. v.)
Cf. [III, 1, 3, 7](sbe2605.htm#3:1:3:7) seq. The construction
(especially the first hi) is rather peculiar. This paragraph apparently
is to supply further proof why he should be cautious in his speech, and
the words 'sa vai dhîkshate' have to be taken parenthetically: 'He
speaks his speech cautiously . . . .; for (anointing himself as he does)
he anoints himself for speech, &c.' The Kâ*n*va text offers less
difficulty: Atha yad dhîkshito nâma vâ*k*e vâ esha etad dhîkshate,
ya*gñ*âya hi dhîkshate, ya*gñ*o hi vâk, tasmâd dhîkshito nâma, dhîkshito
ha vai nâmaitad yad dîkshita ity âhu*h*. Sâya*n*a's comment (MS.) is not
very satisfactory: Vâ*k*a*m* ya*gñ*asâdhanatvena pra*s*a*m*sati; sa vai
dhîkshita iti prasaṅgâd dhîkshita*s*abda*m* nirvakti dhîkshito ha vâ iti
yasmâd dîkshita iti nâma tâd*ris*î dîkshâ vâk sâdhyeti vâk *s*ruti*h*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 2, 3. Third Brâhma*n*a](sbe2609)
