[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2637) 
[Next](sbe2639) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3">3:9:3</span></span>

#### THE SOMA FEAST.

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

##### A. PRÂTAR-ANUVÂKA (MORNING-PRAYER) AND PREPARATORY CEREMONIES.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:1">3:9:3:1</span></span>1. They
(the priests) are wakened (towards morning). Having touched water <span
id="fr_567"></span>[2](#fn_565), they proceed together to the Âgnîdhra
(fire-house) and take the portions of ghee (for the Savanîya animal
offerings). Having taken the portions of ghee, they betake themselves
(to the high altar). When they have deposited the ghee,--

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:2">3:9:3:2</span></span>2. He
(the Adhvaryu) takes down the king (Soma) <span
id="fr_568"></span>[1](#fn_566). Now this (earth) is a safe
resting-place, and the birth-place of living beings; it is to this safe
resting-place that he now takes him down; he spreads him thereon,
produces him therefrom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:3">3:9:3:3</span></span>3. He
takes him down between the shafts; for the cart is (a means of) the
sacrifice, and thus alone he does not put him outside the sacrifice. He
puts him on the pressing stones lying there with their heads (mukha,
mouths) <span id="fr_569"></span>[2](#fn_567) towards each other; for
Soma is the nobility, and the stones are the clans (people); he thereby
raises the nobility over the clan. And as to why they are lying with
their heads together,--he thereby makes the clan of one head (or mouth)
with, and uncontentious towards, the nobles; therefore they are lying
with their heads towards each other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:4">3:9:3:4</span></span>4. He
takes (Soma) down, with (Vâ*g*. S. VI, 25), 'Thee for the heart, thee
for the mind!' This he says for the (accomplishment of the) sacrificer's
wish, since it is with the heart and mind that the sacrificer entertains
the wish for which he sacrifices; therefore he says, 'Thee for the
heart, thee for the mind!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:5">3:9:3:5</span></span>5. 'Thee
for the sky, thee for the sun!' This, on the other hand, he says with a
view to the world of the gods. When he says, 'Thee for the sky, thee

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

for the sun,' he means to say, 'Thee for the gods!' 'Upwards convey thou
to the sky, to the gods, this cult, these invocations!' Cult, doubtless,
means sacrifice: he thereby means to say, 'Upwards carry thou this
sacrifice to the sky, to the gods!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:6">3:9:3:6</span></span>6.
\[Vâ*g*. S. VI, 26\], 'O Soma, king, descend unto all thy people!'
whereby he brings him down for the lordship, for the sovereignty of
these people (creatures).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:7">3:9:3:7</span></span>7. Having
quitted his hold (of Soma) he sits down by him, with, 'May all thy
people descend to thee.' Now, in saying, 'Descend unto all thy people,'
he does what is unseemly, for Soma being the nobility, he thereby, as it
were, confounds good and bad <span
id="fr_570"></span>[1](#fn_568),--and, indeed, in consequence thereof,
people now confound good and bad. But in this (formula) he does what is
right and according to order,--in saying, 'May all thy people descend to
thee,' he makes all his subjects go down (on their knees) before him;
and hence when a noble approaches, all these subjects, the people, go
down before him, crouch down by him on the ground <span
id="fr_571"></span>[2](#fn_569). Sitting near (Soma), the Hot*ri* is
about to recite the morning-prayer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:8">3:9:3:8</span></span>8. Then,
while putting a kindling-stick (on the fire), he (the Adhvaryu) says,
'Recite to the gods

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

the early-coming!' Now the early-coming gods are the metres, as the
after-offerings are the metres; and the after-offerings are performed
with, 'Prompt (the Hot*ri* to recite) to the gods! Recite (the
offering-prayer) to the gods!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:9">3:9:3:9</span></span>9. And so
some say, 'Recite to the gods <span id="fr_572"></span>[1](#fn_570)!'
But let him not say so; for the early-coming gods are the metres, as the
after-offerings are the metres, and the after-offerings are performed
with, 'Prompt--to the gods! Recite (the offering-prayer) to the gods!'
therefore let him say, 'Recite to the gods, the early-coming!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:10">3:9:3:10</span></span>10. And
when he puts on a kindling-stick, it is the metres he thereby kindles.
And when the Hot*ri* recites the morning-prayer <span
id="fr_573"></span>[2](#fn_571), he thereby

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

again strengthens the metres, makes them to be of unimpaired vigour; for
the metres had their vigour impaired by the gods, since it was through
the metres that the gods reached the heavenly worlds; they neither sing
praises (chants) nor recite (*s*astras) here. Hereby he now again
strengthens the metres and makes them to be of unimpaired vigour; and by
means of them, thus unimpaired in vigour, they

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

perform the sacrifice; this is why the Hot*ri* recites the
morning-prayer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:11">3:9:3:11</span></span>11.
Here now they say, 'What is the (Adhvaryu's) response to the
morning-prayer <span id="fr_574"></span>[1](#fn_572)?' The Adhvaryu
should wait through (the prayer) waking, and when he blinks, this is his
response. But let him not do this; if he fall asleep (again) he may as
well sleep. When the Hot*ri* brings his morning-prayer to a close <span
id="fr_575"></span>[2](#fn_573),--there is an offering-spoon called
Pra*k*ara*n*î,--having therein taken ghee in four ladlings, he (the
Adhvaryu) offers it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:12">3:9:3:12</span></span>12. For
when the head of Ya*gñ*a (the sacrifice) was struck off, his sap,
running, entered the waters; that (sap) he fetched yesterday with the
Vasatîvarî water; and he now goes for what sap of the sacrifice remains
therein.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:13">3:9:3:13</span></span>13. And
when he offers that offering, he pours out (the ghee) towards that same
sap of the sacrifice (in the water) and draws it to him. And, indeed, he
pleases those deities to whom he offers that offering, and thus
satisfied and pleased, they fit that sap of the sacrifice together <span
id="fr_576"></span>[3](#fn_574) for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:14">3:9:3:14</span></span>14. He
offers with, 'May Agni, with his flame, hear my prayer;' whereby he
means to say, 'May he hear this prayer of mine, may he vouchsafe it to
me;'--'May the waters and the Soma-bowls hear, the divine!' whereby he
means to say, 'May the waters hear this (prayer) of mine, may they
vouchsafe it to me.'--'Hear me, ye stones,

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

as knowing the sacrifice!' whereby he means to say, 'May the (pressing)
stones hear this (prayer) of mine, may they vouchsafe it to me;' and 'as
knowing the sacrifice,' he says, because the stones are indeed
knowing <span id="fr_577"></span>[1](#fn_575). 'May the divine Savit*ri*
hear my prayer, Hail!' whereby he means to say, 'May the divine
Savit*ri* hear this (prayer) of mine, may he vouchsafe it to me;' for
Savit*ri* is the impeller of the gods; impelled by him he goes for that
sap of the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:15">3:9:3:15</span></span>15.
Having then a second time taken ghee by four ladlings, he says, while
going forth towards the north, 'Summon the waters!' whereby he means to
say, 'Desire the waters, O Hotar!' The reason why the Hot*ri* then
recites <span id="fr_578"></span>[2](#fn_576) is this: by that

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (oblation) he (the
Adhvaryu) pours out (the ghee) towards that sap of the sacrifice (in the
water), and draws it to him; and he (the Hot*ri*) then stands by those
(Ekadhana pitchers) lest the evil spirits should injure them on the way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:16">3:9:3:16</span></span>16. He
(the Adhvaryu) then gives directions, 'Come hither, cup-bearer of the
Maitrâvaru*n*a! Nesh*t*ar, lead up the wives! Ye bearers of the Ekadhana
(cups), come hither! Agnîdh, step ever against the pit with the
Vasatîvarî water and the Hot*ri*'s cup!' this is a composite direction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:17">3:9:3:17</span></span>17.
They walk northwards out (of the sacrificial ground)--by the back of the
pit and the front side of the Âgnîdhra; whereupon they proceed in the
direction in which the water is. They go thither together with the
wives. The reason why they go thither with the wives is this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:18">3:9:3:18</span></span>18.
When the head of the sacrifice was struck off, its sap, running, entered
the waters; those Gandharva Soma-wardens watched it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:19">3:9:3:19</span></span>19. The
gods then said, 'Those Gandharvas, surely, are a great danger to us
here, how can we carry off the sap of the sacrifice to a place free from
danger and injury?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:20">3:9:3:20</span></span>20.
They said, 'Well, the Gandharvas are fond of women; let us go together
with the wives! The Gandharvas, surely, will hanker after the wives, and
we shall carry off that sap of the sacrifice to a place free from danger
and injury.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:21">3:9:3:21</span></span>21.
They went with the wives; the Gandharvas did indeed hanker after the
wives, and they (the

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

gods) carried off that sap of the sacrifice to a place free from danger
and injury.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:22">3:9:3:22</span></span>22. And
so does that (Adhvaryu) now go (to the water) with the wives; the
Gandharvas hanker after the wives, and he carries off that sap of the
sacrifice to a place free from danger and injury.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:23">3:9:3:23</span></span>23. He
offers (the ghee) upon the water; for that sap of the sacrifice, indeed,
draws near to that oblation, when offered; it rises (to the surface) to
meet it; and having thus brought it to light, he seizes it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:24">3:9:3:24</span></span>24. And
again why he offers this oblation: he thereby pours out (ghee) towards
that sap of the sacrifice, and draws it to him, and craves it of the
waters. And, indeed, he pleases those deities to whom he offers that
oblation, and thus satisfied and pleased they fit that sap of the
sacrifice together for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:25">3:9:3:25</span></span>25. He
offers with (Vâ*g*. S. VI, 27), 'Ye divine waters,--the son of waters;'
the waters are indeed divine, hence he says, 'Ye divine waters,--the son
of waters;' 'That wave of yours, suitable for offering;' whereby he
means to say, 'That wave of yours which is suitable for the sacrifice;'
'Mighty, most grateful;' by 'mighty' he means to say 'powerful,' and by
'most grateful' he means to say 'most sweet;' 'Give ye that unto those
gods among the gods,' in saying this he has craved it of them; 'The
drinkers of the pure (Soma);' the pure, doubtless, is the truth; in
saying, 'the drinkers (pa) of the pure,' he means to say, 'the defenders
(pa) of the truth;' 'Whose portion ye are, Hail!' for this indeed is
their portion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:26">3:9:3:26</span></span>26.
Thereupon he makes that oblation (ghee) float away by means of the
Maitrâvaru*n*a's cup, with (Vâ*g*. S. VI, 28), 'Thou art furrowing!'
Even

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

as a coal is consumed by Fire, so is that oblation consumed by that
deity. Now that water, which is in the Maitrâvaru*n*a's cup, he will
have to pour on the king (Soma); and ghee being a thunderbolt, and Soma
seed, he makes (the ghee) float away lest he should injure that seed,
Soma, by that thunderbolt, the ghee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:27">3:9:3:27</span></span>27. He
then takes (water) with, 'I draw thee up for the imperishableness of the
ocean;' for the ocean is water; he thus confers imperishableness upon
the waters; wherefore, in spite of so much food (and drink) being
consumed, the waters are not diminished. Thereupon they draw (water in)
the Ekadhana pitchers, and thereupon the vessels for washing the
feet <span id="fr_579"></span>[1](#fn_577).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:28">3:9:3:28</span></span>28. The
reason why he takes (water) with the Maitrâvaru*n*a's cup is this. When
the sacrifice escaped from the gods, the gods endeavoured to call it up
by means of (sacrificial) calls (praisha) <span
id="fr_580"></span>[2](#fn_578); by means of the puroru*k* ('shining
before') formulas <span id="fr_581"></span>[3](#fn_579) they pleased it
(pra-ro*k*aya), and by the nivids they made (their wishes) known
(ni-vid) to it. Therefore he takes (water) with the Maitrâvaru*n*a's
cup.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:29">3:9:3:29</span></span>29.
They come back. The Agnîdh takes up his position opposite to the pit
with the Vasatîvarî water and the Hot*ri*'s cup. Close over the pit he

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (the Adhvaryu)
makes the Vasatîvarî water and the Maitrâvaru*n*a's cup touch one
another, with, 'Water hath united with water, plants with plants!' the
sap of the sacrifice which was fetched yesterday and that fetched
to-day, both kinds he thereby mixes together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:30">3:9:3:30</span></span>30. Now
some indeed pour (some of) the Vasatîvarî water into the
Maitrâvaru*n*a's cup, and from the Maitrâvaru*n*a's cup (back) to the
Vasatîvarî water, arguing, 'Thereby we mix together both the sap of the
sacrifice which was fetched yesterday and that fetched to-day.' But let
him not do this; for when he pours (the water) together into the
Âdhavanîya trough <span id="fr_582"></span>[1](#fn_580), then both kinds
of sap are mixed together. Thereupon he pours the Vasatîvarî water into
the Hot*ri*'s cup for the Nigrâbhyâs <span
id="fr_583"></span>[2](#fn_581). And as to why he makes them touch one
another close over the pit, it was from thence, forsooth, that the gods
rose to heaven; he thus makes the sacrificer look along the road to
heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:31">3:9:3:31</span></span>31.
They return (to the Havirdhâna). The Hot*ri* asks him, 'Adhvaryu, hast
thou gained the waters?' whereby he means to say, 'Hast thou obtained
the waters?' He replies to him, 'Yea, they have yielded themselves!'
whereby he means to say, 'I have obtained them and they have yielded to
me.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:32">3:9:3:32</span></span>32. And
if it be an Agnish*t*oma, and there be left a residue (of ghee poured
together) in the pra*k*ara*n*î

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

spoon sufficient for an oblation, let him offer that. But if it be not
sufficient for an oblation, he takes another portion of ghee in four
ladlings and offers it, with (Vâ*g*. S. VI, 29; Rig-veda I, 27, 7),
'Whatever mortal thou favourest in battles, whomsoever thou speedest in
the race, he winneth unfailing strength, Hail!' He offers with (a
prayer) to Agni, because the Agnish*t*oma ('Agni's praise') means Agni;
thus he establishes the Agnish*t*oma in Agni. \[He offers\] with (a
verse) containing the word 'mortal,' because the Agnish*t*oma is of the
same measure as man. Let hire then offer in this manner, if it be an
Agnish*t*oma.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:33">3:9:3:33</span></span>33. And
if it be an Ukthya, let him touch the middle enclosing-stick,--there are
three enclosing-sticks and three recitations (uktha) <span
id="fr_584"></span>[1](#fn_582); and by means of them the sacrifice is
there established. And if it be either an Atirâtra or a
Sho*d*a*s*in <span id="fr_585"></span>[2](#fn_583), let him neither make
an oblation nor touch the middle enclosing-stick; having merely muttered
(the above verse), let him silently betake himself (to the Havirdhâna)
and enter it <span id="fr_586"></span>[3](#fn_584). In this way he duly
distinguishes the forms of sacrifice from one another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9:3:34">3:9:3:34</span></span>34. The
Ekadhana pitchers are always of uneven number,--either three, or five,
or seven, or nine, or eleven, or thirteen, or fifteen <span
id="fr_587"></span>[4](#fn_585). Now two and two

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (an even number)
means a productive pair; and the one that remains over, remains over for
the sacrificer's prosperity. And, moreover, that which remains over for
the sacrificer's prosperity is the common property (sa-dhana) of these
(others); and because it is the common property of these, therefore they
are called Ekadhana (having one as their common property).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_565"></span>[226:2](sbe2638.htm#fr_567) After performing
their ablutions they have to perform the preliminary work and
ceremonies, such as preparing the Gârhapatya, fetching and arranging the
vessels, cleaning of spoons, &c. up to the depositing of the ghee, near
the high altar.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[227:1](sbe2638.htm#fr_568) According to Kâty.
VIII, 9, 24-25, on the previous evening,--immediately after the carrying
round And depositing of the Vasatîvarî water,--the Soma is placed on a
seat (âsandi) in the Âgnîdhra fire house, where the sacrificer has to
watch over it during that night. This is not mentioned in the
Brâhma*n*a, and from what follows it would rather seem that the Soma is
taken down from the cart (see III, 6, 3, 17 seq.). Otherwise we might
translate, 'He brings him down (from the Âgnîdhra).'

<span id="fn_567"></span>[227:2](sbe2638.htm#fr_569) That is, with their
broad sides turned towards each other.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[228:1](sbe2638.htm#fr_570) 'He commits a
pâpavasyasa*m*,' i.e. according to Haug, Ait. Br. p. 413, 'a breach of
the oath of allegiance,' (where Sâya*n*a explains it by 'exceedingly
bad'); or 'an (act of) perversity,' Weber, Ind. Stud. IX, p. 300.
Sâya*n*a, to our passage, explains it by 'mixing the bad with the good
(or better).' The literal translation is 'a bad-bettering.' What is
chiefly implied in the term is evidently the showing of disrespect by an
inferior to a superior person.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[228:2](sbe2638.htm#fr_571) Tasmât kshatriyam
upary âsînam adhastâd vi*s*a imâ*h* pra*g*â upâsate. Kâ*n*va text.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[229:1](sbe2638.htm#fr_572) Here now, some say
only, 'Recite to the early-coming!' not 'to the . . . gods!' but let him
not say this. Kâ*n*va text.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[229:2](sbe2638.htm#fr_573) The Prâtar-anuvâka,
or morning-prayer (matin chant), has to be recited by the Hot*ri* in the
latter part of the night before any sound (of birds, &c.) is to be
heard. It may begin immediately after midnight, and conclude as soon as
daylight appears. When called upon by the Adhvaryu to recite the
morning-prayer, the Hot*ri* first makes an oblation of ghee on the
Âgnîdhra fire, with the mantra, 'Protect me from the spell of the mouth,
from every imprecation, Hail!' and then two oblations on the Âhavanîya
with appropriate mantras. Thereupon he betakes himself to the Havirdhâna
(cart-shed), in entering which, by the east door, he touches
successively the front-wreath (rarâ*t*â, cf. [III, 5, 3,
9](sbe2621.htm#3:5:3:9)) and the doorposts, with formulas. He then
squats down between the yoke-pieces of the two Soma-carts, and begins
his recitation with Rig-veda X, 30, 12, 'Ye, O wealthy waters, verily
possess good things; ye confer desirable energy and immortality; ye
command riches with abundant offspring: may Sarasvatî (the river S., and
Speech) bestow on the bard that vital vigour!' The 'early-coming'
deities to whom the recitation is successively addressed, are Agni,
Ushas (the dawn), and the two A*s*vins (the precursors of the sun); the
prayer thus consisting of three sections, termed kratu (Agnikratu <span
id="page_230">p. 230</span>, &c.). The hymns and detached verses making
up these sections are arranged according to the seven metres (thus
forming seven sub-sections of each), viz. gâyatrî, anush*t*ubh,
trish*t*ubh, b*ri*hatî, ush*n*ih, *g*agatî, and paṅkti. The prayer may
consist of as many verses as can be recited between midnight and
daybreak; but there should be at least one hymn in each of the seven
metres to each of the three deities; nor should the recitation consist
of less than a hundred verses. From the beginning of the recitation up
to the end of the last hymn but one, Rig-veda I, 112, there is to be a
gradual modulation of the voice so as to pass upwards through the seven
tones (yama) of the deep scale (mandrasvara). Moreover, that hymn is to
be repeated (if necessary) till daylight appears. As soon as this is the
case, he passes on without any break from the last (25th) verse to the
last hymn (v. 75, 1-9), which he intones in the lowest tone of the
middle scale, after shifting his place further east towards the gate.
The recitation of the first eight verses of this hymn again gradually
ascends through the whole of the middle scale; when--after once more
shifting his place so as to be seated between the two door-posts--he
intones the last verse--'The Dawn hath appeared with her shining kine,
Agni hath been kindled at his appointed time: your car hath been yoked,
ye mighty, mead-loving(?) A*s*vins, showerers of wealth, hear my call!'
in reciting which he makes his voice pass through the several tones of
the high scale. The Subrahma*n*yâ, likewise, has to chant the
Subrahma*n*yâ litany (see [III, 3, 4, 17](sbe2614.htm#3:3:4:17)
seq.)--as he had to do on the previous evening--inserting in it the
names of the sacrificer's father and son. The Agnîdh, in the meantime,
prepares the five havis-oblations (savanîyâ*h* puro*d*a*s*â*h*) to be
offered at the morning-pressing (cf. [IV, 2, 4,
18](sbe2648.htm#4:2:4:18)), and the Unnet*ri* puts the numerous
Soma-vessels in their respective places on the khara, and about the
Soma-carts.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[231:1](sbe2638.htm#fr_574) Cf. [IV, 3, 2,
1](sbe2651.htm#4:3:2:1) seq.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[231:2](sbe2638.htm#fr_575) That is, when he
recites the last verse, 'Ushas hath appeared,' &c.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[231:3](sbe2638.htm#fr_576) Literally, 'Bend
together (sa*m*-nam),' which refers to the 'bending together' of the
cups at the Aponaptrîya ceremony.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[232:1](sbe2638.htm#fr_577) The text has rather
to be construed, 'Ye stones, hear (my prayer) as (of one) knowing the
sacrifice.'

<span id="fn_576"></span>[232:2](sbe2638.htm#fr_578) While the Adhvaryu
and assistants go to the water to fill the Ekadhana pitchers, the
Hot*ri* recites the so-called Aponaptrîya hymn (Rig-veda X, 30) to the
waters, omitting verse twelve, which was already recited as the opening
verse of the morning-prayer. The first verse is recited thrice, and the
tenth verse is recited after the eleventh, while the priests are
returning with the water. As soon as they are in sight, the Hot*ri*
recites verse 13, followed by Rig-veda V, 43, 1; and (when the Ekadhanâ
and Vasatîvarî waters meet together, [paragraph
29](sbe2638.htm#3:9:3:29)) Rig-veda II, 35, 3; and, in case some of the
water is actually poured over into the Hot*ri*'s cup, I, 83, 2. When the
water is brought to the Havirdhâna, the Hot*ri* addresses the Adhvaryu
as stated in [paragraph 31](sbe2638.htm#3:9:3:31); whereupon he
pronounces a 'nigada' (for which see Ait. Br. II, 20; Â*s*v. Sr. V, 1,
14-17), followed by Rig-veda I, 23, i6; while the Ekadhana pitchers are
carried past him. The water in the Maitrâvaru*n*a cup and one third of
both the Vasatîvarî and Ekadhanâ water having been poured into the
Âdhavanîya trough (standing on the northern cart), the pitchers with the
remaining water are then deposited in their respective places behind the
axle of the northern cart, whereupon the Hot*ri* recites the two
remaining verses (24 and 15) of the <span id="page_233">p. 233</span>
Aponaptrîya hymn, and sits down in front of the Soma, behind the
northern door-post of the Havirdhâna (cart-shed).

<span id="fn_577"></span>[235:1](sbe2638.htm#fr_579) These are filled by
the sacrificer's wife, or, if there be more than one sacrificer (or, if
the sacrificer have more than one wife), by all the wives, each having
two vessels. For the use of this water, see note on [IV, 4, 2,
18](sbe2656.htm#4:4:2:18).

<span id="fn_578"></span>[235:2](sbe2638.htm#fr_580) The praishas or
sacrificial directions to the Hot*ri*, for the recitations of
offering-formulas, are given by the Maitrâvaru*n*a; see [p.
183](sbe2630.htm#page_183), note [2](sbe2630.htm#fn_462).

<span id="fn_579"></span>[235:3](sbe2638.htm#fr_581) See note on [IV, 1,
3, 15](sbe2642.htm#4:1:3:15); the nivids, part i, p. 114, note 2.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[236:1](sbe2638.htm#fr_582) See [p.
232](#page_232), note [2](#fn_576) to [paragraph
15](sbe2638.htm#3:9:3:15).

<span id="fn_581"></span>[236:2](sbe2638.htm#fr_583) Nigrâbhyâ*h* is the
technical name the Vasatîvarî water in the Hot*ri*'s cup henceforth
bears. It is handed to the sacrificer to carry to the Havirdhâna; and is
afterwards used for moistening the Soma plants (or, for being poured
thereon) at the time of the pressing. See [III, 9, 4,
14](sbe2639.htm#3:9:4:14) seq.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[237:1](sbe2638.htm#fr_584) See note on IV, 4,
2, 18; Haug, Ait. Br., Transl. p. 251.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[237:2](sbe2638.htm#fr_585) And if it be a
Sho*d*a*s*in, or an Atirâtra, or a Vâ*g*apeya. Kâ*n*va rec. See note on
[IV, 5, 3, 1](sbe2662.htm#4:5:3:1).

<span id="fn_584"></span>[237:3](sbe2638.htm#fr_586) According to Kâty.
IX, 3, 20-21 he may, while muttering that verse, touch the front wreath
at the Sho*d*a*s*in, and the side-mat at the Atirâtra.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[237:4](sbe2638.htm#fr_587) The original
has,--either three, or five, or five, or seven, or seven, or nine, &e.
The Kâ*n*va text, on the other hand, has merely,--either three, or five,
or sevens or nine, or nineteen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 9, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe2639)
