[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2649) 
[Next](sbe2651) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1">4:3:1</span></span>

### THIRD ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:1">4:3:1:1</span></span>1. Having
drunk (Soma) <span id="fr_766"></span>[1](#fn_763) and said, 'We are

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

invited together <span id="fr_767"></span>[1](#fn_764),' he (the
Adhvaryu) rises. He takes a piece of the cake, and at the place where
the A*kh*âvâka, being seated, is now (about to) recite, he puts the
piece of cake in his hand and says, 'O A*kh*âvâka, say what thou hast to
say!' Now, the A*kh*âvâka was excluded (from the Soma) <span
id="fr_768"></span>[2](#fn_765).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:2">4:3:1:2</span></span>2. Indra
and Agni preserved him for the production of creatures, whence the
A*kh*âvâka priest belongs to Indra and Agni. But it is by means of that
sacrificial food, the piece of cake which he now puts in his hand, and
by means of that (saying) of the seers which he now recites, it is
thereby they (Indra and Agni) preserve him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:3">4:3:1:3</span></span>3. When
the A*kh*âvâka has (again) taken his seat

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (behind his
hearth), he (his Adhvaryu) proceeds with the libations of the seasons
(*Ri*tugraha). The reason why he proceeds with the libations of the
seasons when the A*kh*âvâka is seated, is that the A*kh*âvâka represents
a sexual union, since the A*kh*âvâka belongs to Indra and Agni, and
Indra and Agni are two, and a productive union means a pair: from that
same productive union he produces the seasons, the year.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:4">4:3:1:4</span></span>4. And
again why he proceeds with the libations of the seasons, when the
A*kh*âvâka is seated. The seasons, the year, are everything; he thus
produces everything: this is why he proceeds with the libations of the
seasons when the A*kh*âvâka is seated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:5">4:3:1:5</span></span>5. Let
him draw twelve of them,--twelve months there are. in the year:
therefore he should draw twelve (cups of Soma). But he may also draw
thirteen, for, they say, there is a thirteenth month <span
id="fr_769"></span>[1](#fn_766). Let him nevertheless draw twelve only,
for such is completeness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:6">4:3:1:6</span></span>6. He
draws them from the Dro*n*akala*s*a (Soma trough), for the
Dro*n*akala*s*a is Pra*g*âpati, and from out of that Pra*g*âpati he
produces the seasons, the year.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:7">4:3:1:7</span></span>7. He
draws them by means of double-mouthed cups <span
id="fr_770"></span>[2](#fn_767);--for where is the end of those two
(cups) that are double-mouthed? Hence this year revolves without end.
When he has drawn this (libation), he does not deposit it: whence this
year is ceaseless.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:8">4:3:1:8</span></span>8. He
recites no invitatory prayer; since one

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

invites with an invitatory prayer, and the present season has already
come, either by day or by night. Nor does he utter a second Vasha*t*,
lest he should turn away the seasons. Simultaneously they (the Adhvaryu
and Pratiprasthât*ri*) draw the two first and the two last libations:
thus they embrace everything here by means of the year, and everything
here is embraced within the year.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:9">4:3:1:9</span></span>9. Out
(of the Havirdhâna shed) walks the one, in steps the other, whence these
months pass following one another. But were both to walk out together,
or were both to enter together, these months would assuredly pass
separated one from the other: therefore while out walks the one, in
steps the other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:10">4:3:1:10</span></span>10. Six
times they perform <span id="fr_771"></span>[1](#fn_768) with, 'With the

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

season'--thereby the gods created the day; and four times with, 'With
the seasons'--thereby they created the night. And, assuredly, were only
this much (used), there would be nothing but night: it would never pass
away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:11">4:3:1:11</span></span>11.
Over and above they perform twice with the formula 'With the season;'
thereby the gods subsequently gave the day (again), whence it is now day
there, then it will be night, and to-morrow day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:12">4:3:1:12</span></span>12. By
'With the season' the gods forsooth created the men, and by 'With the
seasons' the beasts; and because they created the beasts in the middle
of those (men), therefore these beasts (cattle), being shut in on both
sides, have come into the power of men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:13">4:3:1:13</span></span>13. And
having performed six times with, 'With the season,' they both turn round
their vessels to the other side; and having performed four times with,
'With the seasons,' they turn round their vessels to the other side:
from the one side (or mouth) indeed the gods created the day, and from
the other side the night; from the one side the gods created men, and
from the other beasts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:14">4:3:1:14</span></span>14. Now
he draws the cups (for the seasons)

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

therefrom <span id="fr_772"></span>[1](#fn_769), with (Vâ*g*. S. VII,
30), 'Thou art taken with a support: thee for Madhu!' the Adhvaryu takes
(the first); with 'Thou art taken with a support: thee for Mâdhava!' the
Pratiprasthât*ri* (the second). These two are the spring (months <span
id="fr_773"></span>[2](#fn_770)): because in spring plants sprout and
trees are brought to ripeness, therefore these two are Madhu (sweet) and
Mâdhava.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:15">4:3:1:15</span></span>15.
With 'Thou art taken with a support: thee for *S*ukra!' the Adhvaryu
draws (the third); with 'Thou art taken with a support: thee for
*S*u*k*i!' the Pratiprasthât*ri* (the fourth). These two are the summer
(months): because during them it burns fiercest, therefore these two are
*S*ukra (clear) and *S*u*k*i (bright).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:16">4:3:1:16</span></span>16.
With 'Thou art taken with a support: thee for Nabhas!' the Adhvaryu
draws (the fifth); with 'Thou art taken with a support: thee for
Nabhasya!' the Pratiprasthât*ri* (the sixth). These two are (the months)
of the rainy season: it rains from yonder sky, and hence these two are
Nabhas (mist, cloud) and Nabhasya.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:17">4:3:1:17</span></span>17.
With 'Thou art taken with a support: thee for Ish (sap)!' the Adhvaryu
draws (the seventh); with 'Thou art taken with a support: thee for Ûr*g*
(food)!' the Pratiprasthât*ri* (the eighth). These two are the autumn
(months): because in autumn food (ûr*g*) and juice, (namely) plants,
ripen, therefore these two are Isha and Ûr*g*a.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:18">4:3:1:18</span></span>18.
With 'Thou art taken with a support: thee for Sahas!' the Adhvaryu draws
(the ninth); with 'Thou art taken with a support: thee for

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sahasya!' the
Pratiprasthât*ri* (the tenth). These two are the winter (months):
because the winter by force (sahas) brings these creatures into his
power, therefore these two are Saha and Sahasya.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:19">4:3:1:19</span></span>19.
With 'Thou art taken with a support: thee for Tapas!' the Adhvaryu draws
(the eleventh); with 'Thou art taken with a support: thee for Tapasya!'
the Pratiprasthât*ri* (the twelfth). These two are (the months) of the
dewy season: because during them it freezes most severely, therefore
these two are Tapas and Tapasya.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:20">4:3:1:20</span></span>20.
With 'Thou art taken with a support: thee to A*m*hasaspati (lord of
trouble)!' he (the Adhvaryu) draws the thirteenth libation, if he draw a
thirteenth. The Pratiprasthât*ri* then pours his residue into the
Adhvaryu's vessel, or the Adhvaryu pours his residue into the
Pratiprasthât*ri*'s vessel. He (the Adhvaryu) takes it (to the Sadas)
for the purpose of drinking it <span id="fr_774"></span>[1](#fn_771).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:21">4:3:1:21</span></span>21.
Thereupon the Pratiprasthât*ri* draws the Aindrâgna graha with the
vessel not used for the drinking. The reason why he draws the Aindrâgna
libation with the vessel not used for drinking is that

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

no second Vasha*t* is pronounced on the Ritugrahas, and for them he is
about to take the Aindrâgna graha: thus they become consecrated for him
by a second Vasha*t* through the Aindrâgna.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:22">4:3:1:22</span></span>22. And
again, why he draws the Aindrâgna graha. By drawing the libations to the
seasons he has generated this All, and having generated this All, he now
establishes it on the out-breathing and in-breathing: hence this All is
established on the out-breathing and in-breathing, for Indra and Agni
are the out-breathing and in-breathing, and these two, heaven and earth,
are the out-breathing and in-breathing, and within these two this All is
established.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:23">4:3:1:23</span></span>23. And
again, why he draws the Aindrâgna cup. By drawing the libations to the
seasons he has generated this All, and having generated this All, he
lays the out-breathing and in-breathing into this All: hence these two,
the out-breathing anti in-breathing, are laid into (or beneficial, hita,
in) this All.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:24">4:3:1:24</span></span>24. He
now draws it from that (dro*n*akala*s*a trough) with (Vâ*g*. S. VII, 3,
1; Rig-veda III, 12, 1), 'O Indra and Agni, through our songs come ye
hither to the Soma, to the agreeable fume: drink thereof, urged by our
hymn!--Thou art taken with a support: thee to Indra and Agni!'--with
'This is thy womb: thee to Indra and Agni!' he deposits it (on the
mound), for it is for Indra and Agni that he draws it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:25">4:3:1:25</span></span>25.
Thereupon he draws the Vai*s*vadeva cup <span
id="fr_775"></span>[1](#fn_772).

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For by drawing the
Ritugrahas he has generated this All; but were there nothing but that,
there would indeed be only as many, creatures as were created in the
beginning: no (more) would be generated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:26">4:3:1:26</span></span>26.
Now, in that he draws the Vai*s*vadeva graha, thereby he sends forth
this All, these creatures in due order: whence these creatures are
generated again repeatedly. He draws it with the *S*u*k*ra cup, for the
*S*u*k*ra (bright) is yonder burning (sun), and

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

what rays of his there are, they are the All-gods: therefore he draws it
with the *S*ukra cup.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:3:1:27">4:3:1:27</span></span>27. He
draws it from that (Soma in the Dro*n*akala*s*a) with (Vâ*g*. S. VII,
33; Rig-veda I, 3, 7), 'Ye protectors and supporters of men, O All-gods,
come hither, ye givers, to the giver's liquor!--Thou art taken with a
support: thee to the All-gods!' with 'This is thy womb: thee to the
All-gods!' he deposits it <span id="fr_776"></span>[1](#fn_773), for it
is for the All-gods that he draws it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_763"></span>[316:1](sbe2650.htm#fr_766) The Puro*d*â*s*a
offerings, described in the preceding paragraphs, are followed by
libations from the dvidevatya cups, viz. the Aindravâyava,
Maitrâvaru*n*a, and A*s*vina. Each time the Adhvaryu is about to make a
libation, the Pratiprasthât*ri* draws Soma-juice into the Âditya cup
(pâtra) and makes libations therefrom immediately after the Adhvaryu on
the north side of the fire. And each time he pours the remains from the
Âditya cup into the Âditya sthâlî with, 'Thee to the Âdityas!' finally
covering the latter with the former (see [IV, 3, 5,
6](sbe2654.htm#4:3:5:6)). Then follows the filling of the cups of the
*K*amasins (see [p. 287](sbe2645.htm#page_287), note
[2](sbe2645.htm#fn_693)), and the libations from the *S*ukra and Manthin
grahas (already anticipated in [IV, 2, 1, 13](sbe2645.htm#4:2:1:13)
-[31](sbe2645.htm#4:2:1:31)) and from the cups of the *K*amasins.
Thereupon the Adhvaryu goes to the Sadas and sits down opposite the
Hot*ri*; and in alternate draughts and with mutual 'invitations' they
empty the <span id="page_317">p. 317</span> dvidevatya cups. The remains
are poured into the Hot*ri*'s cup, and portions of the puro*d*â*s*as
having then been put into those cups, they are deposited in the left
track of the southern cart. The Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthât*ri* then
drink the remains of the *S*ukra and Manthin cups; the other priests
also drinking from their cups, without, however, quite emptying them,
after which the cup-bearers deposit them in the Havirdhâna, behind the
axle of the southern cart. Henceforward, till the Vai*s*vadeva cup is
drawn ([IV, 3, 1, 25](sbe2650.htm#4:3:1:25)), those cups are called
nârâ*s*a*m*sa. The Adhvaryu then takes a piece of the sacrificial cake
and rises, calling out, 'We are invited together;' after which follows
the rehabilitation of the A*kh*âvâka, referred to above. Being called
upon by the Adhvaryu, he recites the verse Rig-veda V, 25, 1 (beginning
with 'a*kh*â,' whence perhaps his name), 'Hither will I sing Agni the
god for your protection,' &c., and then says, 'Ye Brâhmans, invite us
Brâhmans also!' whereupon the Adhvaryu says, 'This Brâhman desires an
invitation: invite him, Hot*ri*!' Being then invited, he pronounces an
anuvâkyâ, and his cup-bearer fills his cup, which henceforth ranks last
but one, thus preceding that of the Âgnîdhra. He now drinks from his
cup, and the latter is then deposited along with the other *K*amasas;
whereupon the priests, who have taken part in the offering of the
puro*d*â*s*as, and the sacrificer eat the I*d*â in the Âgnîdhra
fire-house.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[317:1](sbe2650.htm#fr_767) Or rather, we have
been mutually invited.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[317:2](sbe2650.htm#fr_768) See [III, 6, 2,
12](sbe2624.htm#3:6:2:12).

<span id="fn_766"></span>[318:1](sbe2650.htm#fr_769) See part i, p. 321,
note 6.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[318:2](sbe2650.htm#fr_770) The two *Ri*tu
vessels are made of kârshmarya or a*s*vattha wood, of the shape of
spoon-bowls, with spouts on both sides. Kâty. IX, 2, 13.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[319:1](sbe2650.htm#fr_771) The twelve
*Ri*tugrahas are drawn alternately by the Adhvaryu and
Pratiprasthât*ri*--the first two and the last two simultaneously, the
others singly, so that the one enters the cart-shed while the other
leaves. Both in entering and leaving the Pratiprasthât*ri* passes by the
Adhvaryu on the north side, and for a moment encircles him by passing
his arms round him and holding his own vessel south of him. With the
exception of the last two libations, the libations are offered up entire
(holocausts). When either of them is about to offer one of the first six
libations, he calls on the Maitrâvaru*n*a to 'Prompt (the Hot*ri*, &c.)
by the season!'--and at the four succeeding ones (after turning round
the vessels so as to put the other mouth in front) to 'Prompt by the
seasons!' For the last two libations they again reverse the vessels to
the previous position and call on him to 'Prompt by the season!' The
Maitrâvaru*n*a's formula runs thus: 'Let the Hot*ri* pronounce the
offering prayer to Indra!--From the Hot*ri*'s cup, from heaven to earth,
may he drink Soma together with the season (or, seasons)! O Hot*ri*,
pronounce the offering prayer!' Whereupon the Hot*ri* (Pot*ri*, &c.)
recites--'We who worship,--From the Hot*ri*'s cup, from heaven to earth,
may he drink Soma together with the season (or, seasons)! Vausha*t*!'
These formulas are slightly varied according to the deity to whom the
libation is offered, and the priest who pronounces the offering prayer
and Vausha*t*. The <span id="page_320">p. 320</span> deities and
offering priests of the twelve libations are: 1. Indra--the Hot*ri*; 2.
the Maruts--the Pot*ri*; 3. Tvash*tri* and the wives of the gods--the
Nesh*tri*; 4. Agni--the Âgnîdhra; 5. Indra-Brahman--the
Brâhma*n*â*kh*a*m*sin; 6. Mitra-Varu*n*a--the Maitrâ-varu*n*a; 7-10.
Deva Dravi*n*odas--the Hot*ri* Pot*ri*; Nesh*tri*, and A*kh*âvâka
respectively; 11. the A*s*vins--the Hot*ri*; 12. Agni G*ri*hapati--the
Hot*ri*. For this last libation, the Maitrâvaru*n*a in the first place
calls on the sacrificer with, 'O lord of the house, pronounce the
offering prayer!' and the sacrificer then again on the Hot*ri* with, 'O
Hot*ri*; pronounce the offering prayer upon this!' whereupon the Hot*ri*
pronounces the (sacrificer's) offering prayer. Kâty. IX, 13;
*S*âṅkhâyana Sr. VII, 8; Haug, Transl. Ait. Br. p. 135.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[321:1](sbe2650.htm#fr_772) Viz. from the
Dro*n*akala*s*a trough; see paragraph [6](sbe2650.htm#4:3:1:6).

<span id="fn_770"></span>[321:2](sbe2650.htm#fr_773) The Kâ*n*va text
adds *ri*tû in each case.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[322:1](sbe2650.htm#fr_774) The Kâ*n*va text
has 'bhakshyam' instead of 'bhaksham.' Each of the priests who have
pronounced the offering prayer and Vausha*t* partakes of this Soma in
his respective order,--the Hot*ri* thus taking four draughts; and the
Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthât*ri* (who, after drawing the Aindrâgna cup,
join them in the Sadas) drinking alternately from the same vessel with
those Hot*ri* priests, who pronounced the Vasha*t* at their libations.
As at the drawing of the libations, the vessel is turned round after the
sixth and tenth offering priests have drank. The vessel having been
emptied, the Adhvaryu takes it outside the Sadas, and then sits down in
front of the Hot*ri*'s hearth, with his face to the east, till the
recitation of the *S*astra ([IV, 3, 2, 2](sbe2651.htm#4:3:2:2)).

<span id="fn_772"></span>[323:1](sbe2650.htm#fr_775) According to Kâty.
IX, 13, 33 seq. the order of performance is as follows. In the first
place the first Â*g*ya-*s*astra is recited. Thereupon the Adhvaryu
fetches the Aindrâgna cup from the Havirdhâna (where it was deposited by
the Pratiprasthât*ri*), makes a libation from it--after calling on the
Hot*ri*, as at all libations accompanied <span id="page_324">p.
324</span> by a *s*astra, 'Singer of praises, recite Soma's offering
prayer;' the nârâ*s*a*m*sa cups being shaken by the cup-bearers at the
same time--and then drinks the remaining Soma with the Hot*ri*.
Thereupon he draws the Vai*s*vadeva cup from the Dro*n*akala*s*a, pours
the remaining juice from the latter into the Pûtabh*ri*t, and spreads
the straining-cloth over the empty vessels for the midday pressing. He
also prepares the Savanîya purodâ*s*as (see [p.
315](sbe2649.htm#page_315), note [4](sbe2607.htm#fn_99)), for the midday
feast, omitting however the dish of clotted curds (payasyâ). Then
follows the chanting of the first Â*g*ya stotra by the Udgât*ri*s, and
the recitation of the Praüga-*s*astra by the Hot*ri*, after which takes
place the Vai*s*vadeva libation (and emptying of the cup) in the same
way as with the Aindrâgna--the *k*amasas being also drained of their
contents by the respective priests. Then follows the
distribution--already referred to [IV, 2, 3, 11](sbe2647.htm#4:2:3:11)
seq.--of the Soma in the Ukthya bowl into three parts for the three
Hotrakas, now about to recite their *s*astras (preceded by their
respective stotras). The Adhvaryu takes one portion of the Soma, calls
on the Udgât*ri*s to chant the stotra, and afterwards on the
Pra*s*âst*ri* (Maitrâvaru*n*a) to recite his *s*astra; after which he
makes a libation from the portion of Soma, and pours the remainder into
the Pra*s*âst*ri*'s cup, to be drunk by that priest. In the same way the
Pratiprasthât*ri* then proceeds with the portions of the two other
Hotrakas, viz. the Brâhma*n*â*kh*a*m*sin and A*kh*âvâka. Each time also
the ten *k*amasas are filled, and after libations therefrom, are emptied
by the *K*amasins. See also [p. 287](sbe2645.htm#page_287), note
[2](sbe2645.htm#fn_693). At the end of the performance the priests pass
silently out (ni*h*sarp, see [p. 299](sbe2648.htm#page_299), note
[1](sbe2648.htm#fn_718)) of the Sadas by the back-door and out of the
Vedi; the midday performance afterwards beginning with the
pratisarpa*n*a, or 'creeping back' to the Sadas, with homage to the
dhish*n*ya hearths, &c.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[325:1](sbe2650.htm#fr_776) Viz. in the place
of the *S*ukra cup, on the south-east corner of the khara or mound.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV, 3, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe2651)
