[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2626) 
[Next](sbe2628) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1">3:7:1</span></span>

### SEVENTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:1">3:7:1:1</span></span>1. He
takes the spade, with (Vâ*g*. S. VI, 1), 'I take thee, at the impulse of
the divine Savit*ri*, with the arms of the A*s*vins, with the hands of
Pûshan: thou art a woman.' The significance of that formula is the same
(as before); and that spade (abhri, fem.) is indeed female: therefore he
says 'thou art a woman.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:2">3:7:1:2</span></span>2. He
thus draws the outline of the hole (for the stake <span
id="fr_439"></span>[3](#fn_437)), with, 'Herewith I cut off the necks of

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

the Rakshas!' The spade is the thunderbolt: with the thunderbolt he thus
cuts off the necks of the Rakshas.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:3">3:7:1:3</span></span>3. He
then digs, and throws up a heap of earth towards the east. He digs the
hole, making it equal (in depth) with the (unhewn) bottom part (of the
stake). In front of it he lays down the stake with the top towards the
east. Thereon he puts sacrificial grass of the same size, and thereupon
he puts the chip of the stake. In front on the (north) side (of the
stake) he puts down the head-piece <span
id="fr_440"></span>[1](#fn_438). The sprinkling-water has barley-corns
mixed with it: the significance of this is the same (as before <span
id="fr_441"></span>[2](#fn_439)).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:4">3:7:1:4</span></span>4. He
throws the barley-corns in with, 'Thou art barley (yava), keep thou
(yavaya) from us the haters, keep from us the enemies!' There is nothing
obscure in this. He then sprinkles: the significance of the sprinkling
is one and the same: he thereby renders it sacrificially pure.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:5">3:7:1:5</span></span>5. He
sprinkles (the top, middle, and bottom parts) with, 'For the sky--thee!
for the air--thee! for the earth--thee!' the stake being a thunderbolt
(he does so) for the protection of these worlds <span
id="fr_442"></span>[3](#fn_440): 'I sprinkle thee for the protection of
these worlds,' is what he thereby means to say.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:6">3:7:1:6</span></span>6. The
sprinkling-water that remains he then pours into the hole with, 'Be the
worlds pure

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

wherein the Fathers reside!' for a pit that is dug is sacred to the
Fathers: this he thereby renders sacrificially pure.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:7">3:7:1:7</span></span>7.
Thereupon he strews barhis-grass therein, both eastward-pointed and
northward-pointed, with, 'Thou art the seat of the Fathers!' for that
part of it (the stake) which is dug into the ground is sacred to the
Fathers: as though it were (naturally) established among plants, and not
dug in, so does it become established among those plants.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:8">3:7:1:8</span></span>8. He
then throws in the (first) chip <span id="fr_443"></span>[1](#fn_441) of
the stake. Now that chip of the outer (bark) doubtless is the vigour of
trees; hence, when a chip of their outer (bark) is cut off they dry up,
for it is their vigour. Hence, when he throws in the chip of the stake,
he does so thinking, 'I will plant it (the stake) full of vigour.' The
reason why it is this (chip) and no other, is that this one has been
produced with a formula, is sacrificially pure: therefore he throws in
the chip of the stake.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:9">3:7:1:9</span></span>9. He
throws it in with (Vâ*g*. S. VI, 2), 'Thou art a leader, easy of access
to the Unnet*ri*s <span id="fr_444"></span>[2](#fn_442);' for that
(chip) is cut from it in front, wherefore he says, 'Thou art a leader,
easy of access to the Unnet*ri*s.' 'Be thou mindful of this: it will
stand upon thee!' for it (the stake) will indeed stand on it, wherefore
he says, 'Be thou mindful of this: it will stand upon thee.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:10">3:7:1:10</span></span>10.
Having then taken out ghee with the dipping-spoon, he offers it into the
hole, 'lest the evil spirits should rise from below:' ghee is a
thunderbolt, he

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

thus repels the evil spirits by means of the thunderbolt, and thus the
evil spirits do not rise from below. Having then gone round to the
front, he sits down facing the north and anoints the stake. He says (to
the Hot*ri*), 'Recite to the stake as it is anointed <span
id="fr_445"></span>[1](#fn_443)!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:11">3:7:1:11</span></span>11. He
anoints it with, 'The divine Savit*ri* anoint thee with sweet drink
(milk)!' for Savit*ri* is the impeller (prasavit*ri*) of the gods, and
that stake is in reality the sacrificer himself; and sweet drink is
everything here; he thus puts it in connection with all that, and
Savit*ri*, the impeller, impels it for him: therefore he says, 'The
divine Savit*ri* anoint thee with sweet drink!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:12">3:7:1:12</span></span>12.
Having then anointed the top-ring on both sides, he puts it on (the
stake) with, 'To the full-berried plants--thee!' for that (top-ring) is
as its berry. And as to its being, as it were, contracted in the middle,
the berry <span id="fr_446"></span>[2](#fn_444) here on trees is
fastened (to the stalk) sideways; what connecting part there is between
(the fruit and stalk) pressed in, as it were, that he thereby makes it.
This is why it is, as it were, contracted in the middle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:13">3:7:1:13</span></span>13. He
anoints from top to bottom the (corner) facing the fire; for the
(corner) facing the fire is the sacrificer, and the ghee is sap: with
sap he thus anoints the sacrificer; therefore he anoints from top to
bottom the (corner) facing the fire. He then

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

grasps the girding-part all round, and says (to the Hot*ri*), 'Recite to
the (stake) being set up!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:14">3:7:1:14</span></span>14. He
raises it with, 'With thy crest thou hast touched the sky; with thy
middle thou hast filled the air; with thy foot thou hast steadied the
earth;'--the sacrificial stake being a thunderbolt, (he raises it) for
the conquering of these worlds; with that thunderbolt he gains these
worlds, and deprives his enemies of their share in these worlds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:15">3:7:1:15</span></span>15. He
then plants it (in the hole) with (Vâ*g*. S. VI, 3), 'To what resorts of
thine we long to go where are the swift-footed, many-horned kine; there,
forsooth, was imprinted wide-striding Vish*n*u's highest mighty
foot-step.' With this trish*t*ubh verse he plants it; the trish*t*ubh is
a thunderbolt, as the sacrificial stake is a thunderbolt; therefore he
plants it with a trish*t*ubh verse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:16">3:7:1:16</span></span>16.
That (corner which was) facing the fire he places opposite the fire; for
the (corner) facing the fire is the sacrificer, and the sacrifice is
fire. Hence were he to turn the fire-corner aside from the fire, the
sacrificer would assuredly turn aside from the sacrifice; therefore he
places the (corner which was) facing the fire opposite the fire. He then
heaps up (earth) round it and presses it firmly all round, and pours
water thereon <span id="fr_447"></span>[1](#fn_445).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:17">3:7:1:17</span></span>17.
Thereupon he makes (the sacrificer) say while touching it (Vâ*g*. S. VI,
4; Rig-veda I, 22, 19), 'See ye the deeds of Vish*n*u, whereby he beheld
the sacred ordinances, Indra's allied

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

friend!' For he who has set up the sacrificial stake has hurled the
thunderbolt: 'See ye Vish*n*u's conquest!' he means to say when he says,
'See ye the deeds of Vish*n*u, whereby he beheld the sacred ordinances,
Indra's allied friend.' Indra, forsooth, is the deity of the sacrifice,
and the sacrificial stake belongs to Vish*n*u; he thereby connects it
with Indra; therefore he says, 'Indra's allied friend.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:18">3:7:1:18</span></span>18. He
then looks up at the top-ring with (Vâ*g*. S. VI, 5; Rig-veda I, 22,
20), 'The wise ever behold that highest step of Vish*n*u, fixed like an
eye in the heaven.' For he who has set up the sacrificial stake has
hurled the thunderbolt: 'See ye that conquest of Vish*n*u!' he means to
say when he says, 'The wise ever behold that highest step of Vish*n*u,
fixed like an eye in the heaven.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:19">3:7:1:19</span></span>19. He
then girds (the stake with a rope of ku*s*a-grass). Now it is to cover
its nakedness that he girds it; wherefore he girds it in this place
(viz. on a level with the sacrificer's navel), for it is thus that this
(nether) garment is (slung round) <span id="fr_448"></span>[1](#fn_446).
He thereby puts food into him, for it is there that the food settles;
therefore he girds it at that place.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:20">3:7:1:20</span></span>20. He
girds it with a triple (rope), for threefold is food, and food means
cattle; and (there is) the father and the mother, and what is born is
the third; therefore he girds it with a triple (rope).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:21">3:7:1:21</span></span>21. He
girds it with (Vâ*g*. S. VI, 6), 'Thou art enfolded; may the heavenly
hosts enfold

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

thee! may riches enfold this sacrificer among men!' He invokes a
blessing on the sacrificer, when he says, 'May riches enfold this
sacrificer among men.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:22">3:7:1:22</span></span>22.
Thereupon he inserts a chip of the stake (under the rope) with, 'Thou
art the son of the sky.' For it is doubtless the offspring of that
(sacrificial stake); hence if there be the full number of eleven
stakes <span id="fr_449"></span>[1](#fn_447), let him insert in each its
own (chip) without confounding them; and his offspring is born orderly
and not foolish. But whosoever inserts them in confusion, not its own in
each, verily his offspring is born disorderly and foolish; therefore let
him insert its own in each without confounding them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:23">3:7:1:23</span></span>23.
Moreover, that chip of the stake is made an ascent to the heavenly
world; there is this girdle-rope; after the rope the chip of the stake;
after the chip of the stake the top-ring; and from the top-ring one
reaches the heavenly world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:24">3:7:1:24</span></span>24. And
as to why it is called svaru ('very sore'),--that (chip) is cut off from
that (stake), and thus is its own (sva) sore (arus); therefore it is
called 'svaru.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:25">3:7:1:25</span></span>25.
With that part of it which is dug in, he gains the world of the Fathers;
and with what is above the dug-in part, up to the girdle-rope, he gains
the world of men; and with what is above the rope, up to the top-ring,
he gains the world of the gods; and what (space of) two or three
fingers’ breadths

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

there is above the top-ring,--the gods called the 'Blessed <span
id="fr_450"></span>[1](#fn_448),'--their world he therewith gains;
verily, whosoever thus knows this, he becomes one of the same world with
the blessed gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:26">3:7:1:26</span></span>26.
That (sacrificial stake) he sets up on the fore-part (of the altar); for
the stake is a thunderbolt, as the club is a thunderbolt. But in hurling
the club one takes hold of its fore-part; and that (stake) is the
fore-part of the sacrifice; therefore he sets it up on the fore-part (of
the altar).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:27">3:7:1:27</span></span>27.
Verily, by means of the sacrifice the gods gained that supreme authority
which they now wield. They spake, 'How may this (world) of ours be made
unattainable to men?' They sipped the sap of the sacrifice, as bees
would suck out honey, and having drained the sacrifice and scattered it
by means of the sacrificial stake, they disappeared. And because they
scattered (yopaya) therewith, therefore it is called yûpa (sacrificial
stake). At the head stands intelligence, at the head swiftness of
thought; therefore he sets it up on the fore-part (of the altar).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:28">3:7:1:28</span></span>28. It
is eight-cornered; for the gâyatrî  metre consists of eight syllables,
and the gâyatrî is the fore-part of the sacrifice, as this (stake) is
the forepart of the sacrifice; therefore it is eight-cornered.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:29">3:7:1:29</span></span>29. Now
the gods once threw it after (the prastara into the fire) even as now
some throw it after, thinking, 'So the gods did it.' Thereupon the
Rakshas sipped the sacrifice (Soma) after (the gods).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:30">3:7:1:30</span></span>30. The
gods said unto the Adhvaryu, 'Offer thou only a chip of the stake;
thereby this (sacrificer)

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

will be bid good-speed <span id="fr_451"></span>[1](#fn_449); and thus
the Rakshas will not hereafter sip the sacrifice, thinking, "that
(stake) surely is a raised thunderbolt."'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:31">3:7:1:31</span></span>31. The
Adhvaryu, then, offered up only a chip of the stake, and thereby that
(sacrificer) was bid good-speed; and thus the Rakshas did not thereafter
sip the sacrifice, thinking, 'that surely is a raised thunderbolt.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:7:1:32">3:7:1:32</span></span>32. And
in like manner does he now only offer up that chip of the sacrificial
stake <span id="fr_452"></span>[2](#fn_450); thereby this (sacrificer)
is bid good-speed; and thus the Rakshas do not thereafter sip the
sacrifice, thinking, 'that surely is a raised thunderbolt!' He offers
it <span id="fr_453"></span>[3](#fn_451) with the text (Vâ*g*. S. VI,
21), 'May thy smoke rise up to the sky, thy light to the heavens! fill
the earth with ashes, Hail!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_437"></span>[167:3](sbe2627.htm#fr_439) According to the
Kâ*n*va text, one half of it is to be within, and one half outside of
the altar. See Kâty. VI, 2, 8.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[168:1](sbe2627.htm#fr_440) Of the part of the
tree cut off from the sacrificial stake, a top-piece or head-ring
(*k*ashâla) is made some eight or nine inches high, eight-cornered (like
the sacrificial stake); narrower in the middle like a mortar, and
hollowed out so as to allow its being fixed on the stake.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[168:2](sbe2627.htm#fr_441) See [III, 6, 1,
7](sbe2623.htm#3:6:1:7) seq.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[168:3](sbe2627.htm#fr_442) For the
construction, see [p. 15](sbe2605.htm#page_15), note
[3](sbe2605.htm#fn_55).

<span id="fn_441"></span>[169:1](sbe2627.htm#fr_443) See [III, 6, 4,
11](sbe2626.htm#3:6:4:11).

<span id="fn_442"></span>[169:2](sbe2627.htm#fr_444) The Unnet*ri*s are
the priests that have to draw the Soma.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[170:1](sbe2627.htm#fr_445) 'Recite to the
stake being anointed!' or, 'we anoint the stake: Recite!' Kâ*n*va rec.
The latter is the formula mentioned Ait. Br. II, 2 (but 'a*ñg*mo yûpam,'
for Kâ*n*va 'yûpam a*ñg*mo'); where the seven verses recited by the
Hot*ri* (brought up to eleven as usual) are given. See also Â*s*v. III,
1, 8.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[170:2](sbe2627.htm#fr_446) Pippala refers
especially to the berry or fruit of the Ficus Religiosa.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[171:1](sbe2627.htm#fr_447) The same formulas
are used on this occasion as at [III, 6, 1,
17](sbe2623.htm#3:6:1:17)-[18](sbe2623.htm#3:6:1:18).

<span id="fn_446"></span>[172:1](sbe2627.htm#fr_448) According to the
Kâ*n*va text it is to be slung round nîvídaghne, 'on a level with the
nether garment' (nâbhidaghne, Taitt. S. VI, 3, 4, 5). According to Kâty.
VI, 3, 1, the girding is preceded by a call on the Hot*ri* to recite to
the post being anointed; but neither recension mentions this.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[173:1](sbe2627.htm#fr_449) When, instead of a
single he-goat to Agni, eleven victims are slaughtered, they are either
bound to one stake each, or all to one and the same. See [III, 9, 1,
4](sbe2636.htm#3:9:1:4) seq. The chip alluded to is one of those
obtained in rough-hewing the stake and making it eight-cornered.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[174:1](sbe2627.htm#fr_450) On the 'sâdhyas'
see Weber, Ind. Stud. IX, p. 6, note 2.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[175:1](sbe2627.htm#fr_451) See I, 8, 3, 11
seq.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[175:2](sbe2627.htm#fr_452) See Ait. Br. II, 3.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[175:3](sbe2627.htm#fr_453) The offering of the
chips does not take place till the end of the after-offerings (see note
to [III, 8, 5, 6](sbe2635.htm#3:8:5:6)). It is somewhat strange that it
should be anticipated in this place, both in this and the Kâ*n*va
recensions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 7, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe2628)
