[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2612) 
[Next](sbe2614) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3">3:3:3</span></span>

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:1">3:3:3:1</span></span>1. He
bargains for the king (Soma); and because he bargains for the king,
therefore any and everything is vendible here. He says, 'Soma-seller, is
thy king Soma for sale?'--'He is for sale,' says the Soma-seller.--'I
will buy him of thee!'--'Buy him!' says the Soma-seller.--'I will buy
him of thee for one-sixteenth (of the cow).'--'King Soma, surely, is
worth more than that!' says the Soma-seller.--'Yea, King Soma is worth
more than that; but great, surely, is the greatness of the cow,' says
the Adhvaryu.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:2">3:3:3:2</span></span>2. 'From
the cow (comes) fresh milk, from her boiled milk, from her cream, from
her sour curds, from her sour cream, from her curdled milk, from her
butter, from her ghee, from her clotted curds, from her whey:

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:3">3:3:3:3</span></span>3. 'I
will buy him of thee for one hoof <span
id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_185)!'--'King Soma, surely, is worth more
than that!' says the Soma-seller.--'Yea, King Soma is worth more than
that, but great, surely, is the greatness of the cow,' replies the
Adhvaryu; and, having (each time) enumerated the same ten virtues, he
says, 'I will buy him of thee for one foot,'--'for half (the
cow),'--'for the cow!'--'King Soma has been bought!' says the
Soma-seller, 'name the kinds!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:4">3:3:3:4</span></span>4. He
(the Adhvaryu) says, 'Gold is thine, a cloth is thine, a goat is thine,
a milch cow is thine, a pair of kine is thine, three other (cows) are
thine!' And because they first bargain and afterwards come to terms,
therefore about any and everything that is for sale here, people first
bargain and afterwards

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

come to terms. And the reason why only the Adhvaryu enumerates the
virtues of the cow, and not the Soma-seller those of the Soma, is that
Soma is already glorified, since Soma is a god. And the Adhvaryu thereby
glorifies the cow, thinking, 'Seeing her virtues he shall buy her!' This
is why only the Adhvaryu enumerates the virtues of the cow, and not the
Soma-seller those of the Soma.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:5">3:3:3:5</span></span>5. And as
to his bargaining five times:--the sacrifice being of equal measure with
the year, and there being five seasons in the year, he thus obtains it
(the sacrifice, Soma) in five (divisions), and therefore he bargains
five times.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:6">3:3:3:6</span></span>6. He
then makes (the sacrificer) say on the gold <span
id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_186) (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 26), 'Thee, the pure, I
buy with the pure,' for he indeed buys the pure with the pure, when (he
buys) Soma with gold;--'the brilliant with the brilliant,' for he indeed
buys the brilliant with the brilliant, when (he buys) Soma with
gold;--'the immortal with the immortal,' for he indeed buys the immortal
with the immortal, when (he buys) Soma with gold.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:7">3:3:3:7</span></span>7. He
then tempts <span id="fr_188"></span>[2](#fn_187) the Soma-seller (with
the gold): 'In compensation <span id="fr_189"></span>[3](#fn_188) for
thy cow,' whereby he means to say, 'With the sacrificer (be) thy cow!'

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He then draws it
(the gold) back towards the sacrificer, and throws it down, with, 'Ours
be thy gold!' whereby he (the sacrificer) takes unto himself the vital
energy, and the Soma-seller gets only the body. Thereupon the
Soma-seller takes it <span id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_189).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:8">3:3:3:8</span></span>8. He
then makes him (the sacrificer) say on the she-goat, which stands facing
the west, 'Thou art the bodily form of fervour,'--that she-goat was
indeed produced as the bodily form of fervour, of Pra*g*âpati; hence he
says, 'Thou art the bodily form of fervour,'--'Pra*g*âpati's kind,'
because she brings forth three times in the year, therefore she is
Pra*g*âpati's kind. 'Thou art bought with the most excellent animal,'
because she brings forth three times in the year, she is the most
excellent of animals. 'May I increase with a thousandfold increase!'
Thereby he implores a blessing: a thousand meaning abundance, he thereby
means to say, 'May I obtain abundance!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:9">3:3:3:9</span></span>9. With
that (text) he gives the she-goat, with that he takes the king <span
id="fr_191"></span>[2](#fn_190); for a*g*â (goat) doubtless

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

means the same as â*g*â (driving thither <span
id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_191)), since it is through her (the she-goat)
that he finally drives him (Soma) thither. It is thus in a mystic sense
that they call her 'a*g*â.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:10">3:3:3:10</span></span>10. He
takes the king, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 27), 'Come to us, a friend,
bestowing good friends!' whereby he means to say, 'Come to us, as a kind
and propitious one!' Having pushed back the garment on the sacrificer's
right thigh, he lays him (Soma) down thereon, with the text, 'Seat thee
on Indra's right thigh,'--for he, the sacrificer, is at present
Indra <span id="fr_193"></span>[2](#fn_192): therefore he says, 'Seat
thee on Indra's right thigh;'--'willing on the willing,' whereby he
means to say, 'beloved on the beloved one;'--'tender on the tender!'
whereby he means to say, 'propitious on the propitious one.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:11">3:3:3:11</span></span>11.
Thereupon he (the sacrificer) assigns (to the Gandharvas) the objects
constituting the purchase price for the Soma, with the text, 'O Svâna,
Bhrâ*g*a, Aṅghâri, Bambhâri, Hasta, Suhasta, K*ris*ânu! these are your
wages for Soma: keep them! may they not fail you!' Now those
(Gandharvas) are instead of the hearth-mounds--these being the names of
the hearth-mounds--it is these very (names) that he thereby has assigned
to them <span id="fr_194"></span>[3](#fn_193).

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:12">3:3:3:12</span></span>12. He
now uncovers (his head <span id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_194)); for he
who is consecrated becomes an embryo, and embryos are enveloped both in
the amnion and the outer membrane: him (the sacrificer or sacrifice) he
has now brought forth, and therefore he uncovers himself. Now it is he
(Soma <span id="fr_196"></span>[2](#fn_195)) that becomes an embryo, and
therefore he is enveloped, since embryos are, as it were, enveloped both
in the amnion and the outer membrane.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:13">3:3:3:13</span></span>13. He
then makes (the sacrificer) say the text (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 28), 'Keep me, O
Agni, from evil ways! let me share in the right ways.' Now he (Soma)
approaches him while he is seated, and when he has come, he rises:
thereby he does wrong and breaks the vow. This, then, is his expiation
of that (transgression), and thus no wrong is thereby done, and he
breaks not the vow: therefore he says, 'Keep me, O Agni, from evil ways!
let me share in the right ways!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:14">3:3:3:14</span></span>14.
Having then taken the king, he rises, with the text, 'With new life,
with good life, am I risen after the immortals;' for he who rises after
the bought Soma, rises indeed after the immortal: therefore he says,'
With new life, with good life, am I risen after the immortals.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:15">3:3:3:15</span></span>15.
Thereupon he takes the king and goes towards the car, with the text
(Vâ*g*. S. IV, 29), 'We have

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

entered upon the path that leadeth to wellbeing, free from danger;
whereon he escheweth all haters, and meeteth with good <span
id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_196).'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:16">3:3:3:16</span></span>16.
Now, once on a time, the gods, while performing sacrifice, were afraid
of an attack from the Asura-Rakshas. They perceived that prayer for a
safe journey; and having warded off the evil spirits by means of that
prayer, they attained wellbeing in the safe and foeless shelter of that
prayer. And so does he now ward off the evil spirits by means of that
prayer, and attain wellbeing in the safe and foeless shelter of that
prayer. For this reason he says, 'We have entered upon the path that
leadeth to well-being, free from danger; whereon he escheweth all haters
and meeteth with good.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:17">3:3:3:17</span></span>17.
They carry him thus <span id="fr_198"></span>[2](#fn_197), and
(afterwards) drive him about on the cart; whereby they exalt him: for
this reason they carry the seed on their head (to the field), and bring
in (the corn) on the cart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:3:3:18">3:3:3:18</span></span>18. Now
the reason why he buys (the Soma) near water <span
id="fr_199"></span>[3](#fn_198) is that--water meaning sap--he thereby
buys Soma sapful; and as to there being gold, he thereby buys him
lustrous; and as to there being a cloth, he thereby buys him with his
skin; and as to there being a she-goat, he thereby buys him fervid; and
as to there being a milch cow, he thereby buys him with the milk to be
mixed with him; and as to there being a pair (of kine), he thereby buys
him with a mate.--He should buy him with ten (objects), and

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

not with other than ten, for the virâ*g* consists of ten syllables, and
Soma is of virâ*g* nature: therefore he should buy him with ten
(objects) and not with other than ten.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_185"></span>[69:1](sbe2613.htm#fr_186) That is, for
one-eighth of a cow, each foot consisting of two hoofs (or toes,
*s*apha).

<span id="fn_186"></span>[70:1](sbe2613.htm#fr_187) That is, according
to Kâty. VII, 8, 5, in making him touch the gold. The Kâ*n*va text has,
'Thereupon he buys him (Soma) with gold.'

<span id="fn_187"></span>[70:2](sbe2613.htm#fr_188) Or, according to the
commentaries, 'he frightens the Soma-seller (by threatening to take back
the money).'

<span id="fn_188"></span>[70:3](sbe2613.htm#fr_189) ? Sagme (? compact),
explained by the commentators as meaning the sacrificer. Perhaps it may
mean, 'one of the parties to an agreement,' and hence here the
sacrificer as the bargainee. The Kâ*n*va text reads, He then takes it
back again (punar âdatte) with 'Sagme to go*h*,' and throws it down with
'Ours thy gold.'

<span id="fn_189"></span>[71:1](sbe2613.htm#fr_190) According to some
authorities, the gold is again taken away forcibly from the Soma-seller
by the Adhvaryu, after the sacrificer has uncovered his head (paragraph
a 2), and the seller is driven away by blows with a speckled cane. Kâty.
VII, 8, 27. According to Âpastamba (ib.), he buys off the Soma-cow with
another cow, and then dismisses her to the cow-pen; and if the
Soma-seller objects, he is to be beaten with a speckled cane. The
Mânava-sûtra merely says, that they are to give the Soma-seller
something for compensation. The whole transaction was evidently a
feigned purchase, symbolising the acquisition of the Soma by the gods
from the Gandharvas. The real bargain was probably concluded before the
sacrificial performance. See also Haug, Ait. Br. Transl. p. 59, note 2.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[71:2](sbe2613.htm#fr_191) While making over
the she-goat to the Soma-seller with his left hand, he receives the Soma
with the right.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[72:1](sbe2613.htm#fr_192) Sâya*n*a takes
â-a*g* in the sense of 'to go to, to come' (â*g*â, the corner); because
the sacrificer through her comes to Soma.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[72:2](sbe2613.htm#fr_193) See part i,
introduction, p. xix, note 4.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[72:3](sbe2613.htm#fr_194) 'For those same
Gandharvas, the overseers of the Guardians of Soma, they are (meant) in
lieu of those (? hearth-mounds), for those are their names: it is to
them that he thereby assigns those (objects constituting the
purchase-price), and thus he becomes debtless towards them.'
[Kâ*n*va](errata.htm#0) text. See also part i, p. 183, note 2.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[73:1](sbe2613.htm#fr_195) See [III, 2, 1,
16](sbe2607.htm#3:2:1:16). His wife does the same.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[73:2](sbe2613.htm#fr_196) According to a
former passage ([III, 1, 3, 28](sbe2605.htm#3:1:3:28)), the sacrificer
is supposed to remain in the embryonic state till the pressing of the
Soma. The Kâ*n*va recension reads, 'Sa etam ya*gñ*am a*g*î*g*anat sa
esha garbho bhavaty â sutyâyâ*h*;' where 'a*g*î*g*anat' seems to mean
'he has begotten.' I am not quite certain whether Soma himself is really
implied. See [III, 3, 4, 6](sbe2614.htm#3:3:4:6).

<span id="fn_196"></span>[74:1](sbe2613.htm#fr_197) Compare the slightly
different verse, Rig-veda VI, 51, 16.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[74:2](sbe2613.htm#fr_198) The sacrificer
carries the bundle of Soma on his hand resting on his head.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[74:3](sbe2613.htm#fr_199) Viz. the vessel of
water mentioned [III, 1, 2, 2](sbe2604.htm#3:1:2:2).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe2614)
