[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2616) 
[Next](sbe2618) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3">3:4:3</span></span>

#### THE AVÂNTARADÎKSHÂ, OR INTERMEDIARY CONSECRATION.

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:1">3:4:3:1</span></span>1. When
the gods had performed the guest-offering, discord arose between them.
They allayed it by means of the Tânûnaptra (oaths). They desired an
atonement for having spoken evil to one another; for they had appointed
no other consecration-ceremony till the expiatory bath. They perceived
this intermediate consecration <span id="fr_257"></span>[2](#fn_256).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:2">3:4:3:2</span></span>2. By
means of fire they enveloped (the body) with a skin. Now, fire being
fervour, and the consecration being fervour, they thereby underwent an
intermediate consecration; and because they underwent that

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

intermediate consecration, therefore this intermediary consecration
(avântaradîkshâ, is performed). They turned in their fingers more
tightly and drew <span id="fr_258"></span>[1](#fn_257) their zone
tighter, whereby they (again) put round them what had been put round
them before <span id="fr_259"></span>[2](#fn_258);--and so does he
thereby make atonement for what heretofore he has done injurious to the
vow, for what he has spoken injurious to the vow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:3">3:4:3:3</span></span>3. By
means of the fire they (the priests) envelop him with a skin. Now, fire
being fervour, and the consecration being fervour, he thereby undergoes
an intermediate consecration. He turns in his fingers more tightly and
draws the zone tighter, whereby he (again) puts round himself what was
put round him before. Moreover, it was offspring the gods thereby
obtained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:4">3:4:3:4</span></span>4. By
means of Agni (fire) they enveloped (the body) with a skin. Now, Agni
being the causer of sexual union, the progenitor, they thereby obtained
offspring. They turned in their fingers more tightly and drew their zone
tighter, whereby they produced offspring for themselves. And in like
manner does he (the sacrificer) thereby obtain offspring.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:5">3:4:3:5</span></span>5. By
means of Agni he envelops himself with a skin. Now, Agni being the
causer of sexual union, the progenitor, he thereby <span
id="fr_260"></span>[3](#fn_259) obtains offspring. He turns in his
fingers more tightly and draws his zone tighter, whereby he produces
offspring for himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:6">3:4:3:6</span></span>6. Now,
while the gods were consecrated, whichever of them fetched fire-wood or
uttered his appointed texts, him the Asura-Rakshas endeavoured to

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

strike--the one by (assuming) the form of this one, and the other by
that of another. They came together, upbraiding one another, saying,
'See, what thou hast clone to me! see, how thou hast struck me!' But
Agni alone did not speak thus to any one, nor did any one speak thus to
Agni.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:7">3:4:3:7</span></span>7. They
said, 'Have they spoken thus to thee also, Agni?' He said, 'Verily, I
have not spoken to any one, nor has any one spoken to me.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:8">3:4:3:8</span></span>8. They
became aware,--'He verily is the greatest repeller of the Rakshas among
us; let us be like him: thereby we shall escape from the Rakshas,
thereby we shall attain to the heavenly world.' They accordingly became
like Agni, and thereby escaped from the Rakshas and attained to the
heavenly world. And in like manner does this one now become like Agni,
and thereby escape from the Rakshas and attain to the heavenly world. It
is in putting a kindling-stick on (the Âhavanîya fire <span
id="fr_261"></span>[1](#fn_260)) that he enters upon the Avântaradîkshâ.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:9">3:4:3:9</span></span>9. He
puts on the kindling-stick, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. V, 6), 'O Agni,
protector of vows; on thee, O protector of vows--' for Agni is lord of
vows to the gods; wherefore he says, 'O Agni, protector of vows, on
thee, O protector of vows--' 'what bodily form <span
id="fr_262"></span>[2](#fn_261) there is of thine, (may that be) here on
me; and what bodily form there is of mine, (may that be) on thee! May my
vows be bound up with thine, O lord of vows!' whereby he envelops
himself with the skin by means of Agni, 'May the lord of consecration
approve my

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

consecration, and the lord of penance my penance!' Thereby he enters
upon the intermediary consecration. More closely he turns in his
fingers, and closer he draws the zone; whereby he (again) puts round
himself what was put round him before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:10">3:4:3:10</span></span>10.
They then attend on him with the boiling lustral water (madantî);--fire
is heat, and the lustral water is heat: that is why they attend on him
with the lustral water.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:11">3:4:3:11</span></span>11.
Having touched the lustral water, they (the priests and sacrificer)
therewith strengthen <span id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_262) the king
(Soma). The reason why, after touching the lustral water, they
strengthen the king is this;--ghee is a thunderbolt, and Soma is seed:
hence they strengthen the king after touching the lustral water, lest
they should injure the seed, Soma, by the thunderbolt, the ghee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:12">3:4:3:12</span></span>12.
Here now they say, 'Him, Soma, for whom that strengthening (meal), the
guest-offering, is prepared, they ought first to strengthen, and then
(ought to be performed) the Avântaradîkshâ, and thereupon the
Tânûnaptra.' But let him not do this. For such indeed was the course of
the sacrificial performance: discord arose between them (the gods)
thereat; they attained to their former tranquillity; then the
Avântaradîkshâ and finally the strengthening.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:13">3:4:3:13</span></span>13.
Then as to why they strengthen (Soma). Soma is a god, since Soma (the
moon) is in the sky. 'Soma, forsooth, was V*ri*tra; his body is the same
as the mountains and rocks: thereon grows that plant called
U*s*ânâ,'--so said *S*vetaketu Auddâlaki;

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'they fetch it
hither and press it; and by means of the consecration and the Upasads,
by the Tânûnaptra and the strengthening they make it into Soma.' And in
like manner does he now make it into Soma by means of the consecration
and the Upasads, by the Tânûnaptra and the strengthening.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:14">3:4:3:14</span></span>14. 'It
is bees’ honey,' they say; for bees’ honey means the sacrifice, and the
bees that make the honey are no other than the officiating priests; and
in like manner as the working-bees make the honey increase, so do they
(the priests) thereby strengthen the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:15">3:4:3:15</span></span>15. By
means of the sacrifice the gods gained that supreme authority which they
now wield. They spake, 'How can this (world) of ours be made
unattainable to men?' Having sipped the sap of the sacrifice, as bees
would suck out honey, and having drained the sacrifice and scattered it
by means of the sacrificial post, they disappeared; and because they
scattered (yopaya) therewith, therefore it is called yûpa (post).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:16">3:4:3:16</span></span>16. Now
this was heard by the *Ri*shis. They collected the sacrifice; and as
that sacrifice was collected, so does he collect the sacrifice who is
consecrated. The sacrifice is speech: hence he thereby again supplies
what part of the sacrifice here has been sucked out and drained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:17">3:4:3:17</span></span>17.
They strengthen (the Soma), being six <span
id="fr_264"></span>[1](#fn_263):--there are six seasons: having become
the seasons, they strengthen it <span id="fr_265"></span>[2](#fn_264).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:18">3:4:3:18</span></span>18.
They strengthen him with (Vâ*g*. S. V, 7),

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Let stalk after
stalk of thine wax strong, O divine Soma!' whereby they strengthen
(increase) stalk after stalk of his;--'for Indra, the winner of the
ekadhanas <span id="fr_266"></span>[1](#fn_265);' Indra indeed is the
deity of the sacrifice: therefore he says, 'For Indra, the winner (or
bestower) of the ekadhanas.' For verily every one of those stalks swells
to fill a hundred or ten <span id="fr_267"></span>[2](#fn_266) ekadhana
cups for the several gods. 'May Indra wax strong for thee, and wax thou
strong for Indra!' for Indra is the deity of the sacrifice: he thus
strengthens him who is the deity of the sacrifice. By saying, 'Wax thou
strong for Indra,' he instils that invigorating draught into him.
'Strengthen us friends with gain and understanding!' 'With gain' he says
with reference to what he gains; and 'with understanding' he says with
reference to what he recites. 'Mayest thou thrive, O divine Soma, and
may I attain to the Soma-feast!' They, the priests and sacrificer, have
one prayer in common, 'May we reach the end of the sacrifice!' hence he
thereby means to say, 'May I reach the end of the sacrifice!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:19">3:4:3:19</span></span>19.
Thereupon they make amends on the prastara. For the sacrifice requires a
northward attendance;

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

but now they strengthen (Soma) after going, as it were, towards the
right (south) <span id="fr_268"></span>[1](#fn_267); and, the sacrifice
being the fire, they thereby turn their back on the sacrifice and thus
do wrong and are cut off from the gods. Now the prastara also is (part
of) the sacrifice, and by (touching) it they again get hold of the
sacrifice. And this is his expiation of that (transgression); and so no
wrong is committed by them and they are not cut off from the gods: for
this reason they make amends on the prastara.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:20">3:4:3:20</span></span>20.
Here now they say, 'On the anointed?--let them rather make amends on the
unanointed <span id="fr_269"></span>[2](#fn_268)!' They should indeed
make amends on the un-anointed (prastara), since anointed it is thrown
into the fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:21">3:4:3:21</span></span>21.
They make amends <span id="fr_270"></span>[3](#fn_269) with, 'Desirable
treasures (may come) forth for strength and well-being--the right for
the right-saying'--whereby

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

he means to say, 'the truth for the truth-speaking;'--'Homage be to
Heaven and to the Earth!' whereby they make amends to these two, heaven
and earth, on whom this All is founded.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:4:3:22">3:4:3:22</span></span>22.
Having then picked up the prastara, he says, 'Agnîdh, does the water
boil? It boils,' replies the Agnîdh <span
id="fr_271"></span>[1](#fn_270). 'Come hither with it!' He holds (the
prastara) quite close over the fire. The reason why he does not throw it
into the fire is that he (the sacrificer) is to perform therewith <span
id="fr_272"></span>[2](#fn_271) during the days that follow; and in that
he holds it quite close over the fire, thereby it is for him as if it
were really thrown into the fire. He hands it to the Agnîdh, and the
Agnîdh puts it aside (in a safe place).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_256"></span>[97:2](sbe2617.htm#fr_257) The Avântaradîkshâ
extends to the end of the sixth Brâhma*n*a.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[98:1](sbe2617.htm#fr_258) Our text has no
verb; the Kâ*n*va recension reads 'auhanta.'

<span id="fn_258"></span>[98:2](sbe2617.htm#fr_259) Viz. the dîkshâ, as
symbolised by the zone (or the skin).

<span id="fn_259"></span>[98:3](sbe2617.htm#fr_260) Viz. through Agni,
or the Avântaradîkshâ.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[99:1](sbe2617.htm#fr_261) The sacrificer's
wife performs silently on and near the Gârhapatya fire the same
ceremonies as her husband.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[99:2](sbe2617.htm#fr_262) Tanu, see [p.
10](sbe2604.htm#page_10), note [4](sbe2604.htm#fn_40).

<span id="fn_262"></span>[100:1](sbe2617.htm#fr_263) On the 'âpyâyana'
(â-pyai,'to swell; make swell,' to strengthen, become strong, increase,
fill), see part i, p. 178, note 2. According to Âpastamba and other
authorities, they tie a piece of gold to their nameless (gold) finger,
and touch the Soma with their moist hands.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[101:1](sbe2617.htm#fr_264) Viz. the five
priests--Brahman, Udgât*ri*, Hot*ri*, Adhvaryu, and Âgnîdhra--and the
sacrificer.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[101:2](sbe2617.htm#fr_265) That is, as the
seasons make the Soma-plant grow.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[102:1](sbe2617.htm#fr_266) Ekadhana-vid; the
meaning of 'ekadhana' (apparently 'one prize' or 'one part of the booty
or goods') in this compound is not clear. The author of the Brâhma*n*a
seems to take it in its technical sense, viz. the ekadhana pitchers in
which the ekadhanâ water, used for mixing with the Soma juice, is kept,
see [III, 9, 3](sbe2638.htm#3:9:3); [16](sbe2638.htm#3:9:3:16);
[27](sbe2638.htm#3:9:3:27); [34](sbe2638.htm#3:9:3:34). According to
Haug, Transl. Ait. Br. p. 114 notes, they are so called because the
Adhvaryu throws one stalk of Soma (eka-dhana) into each pitcher to
consecrate it.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[102:2](sbe2617.htm#fr_267) This anticlimax is
rather curious. The Kâ*n*va text reads: da*s*a da*s*a vâ ha smaisha
ekaiko ’*ms*ur devân pratîndrâyaikadhanân âpyâyayanti (!) *s*ata*m*
*s*atam vâ tasmâd âhaikadhanavida iti.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[103:1](sbe2617.htm#fr_268) Soma's throne
stands south of the Âhavanîya fire, and in going to perform the
âpyayanam upon him, the priests and sacrificer have to move round the
fire, along the east side of it towards the south (the region of the
Fathers).

<span id="fn_268"></span>[103:2](sbe2617.htm#fr_269) This seems to be
Sâya*n*a's interpretation of the passage 'akte nihnuvîrā̃n anaktā̃i.' The
two words, with their final syllable protracted, being intended to
strongly contradict the preceding 'akte.' It is hardly possible to take
the latter absolutely, 'it being anointed (when thrown into the fire),
let them make amends on it while unanointed.' On the throwing of the
prastara into the fire, see I, 8, 3, 17. The prastara referred to is
that of the guest-offering (âtithyesh*t*i), which was broken off after
the I*d*â ceremony (see III, 4, I, 26) and has to be completed after the
present ceremony. Neither the prastara nor the barhis is burnt on this
occasion.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[103:3](sbe2617.htm#fr_270) In performing this
propitiatory rite, the priests and sacrificer lay their hands on the
prastara, either both of them with the palms upwards, or only the right
one, and the left in the opposite way. Kâty. VIII, 2, 9. The latter mode
is the one practised by the Taittirîyas. Sây. on Taitt. S. I, 2, 11.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[104:1](sbe2617.htm#fr_271) According to the
Kâ*n*va text, this conversation takes the place of the colloquy
(samudita) held by the Adhvaryu and the Âgnîdhra, after the prastara has
been thrown into the fire at the normal ish*t*i; see I, 8, 3, 20.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[104:2](sbe2617.htm#fr_272) Or, 'in the shape
of it (tena),' the prastara representing the sacrificer himself. This
sentence seems also to imply, that the sacrificer thereby continues to
live during the days that follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 4, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe2618)
