[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zfa08)  [Next](zfa10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875482732/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G99RLG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

### WHAT IS BUDDHISM? <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md)

IT seems to be very appropriate and even necessary at the outset to draw
a well-defined line of demarcation between what is understood as
Hinayâna Buddhism and what is known as Mahâyâna Buddhism. Most people
imagine that there is only one school of Buddhism and that that one
school is no other than the Buddhism they have learned from the Buddhist
books written or compiled or translated by Western
Orientalists--Orientalists who are in many respects prejudiced against
the doctrine which they propose to study most impartially. Owing to
these unhappy circumstances, the outsiders are either generally ignorant
or altogether misinformed of the true character of Buddhism. For what is
understood by the Western people as Buddhism is no more than -one of its
main divisions, which only partially expresses the spirit of its
founder.

I said here "divisions," but it may be more proper to say "stages of
development." For Buddhism, like so many other religions, has gone

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

through several stages of development before it has attained the present
state of perfection among the Oriental nations. And it will be evident
to you that if we catch only a glimpse of an object and try to judge the
whole from this transient impression, we place ourselves in a most
awkward position, and shall be at a loss how to extricate ourselves from
it. Therefore, let me try in the beginning to take a comprehensive view
of the subject we here propose to expound.

Properly speaking, Hinayâna Buddhism is a phase of Mahâyâna Buddhism.
The former is preparatory for the latter. It is not final, but merely a
stepping stone which leads the walker to the hall of perfect truth.
Hinayânism is therefore more or less pessimistic, ascetic, ethical (to
be distinguished from religious), and monastical. It fails to give a
complete satisfaction to a man's religious yearnings. It does not fully
interpret the spirit of Buddha. The Buddhism now. prevailing in Ceylon,
Burma, and Siam may be considered to be betraying in a certain way a
Hinayâna tendency.

The Buddhism of present Japan, on the other hand, is Mahâyânistic. It is
more comprehensive, more religious, more humanistic, and more satisfying
to the innermost needs of the religious consciousness. It cannot be said
to be absolutely free from superstition, error, prejudice, etc., for it
is a constantly growing, ever-living faith which knows no ossification
or fossilization.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

Some pious people are apt to consider their religious belief to be
absolutely fixed and unchanging since the dawn of human consciousness;
but they have forgotten, in my opinion, the fact that the human mind is
still keeping on unfolding itself, that it has not yet exhausted all its
possibilities, that it is constantly coming to a clearer consciousness
as to its own nature, origin, and destiny. But what I firmly believe is
that in the Buddhism of Japan to-day are epitomized all the essential
results reached through the unfolding of the religious consciousness
during the past twenty or thirty centuries of Oriental culture.

In a word, what has been known in the West as the teaching of Buddha
does not represent it in its true, unadulterated color, for it is
Hinayânistic in tendency; that is, it is exclusive and not
comprehensive, narrow and limited, and not all absorbing and
assimilating. What I propose to expound in this lecture to-night is the
Mahâyâna Buddhism, so called by Buddhist scholars of the East.

Let me point out in this connection what is most characteristic of
Buddhism as distinguished from any other religion. I refer to a
predominant tendency of Buddhism toward intellectuality, and it seems to
me that the reason why Buddhism is always ready to stand before the
tribunal of science and let her pass a judgment upon its merits or
demerits is due to this intellectual tenor.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

It goes without saying that the intellect does not constitute the most
essential element of religion, but we must not forget that a religious
system too much given up to sentimentalism (understanding it in its
purely psychological sense) is generally prone to accede to unwarranted
mysticism, ignoring altogether the legitimate claim of the intellect.
Buddhism is fortunately saved from this grievous blunder, and always
endeavors not to give a free rein to the wantonness of imagination and
the irrationality of affection. Love without enlightenment excludes,
discriminates, and contradicts itself . Love is not love unless it is
purified in the mill of spiritual insight and intellectual
discrimination.

What are, then, the fundamental teachings of Buddhism? I deem it best to
consider it from two standpoints, ethical and philosophical, or
practical and speculative, or affective and intellectual. The
philosophical or speculative is preparative for the ethical or
practical, for religion is not a system of metaphysics which plays with
verbalism and delights in sophistry, but its aim is pre-eminently
practical and spiritual. It must bear fruit in this our everyday life.

To begin with the metaphysical side of Buddhism: (1) We Buddhists
believe that as far as phenomenality goes, things that exist are all
separate and discrete, they are subject to the law of individuation and
therefore to that of

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

limitation also. All particular things exist in time and space and move
according to the law of cause and effect, not only physically but
morally. Buddhism does not, though sometimes understood by Western
people to do so, advocate the doctrine of emptiness or annihilation. It
most assuredly recognizes the multitudinousness and reality of
phenomena. This world as it is, is real, not void. This life as we live
it, is true, and not a dream.

\(2\) We Buddhists believe that all these particular things surrounding
us come from one ultimate source which is all-powerful, all-knowing, and
all-loving. The world is the expression or manifestation of this reason
or spirit or life, whatever you may designate it. However diverse,
therefore, things are, they all partake of the nature of the ultimate
being. Not only sentient beings, but non-sentient beings, reflect the
glory of the Original Reason. Not only man but even the lower animals
and inorganic substances manifest the divinity of their source. To use
the Christian term, God, it <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) is
visible and audible not only in one of its highest manifestations, whom
Christians call Jesus Christ, but also in the meanest and most
insignificant piece of stone lying in a deserted field. God's

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

splendor is seen not only in the Biblical lilies, but also in the mud
and mire from which they grow. The melody of divine reason is heard not
only in the singing of a bird or in the composition of an inspired
musician, but also in the "slums of life" as Emerson phrases it.

\(3\) This recognition of the oneness of things naturally leads to our
third belief, that the one is the many and the many is the one. God does
not dwell in the heavens. It does not direct its affairs in a closed
office situated somewhere outside this world. It did not create heaven
and earth out of nothingness. According to Buddhism, it is a serious
error to seek God outside this life, outside this universe. It is living
right among ourselves and directing the course of things according to
its innate destiny. Though Buddhists refuse to have God walk out of us,
they do not identify it with the totality of existence, they are not
willing to cast their lot with pantheists so called. God is immanent,
surely enough, but it is greater than the totality of things. For the
world may pass away, the universe may be shaken out of its foundation,
but God will remain and will create a new system out of the former
ruins. The ashes of existence will never be scattered to the winds, but
they will gather themselves in the ever designing hand of God and build
themselves up to a new order of things, in which it is ever shining with
its serene radiance.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

To sum up the first part of this discourse, what may be called the
metaphysical phase of Buddhism is to recognize (1) the reality of the
phenomenal world, (2) the existence of one ultimate reason, and (3) the
immanence of this reason in the universe.

Now to come to the practical side of Buddhism: The aim of Buddhism, to
state it briefly, is to dispel the clouds of ignorance and to make shine
the sun of enlightenment. We are selfish because we are ignorant as to
the nature of self. We are addicted to the gratification of the
passions, because we are ignorant as to the destiny of humanity. We are
quarrelsome and want to make ourselves powerful and predominant at the
expense of our fellow-beings, because we are ignorant of the ultimate
reason of the universe. Buddhists do not recognize any original sin, but
acknowledge the existence of ignorance, and insist on its total removal
as the surest means of salvation. Let us, therefore, all be enlightened
as to the statement made before. Let us know that we are all one in the
reason of the universe, that the phenomenal world is real only to the
extent it manifests reason, that egoism has no absolute sway in this
life, for it destroys itself when it tries to preserve itself through
its arrogant assertion, and that perfect peace is only attained when I
recognize myself in you and you in me. Let us all be enlightened as to
these things, and our ignorance and egoism are forever

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

departed; the wall that divides is destroyed, and there is nothing which
prevents us from loving Our enemies; and the source of divine love is
open in our hearts, the eternal current of sympathy has now found its
unobstructed path. This is the reason why Buddhism is called the
religion of enlightenment.

Now that we stand on this eminence of religious sanctity, we know what
Buddhist practical faith is. It is threefold: W to cease from
wrong-doing, (2) to promote goodness, and (3) to enlighten the ignorant.
Buddhist ethics is the simplest thing to Practise in the world. It has
nothing mysterious, nothing superstitious, nothing idolatrous, nothing
supernatural. Stop doing anything wrong, which is against the reason of
things; do whatever is good, which advances the course of reason in this
life; and finally help those who are still behind and weary of life to
realize enlightenment: and here is Buddhism in a nutshell. It has
nothing to do with prayer and worship and singing and what not. Our
simple everyday life of love and sympathy is all that is needed to be a
good Buddhist.

I was once asked whether there was such a thing as religious life
particularly. To which my answer was simple enough: "Attend to Your
daily business, do all you can for the promotion of goodness in this
world, and out of fulness of heart help your fellow-beings to gain the
path of enlightenment. Outside of this there

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

cannot be anything to be specially called a religious life."

In the latter part of the T’ang Dynasty in China, there was a famous
poet-statesman who is known in Japanese as Hak-Rak-Ten. He learned that
there resided in his district a Buddhist monk greatly noted for his
saintly life and scholarly learning. The governor went to see him,
intending to discuss some deeply religious topics. As soon as he was
ushered into the pretence of the monk, he inquired what was thought by
the saint to be the most fundamental teaching of Buddhism. The monk
immediately replied that it is the teaching of all enlightened ones to
cease doing anything evil, to promote goodness, and to purify one's own
heart.

Hak-Rak-Ten was nonplused to receive such a commonplace instruction from
the mouth of such a scholarly personage professing the faith of Buddha;
for he secretly expected to have something highly metaphysical and
profoundly speculative, which would naturally lead them to further
philosophizing and contentless abstraction. The poet-statesman therefore
retorted: "This is what every child of three summers is familiar with. I
desire on the other hand what is most abstruse, most essential, most
vital in Buddhism." The monk, however, coldly replied: "Every child of
three summers may know what I said now, but even a silvery-haired man of
eighty winters finds it difficult to put the Buddhist

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

instruction into the practice of everyday life."

And it is said that thereupon the Governor reverentially bowed and went
home wiser.

What is philosophical in Buddhism is no more than a preliminary step
toward what is practical in it. Every religion, if it deserves the name,
must be essentially practical and conducive to the promotion of the
general welfare and to the realization of Reason. Though intellectualism
is one of the most characteristic features of Buddhism, making it so
distinct from any other religious system, it never forgets the fact that
our religious consciousness ever demands something concrete, that which
is visible to our senses, that which is observable in our everyday life.
Religion does not necessarily consist in talking on such subjects as the
continuation after death of individual personality, original sin
committed by some mythical personages, the last judgment to be given by
an unknown quantity, a special historical revelation which takes place
in a congested brain, and what not. At least, practical Buddhism does
not trouble itself with solving these problems through speculation or
imagination or sophistry. Let those theologians who delight in
abstraction and supernaturalism discuss them to their hearts' content,
for that is their profession. We, plain ordinary Buddhists, will keep on
removing selfishness, seeking the light that is everywhere, practising
lovingkindness

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

that does not contradict or discriminate. Says an ancient sage, "The Way
is near, and thou seekest it afar." Why, then, shall we ever attempt to
walk away from the path which extends right in front of us, so wide and
well paved?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[79:1](zfa09.htm#fr_29.md) Read before the National
Geographic Society, Washington, D. C., April, 1906.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[83:1](zfa09.htm#fr_30.md) Let me remark here that
it is not at all proper to refer to God, the ultimate source of
everything, as masculine as is usually done. God is above sex. It is
neither "he" nor "she." Even "it" is not appropriate, but will be
preferable to the other pronouns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Middle Way](zfa10.md)
