[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zfa07)  [Next](zfa09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875482732/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G99RLG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### BUDDHIST ETHICS

PAI LU-TIEN, a famous Chinese poet, author, and statesman who lived in
the thirteenth century of the Christian era, once went to see an eminent
Buddhist monk whose saintly life was known far and near, and asked him
if he would instruct him in the essentials of Buddhist doctrine. The
monk assented and recited the following gâtha:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Commit no wrong, but good deeds do,  
  And let thy heart be pure,  
All Buddhas teach this truth,  
  Which will for aye endure." <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The statesman-poet
was not at all satisfied with this simple moral teaching, for he
expected to have something abstruse, recondite, and highly philosophical
from the mouth of such a prominent and virtuous personality. Said the
poet, "Every child is familiar with this Buddhist injunction. What I
wish to learn from you is the highest and most fundamental teaching of

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

your faith." But the monk retorted, "Every child may know of this gâthâ,
but even a silvery-haired man fails to put it into practice." Thereupon,
it is said, the poet reverentially bowed and went home meditatively.

If we are requested to-day to state what is the most fundamental in
Buddhist ethics, we have to make the same assertion. There may be and in
fact are many schools and denominations in Buddhism, each claiming to
have transmitted the true spirit of Buddha; but they will be unanimous
in declaring that the gâthâ aforementioned is one of the common grounds
on which they all stand. "Sabba pâpassa akaranam" is heard in all
Southern monasteries, and the lines "Chu wo mo tso, etc.," are seen
everywhere in the Eastern lands of Buddhism. If Buddhism were called a
sort of ethical culture society on account of this simple code of
morality, its followers would make no objection to it, for the
recognition of a personal God, or the conception of original sin, or
belief in a risen Christ is not thought indispensable to Buddhist
salvation. Let a man do what is good and avoid what is bad and have his
heart as pure as he can of all egotistic impulses and desires, and he
will be delivered from the clutches of ignorance and misery. What ever
his dogmatic views on religion, he is one of the enlightened who are
above bigotry, intolerance, vanity, conceit, pedantry, and prejudice. He
must truly be said to be one whose spiritual

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

insight has penetrated into the depths of existence.

Now, the question is: What is good? What is evil? And how is the heart
to be cleansed? I am not going to discuss here these great ethical and
religious problems from a mere theoretical point of view. Buddhism has
nothing to do with utilitarianism or intuitionalism or hedonism or what
not. Buddhism is most practical in its announcement of what constitutes
goodness. It dogmatically and concretely points out good deeds one by
one. First, negatively, it enumerates ten deeds of goodness (*kusalam*)
as most fundamental in Buddhist ethics; while, positively, it considers
the six pâramitâs (virtues of perfection) or eightfold path as the route
leading to a virtuous life.

The ten deeds of goodness are: (1) Not to kill any living being; (2) Not
to take anything that does not belong to oneself; (3) Not to look at the
other sex with an unclean heart; (4) Not to speak falsehood; (5) Not to
calumniate; (6) Not to use vile language; (7) Not to make sensational
utterances; (8) Not to be greedy; (9) Not to be out of temper; and
lastly, (10) Not to be confused by false doctrines. Later Buddhists,
however, make ten affirmative propositions out of those just mentioned,
thus: It is good (1) to save any living being, (2) to practise charity,
(3) to be clean-minded, (4) to speak truth, (5) to promote

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

friendship, (6) to talk softly and gently, (7) to be straightforward in
speech, (8) to be content with one's own possessions, (9) to be meek and
humble, and (10) to think clearly and rightly.

The six pâramitâs or virtues of perfection are: (1) Charity, which
includes the giving away of worldly possessions as well as the
proclamation of the Good Law, (2) The observation of the moral precepts
as formulated by Buddha, (3) Meekness, (4) Strenuosity, (5)
Contemplation, (6) Spiritual enlightenment.

The eightfold path is: (1) Right view, (2) Right reflection, (3) Right
speech, (4) Right deed, (5) Right livelihood, (6) Right striving, (7)
Right understanding, (8) Right contemplation.

In these various enumerations of Buddhist virtues, what is most unique
are perhaps the virtues of strenuosity and those of contemplation and
enlightenment. To be good Buddhists, we must never be indolent, whiling
away our time to no purpose. Mere piety will not do, so long as there is
some work to be accomplished for the sake of humanity and civilization.
Love, again, must be accompanied with enlightenment, for the affection
is very frequently wasted on account of its blindness. God-fearing is
recommendable, but without contemplation we fail to recognize the
purport of our own position in the system of the universe. Mere passion
leads to fervor and violence if not properly guided

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

by contemplation which brings enlightenment, revealing the reason of
existence and purifying the heart of ignorance.

Ignorance, according to Buddhism, is the root of all evil, and therefore
it advises us in strong terms to have ignorance completely destroyed.
And it is only then that the all-illuminating light of enlightenment
guides us gloriously to the destination of all beings, where we gain
purity of heart, and whatever flows from this eternal fountain of purity
is good.

It is evident, then, that by purity of heart is meant absence of
ignorance and self-will. But it is not a negative condition, for the
most essential postulate of Buddhism is that in each of us there abideth
the indwelling reason of the universe, which, when released from the
temporal bondage of ignorance and self-will, becomes the master of
itself by reducing everything to subjection and restoring it to its
right place. In a pure heart, therefore, the universal reason manifests
itself in its full glory and works its own destiny unmolested. What one
with such a heart wills is what makes the bird sing and the flower
smile, what has raised the mountain and makes the water flow. He is
hungry and the universe wishes to eat; he is asleep and all the world
hybernates. This sounds extraordinary, but the enlightened understand it
perfectly well. We cannot make the blind see what we ourselves see. The
blind may protest that we are deceiving

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

them; but could we do otherwise, inasmuch as they are deprived of the
sense we have, or they have not yet learned how to make use of it? It is
declared by Buddhists, therefore, that to realize fully the sanctity of
religious life one must have Buddha-wisdom awakened from its unconscious
slumber in which it is indulging from time out of mind.

Analytically, purity of heart consists of sympathy and intelligence, and
on this groundwork the structure of practical Buddhism is founded.
Sympathy is the tremulation of the spiritual cord which unites the
hearts of all sentient beings; and it is intelligence that discovers the
presence of the sacred cord in every one of us and keeps it from being
entangled. The cord freely responds to cries of suffering. The heart
contrives to effect all the possible means to relieve sentient beings
from misery and ignorance. The ten deeds of goodness, the eightfold
path, the six virtues of perfection, and many other good things all flow
from this one source of pure-heartedness.

It is, then, of unqualified importance in the ethics of Buddhism to have
one's heart perfectly cleansed and free from the dust of egotism which
has been accumulating through the want of enlightenment. In this sense
"blessed are the pure in heart"; they may not see God as he is
superficially and superstitiously understood, but they will surely come
into personal touch with the

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

ultimate authority of conduct and also perceive that the author is not
residing outside of their being but within themselves. We read in the
Dharmapada:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Manopubbangamâ dhammâ, manosetthâ, manomayâ;  
Manasâ, ce padutthana bhâsati vâ karoti vâ,  
Tato nam dukkham anveti, cakkara va vahato padam.

"Manopubbangamâ dhammâ, manosetthâ, manomayâ;  
Manasâ ce pasannena bhâsati vâ karoti vâ,  
Tato nam sukhara anveti, châyâ va anapâyinî." <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md)

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In this respect
Buddhism can be said to have a decidedly idealistic tendency, since it
fully recognizes the paramountcy of ideas in the moral realm. But we
must not lose sight of the fact that Buddhism is not a system of
metaphysics, but a religion which is practical more than anything else.
What it teaches is the profound spiritual experience of every
enlightened man, while the philosopher and theorist will speculate on
the facts and offer whatever interpretation they may please or feel
compelled to give to account adequately for them.

Buddhism is often charged with passiveness and quietism, lacking the
"push" of some other religions; and the backwardness of Asiatic

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

nations in the general march of humanity is sometimes ascribed to the
influence of Buddhism. Though I am not here entering upon any lengthy
polemics, a few words may not be altogether inopportune to refute such
an erroneous opinion as this.

If there is anything passive in Eastern culture, which is often no more
than tolerance or indifference or self-restraint, it is not due to
Buddhism but to the racial idiosyncrasy of Asiatic peoples. Buddhism
teaches contemplation and tranquillity and at the same time strenuosity,
indefatigable energy in following truth and in destroying ignorance. We
see many admirable examples among its believers who have fully
illustrated these virtues in their person. The history of Buddhism,
while perfectly free from bloodshed and inhumanity, evidences how far
its moral teachings have been carried out. Buddhist ethics is not
certainly passive or negative, unless the absence of arrogance,
aggressiveness, intolerance, bigotry, and fanaticism could be called so.

Religion in its social aspect is not omnipotent, nor is it absolute, as
is imagined by some. It is, like many other things created by man, a
human institution; it has been discovered, shaped, developed according
to the inner necessity of mankind; and as long as he is imperfect and
steering his course through innumerable obstacles, religion also must
share his imperfection and

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

adapt itself to ever-changing surroundings. Instead of imposing its
ideals upon man tyrannically and absolutely, religion reconciles itself
to his needs, going through all the necessary modifications. Therefore,
one religion is diversely interpreted by different peoples among whom it
may thrive. To suppose that religion could do anything it desires
without regard to individual, national, racial peculiarities is far from
the fact. The difference between Oriental and Occidental civilization is
by no means due to the difference between Christianity and Buddhism. On
the other hand, the difference between the two religions is due to the
difference between the two great types of Civilization. Truth, be it
religious or philosophical or scientific, is universal, and as such does
not allow any modification or distortion. But it suffers modification in
its practical application, for it is like a mathematical formula or
figure. When conceived a priori, it is formal and not subject to any
concrete individualization, which latter in fact is the condition of its
particular forms.

In conclusion let me say most emphatically that the ethics of Buddhism
is summed up in the purification of the heart, in keeping oneself
unspotted even though living in the world; and from this eternal root
must sprout such things of God as love, a heart of compassion, the
virtue of strenuosity, humbleness of mind, longsuffering, forbearing one
another, forgiving one another,

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

and freedom from all evils. It is said that there were eighty-four
thousand virtues of perfection practised by all Bodhisattvas, but they
are no more than so many leaves and branches growing from the one stem
of pure-heartedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[69:1](zfa08.htm#fr_27.md) Translation by Dr. Paul
Carus. In Pâli:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Sabbapâpassa, akaranam, kusalassa, upasampadâ,  
Sacittapariyodapanam: etam Buddhâna sâsanam.  
                                   --Dhammapada, v. 183

</div>

<span id="fn_28"></span>[75:1](zfa08.htm#fr_28.md) All that is, is the
result of thought, it is founded on thought, it is made of thought. If a
man speaks or acts with an evil thought, pain follows him, as the wheel
follows the foot of the ox that draws the carriage. All that is, is the
result of thought, it is founded on thought, it is made of thought. If a
man speaks or acts with a pure thought, happiness follows him, like a
shadow that never leaves him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What is Buddhism?](zfa09.md)
