[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zfa06)  [Next](zfa08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875482732/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G99RLG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

### BUDDHIST FAITH.

BUDDHISM is so deep and comprehensive--and, we might say, even
unfathomable--that scholars are sometimes at a loss how and where to
begin its measurement. In some respects it appears to be a chaotic mass
of superstitions, while in others it is a systematic and thoroughgoing
application of an idealistic pantheistic theory. The present discourse
does not propose, however, to clear up all these difficulties, but only
to give a certain clue with which students of Buddhism may be guided in
their exploration. Buddhism, then, will be treated here broadly under
two headings, Faith and Discipline.

First, of Buddhist faith, which is summed up in this gâthâ:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The Buddha-Body fills the world,  
Being immanent universally in all things;  
It will make itself manifest wherever and whenever conditions are
matured,  
Though it never leaves this Seat of Bodhi."</span>

</div>

Generally speaking, faith means trusting--trusting in something external
to oneself. When religion is defined as a faith, it is considered to
imply that there is a being or power which has created this world and
presides over it, directing

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

its course and shaping its destiny; and that religion teaches to trust
or believe in this being or power, which is thus proved to be greater
and wiser than human beings. Therefore, Christians believe in a God who
is a personal reality and who is supposed to exist above and outside of
us poor mortals; and some Buddhists believe in Amitâbha Buddha, who
resides in Pure Land or Western Paradise (*Sukhâvatî*); and for this
reason religion has come to be identified with a belief in an external
object, whatever this be, particularly by Occidental scholars. But
Buddhist faith does not belong to this category, for Buddhism rejects
the existence of a personal God as he is ordinarily understood by some
religionists. What, then, is the faith that keeps Buddhists together?

Briefly, Buddhists believe in three most fundamental facts which are
universally observable about us and which cannot be refuted by any
amount of argument. They believe first in the sameness of things
(*samatâ*). By sameness is understood the presence of a unifying
principle in all phenomena. However diversified and differentiated may
appear those particular existences with which we come in contact in this
world of the senses, they universally partake of one nature, of one
essence; and it is on account of this presence of a supra-individual
reason that life becomes possible, that existence, this phenomenal
world, becomes possible,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

Secondly, Buddhists believe in the difference between things
(*nânâtva*), in their manifoldness, in their particularity, in their.
individuality; for it is an undeniable fact that things are all separate
and distinct, that each has its own individuality, that each moves
according to its own inherent necessity.

Thirdly, Buddhists believe in the fact that all things move or work. For
there is nothing in this world that is not endowed with the possibility
of motion, the power of doing something, the capacity of accomplishing a
work; and in exercising this power everything works upon another and is
at the same time worked upon by another. The universe is a network of
all these particular forces mutually acting and mutually being acted
upon. This is called the principle of karma, and Buddhists apply it not
only to the physical world but to the moral and spiritual realm.

This threefold faith constitutes the cornerstone of Buddhism, which
makes it appear somewhat too metaphysical to be a religion of the
masses, but the fact is that Buddhism is far from being a system of
philosophy. Those who take Buddhists for speculative thinkers will lose
sight of the inner life of the religion in which its followers are
living. It must never be supposed that Buddhists try to get us entangled
in the endless maze of sophistic reasoning. Anything that is to be
designated at all as a religion

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

never proposes to argue with us after the fashion of a philosopher; for
religion is not to analyze, to demonstrate, or to argue with logical
thoroughness, but to see facts directly and to believe and to live them
accordingly.

In the gâthâ recited in the beginning, the idea of sameness is rather
dogmatically expressed: "The Buddha-Body fills the world." In this the
content of sameness is called Buddha-Body or in Sanskrit Buddhakâya. The
Buddhakâya, which is also often called Dharmakâya, is the reason, life,
and norm of all particular existences. When we penetrate through the
diversity of all these individual phenomena, we encounter everywhere
this indwelling Body and therein find the unity or sameness (*samatâ*)
of things.

The principle of diversity is declared in the second line of the gâthâ,
which makes the Buddha-Body universally immanent in all things. The
Buddha-Body, the essence of existence, though absolutely one in itself,
allows itself to be diversified as the lilies of the field, as the fowls
of the air, as the creatures of the water, or as the inhabitants of the
woods. For it is in the inherent nature of the Buddha-Body that it
individualizes itself in the manifoldness of the phenomenal world. It
does not stand alone outside particular existences, but it abides in
them and animates them and makes them move freely. By thus abandoning
its absolute transcendentality, it

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

has subjected itself to certain conditions such as space, time, and
causation '. Its essence is infinite, but its manifestations are finite
and limited. Therefore, the Buddha-Body has to wait to express itself in
this relative world till all the necessary conditions are matured. This
creation, so called, is no more than a manifestation of the
self-limiting Buddha-Body.

Suppose here stands a mirror--the mirror of Buddha-Body. Anything that
comes in front of it is reflected therein, and this without any
premeditation on the part of the mirror. If there comes a man, he is
reflected there; if a woman, she finds herself reflected in it; if it is
a beautiful flower now which presents itself before the mirror, it is
immediately and instantly reflected with all its magnificence. It is
even so with things unsightly or even repugnant, for the mirror does not
refuse its illuminating power to anything, high or low, rich or poor,
ugly or beautiful, good or evil. Wherever and whenever conditions are
ripe, all particular things will be reflected in the supra-natural
mirror of Buddha-Body, without hesitation, without reasoning, without
demonstration. This is the way in which the principle of karma works.

The fourth line of the gâthâ is more or less a continuation of the third
and expresses the same sentiment from another point of view. Things are
many, and are subject to constant transformation as regulated by their
karma, but the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Buddha-Body
eternally abides in the Seat of Bodhi, which is our inmost being.

The moon is one and serenely shines in the sky, but she will cast her
shadow, wherever the conditions are mature, in ever so many different
places. Do we not see her image wherever there is the least trace of
water? It may be filthy, or it may be clean; it may consist of only a
few drops, or it may be a vast expanse, such as the ocean; but they all
reflect one and the same moon as best suited to their inherent nature.
The shadows are as many as different bodies of water, but we cannot say
that one shadow is different from another. However small the moon may
appear when there is only a drop of water, she is essentially the same
as the one in the boundless sheet of water, where its heavenly serenity
inspires awe and reverence. So many, and yet one in all; so diverse, and
yet essentially the same; we see it reflected everywhere, and yet is not
the Buddha-Body sitting, all alone, in the Seat of Bodhi?

Several questions present themselves here: How can we attain a spiritual
insight into the -Sameness of things, and have our minds so transparent
as to reflect one eternal truth? How can we understand the principle of
sameness in its phenomenal aspect and recognize it in the diversity of
desires, feelings, passions, instincts, motives, etc.? How can we see
the Buddha-Body in its manifold activities and recognize it

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

at once without abstraction and premeditation and elaboration?

The most practical way to solve these problems is not through mere
intellection. We must first acquire mental tranquillity, we must be
purified spiritually, we must be freed from all disturbing passions,
prejudices, and superstitions. Buddhism is a religion first and last,
and its aim is always practical and spiritual. Philosophers and
scientists will endeavor to come to a definite solution of the problems
here cited logically, intellectually, metaphysically, analytically,
relying on their demonstrative knowledge. But the way that leads us
practical religionists most effectively to the satisfactory adjustment
of the puzzling world-riddles which so greatly disturb all deep, serious
souls is the practice of meditation, called Dhyâna <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md) by Buddhists.

As to the practical part of Buddhism, or Discipline, it will be treated
under "Buddhist Ethics," which follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[68:1](zfa07.htm#fr_26.md) See the article
"Practice of Dhyâna." (See [p. 146](zfa16.htm#page_146).md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Buddhist Ethics](zfa08.md)
