[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zfa15)  [Next](zfa17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875482732/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G99RLG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

# PRACTICE OF DHYANA

THREE things are usually considered necessary for the realization of the
Buddhist life: 1. *Çîla* (moral precepts), 2, *Dhyâna* (contemplation),
3, [*Prajñâ*](errata.htm#2) (wisdom); and these are coöperative and
mutually related.

To be a good Buddhist, first of all, a man must be ethical and regulate
his life according to the moral precepts, which were laid down by Buddha
and are universally applicable. Next, he must be philosophical, that is,
he must train his mind so as to be capable of practising introspection.
The mechanical observance of the moral laws is not becoming to the
dignity of a rational, conscious being. Man must be master of himself,
intellectually, morally, and spiritually. To be so, he must be able to
examine his own states of consciousness and direct his thoughts and
desires to the end where lies the rationale of existence. This habit of
self-examination is attainable only through the practice of dhyâna,
contemplation. Lastly, he must be religious, by which is meant that he
should have an insight going deep into the indwelling reason of things,
and this insight, according to Buddhism, is the

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

outcome of the mental training acquired by self-introspection. Prajñâ,
which is the most fundamental of all the psychic faculties possessed by
man, lies inactive and altogether unrecognized when the mind is busily
engaged in receiving impressions and elaborating on them through the
ordinary process of understanding. It has no time to withdraw within
itself and watch how impulses are awakened, stimuli felt, thoughts
matured, in short, how the inner working goes on. It never knows what a
precious stone it harbors within its being, which, when discovered, will
illuminate the inmost significance of life and put an end to all
vanities and vexations of spirit. The practice of dhyâna, however,
brings this latent faculty of consciousness to the surface and makes a
new man out of old, worn-out, and apparently unpromising stuff.

Therefore, the three requisites of the Buddhist life are helping one
another like a tripod to stand together and to accomplish their common
purpose. The moral precepts cannot be intelligently and thoroughly
followed unless a man has gained a complete control of himself through
contemplation and self-introspection. But this dhyâna-practice will not
be of much value, religiously considered, to his daily life unless it
leads to the awakening of Prajñâ (wisdom) and to the comprehension of
the ultimate facts of life. Whatever difference there may be in the
different schools of Buddhism, those three forms

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

of discipline, as they are often called, are admitted by them all as
most essential for the realization of their ideal life. The importance
of the moral codes as formulated by Buddha will not be questioned even
by followers of non-Buddhist faiths, and as to the signification of
spiritual insight, which constitutes the essence of religious life, I
have somewhere touched upon the subject. In this short discourse I wish
to say a few words concerning the practice of dhyâna.

\*      \*      \*

Dhyâna is essentially Hindu or, rather broadly speaking, Oriental in its
origin as well as in its significance. In this we can trace one of the
many characteristics which lend a peculiarly charming color to Oriental
culture. The Oriental mind ever strives after the One and is so
idealistic in all its tendencies as sometimes altogether to ignore the
external world. It shuts out all the impressions the senses may bring in
from without, thus endeavoring to realize the aspiration after unity and
eternality. It does not care so much for the subjugation of natural
forces to its own will as for the deliverance of self from its illusory
imprisonment. It does not antagonize the world in which it lives, but
calmly contemplates it, reviewing its vagaries or vicissitudes, or
whatever they may be termed. It dwelleth not in the manyness of things,
but in their oneness, for its ultimate abode is in the region of the
absolute and not in the phenomenal realm.

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A mind like this
naturally takes more to contemplation than to the strenuous life; it
thinks more and acts less; it appreciates instead of criticizing; it
synthesizes instead of analyzing. The practice of dhyâna, therefore, was
the most natural thing for the Oriental people.

The Western people were not altogether unfamiliar with dhyâna, as we can
judge from the life of a mystic or a medieval Christian monk. But their
so-called contemplation or meditation was not as systematic and did not
necessarily form a part of their religious discipline. The Hebrews were
too fanatically religious to allow themselves the time to reflect. The
Greeks were rather scientific and intellectual, while the Romans were
pre-eminently practical. The German mystics perhaps were more or less
after the Hindu type in their general mental constitution, but they seem
not to have made the practice of dhyâna a prominent feature of their
doctrine. Be that as it may, there is no doubt that dhyâna, is an
Oriental production.

What is dhyâna, then? Dhyâna literally means, in Sanskrit, pacification,
equilibration, or tranquillization, but as religious discipline it is
rather self-examination or introspection. It is not necessarily to
cogitate on the deep subjects of metaphysics, nor is it to contemplate
on the virtues of a deity, or on the transitoriness of mundane life. To
define its import in Buddhism, roughly and practically, it is the habit
of with

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

drawing occasionally from the turbulence of worldliness and of devoting
some time to a quiet inspection of one's own consciousness. When this
habit is thoroughly established, a man can keep serenity of mind and
cheerfulness of disposition even in the midst of his whirlwind-like
course of daily life. Dhyâna is then a discipline in tranquillization.
It aims at giving to a mind the time for deliberation and saving it
from. running wild; it directs the vain and vulgar to the path of
earnestness and reality; it makes us feel interest in higher things
which are above the senses; it discovers the presence in us of a
spiritual faculty which bridges the chasm between the finite and the
infinite; and it finally delivers us from the bondage and torture of
ignorance, safely leading us to the other shore of Nirvâna.

Dhyâna is sometimes made a synonym for çamatha and samâdhi and
samâpatti. Çamatha is tranquillity and practically the same as dhyâna,
though the latter is much more frequently in use than the former.
Samâpatti literally is "put together evenly" or "balanced," and means
the equilibrium of consciousness in which takes place neither
wakefulness nor apathy, but in which the mind is calmly concentrated on
the thought under consideration. Samâdhi is a perfect absorption,
voluntary or involuntary, of thought into the object of contemplation. A
mind is sometimes said to be in a state of

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

samâdhi when it identifies itself with the ultimate reason of existence
and is only conscious of the unification. In this case, dhyâna is the
method or process that brings us finally to samâdhi.

\*      \*      \*

Now, the benefits arising from the exercise of dhyâna are more than one,
and are not only practical but moral and spiritual. Nobody will deny the
most practical advantage gained through presence of mind, moderation of
temper, control of feelings, and mastery of oneself. A passion may be so
violent at the time of its agitation that it will fairly consume itself
to utter destruction, but a cool-headed man knows well how to give it
the necessary psychological time of rest and deliberation and thus to
save himself from plunging headlong into the Charybdis of emotion. And
this cool-headedness, though in some measure due to heredity, is
attainable through the exercise of dhyâna.

Intellectually, dhyâna will keep the head clear and transparent and,
whenever necessary, make it concentrate itself on the subject at issue.
Logical accuracy depends greatly on the dispassionateness of the arguing
mind, and scientific investigation gains much from the steadiness of the
observing eye. Whatever be a man's intellectual development, he has
surely nothing to lose, but a great deal to gain, by training himself in
the habit of tranquillization.

In these days of industrial and commercial

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

civilization, the multitudes of people have very little time to devote
themselves to spiritual culture. They are not altogether ignorant of the
existence of things which are of permanent value, but their minds are so
engrossed in details of everyday life that they find it extremely
difficult to avoid their constant obtrusion. Even when they retire from
their routine work at night, they are bent on something exciting which
will tax their already over-stretched nervous system to the utmost. If
they do not die prematurely, they become nervous wrecks. They seem not
to know the blessings of relaxation. They seem to be unable to live
within themselves and find there the source of eternal cheerfulness.
Life is for them more or less a heavy burden and their task consists in
the carrying of the burden. The gospel of dhyâna, therefore, must prove
to them a heaven-sent boon when they conscientiously practise it.

Dhyâna is physiologically the accumulation of nervous energy; it is a
sort of spiritual storage battery in which an enormous amount of latent
force is sealed,--a force which will, whenever demand is made, manifest
itself with tremendous potency. A mind trained in dhyâna will never
waste its energy, causing its untimely exhaustion. It may appear at
times, when superficially observed, dull, uninteresting, and dreamy, but
it will work wonders when the occasion arises; while a mind ordinarily
addicted to dissipation

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

succumbs to the intensity of an impulse or a stimulus without much
struggling, which ends in complete collapse, for it has no energy in
reserve. Here, let me remark incidentally, can be seen one of the many
characteristic differences between Orientalism and Occidentalism. In all
departments of Oriental culture a strong emphasis is placed upon the
necessity of preserving the latent nervous energy and of keeping the
source of spiritual strength well fed and nourished. Young minds are
trained to store up within and not to make any wasteful display of their
prowess and knowledge and virtue. It is only shallow waters, they would
say, that make a noisy, restless stream, while a deep whirlpool goes on
silently. The Occidentals, as far as I can judge, seem to be fond of
making a full display of their possessions with the frankness of a
child; and they are prone to a strenuous and dissipating life which will
soon drain all the nervous force at their command. They seem not to keep
anything in reserve which they can make use of later on at their
leisure. They are indeed candid and open-hearted-traits which sometimes
seem wanting in the Orientals. But they certainly lack the
unfathomableness of the latter, who never seem to be enthusiastic,
clamorous, or irrepressible. The teaching of Lao-tze or that of the
*Bhagavadgîta* was not surely intended for the Western nations. Of
course, there are exceptions in the West as well as in the East.
Generally

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

speaking, however, the West is energetic, and the East mystical; for the
latter's ideal is to be incomprehensible, immeasurable, and
undemonstrative even as an absolute being itself. And the practice of
dhyâna may be considered in a way one of the methods of realizing this
ideal.

\*      \*      \*

In the *Chandradîpa-samâdhi Sûtra*, the benefits of dhyâna-practice are
enumerated as follows: (1) When a man practises dhyâna according to the
regulation, all his senses become calm and serene, and, without knowing
it on his part, he begins to enjoy the habit. (2) Lovingkindness will
take possession of his heart, which, then freeing itself from
sinfulness, looks upon all sentient beings as his brothers and sisters.
(3) Such poisonous and harassing passions as anger, infatuation,
avarice, etc., gradually retire from the field of consciousness. (4)
Having a close watch over all the senses, dhyâna guards them against the
intrusion of evils. (5) Being pure in heart and serene in disposition,
the practiser of dhyâna feels no inordinate appetite in lower passions.
(6) The mind being concentrated on higher thoughts, all sorts of
temptation and attachment and egotism are kept away. (7) Though he well
knows the emptiness of vanity, he does not fall into the snare of
nihilism. (8) However entangling the nets of birth and death, he is well
aware of the way to deliverance therefrom. (9) Having fathomed the
deepest depths

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

of the Dharma, he abides in the wisdom of Buddha. (10) As he is not
disturbed by any temptation, he feels like an eagle that, having escaped
from imprisonment, freely wings his flight through the air,

\*      \*      \*

The practice of dhyâna is often confounded with a trance or
self-hypnotism,--a grave error which I here propose to refute. The
difference between the two is patent to every clear-sighted mind, for a
trance is a pathological disturbance of consciousness, while dhyâna is a
perfectly normal state of it. Trance is a kind of self-illusion which is
entirely subjective and cannot be objectively verified, but dhyâna is a
state of consciousness in which all mental powers are kept in
equilibrium so that no one thought or faculty is made predominant over
others. It is like the pacification of turbulent waters by pouring oil
over them: no waves are roaring, no foams are boiling, no splashes are
spattering, but a smooth, glossy mirror of immense dimension. And it is
in this perfect mirror of consciousness that myriads of reflections, as
it were, come and go without ever disturbing its serenity. In trances
certain mental and physiological functions are unduly accelerated, while
others are kept altogether in abeyance, the whole system of
consciousness thus being thrown into disorder; and its outcome is the
loss of equilibrium in the organism--which is very

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

opposite to what is attained through the practice of dhyâna.

Again, some superficial critics think that Buddhist dhyâna is a sort of
intense meditation on some highly abstracted thoughts, and that the
concentration which works in the same way as self-hypnotism leads the
mind to the state of a trance, called Nirvâna. This is a very grievous
error committed by those who have never comprehended the essence of
religious consciousness, for Buddhist dhyâna has nothing to do with
abstraction or hypnotization. What it proposes to accomplish is to make
our consciousness realize the inner reason of the universe which abides
in our minds. Dhyâna strives to make us acquainted with the most
concrete and withal the most universal fact of life. It is the
philosopher's business to deal with dry, lifeless, uninteresting
generalizations. Buddhists are not concerned with things like that. They
want to see the fact directly and not through the medium of
philosophical abstractions. There may be a god who created heaven and
earth, or there may not; we could be saved by simply believing in his
goodness, or we could not; the destination of evil-doers may be hell and
that of good men paradise, or this may be reversed: true Buddhists do
not trouble themselves with such propositions as these. Let them well
alone; Buddhists are not so idle and superficial as to waste their time
in pondering over the questions which have no

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

vital concern with our religious life. Buddhists through dhyâna endeavor
to reach the bottom of things and there to grasp with their own hands
the very life of the universe, which makes the sun rise in the morning,
makes the bird cheerfully sing in the balmy spring breeze, and also
makes the biped called man hunger for love, righteousness, liberty,
truth, and goodness. In dhyâna, therefore, there is nothing abstract,
nothing dry as a bone and cold as a corpse, but all animation, all
activity, and eternal revelation.

Some Hindu philosophers, however, seem to have considered hallucinations
and self-suggested states of mind as real and the attainment of them as
the aim of dhyâna, practice. Their conception of the eightfold
dhyâna-heaven in which all sorts of angels are living is evidence of it.
When the mythical beings in those regions practise dhyâna, they enter
into different stages of samâdhi. They first come to think that they are
lifted up in the air like a cloud; (2) they feel the presence of some
indescribable luminosity; (3) they experience a supernatural joy; (4)
their minds become so clarified and transparent as to reflect all the
worlds like a very brilliant mirror; (5) they feel as if the soul has
escaped bodily confinement and expanded itself to the immensity of
space; (6) they now come back to a definite state of consciousness in
which all mental functions are presented and the past and present and
future reveal themselves; (7)

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

they then have the feeling of absolute nothingness, in which not a
ripple of mentation stirs; (8) lastly, they are not conscious of
anything particular, nor have they lost consciousness, and here they are
said to have reached the highest stage of samâdhi.

But according to Buddhism all these visionary phenomena as the outcome
of dhyâna are rejected, for they have nothing to do with the realization
of the religious life. In the *Çûrangâma Sûtra* fifty abnormal
conditions of consciousness are mentioned against which the practiser of
dhyâna has to guard himself, and among them we find those psychical
aberrations mentioned above.

\*      \*      \*

To conclude. Dhyâna, beside its being an indispensable religious
discipline for attaining enlightenment, is one of the most efficient
means of training oneself morally and physically. It is beyond question
that dhyâna leads to the awakening of a hidden spiritual faculty
possessed by all conscious beings and to the realization of one's
spiritual significance in spite of the various material limitations.
But, apart from this religious importance, dhyâna is singularly
effective in the tranquillization. of the mind, the purification of the
heart, as well as in the relaxation of the nervous tension. A man will
never realize, until he is thoroughly trained in dhyâna, how confused
and entangled his thoughts are, how susceptible he is and how

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

easily his mind is unbalanced, how soon his nervous force in reserve is
exhausted and his entire system is given up to an utter breakdown, how
fully his senses are occupied in seeking excitement and gratification,
and finally how neglectful he has been in the promotion of higher and
nobler interests of life and in the cultivation of refined thoughts and
purer feelings. Dhyâna, therefore, whatever its religious merits, is not
devoid of its practical utilities and even for this reason alone its
exercise is universally to be recommended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Kwannon Bosatz](zfa17)
