[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zfa17)  [Next](zfa19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875482732/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G99RLG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

### BUDDHISM AND ORIENTAL CULTURE <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)

ONE of the features peculiar to Buddhism and which appeals most
powerfully to Oriental imagination is that man's life is not limited to
this existence only, that if he thinks, feels, and acts truthfully,
nobly, virtuously, unselfishly, he will live forever in these thoughts,
sentiments, and works; for anything good, beautiful, and true is in
accordance with the reason of existence, and is destined to have a life
eternal.

It is not the ideal of the Buddhist life to escape worldliness and to
enter into eternal stillness, as is sometimes understood by Occidental
scholars. Buddhists do not shun struggle and warfare. If a cause is
worth contending for or defending, they will not hesitate to sacrifice
for it not only this life but all of their future lives. They will
appear upon this earth over and again and will not rest until they have
gained the end, that is, until they have attained the ideal of life.
Man, therefore, lives as long as his ideas and feelings conform to the
reason of the universe. This is the Buddhist conception of life eternal.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

If I am not mistaken, it was at the time of the Independence War, or it
might have occurred somewhere in the Old Country,--you will pardon my
imperfect memory--but the fact is that a military officer who served as
a spy for his native country was caught by the enemy and was sentenced
to be hung. At the execution the officer exclaimed, "The pity is that I
have only one life to sacrifice for my country." Pity indeed it was that
the officer did not know the truth and fact that from his very corpse
there have risen so many patriotic spirits breathing the same breath
that he breathed. He was not dead, he was never hung, he did not vanish
into an unknown region; but he is living a life eternal, he is being
born generation after generation, not only in his own country, but also
in my country, and in your country, and in fact all over the three
thousand worlds (as they were believed to be existing in Hindu
mythology).

In this respect a Buddhist general quite famous in the history of Japan
had a decided advantage over the Christian officer just mentioned. The
general is still worshiped in Japan as the type of loyalty and
patriotism. He lived about six hundred years ago. Before the Emperor of
the time came to know him, he was a rather obscure general and would
have died without imprinting his immortal name on the pages of Japanese
history. But Fate decreed otherwise, and he was requested by the Emperor
to lead his royal

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

army against the invading enemy, who greatly outnumbered his forces and
was led by a very able general. Masashigé, which is the name of our
hero, had his own plan as to how best to make a stand against the
onslaught of the overwhelming enemy. But some ignorant court favorite
influenced the Emperor and the hero's proposition could not prevail. He
then knew he was going to fight a losing battle, but determined to do
his best under the circumstances, if necessary to fight to the bitter
end. At last came the day, and the enemy developed the plan as he had
calculated. There was nothing for him to do but to check the advance of
the enemy as long as he could, so that the Emperor could find time
enough to make his safe escape from the capital. He fought most
gallantly, and repeatedly repulsed the furious attacks of the enemy. But
many times outnumbered, and occupying a strategically disadvantageous
position, and himself covered with many wounds, he saw the uselessness
of further resistance. He then gathered his commanding generals around
him and asked them if they had anything to desire in this life before
they bid farewell to all things earthly. They replied that they had done
everything within their power, their obligations were completely filled,
and there was nothing more to be desired. But our hero, Masashigé, made
a solemn utterance: "I pray that I be born seven times on this earth and

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

crush all the enemies of our Imperial House." They all then drew their
daggers and put an end to their present lives.

I do not know how this story strikes you Christian audience, but upon us
Buddhists it makes a very profound impression. It seems to be pregnant
with a great religious significance. It is not altogether necessary to
specify how many times we are to be reborn. Let us only have a thought
or feeling that is worth preserving and actualizing, and we shall come
to this life as many times as is necessary to complete the task, even to
the end of the world. Let us only do what is in accordance with the
reason of things, and the work, which is no more than the world-reason
actualized, will create a new agency as needed through successive
generations. This corporeal existence, this particular temporary
combination of feelings and thoughts and desires, may dissolve, may not
last forever as it is, for it is no more than an agent in the hands of
the world-soul to execute its own end. When it decrees that its agent
must put on a new garment, this will take place as it is willed. "Let
there be light," it commands, and behold there it is!

It is not Buddhistic, therefore, to hanker after personal immortality
and to construct diversity of theories to satisfy this illegitimate
hankering. Do whatever you think right and be sincere with it and the
work will take care of itself, hankering or no hankering after
immortality.

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> My Japanese hero
gave an utterance to his inner feeling and conviction only to make his
generals perfectly understand the significance of his and their work. He
did not mean to come to this life exactly seven times, nor did he mean
to continue his personal existence as he was individually. He did mean
this, that his work should find its new executors in the form of a
worshiper or an imitator or a successor or a disciple or a friend, who
would be inspired by that noble example. And most certainly did he find
a legion of his selves following closely behind his back. Are not all
loyal and patriotic soldiers and sailors who died in the recent war with
Russia all the incarnations of our most beloved hero-general, Masashigé?
Did he not find his selves in all those brave, courageous,
self-sacrificing hearts? Was he not leading in spirit all these soldiers
to the execution of the work he once planned? Who says, then, that the
hero breathed his last when he fought this losing battle some six
hundred years ago? Is he not indeed still living in the heart of every
patriotic and loyal citizen of Japan, nay, of any people that aspires to
be a nation?

When the late commander Hirosé went to blockade the entrance to Port
Arthur, he must have been inspired by the same sentiment which he
expressed in his swan song; he must have become conscious of the
immortality of the work in which he has thoroughly incarnated himself.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In his last
utterance he put this in verse: "Though I may die here while executing
this work, I will come back seven times over and again to discharge my
duties for my country. I have nothing to fear, nothing to desire at the
present moment. Calmly and smilingly I embark on this fated boat." <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) Can we not say here that the idea which
was our long deceased hero himself, found its conscious expression in
this brave Commander? Those who fell in the field and on the water were
equally his incarnations, only with this difference that the former gave
utterance to his conscious sentiment, while the latter remained mute,
though in their inmost hearts the same sentiment was moving. If
otherwise, how could they enjoy that serene contentedness which
characterized every stricken warrior of my country in the recent war?

Some may say that this is fatalism or determinism, but every
clear-headed thinker would see in this not a fatalistic conception of
life but a hopeful solution of existence, a firm belief in the final
triumph of good over evil, and the calm assurance that the individual
lives as long as it identifies itself with a noble thought, worthy work,
exalted sentiment, uplifting impulse, in short, with anything that
cements the brotherly tie of all mankind. Those who are used to look at
things from the individualistic point of view may not understand very
clearly what I have so

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

far endeavored to explain to you; but the fact is, however tenaciously
we may cling to our individual existences, we are utterly helpless when
that which comprehends everything wills otherwise than our selfish
desires; we have but to submit meekly to the ordinance of the unknown
power and to let it work out its own destiny regardless of ourselves.
When Schleiermacher defines religion as a feeling of absolute
dependence, he has rightly laid his hand on that indefinable, uncertain
sense which lurks in the dark recesses of every conscious mind,--the
sense which intuitively recognizes the weakness of individuals as such,
but which feels an immense strength in their identification with a
supraindividual being or power. In this, it must be evident to you,
there is nothing fatalistic nor fantastic.

All sincere Buddhists are firmly convinced of the truth of non-egoism,
and they do not think that the value of an individual as such is
ultimate. On account of this, they are not at all disturbed at the
moment of death; they calmly accept the ordinance and let the
world-destiny accomplish what end it may have in view. This freedom from
the individualistic view of life seems to have largely contributed to
the perfection of the Japanese military culture known as Bushido. Old
Japanese soldiers, nobles, and men of letters, therefore, displayed a
certain sense of playfulness even at the most critical moment

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

when the question of life and death was to be decided without the least
hesitation. This playfulness, as I view it, stands in a marked contrast
to the pious, prayerful attitude of the Christians in their dying
moments.

Ota Dôkwan, a great Japanese statesman-general of some four hundred
years ago, was assassinated in his own castle by a band of spies sent by
his enemy. They surrounded him when he was altogether unarmed. He was
stabbed, and he fell on the ground, covered with wounds and helpless.
One of the assassins approached closer, and applying the dagger at the
victim's throat to finish their cowardly work, he asked what the
unfortunate general had to say before he bade farewell to this world.
The general most calmly answered:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"At the moment like this  
It must be a struggle indeed  
To part with this life so dear,  
If I had not abandoned altogether  
The thought of ego, which is a non-reality."</span>

</div>

Finding peace of heart in this solution of life, Buddhists, whatever
their social positions, are ever ready to sacrifice their lives for a
cause which demands them. They know that the present individual
existences will come to an end, they will not be able to see the faces
dearest to them, to hear the voices tenderest to them, as they depart
from this world; but they know at the same time that spiritually they
live for

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

ever and are in constant communication with their friends, that they
never lead a solitary, unconnected life in some invisible region. What
Buddhism has contributed to Japanese culture is its higher conception of
life and nobler interpretation of death.

Buddhists do not think that "I" is "I" and "you" is "you" when each of
us is Separated from the other. "I" is possible when "you" exists, so
with "you" who is possible through the existence of "I." This
consideration is very important, as it constitutes one of the
fundamental principles of Buddhist ethics. For according to Buddhism an
unconditional assertion of egoism is due to the ignorance of the
significance of the individual. Most people imagine that the individual
is a final reality, stands by itself, has nothing to do with other
fellow-individuals; in fact their existence is tolerated only so far as
it does not interfere with his own interests. They first build a
formidable fort around individualism and look down at their
surroundings, thinking that the position must be defended at all costs.
For it is their conception of life that with the downfall of
individualism the universe goes to pieces.

The Oriental mode of thinking, however, differs from this. We take our
standpoint first on that which transcends individuals, or we take into
our consideration first that which comprehends all finite things, that
which determines the

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

destiny of the universe; and then we come down into this world of
relativity and conditionality, and believe that the earth will sooner or
later pass away according to the will of that which controls it. That is
to say, individuals will not stay here forever, though the whole which
comprises individuals will. Therefore, Oriental ethics considers it of
paramount importance to preserve the whole at all hazards, whatever may
be the fate of individuals.

For instance, suppose my country is threatened by a powerful enemy, and
I will, when called for, sacrifice everything personal and try to do my
best for the conservation of my national honor and safety. This is what
is called patriotism. My parents are old and they are not able to take
care of themselves, and I will do everything for their comfort and
alleviate the loneliness of their declining age. Did they not bring me
up to this stage of manhood? Did they not go through all forms of
hardship for my sake? Did they not care for me with infinite tenderness
of heart? Do I not owe them all that I am to-day? Did they not help me
to this position and enable me to do whatever is within my power for the
welfare and preservation of the whole to which I belong? When I think of
this, the feeling of gratitude weighs heavily on me, and I endeavor to
be relieved of it by doing all acts of lovingkindness to my parents.
This is what you call filial piety, and the same consideration will
apply

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

to the cases of teachers, elder people, friends, and family.

Whatever be the defects of Oriental ethics,--and I think they are not a
few,--I firmly believe that what makes Oriental culture so unique is due
to the emphasis laid upon patriotism, filial piety, faithfulness, and
abnegation of self.

\*      \*      \*

Before concluding, I wish to add a few words as a Buddhist subject of
Japan. All the world knows what Japan has achieved so far in the history
of mankind, especially what she has accomplished in her gigantic
struggle with a most powerful nation of Europe. There must have been
many causes and conditions through a happy combination of which Japan
was able to do what she has done; and among those conditions I would
count the influence of American friendship and sympathy as one of the
most powerful. If America had tried to play some high-handed diplomacy,
imitating some of the European powers, she could have easily seized my
country and held it under subjection since Commodore Perry's entrance
into Uraga. The fact that the United States did not stoop to play a mean
trick upon Japan helped not a little to lift her to the present
position. For that reason, we, people of Japan, owe a great deal to you,
people of the United States of America.

As a Buddhist I have been long thinking how best to repay this special
favor received from the

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

friendly people among whom I am traveling now. You have everything you
need in the line of material, industrial, commercial civilization. By
this I do not mean that you are wanting in spiritual culture and moral
refinement, but I am inclined to think that it would not be altogether
inappropriate to ask you to get more and more acquainted with what
constitutes Oriental culture and religious belief. And it shall be my
duty and pleasure to make such an opportunity of mutual understanding
readily possible in every way. Accordingly, I thank you, ladies and
gentlemen, for your efforts which have resulted in this enjoyable
meeting with each other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[170:1](zfa18.htm#fr_37) Address at the George
Washington University, April, 1906.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[175:1](zfa18.htm#fr_38) From memory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Deer Park](zfa19)
