[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zfa14)  [Next](zfa16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875482732/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G99RLG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

### SPIRITUAL ENLIGHTENMENT

THERE are many characteristic points of divergence between religion and
philosophy, though they have so much in common that some scholars,
broadly speaking, take religion for practical philosophy and philosophy
for speculative religion. The difference between the two, however, is
not merely that of practicability and theorization. It is, in my
judgment, more deeply rooted and fundamental. What is it, then? I
believe that that which makes religion what it is in contradistinction
to philosophy or ethics consists in the truth that it is essentially
founded on facts of one's own spiritual experience, which is beyond
intellectual demonstrability and which opens a finite mind to the light
of universal effulgence. In short, spiritual enlightenment is
indispensable in religion, while philosophy is mere intellection.

By spiritual enlightenment I mean a man's becoming conscious through
personal experience of the ultimate nature of his inner being. This
insight breaks as it were the wall of intellectual limitation and brings
us to a region which has been hitherto concealed from our view. The

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

horizon is now so widened as to enable our spiritual vision to survey
the totality of existence. As long as we groped in the darkness of
ignorance, we could not go beyond the threshold of individuation; we
could not recognize the presence of a light whose most penetrating rays
reveal all the mysteries of nature and mind. The spirit has found that
the light is shining within itself even in its fullest glory, that it
even partakes something of this universal light, that it blundered
miserably in seeking its own ground outside of itself, that "Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the end, which is, and which was, and which is
to come," is no more nor less than itself. And it is through this kind
of enlightenment only that we fully satisfy our inmost spiritual
yearnings and groanings. Without this, religion loses its significance,
becoming merely an applied philosophy or system of metaphysics.

The enlightenment which thus constitutes the basis of the religious life
is altogether spiritual and not intellectual. The intellect in its very
nature is relative and cannot transcend its own limitations. It is
dualistic no matter how high it may take a flight. It always needs an
object with which to deal, and it never identifies itself with it, for
it cannot do so without destroying itself. There must be the "I" and the
"not-I" whenever intellection takes place. Self-alienation or keeping
itself aloof from the object on which it exercises itself is the raison
d'etre of intellect,

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

being its strongest as well as its weakest point. Its strongest point is
seen in science and philosophy, while its weakest point is revealed in
religion. For religion needs a synthetic faculty by which it can
comprehend the realm of particulars, the realm of constant strivings and
eternal contradictions. Religion wants to understand and preserve life
as it is found, and not to "dissect and murder" it as is done by the
intellect. Religion wants to see and not to demonstrate; to grasp
directly with her own hands and not to rely upon a medium; to see
intuitively and not discursively. What is therefore asked for by a
religious spirit is fact and not representation, enlightenment and not
reflection; and this will be supplied by no amount of speculation and
imagination. We must advance one step further beyond the limits and
boldly plunge into the abysmal depths of the Unknowable.

Can a mortal being with his limited consciousness have an insight into a
field without its ken? No; as long as he relies solely upon his
intellectual faculty, he is forever barred from so doing. For the
intellect is really superficial and cannot penetrate through spatial and
temporal relations, nor can she free herself from the bondage of logical
sequence; and therefore the inner life of our being is altogether
unknown to the intellect. We cannot be said to know an object thoroughly
by merely becoming familiar with all its attributes, qualities,
potentialities, and what not.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> All these can be
understood through the senses and the reasoning faculty. There yet
remains a certain feature of the object, the knowledge of which alone
completes our understanding of it. Philosophy and science have done a
great deal for the advancement of our knowledge of the universe, and
there is a fair prospect of their further service for this end. But they
are constitutionally incapable of giving rest, bliss, joy, and faith to
a troubled spirit; for they do not provide us with a complete knowledge
of existence, and are unable to lay bare the secrets of life. What they
teach concerns the shell and husk of reality. In order to satisfy fully
our religious yearnings we must not stop short at this; we must appeal
to a different faculty, which will reveal to us the inmost life of the
universe.

Fortunately, we are in possession of this peculiar faculty which might
be called the religious sense, and through the exercise of which we come
to realize the significance of our existence. How unbearable life would
be, if we were not allowed to have this religious faculty and yet we had
to raise those spirit-harassing questions which could not be solved by
logic!

The faculty seems to have all the essential characteristics of the
feeling. It is intuitive and does not analyze; it is direct and refuses
a medium of any form. It allows no argument, it merely states, and its
statement is absolute. When it says "yes," the affirmation has such a

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

convincing force as to remove all doubts, and even skeptically disposed
intellectual minds have to admit it as a fact and not a whim. It speaks
as one with authority. True, it has only a subjective value, which,
however, is just as ultimate and actual as sense-perception. Being
immediate, there is no other way to test its validity than that each
experience it personally, individually, and inwardly. The sun is risen
on the horizon and all that have eyes see it and harbor not the shadow
of a doubt as to its presence there. The inner sense which I have called
religious faculty makes us feel the inmost life that is running through
every vein and every artery of nature; and we are completely free from
skepticism, unrest, dissatisfaction, and vexation of spirit. We never
try to raise a doubt about the true nature of the feeling and ask
ourselves whether it is merely a phenomenon of mental aberration or due
to a calenture of the brain. We simply feel, and nothing more or less is
to be asserted or denied. And this is what constitutes spiritual
enlightenment.

Mere talking about or mere believing in the existence of God and his
infinite love is nonsense as far as religion is concerned. Talking and
arguing belong to philosophy, and believing in its ordinary sense is a
sort of hypothesis, not necessarily supported by facts. Religion,
however, wants above everything else solid facts and actual personal
experience. If God exists, he

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

must be felt. If he is love, it must be experienced and become the fact
of one's inmost life. Without spiritual enlightenment, all is an idle
talk, like a bubble which vanishes under the least pressure. Without the
awakening of the religious sense or faculty, God is a shadow, the soul a
ghost, and life a dream. In Buddhism this faculty is known as
[*Prajñâ*](errata.htm#1.md).

If we distinguish faith from knowledge, the latter can be understood as
simply intellectual, while the former is intuition gained through the
exercise of the Prajñâ. In knowledge subject and object coexist and
condition each other; in faith they become one, there is identity only
and no mutuality. Transcending the reciprocity of the "I" and the
"not-I," the Prajñâ beholds the universe in its ultimate oneness and
feels all forms of life in their essential sameness. It knows that the
impulse it feels is the quickening spirit of all existence, and that the
pulsation of sympathy which beats in response to outside stimuli is the
source of universal animation. Why? Because the Prajñâ feels so by
reason of its own constitution.

The dictates of the Prajñâ are final and there is no higher faculty in
our consciousness to annul them. Faith is absolute within its own limits
and the office of the intellect is to explain or interpret it
objectively. Speaking religiously, faith is fact and has to be reckoned
with as such. It is only when it wants to express itself that

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

intellection comes in, and individual culture or personal equation makes
itself felt. To a great extent, I feel that differences or quarrels
among the so-called religionists concerning their confession of faith
are due to personal differences in esthetic taste, intellectual calibre,
and the influence of environment, while the fact of faith as such
remains fundamentally the same with Christians, Buddhists, or Taoists.
As everybody endowed with sentiency feels the ice cold and the fire
warm, so what the Prajñâ sees or feels in its inmost being must be
universally the same. God, Allah, Dharmakâya, Tao, Holy Ghost, Brahma,
and what not, are a mere verbal quibbling over the same fact which is
felt in the deepest depths of our being. The inner reason of things
which creates or destroys the three thousand worlds in the same breath
must be smiling at the human trifling over naught.

Spiritual enlightenment must not be confused with trance, a state of
consciousness in which there is nothing but blankness. Those who have
had no spiritual experience or who have not come to recognize in the
awakening of Prajñâ something altogether unique in our subjective
life-phenomena frequently speak of enlightenment as an abnormal
psychical condition, and try to explain it under the same category as
hallucination, somnambulism, self-suggestion, and the like. But the fact
is that enlightenment is not a special psychic state

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

which excludes or suppresses the ordinary exercise of other mental
faculties. Enlightenment goes and must go along with all psychological
phenomena. If enlightenment is to be gained through the suspension of
mentation, religion is false and faith is barren. Enlightenment is
enlightenment because it enlightens all our motives, desires, whims,
determinations, impulses, thoughts, etc. It does not stand separate from
other states of consciousness, sending its commands from a certain
vantage ground. In an enlightened mind a feeling or thought as it occurs
is purified and free from the taints of ignorance and egotism.
Enlightenment is constant and not sporadic. It permeates every mental
fibre and works without rest. It is not something extraordinary that
takes place by fits and starts. Spiritual enlightenment sheds light on
the very reason of consciousness, for it is not a particular event of
our psychical life.

When a Buddhist scholar was asked what was the Path, he answered, "The
normal state of mind." In other words, spiritual enlightenment consists
in following the natural course of human for the enlightened find the
ultimate reason of existence in their desire to drink or to eat
according to their natural appetite, in their sympathy for the misery
and suffering which are endured by the ignorant masses, in their
aspiration to fathom the mysteries of nature and life, in their
ever-assiduous attempt to realize the

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

ideals of lovingkindness and universal brotherhood on this earth, in
their ever-varying devices to let each creation fulfill its inherent
mission and rest in its reason of existence. The religiously ignorant
behave outwardly just as the enlightened, for as far as intellect and
morals go there is no manifested difference between the ignorant and the
enlightened. But, spiritually speaking, there is a wide gap dividing
them, because one knows what he is striving after while the other is
blindly feeling his way, and again because one finds an unspeakable
bliss in all his doings and thinkings and feelings, while the other
labors under a peculiar sensation of uneasiness and compulsion which he
cannot well define but feels at the bottom of his heart.

A person may be very learned in all things, and his philosophical
knowledge may be very profound. He has studied all the ancient lore of
wisdom, and has even formulated his own system of metaphysics in which
he has incorporated all the results of his erudition and speculation.
But from the religious point of view he is yet far from enlightenment,
for his study is like that of the artist who has painted a dragon and
forgot to put the eyes in. His elaborate delineation and coloring in
various hues of this huge mystic animal have miserably failed to produce
the effect desired and attempted, for the eyes are blank and show no
trace of the fiery animation which is possessed by the monster. The
scholar has neglected the most important

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

factor that is absolutely necessary in making up the complete knowledge
of the universe. He thought that he knew everything under the sun when
he exercised his intellectual power to its full extent and considered
existence from all the possible standpoints which his understanding
could grasp. But, as I stated before, the knowledge of an object is not
complete unless its inner life or reason is felt; in other words, unless
the duality of a knowing mind and a known object vanishes, and life is
comprehended as it is and not in its intellectual mutilation. Buddhism
says that even a blade of grass trembling in the evening breeze cannot
be known so long as we cling to this form of individuation and are
unable to merge our particular selves with the self of grass. Buddha, it
is reported, once brought a flower before an assemblage of his disciples
and showed it to them without any comments whatever, and the entire
congregation was bewildered what to make of this strange behavior on the
part of their master, except Kâshyapa, who, thoroughly understanding the
import of this .incident, softly smiled and nodded. Thereupon the Buddha
solemnly proclaimed, "I am in possession of the Eye which penetrates
into the depths of the Dharma and the mysteries of Nirvâna. I now give
it to thee, O Kâshyapa, that thou mayest guard it well." What sort of
eye could it have been which was transmitted from Buddha to Kâshyapa and
which made the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

latter comprehend something incomprehensible in the flower in Buddha's
hand?

In this we see the discrepancy between philosophy and religion more and
more accentuated. It is sufficient for philosophy to know, but religion
demands more than that. When the existence or non-existence of God is
proved, philosophers are satisfied, for they have made the utmost use of
the intellect, which is their sole weapon of attack and defense. In
fact, they sometimes show a disposition to deride those who disagree
with them. But as long as there is some unutterable yearning in the
human heart for something more real, more vital, more tangible than mere
abstraction, mere knowing, and mere "proving," we must conclude that our
consciousness, however fractional, is capable of coming in touch with
the inmost life of things in another way than intellection. The
existence of Prajñâ, the organ of spiritual insight, therefore, is
admitted by Buddhism, and their religious discipline is directed towards
the awakening of this faculty, which is rightly designated "the mother
of all Buddhas," and "the sharpest sword that cuts ignorance and
egotism."

But one must not imagine that there is consciousness, there is Prajñâ,
and there is enlightenment. In point of fact, they are all one
simultaneous act of the universal reason. We speak of them as if they
were three different things: the sentient being is endowed with
consciousness,

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

and this consciousness has the faculty to become acquainted with its own
reason of existence, and the resultant mental state constitutes what is
called spiritual enlightenment. Intellectually, this distinction of
course is inevitable, but as a man actually experiences it, the only
fact he is conscious of is that he is, not as a particular being
separate from others, but as simply existing and living. Buddhist
scholars call this exalted state of spirituality *çûnyatâ* = emptiness,
or *çânti* = tranquillity, or *samâdhi* = contemplation.

A few words may not be amiss here to explain these terms, which have
been frequently misunderstood by the outsider. "Emptiness" may suggest a
deprivation of all mental operations as in the trance, and
"tranquillity" a dormant, sleeping, or "not-yet-awakened" state of
mentality, while contemplation" tends to indicate a withdrawal or
suspension of all psychical functions; thus making spiritual
enlightenment a synonym of death or annihilation. Such
misinterpretations as these, however, ever prove the inherent
onesidedness of the understanding and consequently its inability to lead
us to the final abode of eternal reason which has really "no-abode."
Buddhists use the term "emptiness" to describe the "deep things of God"
which are absolute and not relative. For when we say, "he is," it may be
taken as meaning that he is as we individuals are.

By "All is empty, quiet, and abiding in eternal

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

contemplation," Buddhists understand that the ultimate reason of the
universe as manifested in all forms of animation and intelligence knows
no disturbance, no commotion, no transgression, in the midst of all the
stirring-up and moving-on of this phenomenal world. This, again, I have
to state, guarding against misapprehension, does not mean that there is
something within each existence which like the axle of a wheel or like
the kernel of a seed forms its central part and remains quiet or alive
even when the peripheral parts are whirling around or going to decay.
Buddhism most emphatically condemns this sort of dualism as heretical
and evil-breeding. The Ultimate reason is absolutely quiet when it is
moving on; it is perfectly empty when it is filled to the brim; it is
eternally one when it is differentiating itself into myriads; it has no
abode whatever where it finds itself located, housed, and roomed. And
there is nothing paradoxical or enigmatic in this statement; it is plain
as daylight and simple as the logical axiom *a = a*. But to realize its
truth one must be spiritually enlightened, must go beyond the narrow
limits of intellection, must drink directly from the well of eternal
vitality and find out personally how it tastes, bitter or sweet.

Let philosophers and theologians say whatever they wish concerning the
existence, nature, and activity of God; let them speculate as much as
they wish on the theology of the universe and

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

the destiny of mankind and many other abstruse problems of metaphysics;
but let you who earnestly aspire to know what this life really means
turn away from those wise men and reflect within, or look around
yourselves with an open heart which watches and receives, and all the
mysteries of the world will be revealed to you in the awakening of your
Prajñâ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Practice of Dhyana](zfa16.md)
