[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zfa13)  [Next](zfa15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875482732/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G99RLG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

### IGNORANCE AND ENLIGHTENMENT.

THE fundamental idea of Buddhism is "to disperse the clouds of ignorance
in order to make the moon of enlightenment shine out in her glory."

By ignorance Buddhism understands the assertion of self-will, which is
the root of all evil and misery in this world. Self-will is ignorance,
because it is blind to the truth that the world is a relative existence,
that the self separated from other fellow-selves is non-entity, and that
individuals acquire their reality in proportion as they penetrate the
foundation of existence. This truth is ignored by the principle of
self-assertion. A man who is self-assertive pushes himself forward
without any regard to the welfare of his brother creatures; he hails
himself when he reaches the heights of self-aggrandizement; but
unfortunately he fails to perceive that his success is but the road to
his final destruction. For self-assertion really means
self-annihilation. We live in fact in the oneness of things and die in
isolation and singleness.

In Christian terminology, selfhood is the "flesh," or "the old man";
such is the meaning

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

when Jesus exclaims that "the spirit is truly ready, but the flesh is
weak" (Mark xiv, 38), or when Paul speaks of "the old man which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts" (Eph. iv, 22), or when the
flesh is spoken of as profiting nothing (John vi, 63), or allusion is
made to its infirmity (Rom. vi, 19), or to its not pleasing God (Rom.
viii, 8), or to its lusting against the spirit (Gal. v, 17). Christians
are not so intellectual as Buddhists, and therefore, philosophically
considered, the terminology of the former is not so definite and to the
point as is that of the latter. Besides, the adoption of popular terms
often suggests a wrong conception which is not intended; for instance,
the distinction between the flesh and the spirit has a tendency to a
dualistic interpretation of life. To conceive the nature of the flesh to
be diametrically and radically opposed to that of the spirit is not in
accord with the essentially monistic teaching of Buddhism. Those who are
prone to asceticism and self-mortification are as much condemned by
Buddha as the followers of hedonism for being ignorant and far from
attaining the path of enlightenment.

When the ignorance of self-assertion is removed, Buddhism teaches, the
enlightenment of universal lovingkindness takes its place; and the
arrogance, tenacity, indefatigability, and impertinence which
characterize egotistic impulses are all converted to do service for the
general welfare of humanity,

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

and they will then assume different names as most desirable virtues. As
soon as the veil of ignorance is raised, the glory of enlightenment
which is love is revealed, and we do no more hanker after
self-gratification. Why? Because the Buddha-intelligence is universal
and works in every one of us to bring out the consciousness of oneness
underlying all individual phenomena. We as individuals are all
different; mine is not thine and vice versa; and in this sense egoism is
true, and the assertion of self-will is permissible to that extent. But
we must never lose sight of "the same God that worketh all in all," and
"in which we move and live and have our being," for he is the source of
eternal life and the fountain of love. "Not what I will, but what thou
wilt," is the most fundamental religious truth, not only in
Christianity, but in Buddhism. Not the assertion of self-will, but the
execution of the will of that being in which we are all one, constitutes
the condition of enlightenment.

We must not, however, suppose that the divine will becomes manifest only
when all the lust and passions of the flesh are destroyed. This is the
teaching of anchorites and not of Buddhists. What the latter teach is to
make the inclinations of the flesh those of the spirit, so that there
will be left no hiatus between the two. What one wills, the other wills,
and no discord or mutual exclusion is then allowed. To express this more
Buddhistically, ignorance does

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

not depart when enlightenment comes in, but ignorance itself becomes
enlightenment; self-will is not annihilated in order to make room for
the divine will, but self-will itself assumes divinity.

In the beginning of this discourse, I said that the fundamental idea of
Buddhism is to disperse the clouds of ignorance in order to see the moon
of enlightenment in her glory. This may suggest the thought that
ignorance and enlightenment are fundamentally different and mutually
contradicting, and that one thing called ignorance goes out and another
thing called enlightenment comes in to take its place, as these two do
not agree. But in truth I have there followed the popular dualistic
conception of the matter; and therefore let me repeat that in Nirvâna,
according to Buddhism, there is not such distinction as light and shade,
ignorance and enlightenment, coming and going. If there is anything in
Nirvâna, it is all enlightenment, all purity, and an unconditioned
freedom from selfishness. Accordingly, when one attains Nirvâna, which
is the realization of the Buddhist life, ignorance itself becomes
enlightenment and self-will the divine will. What we thought ignorance
is now enlightenment; where we located the final abode of the ego-soul,
we have now the fount of divine will. This may sound somewhat
sacrilegious, but the Buddhists are such consistent and never-yielding
monists that they do not shrink from carrying out their logic to the
end; they are not

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

at all afraid of the charge of blasphemy or irreligiosity likely to be
preferred by some pious Christians.

This purification or illumination of self-will, however, must not be
confused with antinomianism. or libertinism. The latter is given up to
the wantonness of self-will and not to the free activity of the divine
will. What the pure-hearted do is always pure, while whatever comes from
a heart defiled with egoism is defiled and irrational. There are many
points in the religious life which make it very difficult to distinguish
the latter from the ethical life, for both are so closely related. But
we could consider the subjectivity of religion as most
characteristically contrasted to the objectivity of ethics. The
distinction between the self-will and the divine will must be personally
felt and individually experienced. This may sound vague and be
considered as taking refuge in the maze of subjectivism; but the fact is
that religion has its foundation in our subjective life, and anything
that relates to it lacks in definition and exactitude so typical of
things objective and intellectual. Religion, when devoid of this
mystical element, loses its irresistible fascination. Of course, we must
not make it abide always in the camera obscura of imagination and
mysticism. We must take it out in the broad daylight of science and
subject it to an intellectual scrutiny. But we cannot for all that
ignore the fact that there is something in religion which defies

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

or escapes the most penetrating searchlight of intellectual analysis.
And in this something there lies its charm, its raison d’etre, and its
power to remove vexation of spirit.

Whatever this be, Nirvâna, in which the spirituality of a human being is
fully realized, can be attained only after most strenuous moral efforts
on the part of the aspirant. Intellectual knowledge can be acquired
through an outside agency; we of latter days may be far wiser in this
particular respect than all our venerable moral and religious teachers
of bygone ages, such as Socrates, Plato, Buddha, and Christ. But the
spiritual region lies within, and each of us must strive, through our
own inner and individual efforts and not through any outside agency, to
unfold ourselves and bring about enlightenment. We may have high ideals,
but let us remember that they can be realized only after long discipline
and untiring exertion. Let those therefore forever strive--those that
wish to follow the fundamental idea of Buddhism.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"When the scholar driveth away sloth by
earnestness,  
He attaineth to the palace of wisdom,  
Sorrowless in the sorrowing world,  
And the wise one, he, looks upon the ignorant,  
Even as one on the mountain-peak looks upon one on the ground,"  
                                        --*Dharmapada*, 28.</span>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Spiritual Enlightenment](zfa15)
