[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zfa21)  [Next](zfa23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875482732/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G99RLG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

### BUDDHIST VIEW OF WAR <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42)

"THIS triple world <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43) is my own
possession. All the things therein are my own children. Sentient or
non-sentient, animate or inanimate, organic or inorganic, the ten
thousand things in this world are no more than the reflections of my own
self. They come from the one source. They partake of the one body.
Therefore I cannot rest quiet, until every being, even the smallest
possible fragment of existence, is settled down in its proper
appointment. I do not mind what long eons it will take to finish this
gigantic work of salvation. I work at the end of eternity when all
beings are peacefully and happily nestled in an infinite loving heart."

This is the position taken by the Buddha, and we, his humble followers,
are but to walk in his wake.

Why, then, do we fight at all?

Because we do not find this world as it ought to be. Because there are
here so many perverted

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

creatures, so many wayward thoughts, so many ill-directed hearts, due to
ignorant subjectivity. For this reason Buddhists are never tired of
combating all productions of ignorance, and their fight must be to the
bitter end. They will show no quarter. They will mercilessly destroy the
very root from which arises the misery of this life. To accomplish this
end, they will never be afraid of sacrificing their lives, nor will they
tremble before an eternal cycle of transmigration. Corporeal existences
come and go, material appearances wear out and are renewed. Again and
again they take up the battle at the point where it was left off.

But all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas never show any ill-will or hatred
toward enemies. Enemies--the enemies of all that is good--are indeed
wicked, avaricious, shameless, hell-born, and, above all, ignorant. But
are they not, too, my own children for all their sins? They are to be
pitied and enlightened, not persecuted. Therefore, what is shed by
Buddhists is not blood,--which, unfortunately, has stained so many pages
in the history of religion,--but tears issuing directly from the
fountain-head of lovingkindness.

The most powerful weapon ever used by Buddha in the subjugation of his
wayward children is the practice of non-atman (non-egotism). He wielded
it more effectively than any deadly, life-destroying weapons. When he
was under the

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bodhi-tree
absorbed in meditation on the non-atmanness of things, fiends numbering
thousands tried in every way to shake him from his transcendental
serenity; but all to no purpose. On the contrary, the arrows turned to
heavenly flowers, the roaring clamor to a paradisiacal music, and even
the army of demons to a host of celestials. And do you wonder at it? Not
at all! For what on earth can withstand an absolutely self-freed heart
overflowing with lovingkindness and infinite bliss?

And this example should be made the ideal of every faithful Buddhist.
Whatever calling he may have chosen in this life, let him be freed from
ego-centric thoughts and feelings. Even when going to war for his
country's sake, let him not bear any hatred towards his enemies. In all
his dealings with them let him practise the truth of non-atman. He may
have to deprive his antagonist of the corporeal presence, but let him
not think there are atmans, conquering each other. From a Buddhist point
of view, the significance of life is not limited to the present
incarnation. We must not exaggerate the significance of individuals, for
they are not independent and unconditional existences. They acquire
their importance and a paramount meaning, moral and religious, as soon
as their fate becomes connected with the all-pervading love of the
Buddha, because then they are no more particular individuals filled with
egotistic thoughts

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

and impulses, but have become love incarnate. They are so many
representative types of one universal self-freed love. If they ever have
to combat one another for the sake of their home and country,--which
under circumstances may become unavoidable in this world of
particularity,--let them forget their egotistic passions, which are the
product of the atman conception of selfishness. Let them, on the
contrary, be filled with the lovingkindness of the Buddha; let them
elevate themselves above the horizon of the mine and thine. The hand
that is raised to strike and the eye that is fixed to take aim, do not
belong to the individual, but are the instruments utilized by a
principle higher than transient existence. Therefore, when fighting,
fight with might and main, fight with your whole heart, forget your own
self in the fight, and be free from all atman thought.

It is most characteristic of our religion, as we understand it, that
while Buddha emphasized the paramount significance of synthetic love, he
never lost sight of the indispensableness of analytical intellect. He
extended his sympathy to all creatures as his own children and made no
discrimination in his boundless compassion. But at the same time he was
not ignorant of the fact that there were good as well as bad people,
that there were innocent hearts as well as guilty ones. Not that some
were more favored by the Buddha than others, but they were enabled to
acquire

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

more of the love of the Buddha. One rain falls on all kinds of plants;
but they do not assimilate the water in the same fashion. Buddha's love
is universal, but our hearts, being fashioned of divergent karmas,
receive it in different ways. He knows where they are finally led to,
for his love is unintermittently working out their salvation, though
they themselves be utterly unconscious of it.

Above all things, there is the truth, and there are many roads leading
to it. It may seem at times that they collide and oppose one another.
But let us rest confident that finally every ill will come to some good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[193:1](zfa22.htm#fr_42) Reproduced from THE
OPEN COURT, May, 3, 1904.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[193:2](zfa22.htm#fr_43) The "triple world"
(*triloka*) is a common Buddhist term for "universe." The three worlds
are "the world of desire"--(*kâmaloka*), "the world of bodily form"
(*rûpaloka*), and "the immaterial world" (*arûpaloka*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: At The Battle of Nan-Shan Hill](zfa23)
