[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zfa19)  [Next](zfa21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875482732/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G99RLG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

### THE STORY OF THE GEM-HUNTING <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40)

IN ancient times there was a king who had among his valuable possessions
a precious stone which he most highly prized. An attendant of his one
day dropped it accidentally in a very deep lake which was in his palace
garden. The king was greatly troubled and immediately made an inquiry
among his subjects whether there was any one who could locate the
precious treasure in the water and safely restore it to his hands,
adding that such a one would receive a handsome reward.

There was among his retainers a man called Clear-Sighted, whose optical
power was considered almost supernatural, and everybody thought that he
was the man who could find the lost gem in the lake, however deep and
wide it might be. The man was brought before the king and was directly
commissioned to make a search for the gem.

Clear-Sighted dived deep into the water and tried to locate the precious
stone at its bottom. But, singularly, his sight did not avail him to any

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

great extent, for he was utterly unable to observe it anywhere. The
harder he strove the dimmer became his sight. Completely disappointed at
this unexpected discovery of his shortsightedness, he came out from the
bottom of the lake, and reported his miserable failure to the king,
whose mortification now knew no bounds.

The king did not know what to do; he could not reconcile himself to the
new situation. A long consultation was held again, but no one seemed to
be able to solve the problem in a practical way. In despair they finally
came to test a most unusual method, which seemed almost absurd and
ridiculous.

They knew there was a man called Sightless, and thought if Clear-Sighted
was of no avail this blind man might be found useful in such a case as
this, which was so extraordinary. At any rate, the attempt would not
result in making the situation worse. Things miraculous have frequently
been performed by the blind, and why not in this case?

Sightless was sent for and asked to go down -into the water and find the
lost gem. The man went down as he was told, without any protestation.
When he came out after a short time, the treasure was in his hand. The
king was overjoyed and rewarded him most generously

The moral of this allegorical story is that much cunning and great
learning are not the

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

most effective means, as ordinarily supposed, to obtain the priceless
gem of religious truth, but that the simple in heart and poor in spirit
will find the way to heavenly bliss.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_40"></span>[186:1](zfa20.htm#fr_40) This story was told by
the Rev. Shaku to illustrate Chapter 9 of the *Sutra of Forty-two
Chapters*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sacrifice for a Stanza](zfa21)
