[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc18007)  [Next](cc18009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 18: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part II*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 17

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1**. The sin of Judah *is* written with a
pen of iron, *and* with the point of a diamond: *it is* graven upon the
table of their heart, and upon the horns of your altars.

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1**. Peccatum (*vel* scelus) Jehudah
scripture est in stylo ferri (ferreo) et in ungue adamantino, exaratum
super tabulam cordis eorum et ad cornua altarium vestrorum.

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span><span id="ix.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span>The Prophet teaches us here in other words
what we have often already seen, — that the Jews in vain sought refuges,
for their sin had so much accumulated that it was very apparent. It
indeed often happens, that men fall; but God, who is ever inclined to
mercy, forgives them; and they are also often led astray through levity,
and thus their sins are not engraven on their hearts. But Jeremiah says,
that nothing remained for that nation but to be entirely swept away,
because their iniquity was past recovery. Had they been lightly
besprinkled with vices, there might have been still a remedy for them;
but when their iniquities were engraven on their hearts, on their marrow
and bones, what more remained for them? He had said before,

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span>“Can the Ethiop change his skin?” (<span
id="ix.i-p7.1"></span>[Jer 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023)<span
id="ix.i-p7.1"></span>)

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span>though the Ethiop may change his skin, and
also the panther, yet thou art still like thyself. They had so
completely imbibed a contempt for God, and also perverseness, that they
could not by any means be restored to a right mind. We now then perceive
the meaning of the Prophet in this passage.

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span>He says that the *sin of Judah was written
with an iron pen, with the point of adamant*; as though he had said,
“They are not only slightly imbued with iniquity, for then there might
be some healing; but iniquity is engraven on their inmost feelings, as
though one had graven it with adamant or with an iron pen.” It hence
appears, that they were wholly unworthy of pardon, as they were in no
way capable of receiving mercy, how much soever God might have been
inclined to receive them into favor; for their obstinacy had closed the
way of salvation; nor could they apply to themselves the promises, for
they require repentance in sinners.

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span>He then adds, *It is graven on the table of
their heart*; as though he had said, that they were so addicted to
iniquity, that all their inward parts bore the impressions of it. It
hence follows that the Jews were so proved to be guilty, that they in
vain contrived evasions, for their own conscience condemned them. At the
same time, I consider the Prophet as speaking not only of guilt, but
also of sin itself, and of their propensity to evil. He means then that
the Jews had not only sinned and transgressed God’s law in a way not
common, but that they were also so given up to wickedness as to delight
in the iniquity that was graven on their hearts. He calls by a metaphor
the affections or feelings the tables of the heart: For he compares the
heart to tables; as writing appears when cut in stone or brass, so when
a sinful impression is made on the hearts of men, iniquity itself may be
said to be graven on the tables of the heart.

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, *And on the horns of your
altars*. He had spoken of the heart, he now proceeds farther, — that
there appeared openly an evidence of hidden iniquity. Had he spoken only
of their hearts, the Jews might have objected and said, “How canst thou
penetrate into our hearts? Art thou God, to examine and try our inward
emotions?” But the Prophet adds, that their iniquity was sufficiently
known by their altars. He at the same time intimates, that they in vain
alleged the name of religion; for under that pretense they especially
sinned against God; for they had vitiated his pure worship. And to
confirm this very thing he adds —

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**2**. Whilst their children remember their
altars and their groves by the green trees upon the high hills.

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>**2**. Secundum recordari filios ipsorum
(*hoc est*, cum memores erunt filii ipsorum) altarium ipsorum et lucorum
ipsorum super arborem frondosam, super colles excelsos.

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span><span id="ix.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>Interpreters seem not to me to have perceived
the design of the Prophet here, at least they have not clearly explained
the subject. He proceeds, as I think, with what he said at the end of
the last verse, — that the iniquity of Judah was graven on the altars,
or on the horns of the altars: how was this? even because they
transmitted to posterity whatever they devised as to their ungodly forms
of worship. How then was iniquity graven on the horns of the altars?
even because it was not a temporary wickedness only, when the Jews cast
aside the Law and followed their corrupt superstitions; but, on the
contrary, their iniquity flowed down, as it were, by a hereditary right,
to their posterity. Justly then does Jeremiah accuse them, that they
were not only led away into evil through the whole course of their own
lives, but that they also corrupted their children, for they left to
them memorials of their own superstitions.

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span>Some give this explanation, “As they remember
their children, so also their altars;” as though the Prophet had said,
that idolaters burnt with such ardor, that they held the altars
dedicated to their idols as dear to them as their own children. But this
view seems too forced. I then have no doubt but that the Prophet here
amplifies their wickedness, when he says, that it was graven on the
horns of the altars; for their posterity remembered the superstitions,
which they had received from their fathers. He mentions also *their
groves*;  <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) *for on* or near
*every shady tree they built altars; and also on all high hills*. It
follows —

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span><span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003)<span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span>**3**. O my mountain in the field, I will
give thy substance *and* all thy treasures to the spoil, *and* thy high
places for sin, throughout all thy borders.

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span>**3**. Montane, in agro substantiam tuam
(*opes tuas*,) omnes thesauros tuos in praedam dabo propter excelsa tua,
propter peccatum tuum in omnibus finibus tuis.

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span><span id="ix.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet again repeats, that punishment
was nigh the Jews, and that it availed them nothing to seek for
themselves recesses and lurking-places, for God would draw them forth
from the mountains and expose them as a prey to their enemies.

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span>Some render <span
id="ix.iii-p7.1"></span>הררי, *erri*, “O my mountain,” etc.; and at the
first view this meaning seems appropriate; but as the context requires
this to be understood of the Israelites and the Jews, who always
resorted to their recesses, when any fear of enemies assailed them, I
prefer another rendering. Since then at times of distress they betook
themselves to their hiding-places, the Prophet says, that they would in
vain attempt to escape, for the mountains would be like the fields: *I
will expose*, he says, *as in the field*, or the plain, *your riches and
treasures*, that they may become a prey to your enemies. The meaning is,
that the Prophet denounces vengeance on the Jews, and at the same time
shakes off their foolish confidence, which rendered them secure, so as
to despise all the threatenings of God: “Ye think,” he says, “that there
will be a safe refuge for you on the mountains; but God will draw forth
from thence all your possessions, and expose them on the open field, so
that they may become an easy prey.”

<span id="ix.iii-p8"></span>He again repeats what he had said, that God
would inflict a just punishment on the Jews, because they had sinned
very greatly on their high places. By high places he doubtless means all
their ungodly and corrupt modes of worship. For God had chosen for
himself a Temple on Mount Sion; he designed sacrifices to be offered
there: but they, carried away by a foolish zeal, had built for
thenlselves many altars, so that there was no hill where they had not
set up some altar or another. By stating then a part for the whole, the
Prophet here refers to every thing that was inconsistent with the law of
God: and in order to amplify their sin, he says, *In all thy borders*;
that is, their impiety was widely and extensively diffused, so that no
part of the land was free from their corrupt superstition. Since then
the land was throughout contaminated, justly does the Prophet say, “In
all thy borders;” he declares that there would be no refuge for them, to
preserve them and their treasures from becoming a prey to their enemies.
It follows —

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#004)<span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>**4**. And thou, even thyself, shalt
discontinue from thine heritage that I gave thee; and I will cause thee
to serve thine enemies in the land which thou knowest not: for ye have
kindled a fire in mine anger, *which* shall burn for ever.

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span>**4**. Et derelinqueris et in te ab
haereditate tua, quam dedi tibi, et servire to faciam inimicis tuis in
terra quam non cognoscis: quia ignem succendistis in excandescentia mea
(*vel*, in nare mea, vultu meo) in saeculum usque (*id est*, in
perpetuum) ardebit.

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span><span id="ix.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span>Here, as it is a concise mode of speaking,
there seems to be some obscurity; but as to the subject handled, the
meaning of the Prophet is evident, that they would be *dismissed from
their inheritance*, and as it were from their own bowels. Hence he says,
You shall be dismissed from your inheritance; that is, though ye think
yourselves to be beyond the reach of danger, because as yet the city
remains safe, and ye continue in it; yet ye shall perish, as they say,
living and seeing. *There shall then be a dismissal from the inheritance
even as to thee*; that is, “Though the Lord should delay the time and
suffer you to remain, yet ye shall be like the dead, for God will
destroy you, though he may leave you a pining life.” It seems an
emphatical expression when the Prophet says that there would be at
length a *dismissal* even as to herself: he intimates, that though some
of the people would remain alive, they would yet be given up to exile
and dispersion. And it was a condition worse than death for the Jews to
have their lives continued and to be scattered among their enemies.

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span>And he says, *From the inheritance which I
gave to thee*; and he says this that they might not expostulate with
him, that their own was taken away from them. “How has the land,” he
says, “become your inheritance? even because ye have obtained it through
my bounty. And now, since ye are so ungrateful, why should I be blamed
for taking away what I had given you? or what wrong is done to you? and
what can ye object to me? for it has always been my heritage, though for
a time I granted it to you. Had ye been thankful to me it would have
been yours perpetually; but now when I deprive you of it, this you must
ascribe to your own fault.”

<span id="ix.iv-p8"></span>For the same purpose he adds, *I will make
thee to serve thine enemies*: and this was much more grievous than to
serve their neighbors by whom they were not hated. But he shews here how
dreadful would be their calamity, they being constrained to serve their
enemies. He adds, *In a land which thou knowest not*. This is a
repetition of what has been said before, and it requires no remark. He
in the last place confirms what he had said of their wickedness; *Burn*,
he says, *shall fire in my nostril*: but <span
id="ix.iv-p8.1"></span>אף, *aph*, may be taken for God’s countenance,
though it often means anger. As however he says, “Ye have kindled a
fire,” it seems better to render it here, *In my face*. Further, by the
word *I never*, he intimates that God would be implacable to the Jews,
for they had so deserved.  <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170)

<span id="ix.v"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ix.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou kindly
invitest us every day to repentance, and shewest thyself ready to be
reconciled, — O grant that we may not through our perverseness reject so
inestimable a favor, but submit ourselves to thee, and become so
displeased with our vices as to be touched with a true and sincere
concern for religion, and to labor through the whole course of our life
for nothing else but to render ourselves and our duties approved by
thee, and thus to glorify thy name, so that we may become at last
partakers of that celestial and eternal glory which thine only-begotten
Son has attained for us. — Amen.

<span id="ix.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="ix.vi"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Sixth

<span id="ix.vii"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p1"></span><span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)<span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p2"></span>**5**. Thus saith the LORD, Cursed *be* the
man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart
departeth from the LORD.

<span id="ix.vii-p3"></span>**5**. Sic dicit Jehova, Maledictus vir qui
confidit in homine, et ponit carnem brachium suum, et a Jehova aversum
est cor ejus:

<span id="ix.vii-p4"></span>**6**. For he shall be like the heath in the
desert, and shall not see when good cometh; but shall inhabit the
parched places in the wilderness, *in* a salt land and not inhabited.

<span id="ix.vii-p5"></span>**6**. Et erit quasi myrica (*sic vertunt
communiter*) in deserto, et non videbit cum veniet bonum (*id est*, in
foecunditas,) et habitabit in siccitatibus in deserto, in terra
salsuginis, et quae non habitatur.

<span id="ix.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.vii-p7"></span><span id="ix.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p8"></span>The Prophet, I doubt not, prefixed this
sentence to many of his discourses, for it was neccssary often to repeat
it, as the Jews were so refractory in their minds. We have already seen
how sharply he inveighed against their false confidence: but it was
necessary to lay down this truth. He then wrote once for all what he had
often said. And this deserves to be especially observed, for we shall
not sufficiently understand how needful this truth was, unless we
consider the circumstances: the Prophet had often found that the
promises as well as the threatenings of God were disregarded, that his
doctrine was despised, and that he had to do with a proud people, who,
relying on their own defences, not only esteemed as nothing what was
brought before them under the authority of God, but also, as it were,
avowedly rejected it. This then was the reason why the Prophet not only
once, but often exhorted the people to repent, by setting before them
this truth, that *accursed* are they who trust in men.

<span id="ix.vii-p9"></span>*Flesh* here is to be taken for man, as we
may easily gather from the context. It was a common thing with the
Hebrews to state the same thing twice: In the first clause man is
mentioned, and in the second *flesh*: and arm means power or help. The
meaning is, that all are accursed who trust in man. But the word *flesh*
is no doubt added in the second line by way of contempt, according to
what is done in <span id="ix.vii-p9.1"></span>[Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003)<span id="ix.vii-p9.1"></span>,
where the Prophet says,

<span id="ix.vii-p10"></span>“The Egyptian is man and not God, flesh and
not spirit.”

<span id="ix.vii-p11"></span>He calls the Egyptians flesh by way of
contempt, as though he had said that there was nothing strong or firm in
them, and that the aid which the Jews expected from them would be
evanescent. So it is in this place, though the Prophet, according to the
common usage, repeats in the second clause what he had said in the
first, he yet expresses something more, that men are extremely sottish
when they place their salvation in a thing of nought; for, as we have
said, there is nothing solid or enduring in flesh. As men therefore
quickly vanish away, what can be more foolish than to seek safety from
them?

<span id="ix.vii-p12"></span>But it must be observed that the Prophet
had spoken thus, because the Jews, in looking now to the Assyrians and
then to the Egyptians, thought to gain sufficient defense against God
himself, though they might not have expressly or avowedly despised God:
but we shall hereafter see that God cannot be otherwise deemed than of
no account, when safety is sought from mortal man. As then this false
confidence was an hinderance to the Jews to rely on the favor of God,
and to lead them to repentance, the Prophet said *Accursed is the man
who trusts in man*

<span id="ix.vii-p13"></span>It seems to be a sentence abruptly
introduced; but as we have observed, the doctrine of the Prophet could
not have been confirmed, had he not shaken off from his people the
presumption through which they were blinded, for they thought the
Egyptians would be to them like a thousand gods. We shall thus
understand the design of the Prophet, if we bear in mind what was the
condition of the Jews, and what were the difficulties the Prophet had to
contend with, while he was daily threatening them and labouting to
restore them to God. But no progress was made, and why? because all
God’s promises were coldly received, for they thought themselves ever
safe and secure, while the Egyptians were kind to them and promised them
help: his threatenings also were coldly received, because they hesitated
not to set up as their shield, and as the strongest fortress, the aid
which they expected from the Egyptians. Hence the Prophet was
constrained to cry out, not only once, or ten times, but a hundred
times, *accursed is he who trusts in man and makes flesh his arm*  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171)

<span id="ix.vii-p17"></span>This is however a general truth. We also,
at this day, advance general truths, which we apply to individual cases.
The spirit then declares here generally, that all are *accursed* who
*trust* in men. We indeed know that men are in various ways deceived
while they trust in men: they begin with themselves, and seek in this
and in that thing a ground of security; for every one is inflated with
vain and false confidence, either in his own prudence or dexterity or
power. There is then no one who does not trust in himself before he
trusts in others: I speak even of the most wretched. It is indeed what
men ought to be ashamed of; but there is no one so contemptible but that
he swells with some secret pride, so that he esteems something in
himself, and even ascribes to himself some high dignity. Then they who
seem prudent in their own eyes take aids to themselves from every
quarter, and in these they acquiesce. But when men look behind and
before, they gather help to themselves from all parts of the world:
however their goings around are useless, and not only so, but they turn
out to their own destruction, for God not only derides in this place the
folly of them who trust in flesh, but declares that they are accursed
This curse of God ought to strike us with terror; for we hence learn
that God is highly displeased with all those who seek their own
salvation in the world and in creatures.

<span id="ix.vii-p18"></span>It is added, *And from Jehovah turned away
is his heart*. Hypocrites draw this to their own advantage; for there is
no one who will not object and say, that he does not so trust in man as
to take away or diminish anything from the glory of God. Were all asked,
from the least to the greatest, every one would boldly say that he
leaves God’s honor entire, and never wishes to take anything from it:
this would be the common saying. But yet, when confidence is reposed in
the flesh, God is deprived of his own honor. These two things are no
less contrary, the one to the other, than light is to darkness. Hence
the Prophet intended here to shew that these two things cannot be
connected together — to put confidence in the flesh and in God at the
same time. When water is blended with fire, both perish; so, when one
seeks in part to trust in God and in part to trust in men, it is the
same as though he wished to mix heaven and earth together, and to throw
all things into confusion. It is, then, to confound the order of nature,
when men imagine that they have two objects of trust, and ascribe half
of their salvation to God, and the other half to themselves or to other
men. This is the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="ix.vii-p19"></span>Let us then know that all those who place
the least portion of their hope in men do in part depart from God, and
therefore turn aside from him. In short, the Holy Spirit declares,
briefly indeed, but very solemnly, that all are apostates and deserters
from God who turn to men and fix their hope in them. But if this
declaration be true as to the present life, when we treat of eternal
life, it is doubtless a twofold madness if we ascribe it, even in the
smallest degree, either to our own righteousness or to any other
virtues. He who looks for aid from men is pronounced accursed by God,
even when he expects from them what belongs to this frail life, which
soon vanishes; but when we hope for eternal life and the inheritance of
heaven from ourselves or from other creatures, how much more detestable
it is? Let us then observe this inference, so that the truth taught here
by the Prophet may keep us dependent on God only.

<span id="ix.vii-p20"></span>But here a question may be raised, — Are we
not to hope for help from those men whom God may employ to assist us,
and who are not only the instruments of his favor and aid, but who are
also as it were his hands? for whenever men assist us, it is the same as
though God stretched forth his hands from heaven. Why, them, should we
not look for aid from men whom God has appointed as ministers of his
favor to us? But there is great emlphasis in the word *trust*; for it is
indeed lawful to look to men for what is given to them; but we ought to
trust in God alone, and to hope for all things from him, as well as to
pray for them: and this will hereafter appear more clearly. But we must
now only briefly observe, that when we seek from men what is given them
by God, we detract nothing from his power, who chooses his ministers as
he pleases. But this is a rare thing; for when anything is done to us by
men, we forget God, and our thoughts are drawn downwards to men, so that
God loses a part of his honor; and when anything, even the least, is
taken away from him, he condemns us, as we deserve. We ought especially
to observe what he declares here, that *turned away* from him is the
*heart* of man whenever he places his hope in the flesh.

<span id="ix.vii-p21"></span><span id="ix.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p22"></span>He adds a similitude for the purpose of
confirming his doctrine, *He shall be like a tamarisk*, or a juniper, as
some render it. The word <span id="ix.vii-p22.1"></span>ערער, *oror*,
means a copse. But the Jews themselves are not agreed; some think it to
be the juniper, and others the tamarisk; but we may hold it as certain
that it was a useless shrub, not fruit-bearing for those Jews are
mistaken, in my judgment, who consider it to be the juniper, for some
fruit grows on branches of that. It was a shrub or a tree, as I think,
unknown to us now.  <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172)

<span id="ix.vii-p29"></span>Then he says that they were like shrubs
which *grow in the desert, which see not fruitfulness*, but *dwell in
droughts, in a land of brine*. The Hebrews call barren land the land of
brine or of salt: and he enlarges on the subject by saying, *Which is
not inhabited*: for where nothing grows there are no inhabitants. The
object of the Prophet, then, was merely to shew, that their hopes who
look to men would be vain; for God would frustrate thenl, so that they
could never succeed.

<span id="ix.vii-p30"></span>But we must notice also the other part of
the simile; for the Prophet does not compare the unbelieving to dry
branches, but to shrubs, which have roots, and bear the appearance of
having some life. Such are the unbelieving, while success, as they say,
smiles on them; they think themselves happy, and so they become hardened
in their own false counsels, and reject every instruction, and, as
though they were freed from the authority of God, they rejected all his
prophets. Hence the Prophet, conceding something to them, says, that
they were like shrubs, which indeed have roots and leaves, but no fruit,
and which also dry up when heat comes. As then the heal; of the sun
consumes whatever moisture, beauty, and life, may appear in shrubs, so
also God would scorch and dry up the hopes of the unbelieving, though
they may think that they have roots to preserve them and their life. A
similar declaration is found in <span id="ix.vii-p30.1"></span>[Ps
129:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#006)<span id="ix.vii-p30.1"></span>,
where it is said that the unbelieving are like the grass which grows on
the housetops; for such grass appears conspicuous in a high place, while
the wheat grows in the low fields, and is even trodden under foot; but
that grass, the more elevated it is, the sooner it dries up and perishes
without bringing forth any fruit; so also are the unbelieving, who for a
time glory and exult over God’s children, and look down on then from
their high place, because they are simple and lowly; but as from the
corn comes food to us, and that very corn is blessed, so also the elect
bring forth fruit in their low and despised condition, while the
unfaithful, who occupy elevated stations, vanish away without producing
any fruit. It is the same thing that the Prophet means here. These two
parts of the comparison ought therefore to be particularly noticed. It
follows —

<span id="ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p1"></span><span id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#007)<span id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p2"></span>**7**. Blessed *is* the man that trusteth
in the LORD, and whose hope the LORD is.

<span id="ix.viii-p3"></span>**7**. Benedictus vir qui confidit in
Jehova, et cujus est Jehova fiducia (ad verbum, et erit Jehova fiducia
ejus:)

<span id="ix.viii-p4"></span>**8**. For he shall be as a tree planted by
the waters, and *that* spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall
not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and shall not be
careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.

<span id="ix.viii-p5"></span>**8**. Et erit tanquam arbor plantata prope
aquas, et prope rivum emittet (hoc est, quae emittit) radices suas, et
non videbit cum veniet aestus, et erit folium ejus viride, et anno
prohibitionis non timebit, et non desinet a faciendo fructu (hoc est, a
proferendo fructu.)

<span id="ix.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.viii-p7"></span><span id="ix.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p8"></span>Observed ought to be the order which the
Prophet keeps; for he could not have profitably spoken of this second
part had he not first taken away that false confidence to which the Jews
had long cleaved; for when any one casts seed on an uncultivated soil,
what fruit can there be to his labor? As then it is necessary to make
use of the plough before the seed is sown, so also, when we seek to
teach profitably, it is necessary to pull up the vices which have their
roots in the hearts of men; and this especially must be the case when we
treat of faith in God alone, and of sincere calling on his name. And the
Prophet had a particular reason for what he did, because the Jews had
long hardened themselves in false confidences, so that they disregarded
God in two respects, — they despised his threatenings, and also made no
account of his gracious promises. The Prophet then couht have effected
nothing had he not pursued this method, — that is, to correct the evil
by which they had been long tainted; for noxious weeds must be first
taken away before there can be any room for the corn to grow.

<span id="ix.viii-p9"></span>But had he spoken only negatively, that is,
had he only condemned their false confidence, it would not have been
sufficient. The Jews indeed might have said, that they had been deceived
in placing their hopes in the Egyptians; but this might have happened
through some bad men: and by looking for aid elsewhere, when
disappointed, they would indeed have condemned their own counsels, but
would yet have remained in suspense and anxious, without seeking God.
Hence we see how suitably the Prophet began by condemning the Jews for
placing confidence in men, and then how wisely he added this second
part; for, as I have said, it was not enough to speak as it were
negatively, without inviting them to return to God. But this is often
the case in the present day; for we see that many laugh at those
superstitions which have hitherto prevailed under the Papacy; but yet no
religion appears in them. It is enough for them to ridicule these
mummeries; but it would have been better for them to be retained in the
fear of God, even by some superstition, than thus to expose evil, and
yet to have no reverence for God. It is the same absurdity as to pull
down a bad house and to leave man under the open air; for what end can
such a thing be done? for he who is compelled to leave his house had
something to cover him for a time. Hence it is not sufficient to destroy
what is bad, except a good building succeeds.

<span id="ix.viii-p10"></span>This is the method and order which the
Prophet observed: After having said, that all they are accursed who
confide in men, he now adds, *Blessed is the man who trusts in Jehovah*;
as though he had said, that men are wholly inexcusable in relying on
themselves or on others, when God willingly offers himself to them. What
then in it that prevents men from having their safety secured? Their own
sin in rejecting the grace of God, which is freely offered to them; but
they prefer to deceive themselves, and to ascribe to themselves and to
others what justly belongs to God alone.

<span id="ix.viii-p11"></span>We see then that the ingratitude of the
whole world is here condemned by the Prophet when he says, that all who
*trust in Jehovah* are *blessed*: for had God concealed himself there
would have been some covering for ignorance; and also a defense of this
kind might have been made, — “What else could we do? We sought the aid
which was within our reach: had God called us to himself or allowed us
to come to him, we would have been very willing; but as he has forsaken
us, it was indeed the last refuge of despair to consider what was to be
done, and to seek from every quarter aids for ourselves.” Hence the
Prophet here shews that all such defences were frivolous, for God had
freely invited them to himself; for to no purpose would he have said,
that they are blessed who trust in Jehovah, had not God set himself
forth as their confidence.

<span id="ix.viii-p12"></span>But we must notice what farther confirms
this sentence, which is in itself very clear, *And whose confidence
Jehovah is*. No additional light seems to be given to the preceding
truth; and then what ambiguity does it contain which requires an
explanation? *Blessed is the man who trusts in Jehovah*; even children
can understand this: the words, then, of the Prophet are either
superfluous, or there is some reason why he repeats what is so clear.
Doubtless the unbelief, which every one of us finds in himself, is the
best teacher; for even they who seem to have real confidence in God, yet
falter when some trial assails them. Since then it is a common thing
with us to look around to various quarters when any danger is near, we
may hence, easily know that we do not hope in God. What then seems to us
so easy, we find in reality to be very difficult: and hence the Prophet,
after having said, that they are blessed who trust in God, has mentioned
this in the second place, *And whose hope is God*; as though he had
said, “The world knows not what it is to trust in God: though every one
boldly testifies this, and even boastingly declares that he trusts in
God, yet not one in a thousand finds that he understands this, or has
ever known what it is from the heart to hope in God.” We now see that
this repetition is not superfluous or unmeaning.

<span id="ix.viii-p13"></span><span id="ix.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p14"></span>He then adds a comparison, answerable to
that in the former clause, *He shall be like a tree planted by the
waters, which sends its roots upon*, or nigh *the river, which shall not
see when heat comes*. Here the Prophet points out the difference between
the true servants of God, who trust in him, and those who are inflated
with their own false imaginations, so that they seek safety either from
themselves or from others: he had said of the unbelieving, that they are
like tamarisks, which flourish for a time, but never bring forth any
fruit, and are also soon dried up by the heat; but he says now as to the
faithful, that they are like trees planted by the waters, and send their
roots to the river. The tamarisks have the appearance of life, but there
is no moisture in a dry soil; so their roots quickly dry up; but the
servants of God, they are planted, as it were, in a moist soil,
irrigated continually by streams of water. Hence the Prophet adds, that
this tree *shall not see the heat when it comes*

<span id="ix.viii-p15"></span>He indirectly intimates that God’s
children are not exempt from adversities; for they feel the heat of the
sun, like trees, who are exposed to it; but moisture is supplied, and
the juice diffuses itself through all the branches: hence the Prophet
says, that the leaf was *green*, even by means of the moisture which the
earth supplied, being itself watered. The Prophet then intimates, that
though God’s children feel great heats, as well as the unbelieving; for
this is common to both, they shall yet be kept safe; for though the sun
dries up by its great heat, there is yet a remedy; for the root has
moisture, derived from the irrigation of water.

<span id="ix.viii-p16"></span>We now then see how suitable is every part
of the comparison. He says farther, that it shall *not be careful*. The
verb <span id="ix.viii-p16.1"></span>דאג, *dag*, means to fear and to be
careful; it means also sometimes to grieve, and so some render it here,
“It will not grieve” but the other meaning seems better to me, — that
the tree planted nigh streams of waters is *not afraid of heat*; and
then he adds, *nor shall it cease from producing fruit*  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173)

<span id="ix.viii-p20"></span>Nearly the same similitude is found in
<span id="ix.viii-p20.1"></span>[Ps
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003)<span id="ix.viii-p20.1"></span>,
only that the fear of God and meditation on his law are mentioned, and
not hope:

<span id="ix.viii-p21"></span>“Blessed is the man, etc., who meditates
on the law of God;”

<span id="ix.viii-p22"></span>but Jeremiah speaks here expressly of the
hope which ought to be put in God alone. Yet the two Prophets well agree
together as to this truth, — that all their hopes are accursed, by which
men inebriate themselves, while they seek salvation in themselves or in
the world, and make more account of their own counsels, virtues, power,
or the aids they expect from others, than of God himself and of his
promises: for he who really meditates on the law of God day and night,
well knows thereby, where to put his trust for salvation, both temporal
and eternal. It follows —

<span id="ix.ix"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p1"></span><span id="ix.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)<span id="ix.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p2"></span>**9**. The heart *is* deceitful above all
*things*, and desperately wicked: who can know it?

<span id="ix.ix-p3"></span>**9**. Insidiosum cor prae omnibus (super
omnia) et perversum (*vertunt quidam*; *alii*, durum; *alii*, eagrotum;
*possumus vertere*, vitiosum, *vel*, morbidum;) quis cognoscet illud?

<span id="ix.ix-p4"></span>**10**. I the LORD search the heart, *I* try
the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, *and* according
to the fruit of his doings.

<span id="ix.ix-p5"></span>**10**. Ego Jehova exquirens (*vel*,
explorans) cor, examinans renes, ad dandum (*id est*, ut dem, ut reddam)
cuique secundum vias ejus, secundum fructum operum ejus.

<span id="ix.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.ix-p7"></span><span id="ix.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p8"></span>What is taught here depends on what is gone
before; and therefore they ought to be read together. Many lay hold on
these words and mutilate them without understanding the design of the
Prophet. This is very absurd: for we ought first to see what the
prophets had in view, and by what necessity or cause they were led to
speak, what was their condition, and then the general doctrine that may
be gafilered from their words. If we wist to read the prophets with
benefit, we must first consider the reason why a thing is spoken, and
then elicit a general doctrine. Thus we shall be able rightly to apply
this passage to a common use, if we first understand why the Prophet
said, that the *heart of man was insidious*. He wished, no doubt, to be
more earnest with the Jews; for he saw that they had so much wantonness
and obstinacy, that a simple and plain doctrine would not have
penetrated into their hearts. The declaration, that they are accursed
who trust in men, and that no blessedness can be expected except we rely
on God, ought to have been sufficient to move them; but when he saw that
there was no sufficient power in such a declaration, he added, “I see
how it is, the *heart is wicked and vicious*; so ye think that you have
so much craftiness, that ye can with impunity deride God and his
ministers: *I*, says Jehovah, *I will inquire and search*; for it
belongs to me to examine the hearts of men.”

<span id="ix.ix-p9"></span>We hence see that there is an implied
reproof, when he says, that the *heart is insidious* and *wicked*;
 <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) as though he had said, “Ye
think yourselves in this instance wise; is not God also wise?” Isaiah
says ironically the same,

<span id="ix.ix-p13"></span>“Woe to them who go down to Egypt and make
secret covenants, and who trust in horses, as though they could deceive
me: ye are wise, I also have a portion of wisdom.” (<span
id="ix.ix-p13.1"></span>[Isa 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001)<span
id="ix.ix-p13.1"></span>)

<span id="ix.ix-p14"></span>Notice especially the expression, “Ye are
wise, etc.;” that is, “Ye are not alone wise; leave to me some portions
of wisdom, so that I may be wise like yourselves.” So also in this
place, “Ye are deceitful and insidious, and think that I can be
deceived:” for astute men are ever pleased with their own counsels, and
seek to deceive God with mere trumperies. “Ye are,” he says, “very
cunning; but I, Jehovah, will search both your hearts and your reins.” I
cannot finish the whole to-day.

<span id="ix.x"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ix.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are wholly
nothing and less than nothing, we may know our nothingness, and having
cast away all confidence in the world as well as in ourselves, we may
learn to flee to thee as suppliants, and so put our trust in thee for
our present life and for eternal salvation, that thou alone mayest be
glorified: and may we be devoted to thee through the whole course of our
life, and so persevere in humility and in calling on thy name, that thou
mayest not only for once bring us help, but that we may know that thou
art always present with those who truly and from the heart call upon
thee, until we shall at length be filled with the fullness of all those
blessings, which are laid up for us in heaven by Christ our Lord — Amen.

<span id="ix.xi"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Seventh

<span id="ix.xi-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain that passage
where the Prophet says, that the *heart is insidious*, or fallacious and
wicked, so that no one can penetrate into those deceits which are
concealed withill it. We referred to the Prophet’s object in saying
this, — -that the Jews might know that their cunning was in vain, while
they hid their thoughts as it were under the earth, that is, while they
thought that by their false pretences they could deceive God as well as
men.

<span id="ix.xi-p3"></span>He says then what he takes as granted, “I
know that you have a fallacious heart.” This indeed they did not allow;
for they made a specious pretext and boasted of their wisdom, and not of
deceit and guile. But the Prophet speaks plainly and expresses the fact
as it was, “There is in you,” he says, “a fallacious and a wicked heart:
hence is the confidence, which inebriates you; for ye think that your
deceits cannot be discovered.” Then in astonishment he asks, *Who can
search it?* but the answer immediately follows, *I* — *I Jehovah*; that
is, “It belongs to one to search the heart and the reins, and so nothing
can escape me.”  <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) The meaning
then is, that when men try to deceive God, they gain nothing, for God
knows how to take the wise in their own craftiness, and to discover all
their guiles and deceits. Then he adds for what end is this done, *That
I may render to every one according to his ways, according to the fruit
of his works.*

<span id="ix.xi-p7"></span><span id="ix.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p8"></span>By these words he means that they, after
having for a long time made many evasions, would yet be brought to
judgment, willing or unwilling; for they could not possibly deprive God
of his right, that he should not be the judge of the world, and thus
render to each the reward of his own works: for the Prophet does not
speak of merits or of virtues, but only shews that how much soever the
ungodly might hide themselves, they could not yet escape the tribunal of
God, but that they must at last render an account to him.

<span id="ix.xi-p9"></span>We may further gather from this passage a
general truth, — that the recesses of the heart are so hidden, that no
judgment can be formed of man by any human being. We indeed know that
there are appearances of virtue in many; but it belongs to God alone to
search the hearts of men and to try the reins. Rashly then do many form
an estimate of man’s character according to their own apprehensions or
the measure of their own knowledge; for the heart of man is ever false
and deceitful. If any one objects and says, that Jeremiah speaks of the
Jews then living, there is an answer given by Paul,

<span id="ix.xi-p10"></span>“Whatsoever things are written in the Law
pertain to all.” (<span id="ix.xi-p10.1"></span>[Ro
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)<span id="ix.xi-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xi-p11"></span>Described then is here the character of all
mankind, until God regenerates his elect. As then there is no purity
except from the Spirit of God, as long as mencontinue in their own
nature, their hearts are full of deceits and frauds. So the fairest
splendor is nothing but hypocrisy, which is abominable in the sight of
God. Let us proceed —

<span id="ix.xii"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011)<span id="ix.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p2"></span>**11** *As* the partridge sitteth *on*
*eggs*, and hatcheth *them* not; *so* he that getteth riches, and not by
right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall
be a fool.

<span id="ix.xii-p3"></span>**11**. Perdix quae congregat et non parit,
qui facit (*hoc est*, acquirit, *vel*, comparat) divitias, idque non in
judicio (*id est*, non recte) in medio dierum suorum relinquet illas, et
in exitu suo erit nihili.

<span id="ix.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p6"></span>The Prophet no doubt intended only to shew
that those who enriched themselves by unlawful means, or heaped together
great wealth, would yet be subject to the curse of God, so that whatever
they may have got through much toil and labor would vanish away from
them; for God would empty them of all they possessed. There is therefore
no ambiguity in the meaning of the Prophet, or in the subject itself.
But as to the words, interpreters do not agree: the greater part,
however, incline to this view, — That as the partridge gathers the eggs
of others, which she does not hatch, so also he who accumulates wealth,
shall at length have nothing, for God will deprive him. But the passage
seems to me to be plainly this, — *Whosoever makes,* or procures or
acquires, *riches, and that not by right*, that is, not rightly nor
honestly, but by wicked and artful means, *shall leave them in the midst
of his days, and at last shall be of no account*, or shall be a mockery:
for <span id="ix.xii-p6.1"></span>נבל *nabal*, means a thing of nought;
some render it fool, and rightly, for so it often means.

<span id="ix.xii-p7"></span>But there is a similitude employed, *As the
partridge gathers eggs and produces not*. To produce may be here
explained in two ways; it may be applied to the pullets or to the eggs.
Some consider the word, <span id="ix.xii-p7.1"></span>קרא *kora*, to be
masculine: then it is, The partridge, that is, the male, *gathers*, or
lays on *eggs which he has not produced*, or did not lay. But to produce
may also mean to hatch.  <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176)

<span id="ix.xii-p11"></span>It may be now asked, how can this
similitude be applied to the subject in hand? The Rabbins, according to
their practice, have devised fables; for they imagine that the partridge
steals all the eggs of other birds which she can find, and gathers them
into one heap; and then that the pullets, when hatched, fly away, as by
a certain hidden instinct, they understand that it is not their mother.
But neither Aristotle nor Pliny say any such thing of partridges. They
indeed say that the bird is full of cunning, and mention several
instances; but they refer to no such thing as that the partridge
collects thus stealthily its eggs. These things then are fables, which
it would be very absurd to believe. But it is said of partridges with
one consent, by Aristotle and Pliny, as well as by others, that it is a
very lustful bird. So great is their lust, that the males seek after the
eggs, and lest the females should lay on them, they break them with
their beaks or scatter them with their feet. There is also, as they say,
great lust in the females, but a greater concern for their brood: they
therefore hide their eggs, except when lust at times compels them to
return to the males; and then they lay their eggs in their presence; and
the male, when it finds an egg, breaks it with his feet. Hence great is
the difficulty to protect the brood; for before the female hatches the
eggs, they are often forced out by the male. I doubt not therefore but
that the real meaning of the Prophet is this, — that while partridges so
burn with love to their brood, they are at the same time led away by
their own lust, and that while they conceal their eggs, the male
cunningly steals them, so that their labor proves useless. Now the
Prophet says, “that all those who accumulate riches in an unjust manner
are like partridges; for they are compelled to leave riches unlawfully
got in the midst of their days.”  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) The purport of the whole is, that
whosoever seeks to become rich by means of injustice and wrong, will be
exposed to the curse of God, so that at last he will not enjoy his
ill-gotten wealth.

<span id="ix.xii-p16"></span>If any one will object and say, that many
who are avaricious, perfidious and rapacious, do enioy their riches: I
answer, that there is no true enjoyment, when there is no use made of
them and no security for them. If we duly consider how the avaricious
possess what they have plundered, we shall find that they always gape
for more plunder and are like the partridges; for they lay clogs as it
were, and yet no fruit appears. Before any fruit is brought forth, or at
least before it comes to them, they become destitute in the midst of
their days. And though God permits them to hold hidden riches, yet they
derive, as it is well known, no benefit from them: nay, their cupidity,
as it is insatiable, is a dropsy; for they are always thirsty; and the
very mass of wealth so inflames their avarice, that the richest of them
has less than he who is contented with a moderate and even with a small
fortune. It is then certain, that those who, even to death, possess
ill-gotten wealth, do not yet really enjoy it; for they always lay on
their eggs, and yet, as I have said, they derive no benefit. And then
the more remarkable judgment of God may be noticed; for in a moment the
richest are reduced to the extremes of poverty; and though they think to
make their children happy by leaving them a large patrimony, they yet
leave them nothing but what proves to be snares to them all their life,
and turns to their ruin. However this may be, experience sufficiently
proves the truth of the old proverb, “What is in-got is in-spent.” And
this is what the Prophet means, when he compares to partridges those who
accumulate riches, *not by right*, as he says.

<span id="ix.xii-p17"></span>An exception is to be here noticed; for a
just man may become rich, as God made Abraham rich; but he became not
rich by frauds and plunder and cruelty: the blessing of God made him
rich. But they who by wrong and injustice accumulate wealth must
necessarily at length be destroyed by God.

<span id="ix.xii-p18"></span>He says first, *In the midst of his days
shall he leave them*; that is, even while he has money shut up in his
chest, while he has his granaries and his cellars full, even then his
wealth shall vanish away. We see that where there is the greatest
abundance, the master himself is hungry and famishing; he cannot cat so
as to satisfy his hunger, while he could feed hundreds. Thus then his
wealth disappears and vanishes in his hands, he afterwards adds, *at his
end he will be nothing*, or he will be a mockery, or he will be a fool.
The world indeed esteems those alone wise, who are provident, who are
attentive to their own gain, and who plunder on every side, and
tenaciously hold what has once come to their hands; but the Lord here
condemns them all for their folly and vanity. I think, at the same time,
that the slaves of money are here called men of nought and contemptible.
It follows: —

<span id="ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012)<span id="ix.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p2"></span>**12**. A glorious high throne from the
beginning *is* the place of our sanctuary.

<span id="ix.xiii-p3"></span>**12**. Soilum gloriae excelsum (vel,
celsitudo; <span id="ix.xiii-p3.1"></span>מרום enim tam adjective
capitur, quam substantive) ab initio locus sanctuarii nostri.

<span id="ix.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xiii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p6"></span>No doubt the Prophet refers to the singular
favor which God granted the Jews, when he chose for himself an
habitation among them. It was an incomparable honor when God was pleased
to dwell in the midst of that people. Hence,the Prophet exclaims, that
the *throne of glory and of loftiness was the place of his sanctuary*,
which God had chosen in that land. But we must understand the design of
the Prophet; for the Holy Spirit sometimes commemorates the blessings of
God, to raise the minds of men to confidence, or to rouse them to make
sacrifices of praise. Here is then a twofold object, when the Scripture
sets before us the blessings of God; it is first, that we may be fully
persuaded, that he will be always a father to us, for he who begins is
wont to bring his work to an end, according to what is said in <span
id="ix.xiii-p6.1"></span>[Ps
138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)<span id="ix.xiii-p6.1"></span>,

<span id="ix.xiii-p7"></span>“The work of thine hands thou wilt not
forsake.”

<span id="ix.xiii-p8"></span>And then, the Scripture sometimes
encourages us to render thanks to God, when it shews how bountifully he
has dealt with us. But here is a reproof when the Prophet says, that the
*glorious throne* of God was among the Jews, as though God appeared
there openly and in a visible form; for Judea, so to speak, was as it
were a terrestrial heaven; for God had consecrated to himself mount
Sion, that he might dwell there.

<span id="ix.xiii-p9"></span>We now then understand why the Prophet here
extols the dignity to which God had raised the Jews, when he had
commanded a temple for himself to be built on mount Sion. Some will have
a particle of comparison to be understood, “As a throne of glory;” that
is, as heaven itself in height, so is the place of our sanctuary; but we
may take the words simply as they are. We must at the same time
repudiate the Rabbinical comment, — that God before the creation of the
world had built the temple, as he had appointed the Messiah and other
things. But these are foolish trifles. Yet this passage has afforded the
Jews an occasion for labling; for it is said *from the beginning*, <span
id="ix.xiii-p9.1"></span>מראשון *merashun*. If the throne of God, that
is, the sanctuary, \[they say\] was from the beginning, it then follows
that it was created before heaven and earth. But this is disproved by
this single consideration, — that he speaks not here of time but of the
order of things, and that that order is; not according to the essence of
things, but according to the providence of God. *From the beginning*,
then *was the throne of God glorious* in Judea, even because God in his
eternal counsel had determined to choose the race of Abraham, and then
to raise up in that nation the throne of David, and from thence to
extend salvation to the whole world.  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) Predestination therefore is the
antiquity of the throne of which the Prophet now speaks. Hence the most
suitable view is this, — that God had honored the Jews with a singular
privilege, because he had purposed to dwell among them, not otherwise
than in heaven, so that their condition became more excellent than all
human glory. It now follows, —

<span id="ix.xiv"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#013)<span id="ix.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p2"></span>**13**. O LORD, the hope of Israel, all that
forsake thee shall be ashamed, *and* they that depart from me shall be
written in the earth, because they have forsaken the LORD, the fountain
of living waters.

<span id="ix.xiv-p3"></span>**13**. Spes (*vel*, expectatio) lsrael
Jehova, quicunque abs te discedunt (*vel*, qui te derelinquunt, <span
id="ix.xiv-p3.1"></span>עזבוך; *hoc verbo nuper fuerat usus de
perdicibus loquens*) pudefient; qui deficiunt a me in terra scribentur;
quia dereliquerunt (*idem est verbum*) fontem aquarum viventium Jehovam.

<span id="ix.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xiv-p5"></span><span id="ix.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p6"></span>It appears more clear from this verse why
the Prophet had commended before the excellency of his own nation, even
that by the comparison their impiety might appear less excusable; for
the more bountiful God had dealt with them, the more atrocious was their
sin of ingratitude. As then the Jews had been raised high, so that their
elevation appeared eminent through the whole world, the more detestable
became their contumacy against God, and also their ingratitude in
rejecting and despising a favor so remarkable, when they forsook him and
followed idols, vain hopes, and their own false counsels. It is the same
as though the Prophet had said, — “What does it avail you, that God
dwells among you, and that the Temple is as it were his earthly
habitation, where he converses familiarly with you? what benefit is this
to you? for no one accepts of this favor; nay, we wilfully, and as it
were designedly cast away from us this kindness which is freely offered
to us.”

<span id="ix.xiv-p7"></span>We hence see that all this ought to be read
together, — that the throne of God was in Judea, but that the people in
the meantime malignantly and wickedly rejected the favor offered them.

<span id="ix.xiv-p8"></span>But the Prophet turns to God, that he might
rouse the Jews, for such was their perverseness that he in vain taught
them. And he says, *Jehovah, the expectation of Israel! whosoever
forsake thee shall be made ashamed*; as though he had said, — “The
ungodly multitude which accepts not the dignity by which our race excels
all other nations, receives no benefit. God indeed dwells in the midst
of us, but hardly one in a hundred cleaves to him; nay, almost all
treacherously forsake him; but notwithstanding all their glory, they
shall be made ashamed who thus reject the kindness of God.” The Prophet,
in short, reminds the Jews how vainly and presumptuously they gloried,
because God had adopted their race; for a reciprocity was required, so
that they were to respond to God and receive his benefits. But when they
perversely his favor, what could have remained for them?

<span id="ix.xiv-p9"></span>Hence he says, *Ashamed shall all they be
made who forsake thee*. By the word forsake, he intimates that the Jews
had been favored by God; for this could not have been said in the same
sense, and in an equal degree of the heafilens, as the heathens had
never been gathered by God into one body; but the Jews alone had enjoyed
this favor. When therefore he had manifested himself to them, and
testified that he would be their Father, he was forsaken by them. This
defection, of which the Jews alone were guilty, is noticed, because God
had sought them for himself; he had also come to them, and made with
them a covenant. As then they were thus brought nigh to God, this
defection was the more execrable. This is what the Prophet means.

<span id="ix.xiv-p10"></span>He now adds, *And they who depart shall be
written in the earth*. Literally it is, “Who depart from me;” but the
<span id="ix.xiv-p10.1"></span>י, *iod*, at the end, as many think, is a
servile letter. And some think that the word is a verb, and that the
<span id="ix.xiv-p10.2"></span>י, *iod*, at the beginning denotes the
future tense, and they regard the <span id="ix.xiv-p10.3"></span>י,
*iod*, at the end to be for <span id="ix.xiv-p10.4"></span>ו, *vau*,
<span id="ix.xiv-p10.5"></span>יסודו *isuru*, “Who depart.” Others
suppose it to be a noun, and read <span id="ix.xiv-p10.6"></span>יסורי
*isuri*, for <span id="ix.xiv-p10.7"></span>וסורים *vasurim*  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) As to the meaning, it is evident that
the Prophet designed here to shake off from the Jews the vain glory with
which they were inflated, when they boasted that they were the people of
God, the holy race of Abraham, the royal priesthood; all these things he
ridicules as vain, as though he had said, — “Away with all these
boastings, which are all false; ye are apostates, therefore your name
shall be written in the earth.” No doubt, the earth here is set in
opposition to heaven; and Scripture sometimes says, that the name of the
wicked shall be a reproach on earth. But as they often acquire a
celebrated and honorable name on earth, the Prophet makes a concession
and says, “Be it so; let the world regard you as the holy race of
Abraham, the blessed seed and the chosen people; let, in short, every
one of you claim for himself whatever he pleases, but your name shall be
on earth, and shall be blotted out from heaven; there will be no
inheritance above for you, no portion in the kingdom of God.” He in
short intimates, that the Jews would have no place before God and his
angels, for they were unworthy that God shouhi regard them as his
children, since they had wickedly denied him. He then grants them a name
on earth; but it is the, same as though he had said, that they wickedly
lied in boasting that they were a chosen people, since they themselves,
as far as they could, obliterated the election of God.

<span id="ix.xiv-p14"></span>He afterwards adds, *Because they have
forsaken Jehovah, the fountain of living waters*. The Prophet confirms
what he had said, lest the Jews should think that they were too severely
rebuked, when he said that their name was blotted out from heaven: Ye
*have forsaken*, he says, *the fountain of living waters*. “What does
this mean? God (according to what is said in <span
id="ix.xiv-p14.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#000)<span id="ix.xiv-p14.1"></span>)
manifested himself to you; is there not in him a full and sufficient
happiness for you? What more can be sought for by a mortal man than to
enjoy his God, in whom there is the fullness of all blessings? God has
offered himself to you, and his bounty has ever been extended to you, as
though he were a fountain from which you might draw enough to satisfy
you; but ye have forsaken this fountain. You must therefore perish
through thirst, and justly so, for your ingratitude has been so great as
to despise these remarkable and invaluable favors of God.” It now
follows —

<span id="ix.xv"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014)<span id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p2"></span>**14**. Heal me, O LORD, and I shall be
healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for thou *art* my praise.

<span id="ix.xv-p3"></span>**14**. Sana me Jehova, et sanabor; serva me,
et salvus ero; quia laus mea tu es.

<span id="ix.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xv-p5"></span><span id="ix.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet, as though terrified, hides
himself under the wings of God, for he saw that apostasy and every kind
of wickedness prevailed everywhere throughout the land; he saw that the
principal men of his nation were wicked despisers of God, and that they
vainly boasted of their own descent, while yet destitute of all care for
justice and uprightness. When therefore he saw that the land was thus
infected, in order that fainting might not overcome him, he presents
himself to God, as though he had said, “What shall become of me, Lord?
for I am here surrounded with wickedness; wherever I turn I find nothing
but what allures and leads me away from true religion and the sincere
worship of thy name. What then will be the case if thou forsakest me? I
shall be immediately seized, and it will be all over with me, for there
is no safety in the whole land, and no healing, it is as though
pestilence prevailed, so that no one can go forth lest he should meet
with some contagion.” Thus the Prophet in this passage, on seeing the
whole land so polluted with crimes that there was not a corner free from
them, flees to God for help, and says, “O Lord, I cannot be safe except
thou keep me; I cannot be pure except my purity comes from time.” We now
understand the design of the Prophet, and how this verse is connected
with the preceding verses.

<span id="ix.xv-p7"></span>He says first, *Heal me, and I shall be
healed*; as though he had said that he was now diseased, having
contracted a taint from corrupt practices. He therefore seeks healing
from God alone, and through his gracious help. And for the same reason
he adds that then only he should be *safe* when saved by God.

<span id="ix.xv-p8"></span>We are taught by these words, that whenever
stumbling-blocks come in our way, we ought to call on God with
increasing ardor and earnestness. For every one of us must well know his
own infirmity; even when we have not to fight, our own weakness does not
suffer us to stand uncorrupted; how then will it be with us, when Satan
assails our faith with his most cunning devices? While therefore we now
see all things in the world in a corrupted state, so that we are allured
by a thousand things from the true worship of God, let us learn by the
example of the Prophet to hide ourselves under the wings of God, and to
pray that he may heal us, for we shall not only be apparently vicious,
but many corruptions will immediately devour us, except God himself
bring us help. Hence the worse the world is, and the greater the
licentiousness of sin, the more necessity there is for praying God to
keep us by his wonderful power, as it were in the very regions of hell.

<span id="ix.xv-p9"></span>A general truth may be also gathered from
this passage, that it is not in man to stand or to keep himself safe, so
as to be preserved, but that this is the peculiar kindness of God; for
if man had any power to preserve himself, so as to continue pure and
unpolluted in the midst of corruptions, no doubt, Jeremiah would have
been endued with such a gift; but he confesses that there is no hope of
healing and of salvation, except through the special favor of God. For
what else is healing but purity of life? as though he had said, “O Lord,
it is not in me to preserve that integrity which thou requirest:” and
hence he says, *Heal me, and I shall be healed*. And then, when he
speaks of salvation, he no doubt intended to testify, that it is not
enough for the Lord to help us once or for a short time, except he
continues to help us to the end. Therefore the beginning, as well as the
whole progress of salvation, is here ascribed by him to God. It hence
follows that all that the sophists vainly talk about free-will is
reduced to nothing. They indeed confess that it is not in man’s power to
stave himself; but they afterwards pull down and subvert what they seem
to confess, for they say that the grace of the Spirit concurs with
free-will, and that man saves himself while God is co-operating with
him. But all this is mere trifling; for the Prophet here not only
implores help, and prays God to succor his infirmity, but he confesses
that it is God’s work alone to heal and to save him.

<span id="ix.xv-p10"></span>And this he further confirms by saying,
*Thou art my praise*;  <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) for he
thus declares that he effected nothing, but that all the praise for his
salvation was due alone to God; for how can God be said to be our
Praise, except when we glory in him alone? according to what is said in
the ninth chapter. If men claim even the least thing for themselves,
they cannot call God their praise. The Prophet then acknowledges here
that he contributed nothing towards the preservation of his purity, but
that this was wholly the work of God. And then he confirms his own hope,
as he doubted not but he would be heard by God, for he asks of him
whatever was necessary for his salvation.

<span id="ix.xv-p12"></span>We have then this general rule, that if we
desire to obtain from him the beginning and the end of our salvation,
his praise must be given to him, so that we may glory in him alone. If
then we own ourselves destitute of all power, and flee to God under the
consciousness of such a want, we shall doubtless obtain whatever is
needful for us; but if we are inflated with the conceit of our own
power, or of our own righteousness, the door is closed against us. We
now then see the benefit of this confirmation; it assures the faithful
that they shall find in God whatever they may want, for they do not
obscure the glory of God by transferring to themselves what peculiarly
belongs to him, but confess that in him dwells what they cannot find in
themselves. The rest I defer till to-morrow.

<span id="ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ix.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that we may learn,
whether in want or in abundance, so to submit ourselves to thee, that it
may be our only and perfect felicity to depend on thee and to rest in
that salvation, the experience of which thou hast already given us,
until we shall reach that eternal rest, where we shall enjoy it in all
its fullness, when made partakers of that glory, which has been procured
for us by the blood of thine only-begotten Son.--Amen.

<span id="ix.xvi-p3"></span> 

<span id="ix.xvii"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Eighth

<span id="ix.xviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#015)<span id="ix.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p2"></span>**15**. Behold, they say unto me, Where
*is* the word of the LORD? let it come now.

<span id="ix.xviii-p3"></span>**15**. Ecce ipsi dicunt mihi, Ubi est
sermo Jehovae? veniat nunc.

<span id="ix.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xviii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p6"></span>Here Jeremiah complains of the obstinate
contempt of the people; he found them not only uncourteous but even
petulant towards God, so that they hesitated not to discredit all
prophecies, to despise the promises, and boldly to reject all
threatenings. The Prophet had often threatened them; and when God
delayed the time, they made a wrong use of his forbearance, as it is
commonly the case with the reprobate. Nor did they deem it enough even
to add sins to sins, but they openly and petulantly provoked God,
“*Where is the word?* many years have now elapsed since thou hast
continually spoken of war, of famine, and of pestilence; but we still
remain quiet, and God spares us; where then is the *word of Jehovah*,
which thou hast announced?”

<span id="ix.xviii-p7"></span>We now then see how great was the
wilfulness of this people, for the teaching of Jeremiah became not only
useless but was treated with ridicule. They had however heard much
before from the mouth of Isaiah,

<span id="ix.xviii-p8"></span>“Alas! when the Lord calls you to ashes
and sackcloth, ye say, “Let us eat and drink, to-morrow we shall die.”
“As I live, saith the Lord, not forgiven to you shall be this
iniquity.”  
(<span id="ix.xviii-p8.2"></span>[Isa
22:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#012)<span
id="ix.xviii-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xviii-p9"></span>God then had sworn by his own glory that
their sin would be inexpiable, because they continued obstinately in
their vices, and were in no degree terrified by the threatenings of the
prophets. We however see that they ever became worse and worse. Isaiah
was dead when they thus spoke in contempt and mockery, *Where is the
word of Jehovah? let it now come*, as though they designedly provoked
God, like one who despises his enemy, and says, “Oh! thou art indeed to
be dreaded, if thou art to be believed; let us now see thy power, shew
to us what thou canst do.” Thus contemptibly did they utter their
scoffs, when God by his servants made known to them the approaching ruin
which they deserved. We see, in short, that the Prophet shews here that
they had come to a hopeless state.  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) It follows —

<span id="ix.xix"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p1"></span><span id="ix.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#016)<span id="ix.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p2"></span>**16**. As for me, I have not hastened from
*being* a pastor to follow thee: neither have I desired the woeful day;
thou knowest: that which came out of my lips was *right* before thee.

<span id="ix.xix-p3"></span>**16**. Ego autem non festinavi, ut essem
pastor post te, et diem doloris non concupivi, tu nosti: quod egressum
est e labiis meis, coram facie tua fuit.

<span id="ix.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xix-p5"></span><span id="ix.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p6"></span>The Prophet here implores God as his
defender, having found his own nation so refractory, that they could in
no way be brought to a right mind. There is yet no doubt but he intended
to double their fear in thus testifying that he brought nothing of his
own, but faithfully executed the command of God, that he did not
presumptuously undertake the office of a teacher, but obeyed the call of
God, as though he had said, that they (as we shall find in another
place) did not resist a mortal man, but God himself. He therefore refers
the matter to God, as though he had said, “Contend with God; for what
have I to do with you, or you with me? For I do not plead my own cause,
nor came I forth through any desire of my own; but as God has committed
to me this office, it was necessary for me to obey. As then I am only
the instrument of God, what will you at last gain after having
quarrelled ever so much? No doubt God will shew that he is an adversary
to you, and can ye conquer him?” We now understand the object of the
Prophet.

<span id="ix.xix-p7"></span>But we have said elsewhere that the Prophet
fled to God when he found no equity or rectitude in the world; yea, when
all were deaf and so blinded that there was no hope of obtaining notice.
When therefore men are thus perverted in their minds, we must
necessarily have recourse to God. So the Prophet does now, as he had
done before, leaving men he addresses his words to God; and this kind of
apostrophe has more force than if he had charged them with perverseness.

<span id="ix.xix-p8"></span>*But I*, he says, *I have not hastened*.
Here interpreters differ; for <span id="ix.xix-p8.1"></span>אוף, *auts*,
means sometimes to hasten, and sometimes to be slow, two contrary
things. It signifies also to be careful and to abominate or to dislike;
and so some render it here, “I have not disliked, so as not to become a
pastor;” for <span id="ix.xix-p8.2"></span>מן *men*, in Hebrew is often
taken as a negative. Others give this version, “I have not been
careful,” or anxious, “I have not cared to become a pastor.” But a
meaning more suitable to the context may be given to the words, that the
Prophet *hastened not*, for it follows, and *I have not coveted*. These
two expressions, <span id="ix.xix-p8.3"></span>לא אצתי *la atsati*,
hastened,” and, <span id="ix.xix-p8.4"></span>לא התאויתי *la ethaviti*,
correspond the one with the other, I have not hastened,” and “I have not
coveted;” and both is a denial of his temerity. Many indeed thrust
themselves, as we shall see in the twenty-third chapter, without being
called by God; they run of themselves, and are led astray by foolish
imaginations.

<span id="ix.xix-p9"></span>The Prophet says first, that he had *not
hastened to be a pastor after God*, literally; for many are ruled by
ambition, which leads them to undertake more than what is right for
them, and they do not regard what may please God. Hence the Prophet says
in the first place, that he had *not hastened*, and then that he had
*not coveted*, which is not different in meaning, but is a confirmation
of the same thing. But let us first bear in mind that he thus proves the
impiety of the people, for they fought against God himself the author of
his call. How so? had he hastened, that is, had he through foolish zeal
obtruded himself, the Jews might have justly contended with him, and
might have done so with impunity; but as he had waited for the call of
God, they had no ground to contend with him, and by opposing the servant
of God, they discovered their own impiety.  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182)

<span id="ix.xix-p16"></span>Jeremiah prescribes here a law for all
prophets and teachers, and that is, that they are not to aspire to this
office as many do, who, as we have already said, are guided by ambition.
He then alone is to be deemed a lawful minister and prophet of God and a
teacher in his church who is not led by the impulse of his own flesh,
nor by inconsiderate zeal, but to whom God extends his hand, and who
being called obeys. The beginning then is obedience, if we wish to
become lawful teachers. This is one thing.

<span id="ix.xix-p17"></span>In the second place he shews, that those
who are called to the office of teaching are not endued with a sovereign
power, so that they can announce whatever pleases them, but that they
are pastors for God. God indeed would have his prophets to take the
lead, so as to point out the way to the rest of the people, and he thus
honors them with no common dignity. He would have them to be heads or
leaders, or ensign-bearers, but still he himself retains his own
peculiar honor; hence no one ever so presides over God’s Church as to be
the chief pastor, for God takes away nothing from himself by
transferring the office of teaching to his ministers, but on the
contrary he remains complete in his own authority. In short, he does not
resign, as they say, his own right, but substitutcs those who teach in
his own place, and in such a way as still to retain what peculiarly
belongs to him. Hence these words ought to be carefully noticed, *I have
not hastened to become a pastor after thee*, that is, that he might
follow God. Whosoever then takes so much liberty as not to follow God,
but is carried away by his own spirit, is to be repudiated, and deserves
not to be reckoned among lawful pastors.

<span id="ix.xix-p18"></span>But this passage seems to militate against
what is declared by Paul when he says, that he who desires the
episcopate seeks an excellent work. (<span id="ix.xix-p18.1"></span>[1Ti
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)<span id="ix.xix-p18.1"></span>.)
Paul does not there condemn, it is said, the desire, he only reminds us
how difficult and arduous is the office of a bishop. To this we may
readily answer, that Paul there does not speak of that foolish ardor by
which many are inflamed, while they do not consider their own abilities,
or rather their own weakness; but he says, that if any offers himself to
God for the office of teaching, he is to think and duly to consider that
it is no common work. He ought then rather to restrain himself, while
bearing in mind how difficult it is to fulfill all the duties of a good
bishop. But Jeremiah here refers to what we have seen in the first
chapter, for he even dreaded the prophetic office, and confessed that he
was not able to speak. As then he alleged his own stammering, he was
very far from having any corrupt desire. There is then nothing
inconsistent in the words, that Jeremiah did not desire the office of a
pastor, and that whosoever desires the episcopate desires an excellent,
work.

<span id="ix.xix-p19"></span>He now adds a confirmation, *The day of
grief*, he says, *have I not desired*. Some think the verb to be
passive, but I have rendered it with others as an active verb, yet some
read, “And the day of affliction, or of sorrow, has not been wished for
by me.” But there is, in reality, no difference. He confirms what he had
said, for he saw clearly, when God chose him a Prophet, that he would be
drawn into hard contests; “Why, he says, should I covet the prophetic
office? It would have been an insane ambition.” He found out from the
very beginning the consequence of undertaking the office, that he had to
contend with the whole people, yea, with every one of them, “I knew how
great would be their stubbornness, and how great also would be their
cruelty; how then could I have wished of mine own accord to run into
danger, and to throw mysdf into so many troubles and so many sorrows?”
Jeremiah then shews from what he had apprehended as to the issue, that
he had not, been led by any hasty desire.

<span id="ix.xix-p20"></span>If one objects and says, that many are
notwithstanding led away by a foolish ambition to undergo dangers and
troubles which they cannot but foresee. To this I answer, that the
Prophet assumes the fact as it was, that not only known to him from the
beginning was whatever he after-wards experienced, for he had well
considered what the people were, but that he had been also constrained
by God’s command to renounce his own will. Many hasten because they
consider not the difficulties of the office, hardly one in a hundred at
this day duly considers how difficult and arduous it is rightly to
discharge the pastoral office. Hence many are led to undertake it as an
easy duty, and of no great importance. Afterwards experience too late
teaches them, that they have foolishly desired what was unknown to them.
Some think that they possess great skill and activity, and also promise
themselves great things on account of their own capacities, learning,
and judgment; but they afterwards very soon find how scanty is a
furniture, as they say, of this kind, for aptness for the work fails
them at the very outset, and not in the middle of their course. Some
also, while seeing that they are to have many and grievous contests,
dread nothing and put on an iron front, as though they were born to
fight. Others there are who, in desiring the office of teachers, are
mercenaries. We indeed know that all God’s servants are miserable as to
this world, and according to the perceptions of men, for they must carry
on war against the prevailing dispositions of all, and thus displease
men that they may please God; but mercenaries, who have no religion and
adulterate God’s word, desire the office, and why? because they see that
they can deal in a pleasing manner with men, for they will carefully
avoid everything that may offend, But this was not the case with the
Prophet; hence he assumes, as I have said, this fact, that he sincerely
engaged in his office of teaching, and was not induced by any other
motive than that of promoting the well-being of the people.

<span id="ix.xix-p21"></span>He say’s that *he hastened not*; how so? “I
should have been,” he says, “altogether insane had I been led by an
inconsiderate zeal, for I know that I should have to contend, and to
contend not with one man only, but with the whole people, yea, with
every one of them.” Hence he calls the warfare which awaits all true
pastors, *the day of sorrow*, for if they please men they cannot be the
servants of God. And of this fact he makes God a witness, *Thou
knowest*. Men of wind profess boldly enough that they have nothing in
view but to serve God, that they do not rashly enter on their course;
but the Prophet here sets himself in God’s presence, and is not anxious
to secure the approbation of men, being content with that of God alone.
 <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)

<span id="ix.xix-p24"></span>And then he adds, *Before thy face has been
whatever has proceeded from my lips*. By these words he intimates, that
he had not vainly spoken whatever came to his mind, but what he had
received from God himself, and that before God was everything which had
proceeded from his mouth. We hence learn, that it is not enough for one
to have been once called, except he faithfully delivers what he has
received from God himself, It now follows —

<span id="ix.xx"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p1"></span><span id="ix.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#017)<span id="ix.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p2"></span>**17**. Be not a terror unto me: thou *art*
my hope in the day of evil.

<span id="ix.xx-p3"></span>**17**. Ne sis mihi in terrorem; protectio
mea tu in die mali.

<span id="ix.xx-p4"></span>**18**. Let them be confounded that persecute
me, but let not me be confounded: let them be dismayed, but let not me
be dismayed: bring upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with
double destruction.

<span id="ix.xx-p5"></span>**18**. Pudefiant qui persequuntur me, et non
pudetiam ego; terreantur illi, et non terrear ego; inducas super eos
diem mali, et duplici contritione contere eos.

<span id="ix.xx-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xx-p7"></span><span id="ix.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p8"></span>Now the Prophet, having appealed to God as a
witness to his integrity, prays him to show himself as his patron and
defender. Thus he again implores God’s aid, *Be not thou*, he says, *a
terror to me*, that is, “Suffer me not while pleading thy cause to be
terrified.” Thy the word, terror, he means such a dread as stupifies all
the feelings. It would have indeed been wholly unreasonable for the
Prophets to fail in constancy and firmness, for it belonged to God to
rule them by his Spirit, and to support them by his grace, from the time
he committed to them their office. Since then no one is of himself fit
to discharge the duties of a faithful teacher, God must: necessarily
succor and aid those whom he calls and sends to the work. This is now
what the Prophet speaks of when he says, *Be not to me a terror*, that
is, “Be not to me a cause of dread by depriving me of constancy and
firmness, so as to render me an object of ridicule to all;” and why?
because *thou art my protection*, or my hope, for the word means both.

<span id="ix.xx-p9"></span>*Thou art* then *my protection* (of this
meaning I mostly approve) *in the day of evil*, that is, “I have chosen
thee as my protector, as though thou were a shield to me; as then I have
promised myself the favor of having thee as my help, see that I be not
left destitute, since I have to right for thee and under thy banner.”
Hence he adds, *Ashamed let them be who persecute me, and let not me be
ashamed; terrified let them be, and let not me be terrified*

<span id="ix.xx-p10"></span><span id="ix.xx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p11"></span>The Prophet, as we have seen, had a hard
contest, not only with one man or with a few, but with the whole people,
and then it is probable that there were many sects, for when he cried
against the avaricious, there was a commotion instantly made by all
those who lived on plunder, when he spoke against the indulgence of
lust, there was a second conspiracy against him; when he condemned
drunkenness and intemperance, there was a new combination formed to
oppose him. We hence see how all the ungodly in all parts and for
various reasons assailed the Prophet, he was therefore constrained to
pray, as he now does, *Ashamed let them be who persecute me*, even
because they now testified that they were evidently the enemies of God,
for he had no private concern with them, but faithfully obeyed the
command of God. As then he knew them to be God’s avowed enemies, he
hesitated not to ask God himself to oppose them.  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184)

<span id="ix.xx-p17"></span>We must yet notice what we have said in
other places, that the Prophet was not only influenced by a holy and
pious zeal, but was also governed by the wisdom of the Spirit. This I
again repeat, for there are many foolish imitators, who always appeal to
the vehemence which the Prophets shewed, while they themselves are
carried away by a violent rather than by a vehement impulse. But we must
first see whether the Holy Spirit guides us, lest we should utter
imprecations against the very elect; and then we must beware of being
influenced by the feelings of our flesh, and intemperate zeal is ever to
be feared, for it is a rare gift so to burn with zeal as to join with it
the moderation that is required. As then there is always something
turbulent in our zeal, we must remember that the Prophets never uttered
a word but as the Spirit guided their tongues, and then that they had no
regard to themselves, and, thirdly, that they were so calm and composed
in their ardor that they were not, guilty of excess.

<span id="ix.xx-p18"></span>The Prophet no doubt fully knew that all
those were reprobate on whom he imprecated God’s vengeance, but as it
does not belong to us to distinguish between the elect and the
reprobate, let us learn to suspend and check our zeal, so that it may
not be too fervid, for we may often mistake, if we follow generally what
the Prophet says here, *Bring on them the day of evil, and with a double
breach break them*. Were we thus to speak indiscriminately of all, our
zeal would often hit the very children of God. We must therefore bear in
mind, that before the Prophet uttered this imprecation he was taught by
the Spirit of God that he had to do with reprobate and irreclaimable
men. Now a new discourse follows —

<span id="ix.xxi"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#019)<span id="ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p2"></span>**19**. Thus said the LORD unto me; Go and
stand in the gate of the children of the people, whereby the kings of
Judah come in, and by the which they go out, and in all the gates of
Jerusalem;

<span id="ix.xxi-p3"></span>**19**. Sic dixit mihi Jehova, Vade et sta
in porta filiorum populi; per quam ingrediuntur reges Jehudah, et per
quam egrediuntur, (*ad verbum*, e qua egrediuntur in ipsa; *sed* וב *est
supervacuum*,) et onmibus portis Jerusalem:

<span id="ix.xxi-p4"></span>**20**. And say unto them, Hear ye the word
of the LORD, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates:

<span id="ix.xxi-p5"></span>**20**. Et dic illis, Audite sermonem
Jehovae, reges Jehudah, et totus Jehudah, et omnes incolae Jerusalem,
qui ingredimini per has portas

<span id="ix.xxi-p6"></span>**21**. Thus saith the LORD, Take heed to
yourselves, and bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring *it* in by
the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="ix.xxi-p7"></span>**21**. Sic dicit Jehova, Custodite vos,
(*vel*, cavete vobis,) in animabus vestris, ne inferatis onus die
sabbathi, (ne tollatis,) et inferatis per portas Jerusalem.

<span id="ix.xxi-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxi-p9"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p10"></span>This discourse is no doubt to be separated
from the preceding one, and whosoever divided the chapters was deficient
in judgment as to many other places as well as here. Now the meaning is,
that so great and so gross was the contempt of the law, that they
neglected even the observance of the Sabbath; and yet we know that
hypocrites are in this respect very careful, nay, Isaiah upbraided the
men of his day that they made so much of their sanctity to consist in
the outward observance of days. (<span id="ix.xxi-p10.1"></span>[Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)<span id="ix.xxi-p10.1"></span>.)
But, as I have already said, the Jews were so audacious in the time of
Jeremiah that they openly violated the Sabbath, men were become so lost,
as we commonly say, as not to pretend any religion. The licentiousness
of the people was so great that they had no shame; nay, they all openly
shewed that they had wholly cast away the yoke of God and of his law.
When this was the case at Jerusalem, wlmt can we think was done in
obscure villages where so much religion did not exist? for if there was
any right teaching, if there was any appearance of religion, it must
have been at Jerusalem.

<span id="ix.xxi-p11"></span>We now then see that the Prophet was sent
by God to charge the people with this gross and base contempt of the
law; as though he had said, “Go to now, and pretend that you retain at
least some religion: yet even in this small matter, the observance of
the Sabbath, ye are deficient, for *ye bring burdens*, that is, ye carry
on business on the Sabbath as on other days. As then there is not among
you even an external sanctity as to the Sabbath, why do you go on with
your evasions? for your impiety is sufficiently proved.” We now see what
the Prophet means, and what the import of this discourse is which we are
now to explain.

<span id="ix.xxi-p12"></span>He says first, that he was sent, *go*, to
bring this message. He had been indeed chosen before a prophet; but he
speaks here of a special thing which he was commissioned to do: and he
says that he was sent to *the chief gate of the city, through which the
kings entered in and went out and the whole people*  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) and then that he was sent *to all the
gates*. By these words he means, that it was not God’s will that the
profanation of the Sabbath should be partially made known, but be
everywhere proclaimed, in order that he might shame not only the king
but also the whole people. The prophets usually spoke first in the
Temple, and then they went to the gates, where there was a larger
concourse of people. But Jeremiah had here something unusual; for God
intended most clearly to condemn the Jews for their base and inexcusable
contempt of the Sabbath.

<span id="ix.xxi-p14"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p15"></span>He then adds, *Thou shalt say to them, Hear
the word of Jehovah, ye kings of Judah, and let all the people hear, and
let all the citizens of Jerusalem* hear, *who enter in at these gates*.
The Prophet was commanded to begin with the king himself, who ought to
have repressed so great a licentiousness. It was therefore an
intolerable indifference in the king silently to bear this contempt of
religion, especially in a matter so easy and so evident; for he could
not have pretended that he was unacquainted with it: it was indeed the
same as though the Jews intended to triumph against God, and to shew
that his law was deemed of no value. Hence the profanation of the
Sabbath was a proof of their shamelessness, as they thereby shewed that
they cared nothing either for God or for his law. We shall hereafter see
how great that wickedness was; but; I shall defer the subject, as I
cannot now discuss it at large, and a more convenient opportunity will
offer itself.

<span id="ix.xxi-p16"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p17"></span>He bids them to *attend*, or to beware *in
their souls*. Some render the words, “As your souls are precious to
you.” But I take souls, not for their lives, but for the affections of
their hearts; as though he had said, “Take heed carefully of yourselves,
that this may be laid up in your inmost heart.” The word <span
id="ix.xxi-p17.1"></span>נפש *nuphesh*, means often the heart, the seat
of the affections. It is said in <span id="ix.xxi-p17.2"></span>[De
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015)<span id="ix.xxi-p17.2"></span>,

<span id="ix.xxi-p18"></span>“Take heed to yourselves, <span
id="ix.xxi-p18.1"></span>לנפשותיכם *lanupheshuticam*,  
to your souls.”

<span id="ix.xxi-p19"></span>here it is, <span
id="ix.xxi-p19.1"></span>בנפשותיכם, *benupheshuticam*, “in your souls;”
but there, “to” or “for your souls,” as also in <span
id="ix.xxi-p19.2"></span>[Jos
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#011)<span id="ix.xxi-p19.2"></span>.
But the same thing is meant, and that is, that they were to take great
heed, to take every care, to exert every effort, and, in short, every
faculty of their souls. *Take heed* then *carefully*,  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) he says, take heed with every thought
and faculty of your soul, *that ye carry no burden on the Sabbath-day,
and that ye bring it not through the gates of Jerusalem*. It was a thing
not difficult to be observed; and further, it was a most shameless
transgression of the law; for, as I have said, by this slight matter
they shewed that they despised the law of God, while yet the observance
of the Sabbath was a thing of great importance: it was important in
itself, but to observe it was easy. Hence appeared the twofold impiety
of the people, — because they despised God’s singular favor, of which
the seventh day was an evidence; and, because they were unwilling to
take rest on that day, and in so easy a matter, they hesitated not, as
it were, to insult God, as it has been before said.

<span id="ix.xxi-p21"></span>Hence we ought to notice also what he says
in these words, *Carry no burden, and bring it not through the gatesof
Jerusalem*: and this was emphatically added; for it was not lawful even
in the fields or in desert places to do anything on the Sabbath; but it
was extremely shameful to carry a burden through the gates of Jerusalem;
it was as though they wished publicly to reproach and despise God.
Jerusalem was a public place; and it was as though one was not content
privately to do dishonor to his neighbor or his brother, but must shew
his ill-nature openly and in the light of day. Thus the Jews were not
only reproachful towards God, but also dared to shew their impiety in
his own renowned city, and, in short, in his very sanctuary. The rest we
must defer.

<span id="ix.xxii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ix.xxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast not
only in former times sent thy prophets, but makest the testimony of thy
will to be declared to us daily, — O grant, that we may learn to render
ourselves teachable and submissive to thee, and so willingly bear thy
yoke, that thy holy word may gain among us that reverence which it
deserves: and may we so submit ourselves to thee, while thou speakest to
us by men, that we may at length enjoy a view of thy glory, in which
will consist our perfect felicity; and that we may not only contemplate
thy glory face to face, but also hear thee thyself speaking, and so
speaking, that we shall delight in that sweetness, which is laid up for
us in hope, through Christ, our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ix.xxii-p3"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Ninth

<span id="ix.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#022)<span id="ix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p2"></span>**22**. Neither carry forth a burden out of
your houses on the sabbath day, neither do ye any work, but hallow ye
the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p3"></span>**22**. Et ne efferatis onus e domibus
vestris die Sabbathi, et omne opus ne faciatis (nullum opus faciatis,)
et sanctificetis diem Sabbathi, quemadmodum praecepi patribus vestris.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p6"></span>We stated in our last lecture why the
Prophet so severely reproved the Jews for neglecting an external rite.
It seems indeed a thing in itself of small moment to rest on one day;
and God by Isaiah clearly declares, (<span id="ix.xxiv-p6.1"></span>[Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)<span id="ix.xxiv-p6.1"></span>,)
that he cares not for that external worship, for hypocrites think they
have done all their duty when they rest on the seventh day; but God
denies that he approved of such a service, it being like a childish
play. We know what Paul says, that the exercises of the body do not
profit much. (<span id="ix.xxiv-p6.2"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="ix.xxiv-p6.2"></span>.)
This was not written when Jeremiah spoke, but it must have been written
in the hearts of the godly. It might then, at the first view, appear a
strange thing, that the Prophet insisted so much or a thing of no great
moment: but the reason I have briefly explained, and that was, — because
the gross impiety of the people was thereby plainly detected, for they
despised God in a matter that could easily be done. Men often excuse
themselves on the ground of difficulty, — “I could wish to do it, but it
is too onerous for me.” They could not have alleged this as to the
sanctification of the Sabbath; for what can be easier than to rest for
one day? Now, when they carried their burdens and did their work on the
Sabbath as on other common days, it was, as it were, designedly to shake
off the yoke, and to shew openly that they wholly disregarded the
authority of the law.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p7"></span>Another reason must also be noticed, which
I have not yet, stated: God did not regard the external rite only, but
rather the end, of which he speaks in <span id="ix.xxiv-p7.1"></span>[Ex
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013)<span id="ix.xxiv-p7.1"></span>,
and in <span id="ix.xxiv-p7.2"></span>[Eze
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#012)<span id="ix.xxiv-p7.2"></span>.
In both places he reminds us of the reason why he commanded the Jews to
keep holy the seventh day, and that was, that it might be to them a
symbol of sanctification.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p8"></span>“I have given my Sabbaths,” he says, “to
you, that ye might know that I am your God who sanctifies you.”

<span id="ix.xxiv-p9"></span>If then we consider the end designed by the
Sabbath-day, we cannot say that it was an unimportant rite: for what
could have been of more importance to that ancient people than to
acknowledge that they had been separated by God from other nations, to
be a holy and a peculiar people to him, nay, to be his inheritance?

<span id="ix.xxiv-p10"></span>And it appears from other places that this
command was typical. We learn especially from Paul that the Sabbath-day
was enjoined in order that the people might look to Christ; for well
known is the passage in <span id="ix.xxiv-p10.1"></span>[Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016)<span id="ix.xxiv-p10.1"></span>,
where he says that the Sabbath as well as other rites were types of
Christ to come, and that he was the substance of them. And the Apostle
also, in the Epistle to the <span id="ix.xxiv-p10.2"></span>[Heb
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#009)<span id="ix.xxiv-p10.2"></span>,
shews that we are to understand spiritually what God had formerly
commanded respecting the seventh day, that is, that men should rest from
their works, as God rested from his works after he had finished the
creation of the world: and Isaiah, in <span
id="ix.xxiv-p10.3"></span>[Isa 58](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#000)<span
id="ix.xxiv-p10.3"></span>, teaches us with sufficient clearness what
the design of the Sabbath is, even that the people should cease from
their own pleasure; for it was to be a day of rest, in which they were
truly to worship God, and to leave off pursuing any of the lusts of
their own flesh. And God did not simply forbid them to do some things;
but he says,

<span id="ix.xxiv-p11"></span>“Thou shalt rest from all thy work.”  
(<span id="ix.xxiv-p11.2"></span>[Ex
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010)<span id="ix.xxiv-p11.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.xxiv-p11.3"></span>[De
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#014)<span id="ix.xxiv-p11.3"></span>)

<span id="ix.xxiv-p12"></span>To come to the Temple, to offer
sacrifices, and to circumcise infants, were indeed works; but we cannot
say that it was a human work to circumcise infants, for they obeyed
God’s command in thus presenting to him their offspring; and it was the
same when they came to sing God’s praises and to offer sacrifices.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p13"></span>We now then perceive that the design as to
the ancient people was, that they might know that they were to rest from
all the works of the flesh; and God, that he might more easily bend them
to obedience, set before them his own example; for there is nothing more
to be desired than a mutual agreement between us and God. For this
reason God says,

<span id="ix.xxiv-p14"></span>“I rested the seventh day from all my
works: therefore, rest ye also now from your works.” (<span
id="ix.xxiv-p14.1"></span>[Ex
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#011)<span id="ix.xxiv-p14.1"></span>)

<span id="ix.xxiv-p15"></span>God had no doubt chosen the seventh day,
that men might devote themselves wholly to the consideration of his
works. However this may be, we see that the principal thing on the
seventh day was the worship of God. And even heathen writers, whenever
they speak of the Sabbath, mention it as the difference between the Jews
and the rest of the world. It was, in short, a general profession of
God’s worship, when they rested on the seventh day. When they now
regarded it as nothing, by carrying their burdens and violating their
sacred rest, it was doubtless nothing less than wantonly to cast away
the yoke of God, as though they openly boasted that they despised
whatever he had commanded. There was then in the violation of the
Sabbath a public defection from the law. As then the Jews had become
apostates, Jeremiah with severity justly condemns them; and hence he
says that their extreme impiety was sufficiently proved, because they
thus disregarded the seventh day.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p16"></span>He says further, *Carry not a burden from
your houses*. Under one thing he includes every worldly business, by
which they violated the Sabbath, though he afterwards adds also what is
general, *And do no work, but sanctify the Sabbath, as I commanded your
fathers*. To sanctify the Sabbath-day is to make it different from the
other days; for sanctification is the same as separation: they ought not
then to have done their own concerns on that day as on other days; for
it was a day consecrated to God. He then adds, that it was a day which
he commanded their *fathers* to keep holy. He doubtless claims here
authority for the law on the ground of time; as though he had said, that
he did not introduce the law on that day or on the day before, but that
from the time he gathered the people for himself, the precept concerning
the observance of the Sabbath had been given, as it was evident; for God
at the beginning thus spoke by Moses,

<span id="ix.xxiv-p17"></span>“Remember the seventh day,” etc. (<span
id="ix.xxiv-p17.1"></span>[Ex
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008)<span id="ix.xxiv-p17.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xxiv-p18"></span>As then the whole law of God and the whole
of religion fell to the ground through the violation of the Sabbath, the
Prophet rightly reminded them here that this day was commanded to be
observed by their *fathers*. We may add further, that they were not
ignorant of the memorable punishment by which God had sanctioned the
observance of the Sabbath, when by his command he who gathered wood on
that day was stoned to death. It now follows —

<span id="ix.xxv"></span>

<span id="ix.xxv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#023)<span id="ix.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxv-p2"></span>**23**. But they obeyed not, neither
inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they might not hear,
nor receive instruction.

<span id="ix.xxv-p3"></span>**23**. Et non audierunt, et non inclinarunt
aurem suam, et obduraverunt cervicem suam non audiendo et non recipiendo
disciplinam.

<span id="ix.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxv-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet exaggerates their crime, —
that the Jews had not now begun for the first time to violate this
precept of the Law; for he reminds them that the Sabbath had been before
violated by their fathers. We have said elsewhere that men are less
excusable when the children follow the bad examples of their fathers.
This is indeed what the world does not commonly think; for we see at
this day, that most men boast of the examples of their fathers, when
they wish to reject both the Law and the Prophets and the gospel: they
think themselves to be defended by a strong shield, when they can object
to us and say that the fathers had done otherwise. But we have seen from
many passages how frivolous is such a defense; and Jeremiah here
confirms the same thing, by saying that the crime of the people was the
more atrocious, because their fathers had many ages before begun to
despise this command of God.

<span id="ix.xxv-p7"></span>*But they heard not*,  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) he says, *nor inclined their ear, but
hardened their neck*. By these words he shews most clearly that their
fathers had not sinned through inadvertence or ignorance, but because
they had hardened themselves in the contempt of God. It often happens
that men, rightly taught, go astray through ignorance, as their want of
knowledge may prevent them to understand what they hear: but when men
incline not their ear, but harden their neck, their obstinacy becomes
manifest, for they knowingly and wilfully reject God. Such perverseness
then does Jeremiah here set forth by the various expressions he employs,
as we have seen done in other places.

<span id="ix.xxv-p9"></span>As to the hardening of the *neck*, it is a
metaphor, as stated elsewhere, taken from untameable oxen. God compares
his law to a yoke, and for the best reason; for as the oxen are tamed
that they may labor and are trained to obey when the yoke is laid on
them; so also God proves our obedience, when he rules us by his law, for
we otherwise wander after our lusts. As therefore God corrects and
checks in us by his law, all the unruly passions of the flesh, he is
said to lay his yoke on us. Now, if we are intractable and do not submit
to the authority of God, we are said to harden our neck. Jeremiah speaks
afterwards without a metaphor, and says, *That they heard not, nor
received instruction*, or correction.  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) The word <span
id="ix.xxv-p12.1"></span>מוסר *musar*, means teaching or correction. The
import of the whole is, that the Jews were not only unteachable when the
will of God was plainly made known to them, but that they were also
refractory and perverse in their spirit: for when to teaching were added
exhortations the more to stimulate them, and when to these were added
threatenings, yet God could not by any means subdue their wantonness. It
now follows--

<span id="ix.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#024)<span
id="ix.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p2"></span>**24**. And it shall come to pass, if ye
diligently hearken unto me, saith the LORD, to bring in no burden
through the gates of this city on the sabbath day, but hallow the
sabbath day, to do no work therein;

<span id="ix.xxvi-p3"></span>**24**. Et erit, si audiendo audieritis me,
dicit Jehova, ne efferatis onus per portas urbis hujus die Sabbathi, et
ad sanctificandum diem (*hoc est*, si sanctificatis diem,) non agendo in
eo quicquam operis;

<span id="ix.xxvi-p4"></span>**25**. Then shall there enter into the
gates of this city kings and princes sitting upon the throne of David,
riding in chariots and on horses, they, and their princes, the men of
Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: and this city shall remain for
ever.

<span id="ix.xxvi-p5"></span>**25**. Tunc (*copula enim hic accipitur
pro adverbio temporis*) ingredientur per portas urbis hujus Reges et
principes, sedentes super solium Davidis, vecti curru et equis, ipsi et
proceres eorum, vir Jehudah, et incolae Jerusalem, et habitabitur urbs
haec in perpetuum.

<span id="ix.xxvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxvi-p7"></span><span id="ix.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p8"></span>Jeremiah introduced, as I have said, a
condemnation as to the fathers, that he might make the Jews of his age
ashamed of themselves, lest they shouhl imitate the example of those
whom they saw to have been disobedient to God. He yet shews, that God
would be reconciled to them, provided they from the heart repented; as
though he had said, — “Your fathers indeed provoked, for many years, and
even for ages, the vengeance of God; but as he is ever inclined to
mercy, he is ready to forgive you, if only you cease to follow your
fathers and return to him.” In short, he promises them pardon for the
time past, if they turned to God.

<span id="ix.xxvi-p9"></span>*If by hearing ye will hear*, he says, *so
as to carry no burden through the gates of this city on the
sabbath-day*, and to sanctify (this is connected with “hear”) *the
sabbath-day, so that ye do no work on it; then shall enter through the
gates of this city kings and princes*, *etc*. He first promises them a
perpetuity as to the kingdom; and it was the chief happiness of the
people to have a king from the posterity of David; for thus they saw as
it were with their eyes the favor of God present, with them, inasmuch as
David and his posterity were visible pledges of God’s favor. And we must
remember also, that that kingdom was a type of a better kingdom, which
had not yet been plainly discovered. Hence in the posterity of David the
Jews beheld Christ, until he was manifested. For this reason I said,
that they were miserable without a king, and that the perpetuity of the
kingdom was a main part, of their happiness. This is the reason why
Jeremiah now sets before them, as a singular benefit, the continuance of
David’s kingdom among them, provided they observed the sabbath-day: and
thus God did not only strictly demand what he had a ritht to do, but
also allured them by the sweetness of his promise, according to his
usual manner. He may indeed in one word command what he pleases; but
when he invites us by promises, he has a regard to our infirmity.

<span id="ix.xxvi-p10"></span><span id="ix.xxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p11"></span>But it may be here asked, Was the rest on
the seventh day of such a moment, that God should on that account
promise to them the perpetuity of the kingdom? The answer has been
already given, that is, that the end, which was spiritual, was connected
with the outward rite; for God commanded the people to keep holy this
day, that they might have a manifest symbol:, as it has been said, of
their own sanctification. When therefore the Prophet thus speaks, *If ye
carry no burden through the gates of this city*, that is, If ye observe
the sabbath-day, the perpetuity of the kingdom shall be secured to you,
— when he thus speaks, he had doubtless, as I have said, a regard to a
true observance of the day, which consists not in the naked rite, but
included something greater and more excellent, even that they might
learn by self-denial to render themselves up to God to be ruled by him;
for God will not work in us, unless we first renounce our own reason and
the thoughts and feelings of our flesh. In the observance of the
Sabbath, therefore, is briefly included the whole of religion: hence he
says, *Enter in shall kings and princes, sitting on the throne of
David.*

<span id="ix.xxvi-p12"></span>Noticed also ought to be the state of
things at that time: It was a time when the country was nearly in ruins
and the kingdom greatly weakened, so that the kings and the whole people
were daily exposed to danger. When therefore there were hardly any means
to defend the city and to support the kingdom, Jeremiah promised it, as
a special favor from God, that the kings and the Princes would be
rendered secure. From the family of David, as it is well known, were
descended the royal counsellors; and hence he says of the counsellors as
well as of the king, that they would sit on the throne of David: and he
further says, They shall *ride in a chariot and on horses, they the
kings and their princes*; and he adds, *the men of Judah, etc*. He
extends the promise to the whole body of the people; after having spoken
of the chief men, he then adds, that the whole community would be
partakers of this blessing and favor of God; for the kingdom was formed,
that the whole people might know that they were under God’s care and
protection. It was not then without reason that Jeremiah states here
that this blessing would be conferred in common on the whole people.

<span id="ix.xxvi-p13"></span>*And inhabited*, he says, *shall be the
city perpetually*. For the same reason he also adds this; for Jerusalem
was then in great danger; nay, there were new terrors daily, and there
was a horrible desolation in every part, for the whole country had been
visited with many calamities. Jeremiah therefore promised now what in a
manner seemed incredible, that is, that the city would be made safe, if
they truly and faithfully worshipped God, and testified that by
observing the Sabbath. The meaning is, that it would be their own fault,
if they found not the aid of God sufficient for them, that even if they
were besieged by enemies, yet God would be a sure protector of their
safety, provided they became his true and faithful servants. He
afterwards adds —

<span id="ix.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#026)<span id="ix.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvii-p2"></span>**26**. And they shall come from the
cities of Judah, and from the places about Jerusalem, and from the land
of Benjamin, and from the plain, and from the mountains, and from the
south, bringing burnt offerings, and sacrifices, and meat offerings, and
incense, and bringing sacrifices of praise, unto the house of the LORD.

<span id="ix.xxvii-p3"></span>**26**. Et venient ex urbibus Jehudah, et
ex circuitibus (*hoc est*, ex toto circuitu) Jerusalem, et ex terra
Benjamin, et ex planitie, et ex monte (*hoc est*, ex montibus, *vel*,
regionibus montanis,) et a meridie, afferentes holocaustum, sacrificium,
et oblationem <span id="ix.xxvii-p3.1"></span>מנחה et thus, et
afferentes confessionem (*vel*, laudem,) in domum Jehovae.

<span id="ix.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvii-p6"></span>Here he mentions the second part of the
blessing; for the whole people would be preserved safe in the possession
of their kingdom and priesthood, as in both the favor of God appeared;
for both the king and the priest were types of Christ. For as by the
priesthood they knew that God was propitious to them, they being
reconciled to him by sacrifices, and as by the kingdom they knew that
God was the protector and guardian of their safety, so these two things
constituted a real and complete happiness. Hence the Prophet, having
mentioned one of these things, now proceeds to the other, —

<span id="ix.xxvii-p7"></span>*They shall come from the cities of Judah
ad from the whole circuit of Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin*,
and from other places, to offer sacrifices in the Temple. Sacrifices of
themselves could not indeed serve the people; but Jeremiah assumed this
principle, — that reconciliation was not in vain promised to the people
by the sacrifices; for sins were really atoned, and Godas it were came
forth to gather a people for himself. It was the same as though God
said, that he would by all means be gracious to them, if only they
observed the Sabbath, that is, if they with a pure heart devoted
themselves to his service. The country, as I have said, was in a great
measure laid waste; but the Prophet, after having spoken of the city,
now adds, that all Judea would become inhabited, for from thence they
would ascend to the Temple to offer sacrifices. After having mentioned
the whole circuit, he names the *land of Benjamin*, the half tribe of
whom, as it is well known, had continued in the faith, and had not
separated from the family of David; indeed a part of the city was in the
tribe of Benjamin.

<span id="ix.xxvii-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, *the plain and the
mountains*, as though he had said, God’s worshippers would come from all
the neighboring region to celebrate the feasts and to offer sacrifices
as usual.

<span id="ix.xxvii-p9"></span>At last he mentions *burnt-offering,
sacrifice, and oblation*, <span id="ix.xxvii-p9.1"></span>מנחה,
*meneche*; the three principal offerings. But Jeremiah wished to shew
briefiy that God would cause religion to flourish and prevail among them
as before. But after having spoken of the external worship, he then
refers to the end, *They shall bring*, he says, *confession*, or praise,
<span id="ix.xxvii-p9.2"></span>תודה, *tude*, into the Temple.  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) Here by one word Jeremiah includes the
chief thing in sacrifices, as we may learn from <span
id="ix.xxvii-p12.1"></span>[Ps. 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)<span id="ix.xxvii-p12.1"></span>;
where it is said,

<span id="ix.xxvii-p13"></span>“sacrifice praise unto God.”

<span id="ix.xxvii-p14"></span>God there rejects the sacrifices which
were offered by the Jews without a right motive: he then shews what he
required, commanding them to sacrifice praise. So now Jeremiah teaches
us that the design of all sacrifices was to celebrate the name of God,
that is, that the Jews might profess that they owed all things to him,
that they received their life and their safcty freely from him. in
short, they were thereby to testify their gratitude before God. So at
this day this truth remains the same, though the types have been
abolished: we do not offer calves or oxen or rams, but the sacrifice of
praise, by confessing and proclaiming his benefits and blessings,
according to what the Apostle says in <span
id="ix.xxvii-p14.1"></span>[Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)<span
id="ix.xxvii-p14.1"></span>. But what ought to prevail among us apart
from types, was formerly accompanied with types; and yet this truth was
observed by the Jews in common with us, — that while they offered their
sacrifices under the Law, they were to testify their gratitude by
visible symbols. Let us proceed —

<span id="ix.xxviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p1"></span><span
id="ix.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#027)<span id="ix.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p2"></span>**27**. But if ye will not hearken unto
me to hallow the sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, even entering in
at the gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire
in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and
it shall not be quenched.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p3"></span>**27**. Quod si non audietis me ad
sanctificandum diem sabbathi, et non tollendo onus, et ingrediendo per
portas Jerusalem die sabbathi; tunc accendam ignem in portis ejus, et
vorabit palatia Jerusalem, et non extinguetur.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxviii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p6"></span>Now, on the other hand, the Prophet
terrifies them, if they hearkened not to the promises of God. God first
kindly allures us; but when he sees us to be refractory, he deals with
us according to the hardness of our hearts. He therefore now adds
threatenings to promises. He had said, that the Jews would be happy, if
they worshipped and served God faithfully; for their priesthood and
their kingdom would be continued to them.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p7"></span>But he now adds, *If ye will not obey, so
as to sanctify the sabbath-day, and not to carry a burden on it, and not
to enter through the gates of Jerusalem,* that is, for the purpose of
doing business (for it was lawful for them, as it is well known, to go
out of the city, but by entering he means the transaction of business) —
*If* then *ye will not hearken to me* in this respect, *then*, he says,
*I will kindle a fire in the gates* of this city. We see the design of
the Prophet, — that he would have the Jews to entertain a sure hope of
their safety, provided they repented, and provided the pure and
uncorrupted worship of God prevailed among them; but that, on the other
hand, he wished to fill them with terror, if they went on in their
obstinacy.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p8"></span>No doubt this commination greatly
offended them; for we know how self-confident they were, and how
foolishly they boasted that the city, in which God had his habitation,
could not be demolished; and yet the Prophet declares here that the
destruction of the holy city was nigh at hand, if they violated the
sabbath-day as they had been accustomed to do. But that this punishment
might not seem to be too severe, he shews that the people were
inexcusable, if they rejected these plain warnings: he says, *If ye will
not hearken to me*; for they might have otherwise objected and said,
that they had been deceived, as they did not think that there was so
great a sin in violating the Sabbath. Jeremiah now excludes all such
evasions, for he says in effect, “Behold I am present with you by God’s
authority; if ye will violate the Sabbath as hitherto, what excuse can
you make? Have you not been proved guilty of open impiety? for God has
spoken; and how is it that ye reject his teaching?” We thus see that
this, *If ye will not hearken to me so as to sanctify the Sabbath*, was
said to anticipate an objection.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p9"></span>He then adds, *Devour shall the fire the
gates of the city, and shall not be extinguished*, that is, shall not be
extinguished until it shall consume the whole city and its gates. We
indeed know that assemblies were then held at the gates, and that they
were therefore places of great importance. As to the *fire* it is to be
taken metaphorically for destruction; and yet we know that even fire was
kindled by the Chaldeans; for they deemed it not enough to demolish the
city, but proceeded still farther: hence the Temple was burnt, and the
houses were consumed by fire. We ought however to explain the word of
the Prophet as meaning simply this — that God’s vengeance would be like
fire, destroying and consuming all things, so that not even the gates
would remain. Something usually remains when cities are demolished to
the foundations; but God threatens the Jews with something more grievous
— that the city would not be in a common way destroyed, but be so wholly
consumed that nothing would remain. We shall proceed to-morrow.

<span id="ix.xxix"></span>

<span id="ix.xxix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ix.xxix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou dost not
now prescribe to us one day on which we are to testify that we are
sanctified by thee, but commandest us to observe a sacred rest through
our whole life, so as to renounce ourselves and the world, — O grant,
that we may really contemplate this rest, and so crucify the old man,
that being effectually united to thine only-begotten Son, we may become
also partakers of that resurrection in which he has led the way, and be
gathered into that celestial kingdom which he has procured for us by his
death and resurrection, after having so fought in this world, under thy
banner, that thou mayest ever reign in us and rule and govern us by thy
Spirit, so that nothing throughout life may be our own doing, but that
we suffer ourselves to be governed by thee, until thou at length become
to us all in all. — Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc18008.htm#fr_169) <span
id="ix.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span> The word rendered “groves,” means also
idols. See <span id="ix.ii-p8.1"></span>[2Ki
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#006)<span id="ix.ii-p8.1"></span>,
where “grove” in our version must mean an idol. What follows here, “near
the green tree,” shews clearly that “idols,” or images, are the things
meant; and such is the version given by *Venema* and *Horsley.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc18008.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ix.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p9"></span> The whole of this passage, from the first to
the end of the fourth verse, is wanting in the *Septuagint* and
*Arabic,* but is found in the other versions and the *Targum.* The many
emendations of *Houbigant* and *Horsley* are quite unwarrantable; the
first makes his mostly from the *Syriac;* and the second from various
readings, and those of no value, except in one or two instances, as
“their” instead of “your altars” in the first verse, countenanced by
very many MSS.; the other *nine* emendations have, for the most part,
nothing of any weight in their favor. The transpositions of *Houbigant*
are quite irreconcilable with any thing like errors incidentally
committed by scribes. The same objection does not lie against the
emendations of *Horsley;* but that *ten* mistakes should occur in the
space of four verses is not credible; nor are most of the emendations at
all necessary.

<span id="ix.iv-p10"></span>The received text is no doubt materially
correct, there being no different readings of any weight or suitable,
except the one noticed above. The *Vulgate,* the *Syriac,* and *Targum,*
differ from one another as much as they do from the Hebrew. They indeed
all agree materially as to the beginning of the third verse, in
regarding “the mountain” and “the field” as places where the people
worshipped idols; and the *Vulgate* and the *Syriac* connect the words
with the former verse; and this, I believe, is what ought to be done.
Then the passage will read as follows: —

<span id="ix.iv-p11"></span>**1.** The sin of Judah is written by a pen
of iron, By the point of adamant it is graven, On the tablet of their
heart, And on the horns of their altars:

<span id="ix.iv-p12"></span>**2.** As a memorial to their children *Are*
their altars and their idols, Near the green tree, on the high hills,
*On* the mountains, in the field. —

<span id="ix.iv-p13"></span>**3.** Thy substance, all thy treasures For
a plunder will I give, Thy high places *also* for sin in all thy
borders;

<span id="ix.iv-p14"></span>**4.** And thou shalt be removed, even for
thyself, From thine inheritance which I gave thee; And I will make thee
to serve thine enemies In a land which thou knowest not; For a fire have
ye kindled in mine anger, Perpetually shall it burn.

<span id="ix.iv-p15"></span>According to the frequent manner of the
prophets, the last line in the first verse is connected with the first
line, and the third with the second. The sin of Judah was “written” on
“the horns of the altars;” it was “graven” on “the tablet of their
heart.” The services at the altars were visible; the impressions within
were seen only by God. They left their altars and their idols to their
children. The genitive case in Hebrew may often be rendered by a dative,
as here, “A memorial to their children.” All emendations as to the
beginning of the third verse are unsatisfactory: it will bear the
rendering above; “for thyself,” that is, for thine own fault. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc18008.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ix.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p14"></span> Like the Hebrew, there is no need of the
verb is, or be, after “cursed,” inWelsh: the sentence is more emphatieal
without it. In that language, too, the future tense of “trust” is
understood as the present, —

<span id="ix.vii-p15"></span><span id="ix.vii-p15.1"></span>Melldigedig
y gwr yr hwn a hydero mewn dyn.

<span id="ix.vii-p16"></span>It is a denunciation, not an imprecation;
therefore “be,” introduced into the English version, is not proper. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc18008.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ix.vii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p23"></span> It is rendered “a wild *tamarisk* — <span
id="ix.vii-p23.1"></span>ἀγριομυρίκη*,”* by *the Septuagint;* “a
tamarisk,” by the *Vulgate* and the *Targum;* and “a log,” or *“a*
trunk,” by the *Syriac. Gataker* considers that no particular tree is
meant, but that it means a “solitary” or a “barren” tree, agreeably, in
his view, with what is contrasted with it in the 8th verse. *Blayney*
renders it, “a blasted tree.” of which *Horsley* approves. The word is a
reduplicate of a verb, which means to be bare; and the wild tamarisk may
suitably be thus designated, as it bears a very few leaves. The idea of
being “blasted” is foreign to the word.

<span id="ix.vii-p24"></span>But *Venema* contends that the reference is
not to any tree, but to a person dwelling in solitude; and he renders
the passage thus, —

<span id="ix.vii-p25"></span>And he shall be like the naked in solitude,
Nor shall he see when good cometh; And *is like him* who inhabits
parched spots in the desert, A land of salt and not inhabited.

<span id="ix.vii-p26"></span>The words “see” and “inhabit,” appear
doubtless more suitable when the passage is thus rendered; yet what is
said of the “tree” in verse 8 is equally metaphorical. What seems most
agreeable to the whole context is such a rendering as follows: —

<span id="ix.vii-p27"></span>And he shall be like a bare *tree* in the
desert, Which perceives not when good cometh; For it inhabits parched
spots in the wilderness, The land of salt and not inhabited.

<span id="ix.vii-p28"></span>It is sometimes the case that it is proper
in our language to render the copulative <span
id="ix.vii-p28.1"></span>ו by “which;” not that it properly means that,
but the meaning cannot be otherwise seen. The connection here is with
the “bare” tree; it is bare, and perceives or knows not widen good
comes, for it inhabits parched places. This seems to be the meaning. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc18008.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ix.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p17"></span> The verbs here are all futures, but ought
to be rendered in our language, as they are in *Syriac,* in the present
tense, —

<span id="ix.viii-p18"></span>And he shall be like a tree *which is*
planted by waters, And nigh the stream sends forth its roots, Which
perceives not when heat comes; And its leaf is flourishing, And in the
year of drought it suffers not, And never ceases from bringing forth
fruit.

<span id="ix.viii-p19"></span>The verb <span
id="ix.viii-p19.1"></span>דאג, when applied to the mind, means
agitation, commotion, trouble, disturbance: but here, as applied to a
tree, it must mean a withering effect, a disturbance as to the process
of growing. Joined with a negative, it may therefore be rendered, “it
suffers not,” or, it withers not, according to the *Targum,* which
applies it to the *leaf,* but not correctly. “It will not fear” is the
rendering of the *Septuagint;* of the *Vulgate,* “it will not be
careful,” as in our version; and of *Blayney,* “it is without concern.”
None of these give the secondary meaning of the verb, which it evidently
has here. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc18008.htm#fr_174) <span
id="ix.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p10"></span> The early versions and the *Targum* are
neither consistent nor satisfactory as to the beginning of this verse:
“Deep is the heart above all things, and it is man,” *Septuagint*;
“Depraved is the heart of all, and inscrutable,” Fulgate; “Hard in heart
is man above all things,” *Syriac*; “The heart, deeper than anything, is
human,” Arabic; “Deceitful is the heart above all things, and it is
strong.” *Targum*. Correct, no doubt, is the first clause in the
*Targum*, but not the last. Critics agree as to the first word,
“deceitful,” but not as to the word rendered in our version “desperately
wicked.” It occurs in all nine times, and four times in other parts of
Jeremiah, (<span id="ix.ix-p10.1"></span>[Jer
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#018)<span id="ix.ix-p10.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.ix-p10.2"></span>[Jer
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#016)<span id="ix.ix-p10.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.ix-p10.3"></span>[Jer.
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015)<span id="ix.ix-p10.3"></span>) and
it is rendered “incurable,” except in <span id="ix.ix-p10.4"></span>[Jer
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#016)<span id="ix.ix-p10.4"></span>.
It means to be so bad as to be past endurance or past remedy. *Blayney*
renders it here, “past all hope;” and *Horsely*, “incurable,” which is
perhaps the best word, —

<span id="ix.ix-p11"></span>Deceitful the heart above every thing, And
incurable it is,  
who can know it?

<span id="ix.ix-p12"></span>The meaning is, that it is incurably
deceitful; hence the question,” Who can know it?” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc18008.htm#fr_175) <span
id="ix.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p4"></span> The beginning of this verse is an answer to
the previous question, “Who can know it?” The best rendering would be
this, —

<span id="ix.xi-p5"></span>I Jehovah, — who search the heart and try the
reins, And *that* in order to give to every man According to his ways,
according to the fruit of his doings.

<span id="ix.xi-p6"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc18008.htm#fr_176) <span
id="ix.xii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p8"></span> It is evident from <span
id="ix.xii-p8.1"></span>[1Sa
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#020)<span id="ix.xii-p8.1"></span>,
that the partridge is meant; and it appears from a quotation which
*Parkhurst* makes from *Buffon,* under the word <span
id="ix.xii-p8.2"></span>קרא, that the *red* partridge is referred to
here; for the male of the red kind in eastern countries sits on eggs as
well as the female. This explains what appears intricate in this
passage; for the word is masculine, and the verbs are in the same
gender. What is here stated respecting the partridge is what often
happens, the nest being often disturbed; and then the eggs become
useless. It is a case of this kind that is here referred to, —

<span id="ix.xii-p9"></span>A partridge sitting and not hatching, *Is*
he who gets wealth, and not by right; In the midst of his day shall he
leave it, And at his end shall be a fool.

<span id="ix.xii-p10"></span>The reason why the partridge sits and
hatches not, is intimated in the second clause, when it is said that the
getter of wealth leaves it in the midst of his day: various things often
compel the partridge to leave its eggs, such as dogs, cattle, etc.: and
then nothing is brought forth. So the rich man is constrained to quit
his wealth before he derives any benefit from it. This seems to be the
comparison. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc18008.htm#fr_177) <span
id="ix.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p12"></span> There are many MSS. and the marginal
reading, in favor of “days” for “day:” but the latter is more poetical:
man’s day is his life. “A fool,” — so the versions, and more suitable
here than any other word: he will then appear to all to have acted
foolishly and not wisely; and he will find himself to have so acted,
though he thought himself before to be very wise.

<span id="ix.xii-p13"></span>Some consider the word to be a proper name,
Nabal, whose history we have in <span id="ix.xii-p13.1"></span>[1Sa
25:10-39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#010)<span
id="ix.xii-p13.1"></span>; and they render the line thus, —

<span id="ix.xii-p14"></span>And at his end shall be a Nabal.

<span id="ix.xii-p15"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc18008.htm#fr_178) <span
id="ix.xiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p10"></span> If we connect “from the beginning” with
the following words, and not with “high,” which seems to give a better
meaning, we shall get rid of the Rabbinical figment; and it seems also
right to join with this verse the first words in the next, as it has
been done by the *Septuagint,* —

<span id="ix.xiii-p11"></span>A throne of glory on high, Is from the
beginning the place of our sanctuary, —  
The hope of Israel.

<span id="ix.xiii-p12"></span>Or we may render the first line thus, —

<span id="ix.xiii-p13"></span>The glorious throne of the most high.

<span id="ix.xiii-p14"></span>For so we find <span
id="ix.xiii-p14.1"></span>מרום rendered in <span
id="ix.xiii-p14.2"></span>[Ps
56:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#002)<span id="ix.xiii-p14.2"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc18008.htm#fr_179) <span
id="ix.xiv-p10.8"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p11"></span> The reading of the *Keri* and of many MSS.
is no doubt to be adopted, and the final <span
id="ix.xiv-p11.1"></span>ם as is sometimes the case, is dropped. It
would then be, according to the *Septuagint,* <span
id="ix.xiv-p11.2"></span>וסורים Our version is the *Vulgate.* I would
connect “earth” or land with this word, —

<span id="ix.xiv-p12"></span>And apostates in the land shall they be
recorded.

<span id="ix.xiv-p13"></span>This would be their designation; they were
to be handed down to posterity as apostates in the very land which God
gave them. The reason why the <span id="ix.xiv-p13.1"></span>ם is
dropped is the connection of the word with “land,” though preceded by
<span id="ix.xiv-p13.2"></span>ב — *Ed*

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc18008.htm#fr_180) <span
id="ix.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p11"></span> Both the object and the ground of praise:
Thou art he whom I praise or glorify; or, Thou art he who givest me an
occasion to praise. “Thou art my boasting (<span
id="ix.xv-p11.1"></span>καύχημα,”) is the *Septuagint.* — E*d.*

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc18008.htm#fr_181) <span
id="ix.xviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p10"></span> The *Targum* thus paraphrases the verse,
—

<span id="ix.xviii-p11"></span>Behold they say to me “Where is what thou
hast prophesied in the name of the Lord? let it be now confirmed.”

<span id="ix.xviii-p12"></span>Their language was similar to that of
those mentioned in <span id="ix.xviii-p12.1"></span>[2Pe
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004)<span id="ix.xviii-p12.1"></span>.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc18008.htm#fr_182) <span
id="ix.xix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p10"></span> It is singular how variously the early
versions and the *Targum* have rendered the first half of this verse.
Various, too, have been the opinions of critics. The first verb means to
*hasten,* in a transitive, and in an intransitive sense, to *urge,* and
to be *urgent, forward,* or *hasty.* It is used here evidently
intransitively. Then the literal rendering seems to be this, —

<span id="ix.xix-p11"></span>But I have not been more forward than a
pastor  
after thee, *or* following thee.

<span id="ix.xix-p12"></span>The meaning seems to be, that he did not
exceed his commission; and this is confirmed by the latter part of the
verse. The preposition <span id="ix.xix-p12.1"></span>מ has often the
meaning of “more than,” or above.

<span id="ix.xix-p13"></span>The word “woeful” is the same with what is
rendered “desperately wicked” in <span
id="ix.xix-p13.1"></span>[Jeremiah
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)<span id="ix.xix-p13.1"></span>.
Its meaning is, to be bad beyond recovery; and when applied to day, it
may be properly rendered “irretrievable.” I thus render the two lines, —

<span id="ix.xix-p14"></span>But I — I have not been forwarder than a
pastor following thee, And the irretrievable day have I not desired.

<span id="ix.xix-p15"></span>This day was the day of exile which he had
foretold. Then the words, “thou knowest,” stand connected with what
follows. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc18008.htm#fr_183) <span
id="ix.xix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p22"></span> The *Targum* connects “thou knowest” with
what follows; and such is the version of *Blayney,* and more suitable it
is to the passage, —

<span id="ix.xix-p23"></span>Thou knowest what has gone forth from my
lips, Before thy face has it been.— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc18008.htm#fr_184) <span
id="ix.xx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p12"></span> I would render <span
id="ix.xx-p12.1"></span>[Jer
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#018)<span id="ix.xx-p12.1"></span>
thus, —

<span id="ix.xx-p13"></span>**18.** Ashamed let my persecutors be, That
I may not be ashamed; Dismayed let them be, That I may not be dismayed;
Bring on them the day of evil, And doubly with breaking break them.

<span id="ix.xx-p14"></span>There was a contest between the Prophet and
his enemies; the shame and dismay of his enemies would deliver him from
shame and dismay. The copulative <span id="ix.xx-p14.1"></span>ו may
often be rendered *that, ut.* The two last lines refer to the two
preceding couplets in an inverted order. “The day of evil” was to dismay
his enemies, and “the breaking” was to make them ashamed. The breaking
was that of the spirit or of the heart; it means sorrow, trouble, such
as brings men to a state of helplessness; it does not mean destruction.
The line may be thus rendered, —

<span id="ix.xx-p15"></span>And doubly with depression depress them.

<span id="ix.xx-p16"></span>The word doubly, means what is extreme. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc18008.htm#fr_185) <span
id="ix.xxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p13"></span> There is a peculiarity in the phraseology
of the original as to the relative “which,” after “the gate of the
city;” literally it is, “which they enter through it the kings of Judah,
and which they go out through it.” In Welsh there is exactly the same
form of expression, — <span id="ix.xxi-p13.1"></span>*Yr* *hwn yr a
trwyddo frenhinoedd Iwda,* etc. Had this been the Welsh version, it
would have been literally the Hebrew, and more consonant than the
present version with the idiom of the language. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc18008.htm#fr_186) <span
id="ix.xxi-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p20"></span> “Guard ye your souls” is the version of
the *Septuagint, Vulgate,* and the *Targum;* but that of the *Syriac*
is, “Take heed to yourselves;” which is no doubt the meaning, as the
word soul, <span id="ix.xxi-p20.1"></span>נפש, is often used for one’s
self. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc18008.htm#fr_187) <span
id="ix.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxv-p8"></span> Our version, “they obeyed not,” is the
*Targum.* The *Septuagint* and the *Vulgate* have the same rendering
with that of *Calvin.* The verb is <span id="ix.xxv-p8.1"></span>שמע
which is to hear, to hearken, to listen. The charge of not hearing God’s
word, was often brought by the prophets against the Jews. They would not
hear or attend to what was said to them, not that they did not obey it.
This is the case still with all who are perverted by superstition and
tradition; they will not hear the word of God, and its authority is
wholly disregarded. Anything about tradition and the Church will be
attended to; but God’s word is neglected; they will not hear it. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc18008.htm#fr_188) <span
id="ix.xxv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxv-p10"></span> The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="ix.xxv-p11"></span>And they hearkened not, nor inclined their
ear; But hardened their neck, So as not to hear, and not to receive
correction.

<span id="ix.xxv-p12"></span>They were reproved and warned; but they
refused to be corrected. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc18008.htm#fr_189) <span
id="ix.xxvii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvii-p10"></span> It is more consistent with the rest of
the passage to regard this word as meaning “sacrifice of praise,” or
thanksgiving, or confession. There were sacrifices of this kind
especially prescribed; see <span id="ix.xxvii-p10.1"></span>[Le
7:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012)<span
id="ix.xxvii-p10.1"></span>, and the word is often taken in this sense,
without the word “sacrifice” being connected with it. Offerings
according to the Law are the things which are here mentioned: and the
same verb “bring,” precedes <span id="ix.xxvii-p10.2"></span>תודה as in
the previous instances, when “burnt-offering, sacrifice,” etc., are
named.

<span id="ix.xxvii-p11"></span>The *Septuagint,* as in many other
instances, give only a verbal translation, “praise;” “oblation,” is the
*Vulgate;* “thanksgiving,” the *Syriac;* and “sacrifice of confession,”
the *Targum.*

<span id="ix.xxvii-p12"></span>All the words are singular in Hebrew —
burnt-offering — sacrifice — oblation, (or meat-offering) — incense —
thanksgiving. It would be well to retain the singular in a version. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](cc18009)
