[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc18010)  [Next](cc18012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 18: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part II*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION OF

<span id="xii-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION OF

<span id="xii-p3"></span>JEREMIAH

<span id="xii-p4"></span>CHAPTERS 10—19

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1** Hear ye the word which Jehovah speaks
to you, O house of Israel:

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah, — The way of the
Gentiles learn not, And of the signs of heaven be not afraid, For fear
them do the Gentiles:

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**3** Because the rites of the heathens are
vanity, For a tree from the forest does *one* cut — The work of the
craftsman’s hands by the ax;

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>**4** With silver and gold they beautify it,
With nails and hammer they make it fast, That it should not move;

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>**5** As a palm, erect, but they speak not;
And being raised, they are raised, for they cannot walk: Fear them not,
for they cannot do evil, And to do good is not in their power. (2:14)

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>**6** From no time has been found *any* Like
thee, Jehovah; great *art* thou, And great is thy name in power.

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>**7** Who should not fear thee, king of
nations? For to thee this belongs; For among all the wise of the
nations, And in all their kingdoms, From no time has there been *one*
like thee. (2:28)

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>**8** Even in this one thing they are
foolish and fatuitous — The teaching of vanities the wood is:

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>**9** Silver, extended, is from Tarshish
brought, And gold from Ophas, — The work of the artificer and of the
melter’s hands; Hyacinth and purple *are* their garments, The work of
the wise, all of them.

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>**10** But Jehovah is God, the truth, God,
the life and the king of ages: Through his fury tremble will the earth,
And the nations will not bear his wrath.

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>**11** Thus shall ye say to them, — The gods
who made not the heaven and the earth, Let them perish from the earth
and from under heaven:

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>**12** He who made the earth by his power,
Who set in order the world by his wisdom, And by his understanding
extended the heavens, —

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>**13** At his voice *there is* abundance of
waters in the heavens, And he makes vapors to ascend from the extremity
of the earth; Lightnings he makes for rain, And brings the wind from his
treasures. (2:31)

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>**14** Foolish is every man through *his*
knowledge, Ashamed is every maker of the graven image, For a falsehood
is the molten image, And there is no breath in them.

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span>**15** Vanity they are, the work of
illusions; At the time of their visitation they shall perish.

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>**16** But not like them *is* the portion of
Jacob, For the Creator of all things is he, And Israel *is* the rod of
his inheritance; Jehovah of hosts is his name.

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span>**17** Gather from the land thy treasures
Thou who dwellest in a fortress:

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span>**18** For thus saith Jehovah, — Behold!
will cast out *as* with a sling The inhabitants of the land at this
time, And I will straiten them, That they may find *what they deserve.*

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span>**19** Woe is me on account of my bruising!
Full of pain is the smiting given to me! and I said, — Surely it is my
stroke, and I will bear it:

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span>**20** My tent is pulled down, And all my
cords are broken; My sons are gone from me, and there are none — No one
to extend any more my tent, And to set up my curtains!

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span>**21** For infatuated are the pastors, And
Jehovah have they not sought; Therefore have they not prospered, And all
that was in their pastures has been destroyed.

<span id="xii.i-p24"></span>**22** A sound of rumor! lo, it comes, And a
great tumult, from the land of the north, To make the cities of Judah a
waste, The habitation of dragons!

<span id="xii.i-p25"></span>**23** I know Jehovah, That his way is not
in the power of man, *That* it is not in man who walketh to guide his
steps.

<span id="xii.i-p26"></span>**24** Chastise me, Jehovah, but only in
moderation; Not in thy wrath, lest thou shouldest consume me:

<span id="xii.i-p27"></span>**25** Pour thy wrath on the nations, who
know thee not, And on the families who have not called on thy name; For
they have devoured Jacob, Yea, they have devoured and consumed him, And
his tents have they laid waste.

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span>**1** The word which came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, saying, —

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span>**2** Hear ye the words of this covenant;
and say ye to the men

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span>**3** of Judah and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem: and thou shalt say to them, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of
Israel, — Cursed

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span>**4** Is the man who hears not the words of
this covenant, which I commanded your fathers in the day in which I
brought them out of the land of Egypt, from the iron furnace, saying, —
Hear ye my voice, and do according to all those things which I have
commanded you; and ye shall be to me a people and I will

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>**5** Be to you a God; that I may confirm
the oath which I swear to your fathers, to give them a land flowing with
milk and honey, according to what it is at this day. And I answered and
said, Amen, Jehovah.

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>**6** And Jehovah said to me, Proclaim these
words in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying, —
Hear the words of this covenant and do them;

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span>**7** For protesting I protested to your
fathers, In the day in which I brought them Out of the land of Egypt, to
this day, Rising up early and protesting, and saying, —

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span>**8** “Hear ye my voice:” Yet they heard
not, nor inclined their ear, But walked, every one of them, After the
wickedness of his own evil heart: I have therefore brought on them All
the words of this covenant, Which I commanded them to do, But they did
them not. (2:84)

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span>**9** And Jehovah said to me, — Found out
is a conspiracy, Among the men of Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem:

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span>**10** Returned are they to the iniquities
of their forefathers, Who refused to hear my words, But walked after
foreign gods to serve them: Broken have the house of Israel and the
house of Judah My covenant, which I made with their fathers.

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span>**11** Therefore thus saith Jehovah, —
Behold, I will bring upon you an evil, From which ye shall not be able
to escape; And they shall cry to me, but I will not hear them:

<span id="xii.ii-p14"></span>**12** And go shall the cities of Judah and
the citizens of Jerusalem, And cry to the gods to whom they have offered
incense; But by saving they will not save them In the time of *their*
affliction:

<span id="xii.ii-p15"></span>**13** For according to the number of thy
cities Have been thy gods, O Judah; And according to the number of
streets of Jerusalem, Have ye set up altars for reproach — Altars to
offer incense to Baal. (2:94)

<span id="xii.ii-p16"></span>**14** And thou, pray not for this people,
And raise not for them a cry and a prayer; For I will not hear them at
the time When they shall cry to me for their distress.

<span id="xii.ii-p17"></span>**15** What has my beloved to do in mine
house, While she commits abomination with many? And the flesh of the
sanctuary is taken from thee; For when thou didst evil, thou didst then
glory. (2:102)

<span id="xii.ii-p18"></span>**16** A green olive, fair in fruit *and*
form, Hath Jehovah called thy name; At the noise of great tumult hath he
kindled a *fire* on it, And broken down are its branches: (2:105)

<span id="xii.ii-p19"></span>**17** For Jehovah of hosts who planted
thee Hath spoken against thee an evil, For the wickedness of the house
of Israel And of the house of Judah, Which they have done for
themselves, To provoke me by offering incense to Baal.

<span id="xii.ii-p20"></span>**18** Jehovah hath made me to know, and I
knew it; Thou didst then discover to me their works.

<span id="xii.ii-p21"></span>**19** But I was like a lamb *or* an ox Led
to be slain; and I knew not That they meditated thoughts against me:
“Let us spoil with wood his bread, And cut him off from the land of the
living; And let his name be remembered no more.” (2:113)

<span id="xii.ii-p22"></span>**20** Now, Jehovah of hosts, who judgest
righteously, Who searchest the reins and the heart, Let me see thy
vengeance on them, For to thee have I revealed my cause.

<span id="xii.ii-p23"></span>**21** Therefore thus saith Jehovah To the
men of Anathoth, who seek thy life and say, “Prophesy thou not in the
name of Jehovah, That thou mayest not die by our hand;”

<span id="xii.ii-p24"></span>**22** Therefore thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, — Behold, I will visit them; Their young men shall die by the
sword, Their sons and their daughters shall die by famine,

<span id="xii.ii-p25"></span>**23** And there shall be no remnant of
them; For I will bring evil on the men of Anathoth, In the year of their
visitation.

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span>**1** Just *art* thou, Jehovah, though I
contend with thee; Yet of judgments will I speak to thee: How long shall
the way of the ungodly prosper? Secure are all they who by transgressing
transgress. (2:121)

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span>**2** Thou hast planted them, they have
even taken root; They have grown, they have even produced fruit: Nigh
art thou in their mouth, But far from their reins.

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span>**3** But thou, Jehovah, knowest me, Thou
seest me and hast tried my heart towards thee; Draw them forth as sheep
for the slaughter, And prepare them for the day of destruction.

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span>**4** How long shall mourn the land, And
the grass of every field wither For the wickedness of those who dwell in
it? Consumed are the beasts and the birds, Because they have said, “He
shall not see our end.” (2:129)

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span>**5** If with footmen thou hast run, And
they have wearied thee, How canst thou contend with horsemen? In the
land of peace thou hast trusted, How then canst thou do in the rising of
Jordan?

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span>**6** Truly, even thy brethren and the
house of thy father, Even these act perfidiously towards thee; Yea, they
cry after thee with a loud voice: Trust them not, even when they speak
good things to thee.

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span>**7** I have forsaken my house, I have left
my heritage; I have given up the darling of my soul Into the hand of her
enemies!

<span id="xii.iii-p10"></span>**8** My heritage has become to me like a
lion in the forest; It has sent forth its voice against me; Therefore
have I hated it.

<span id="xii.iii-p11"></span>**9** Is my heritage to me a speckled
bird? Is there not a bird around over it? Come, gather yourselves all ye
beasts of the field; Come to devour it. (2:140)

<span id="xii.iii-p12"></span>**10** Many shepherds have destroyed my
vineyard, They have trodden under foot my portion, They have made nay
choice portion a desolate wilderness;

<span id="xii.iii-p13"></span>**11** They have made it a desolation, It
mourns to me, being desolate; Desolate is become the whole land; Though
no one hath laid it to heart.

<span id="xii.iii-p14"></span>**12** On all high places in the
wilderness have come destroyers; For the sword of Jehovah hath devoured,
From one end to the other end of the land; There is no peace to any
flesh.

<span id="xii.iii-p15"></span>**13** They have sown wheat And thorns
have they reaped; An heritage have they got, but have not succeeded:
Ashamed have they been of your produce, Through the burning of the wrath
of Jehovah. (2:149)

<span id="xii.iii-p16"></span>**14** Thus saith Jehovah, — As to all my
evil neighbors, Who touch my heritage, Which I have inherited, *even* my
people Israel, Behold, I will pluck them up from their land, And the
house of Judah Will I pluck up from the midst of them.

<span id="xii.iii-p17"></span>**15** And it shall be, after I draw them
out, That I shall return and shew mercy to them, And will restore them,
every one to his heritage, And every one to his own land.

<span id="xii.iii-p18"></span>**16** And it shall be, that if by
learning they will learn The ways of my people, To swear by my name,
“Live does Jehovah,” As they taught my people to swear by Baal, They
shall then be built up In the midst of my people:

<span id="xii.iii-p19"></span>**17** But if they will not hear, I will
then pluck up that nation, Plucking *it* up and destroying *it,* saith
Jehovah.

<span id="xii.iv"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 13

<span id="xii.iv-p3"></span>**1** Thus saith Jehovah to me, — Go and get
thee a linen belt, and put it on thy loins, and

<span id="xii.iv-p4"></span>**2** In water set it not. So I got for me a
belt, as Jehovah had

<span id="xii.iv-p5"></span>**3** commanded, and put it on my loins.
Then came the word of

<span id="xii.iv-p6"></span>**4** Jehovah to me again, saying, — Take
the belt which thou hast got, which is on thy loins, and rise, go to
Euphrates and hide

<span id="xii.iv-p7"></span>**5** I*t* there in the hole of a rock. Then
I went and hid it by

<span id="xii.iv-p8"></span>**6** Euphrates, as Jehovah had ordered me.
And it was, that at the end of many days, Jehovah said to me, Rise and
go to Euphrates, and take thence the belt which I commanded thee

<span id="xii.iv-p9"></span>**7** To hide there. So I went to Euphrates,
and digged, and took the belt from the place where I had hid it; and
behold the belt

<span id="xii.iv-p10"></span>**8** Was marred, *and* it was good for
nothing. Then came the word of Jehovah to me, saying, —

<span id="xii.iv-p11"></span>**9** Thus saith Jehovah, — In this way
will I mar the excellency of Judah And the great excellency of
Jerusalem:

<span id="xii.iv-p12"></span>**10** This wicked people, who refuse to
hear my words, Who walk in the wickedness of their own heart, And walk
after foreign gods, That they may serve them and worship them, — Shall
be even as this belt, Which is good for nothing.

<span id="xii.iv-p13"></span>**11** For as the belt cleaves to the loins
of man, So had I joined to me the whole house of Israel And the whole
house of Judah, saith Jehovah, That they might be to me a people and a
name, Yea, a praise and a glory; But they hearkened not.

<span id="xii.iv-p14"></span>**12** Thou shalt also say this word to
them, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, — Every bottle shall be
filled with wine. When they shall say to thee, Knowing do we not know,
that every

<span id="xii.iv-p15"></span>**13** Bottle shall be filled with wine?
then shalt thou say to them, — Thus saith Jehovah, — Behold, I will fill
with drunkenness All the inhabitants of this land, And all the kings who
sit for David on his throne, The priests also and the prophets, And all
the inhabitants of Jerusalem;

<span id="xii.iv-p16"></span>**14** And I will dash them, every one
against his brother, The fathers also and the sons together, saith
Jehovah: I will not spare, nor will I be propitious, Nor shew pity until
I destroy them.

<span id="xii.iv-p17"></span>**15** Hear ye and attend, be not lifted
up, For Jehovah hath spoken:

<span id="xii.iv-p18"></span>**16** Give to Jehovah your God the glory,
Before he makes it to grow dark, And before your feet stumble at the
dark mountains, And *before* he turns the light ye hope for Into the
shadow of death, And makes it thick darkness. (2:179)

<span id="xii.iv-p19"></span>**17** But if ye will not hear this, In
secret will my soul mourn for pride, And weeping my eye will weep And
run down with tears; For led captive is the flock of Jehovah.

<span id="xii.iv-p20"></span>**18** Say to the king and to the queen, Be
ye humbled, lie ye down, For come down from your heads Shall the crown
of your glory.

<span id="xii.iv-p21"></span>**19** The cities of the south are closed
up, And there is no one to open *them;* For carried away has been all
Judah, He has been carried away completely. (2:185)

<span id="xii.iv-p22"></span>**20** Raise ye your eyes, And behold them
who come from the north: Where is the flock, which has been given to
thee, The sheep of thy glory?

<span id="xii.iv-p23"></span>**21** What wilt thou say when he visits
thee? But thou hast taught them to be leaders over thy head; Shall not
sorrows lay hold on thee, As on a woman in travail?

<span id="xii.iv-p24"></span>**22** But if thou wilt say in thine heart,
“Why have these evils happened to me?” For the multitude of thine
iniquity Are thy skirts discovered, And naked are made thy heels.

<span id="xii.iv-p25"></span>**23** Can the Ethiop change his skin, And
the panther his spots? Even so can ye do good, Who have been taught
evil. (2:192)

<span id="xii.iv-p26"></span>**24** I will therefore scatter them like
the stubble, That passeth away by the wind of the desert.

<span id="xii.iv-p27"></span>**25** This thy lot *is* the portion of thy
measures From me, saith Jehovah, For thou hast forgotten me, And thou
hast trusted in falsehood;

<span id="xii.iv-p28"></span>**26** And I also will uncover thy skirts
on thy face, That seen may be thy shame.

<span id="xii.iv-p29"></span>**27** Thy adulteries and thy neighings,
The thought of thy whoredom, On the mountains, in the field, have I
seen, *Even* thine abominations; Woe to thee, Jerusalem! Wilt thou not
at length be made clean? How long yet!

<span id="xii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 14

<span id="xii.v-p3"></span>**1** The word which came to Jeremiah
respecting the drought:

<span id="xii.v-p4"></span>**2** Mourned has Judah, And his gates have
been weakened; They are become black on the ground, And the cry of
Jerusalem has gone up: (2:205)

<span id="xii.v-p5"></span>**3** And their chiefs sent the common people
to the waters; They came to the cisterns, they found no water; They
returned with empty vessels; They were confounded and ashamed, And they
covered their head:

<span id="xii.v-p6"></span>**4** For the chapt ground, as there was no
rain in the land, Ashamed were the husbandmen, And they covered their
head:

<span id="xii.v-p7"></span>**5** Moreover the hind brought forth young
in the field, And forsook it, for there was no grass:

<span id="xii.v-p8"></span>**6** And the wild asses stood on the cliffs,
They drew in wind like serpents; Fail did their eyes, for there was no
grass. (2:209)

<span id="xii.v-p9"></span>**7** Though our iniquities testify against
us, O Jehovah, Deal *with us* for thine own name’s sake; For multiplied
have our defections, Against thee have we done wickedly,

<span id="xii.v-p10"></span>**8** Hope of Israel! Savior art thou In the
time of trouble; Why shouldest thou be as a stranger in the land? As a
traveler, turning aside to pass the night?

<span id="xii.v-p11"></span>**9** Why shouldest thou be as a man
terrified? As a strong man, who yet cannot save? Thou art in the midst
of us, O Jehovah, And on us is thy name called, Forsake us not. (2:214)

<span id="xii.v-p12"></span>**10** Thus saith Jehovah of this people: As
they have loved to wander, *And* have not restrained their feet,
Therefore Jehovah has not been pleased with them; He will now remember
their iniquities, And visit their sins.

<span id="xii.v-p13"></span>**11** Jehovah said also to me: Pray not for
this people for *their* good:

<span id="xii.v-p14"></span>**12** When they fast I will not hear their
cry; And when they offer a sacrifice and an oblation, I will not be
pleased with them; For with the sword and with famine, And with
pestilence, will I consume them.

<span id="xii.v-p15"></span>**13** And I said, Ah! Lord Jehovah, Behold,
the prophets say to them, — “Ye shall not see the sword, And famine
shall not be to you, Nay, sure peace will I give you in this place.”

<span id="xii.v-p16"></span>**14** Then said Jehovah to me, — Falsehood
do the prophets prophesy in my name; I have not sent them nor commanded
them, Nor have I spoken to them; A false vision and divination, Yea,
vanity and the deceit of their own heart, Do they of themselves prophesy
to you. (2:226)

<span id="xii.v-p17"></span>**15** Therefore, thus saith Jehovah, of the
prophets who prophesy in my name, and I have not sent them, and who say,
The sword and the famine shall not be in this land, — By the sword and

<span id="xii.v-p18"></span>**16** Famine shall these prophets be
consumed; and the people, to whom they have prophesied, shall be cast
out in the streets of Jerusalem through the famine and the sword, and
there will be none to bury them, — they, their wives: and their sons,
and their daughters; and I will pour upon them their own wickedness.

<span id="xii.v-p19"></span>**17** Therefore shalt thou say to them this
word, — Run down shall mine eyes with tears Day and night, and they
shall not rest, For with a great breach is broken down The virgin, the
daughter of my people; The stroke *is* very grievous:

<span id="xii.v-p20"></span>**18** If I go out to the field, behold the
slain with the sword! And if I enter the city, behold the sorrowful with
famine! For both the prophet, and the priest, Go round through the land,
and know not *what to do.*

<span id="xii.v-p21"></span>**19** Repudiating hast thou repudiated
Judah? Has thy soul abominated Sion? Why hast thou *so* smitten us, that
we have no healing? We have looked for peace, and there is no good, And
for time of healing, and behold terror!

<span id="xii.v-p22"></span>**20** We know, O Jehovah, our wickedness,
And the iniquity of our fathers; For we have done wickedly against thee.

<span id="xii.v-p23"></span>**21** Reject not, for thy name’s sake,
Overthrow not the throne of thy glory; Remember. render not void, Thy
covenant with us. (2:240)

<span id="xii.v-p24"></span>**22** Are there any among the vanities of
the Gentiles, Who can cause it to rain? And can they give rain from
heaven? Art not thou thyself, Jehovah, our God? And we have looked to
thee, For thou hast done all these things.

<span id="xii.vi"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p2"></span><span id="xii.vi-p2.1"></span>CHAPTER 15
 <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md)

<span id="xii.vi-p5"></span>**1** Then Jehovah said to me: Though Moses
and Samuel stood before me, My soul would not be towards this people;
Send *them* from my presence, and let them depart.

<span id="xii.vi-p6"></span>**2** And it shall be, if they say to thee,
“Whither shall we go forth?” Then shalt thou say to them, — Thus saith
Jehovah, — They who are for death, to death, And they who are for the
sword, to the sword, And they who are for the famine, to the famine, And
they who are for captivity, to captivity:

<span id="xii.vi-p7"></span>**3** And I will set over them four kinds,
saith Jehovah, — The sword to kill, and the dogs to drag, And the bird
of heaven, and the beast of the earth, To devour and to destroy:

<span id="xii.vi-p8"></span>**4** And I will set them a vexation, To all
the kingdoms of the earth, For Manasse, the son of Hezekiah, king of
Judah, On account of what he did in Jerusalem.

<span id="xii.vi-p9"></span>**5** For who will pity thee, O Jerusalem?
And who will condole with thee? And who will turn aside To inquire of
thy welfare?

<span id="xii.vi-p10"></span>**6** Thou hast forsaken me, saith Jehovah;
Backward hast thou gone; I will therefore stretch my hand against thee,
And I will destroy thee; I am wearied with repenting:

<span id="xii.vi-p11"></span>**7** And I will fan them with a fan
Through all the gates of the earth; I have bereaved, I destroyed my
people; From their own ways they have not returned.

<span id="xii.vi-p12"></span>**8** Multiplied have their widows to me
Above the sand of the sea; I brought to them, on the troop of youths, A
waster at mid-day; And I cast on them suddenly A tumult and terrors.

<span id="xii.vi-p13"></span>**9** Weakened did she become who had born
seven, Expire did her soul, Go down did her sun while it *was yet* day,
Confounded has she been and ashamed: And the remainder of them to the
sword will I give, Before their enemies, saith Jehovah. (2:266)

<span id="xii.vi-p14"></span>**10** Wo to me, my mother! That thou hast
born me a man of strife, And a man of contention to the whole land: I
have not lent on usury, And they have not on usury lent to me; *Yet*
every one curses me.

<span id="xii.vi-p15"></span>**11** And Jehovah said, — Surely thy
latter end shall be well; Surely I will cause to meet thee the enemy, In
the time of evil and in the time of distress. (2:273)

<span id="xii.vi-p16"></span>**12** Shall iron break The iron from the
north and the steel!

<span id="xii.vi-p17"></span>**13** Thy wealth and thy treasures To
plunder will I give, Not in exchange, but for all thy wickedness, And
for all thy counsels:

<span id="xii.vi-p18"></span>**14** And I will make *thee* to pass to
the enemy Into a land which thou knowest not; For a fire is kindled in
my wrath, On you it shall burn.

<span id="xii.vi-p19"></span>**15** Thou knowest, O Jehovah, Remember me
and visit me, And avenge me on my persecutors, Lest thou shouldest take
me away By protracting thy wrath: Know that for thee have I borne
reproach. (2:280)

<span id="xii.vi-p20"></span>**16** Found were thy words, and I did eat
them; And thy word was my joy and the gladness of my heart; For called
on me was thy name, O Jehovah, the God of hosts.

<span id="xii.vi-p21"></span>**17** I sat not in the assembly of
mockers, Nor exulted on account of thy hand; I sat apart, for with
indignation Hast thou filled me.

<span id="xii.vi-p22"></span>**18** Why is my pain strong, and my stroke
incurable, *And* refuses to be healed? Wilt thou be to me As the
deception of unfaithful waters?

<span id="xii.vi-p23"></span>**19** Therefore, thus saith Jehovah, — If
thou wilt be turned, then I will turn thee, That thou mayest stand
before me; And if thou separatest the precious from the worthless, As my
mouth shalt thou be: Let them turn to thee, but turn not thou to them.

<span id="xii.vi-p24"></span>**20** I have even made thee to this people
A wall of brass, fortified; They shall therefore fight against thee, But
over thee they shall not prevail; For with thee am I to save thee, And
to deliver thee, saith Jehovah:

<span id="xii.vi-p25"></span>**21** Yea, I will save thee from the hand
of the wicked, And deliver thee from the hand of the strong. (2:300)

<span id="xii.vii"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 16

<span id="xii.vii-p3"></span>**1** Then came the word of Jehovah to me,
saying, —

<span id="xii.vii-p4"></span>**2** Take not to thee a wife, And have no
sons and daughters in this place:

<span id="xii.vii-p5"></span>**3** For thus saith Jehovah, — As to the
sons and daughters, born in this place, And as to the mothers who shall
bear them, And as to the fathers, who shall beget them in this land —

<span id="xii.vii-p6"></span>**4** With deaths of sicknesses shall they
die, They shall not be lamented nor buried; As dung on the face of the
earth shall they be; With the sword also and the famine shall they be
consumed, And their carcasses shall be for meat To the birds of heaven,
and to the beasts of the earth. (2:305)

<span id="xii.vii-p7"></span>**5** For thus saith Jehovah, — Enter not
the house of mourning Nor go to lament, nor be moved for them; For I
have taken away my peace From this people, saith Jehovah, *My* kindness
*also* and mercies:

<span id="xii.vii-p8"></span>**6** And die shall they, great and small,
in this land; They shall not be buried, Nor shall any lament for them
nor cut themselves, Nor shall baldness be made for them;

<span id="xii.vii-p9"></span>**7** And they shall not for them smite the
hand, To console them for the dead; Nor shall they drink to them the cup
of consolations, For their father or for their mother. (2:310)

<span id="xii.vii-p10"></span>**8** The house of feasting also enter
not, To sit with them to eat and to drink;

<span id="xii.vii-p11"></span>**9** For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the
God of Israel, — Behold, I will take away from this place Before your
eyes and in your days, The voice of joy and the voice of gladness, The
voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.

<span id="xii.vii-p12"></span>**10** And it shall be, when thou
declarest to this people All these words, that they will say to thee, —
“Why has Jehovah spoken against us All this great evil? And what is our
iniquity? and what is our sin? Which we have wickedly done against
Jehovah, our God.”

<span id="xii.vii-p13"></span>**11** Then thou shalt say to them, —
Because your fathers forsook me, saith Jehovah: For they went after
foreign gods, And served them and bowed down to them, And me they
forsook, and my law they did not keep;

<span id="xii.vii-p14"></span>**12** And worse are ye become than your
fathers; For, behold, ye have walked, every one of you, After the
wickedness of his own evil heart, So as not to hearken to me.

<span id="xii.vii-p15"></span>**13** I will therefore cast you out of
this land, Into a land which ye have not known, nor your fathers, And
there shall ye serve foreign gods, day and night; For I will shew you no
favor.

<span id="xii.vii-p16"></span>**14** Therefore, behold, the days will
come, saith Jehovah, When it shall be no more said, Live does Jehovah,
Who brought up the children of Israel from the land of Egypt:

<span id="xii.vii-p17"></span>**15** But, Live does Jehovah, who has
brought up The children of Israel, from the land of the north, And from
all the lands to which he had driven them; For I will restore them to
the land Which I gave to their fathers.

<span id="xii.vii-p18"></span>**16** Behold, I will send for many
fishers, saith Jehovah; And they shall fish them; And afterwards I will
send for many hunters, And they shall hunt them from every mountain, And
from every hill and holes of rocks:

<span id="xii.vii-p19"></span>**17** For mine eyes are on all their
ways; They are not hid from my face, Nor are their iniquities hid from
mine eyes:

<span id="xii.vii-p20"></span>**18** And I will render double, from the
beginning, For their iniquities and their sins; For they have polluted
my land With the carcasses of their abominations; And with their
defilements Have they filled mine inheritance. (2:325)

<span id="xii.vii-p21"></span>**19** O Jehovah, my strength and my
fortress, And my refuge in the day of distress, To thee shall come the
Gentiles From the extremities of the earth, and shall say, — “Surely
falsehood did our fathers inherit; Vanity and nothing profitable had
they.”

<span id="xii.vii-p22"></span>**20** Can men make gods for themselves,
When they themselves are no gods? (2:333)

<span id="xii.vii-p23"></span>**21** Therefore, behold, I will make them
to know at this time, I will make them to know My hand and my power; And
they shall know that my name is Jehovah.

<span id="xii.viii"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 17

<span id="xii.viii-p3"></span>**1** The sin of Judah is written With a
pen of iron, with the point of adamant, It is graven on the tablet of
their hearts, And on the horns of your altars:

<span id="xii.viii-p4"></span>**2** For their children remember Their
altars and their groves, Under the shady tree, on high hills.

<span id="xii.viii-p5"></span>**3** Dweller on mountains! in the field
will I give for spoil Thy wealth *and* all thy treasures, Because of thy
high places, Because of thy sin in all thy borders:

<span id="xii.viii-p6"></span>**4** And dismissed shalt thou be, even
thyself, From thine inheritance which I gave thee; And I will make thee
to serve thine enemies In a land which thou knowest not; For ye have
kindled a fire in my wrath, Perpetually shall it burn. (2:342)

<span id="xii.viii-p7"></span>**5** Thus saith Jehovah, — Cursed *is*
the man who trusts in man, And makes flesh his arm, And whose heart
turns away from Jehovah:

<span id="xii.viii-p8"></span>**6** And he shall be like a tamarisk in
the desert, And shall not see when good comes, And shall dwell in
dryness in the desert, In the land of salt and not inhabited.

<span id="xii.viii-p9"></span>**7** Blessed *is* the man who trusts in
Jehovah, And whose hope Jehovah is:

<span id="xii.viii-p10"></span>**8** And he shall be like a tree, *That
is* planted near waters, And nigh the stream sends its roots, And shall
not see when heat comes; And green shall be its leaf, And in the year of
drought it shall not fear, Nor cease from bringing forth fruit. (2:347)

<span id="xii.viii-p11"></span>**9** Insidious is the heart above all
things, And vicious, — who can know it?

<span id="xii.viii-p12"></span>**10** I Jehovah, who search the heart
And try the reins, to give to every one, According to his ways,
According to the fruit of his doings. (2:354)

<span id="xii.viii-p13"></span>**11** A partridge, which gathers and
produces not, *Is* he who gains riches, and not by right; In the midst
of his days he leaves them, And at his end he is nothing.

<span id="xii.viii-p14"></span>**12** A high throne of glory, from the
beginning, *Is* the place of our sanctuary.

<span id="xii.viii-p15"></span>**13** The hope of Israel *art thou,*
Jehovah; All who thee forsake shall be ashamed: They who turn aside
shall on the earth be written; For they have forsaken The fountain of
living waters, even Jehovah.

<span id="xii.viii-p16"></span>**14** Heal me, O Jehovah, And I shall be
healed; Save me, and I shall be saved, For my praise art thou.

<span id="xii.viii-p17"></span>**15** Behold they say to me, — “Where is
the word of Jehovah? let it now come.”

<span id="xii.viii-p18"></span>**16** But I hastened not to be a pastor
following thee, And the day of grief I desired not, thou knowest: What
went forth from my lips, Before thy face has it been.

<span id="xii.viii-p19"></span>**17** Be not to me a terror; My
protector *art* thou in the day of evil.

<span id="xii.viii-p20"></span>**18** Ashamed let them be who persecute
me, And let not me be ashamed; Terrified let them be, And let not me be
terrified: Bring upon them the day of evil, And with a double breach
break them.

<span id="xii.viii-p21"></span>**19** Thus said Jehovah to me, — Go and
stand in the gate of the children of the people, through which the kings
of Judah enter, and through which they go

<span id="xii.viii-p22"></span>**20** out, and in all the gates of
Jerusalem; and say to them, — Hear the words of Jehovah, ye kings of
Judah, and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, who enter in
through these

<span id="xii.viii-p23"></span>**21** gates, Thus saith Jehovah, — Take
heed to yourselves, And bring not a burden on the Sabbath-day, Yea,
bring it not through the gates of Jerusalem;

<span id="xii.viii-p24"></span>**22** Nor bring a burden from your
houses On the Sabbath-day, nor do any work, But sanctify the
Sabbath-day, As I commanded your fathers;

<span id="xii.viii-p25"></span>**23** Though they heard not nor inclined
their ear, But hardened their neck, So as not to hear nor receive
correction:

<span id="xii.viii-p26"></span>**24** And it shall be, if by hearing Ye
will hear me, saith Jehovah, So as not to bring a burden Through the
gates of the city on the Sabbath-day, And if ye sanctify the Sabbath-day
By doing on it no work;

<span id="xii.viii-p27"></span>**25** Then shall enter through the gates
of this city Kings and princes, sitting on David’s throne, Riding in
chariots and on horses, They and their princes, the men of Judah And the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, And inhabited shall be this city perpetually:

<span id="xii.viii-p28"></span>**26** And come shall they from the
cities of Judah, And from the circuits of Jerusalem, And from the land
of Benjamin, And from the plain, and the mountain, and the south,
Bringing burnt-offering and sacrifice, And oblation and incense, And
bringing praise, to the house of Jehovah. (2:388)

<span id="xii.viii-p29"></span>**27** But if ye will not hearken to me,
So as to sanctify the Sabbath-day, And not to bring a burden, nor enter
Through the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath-day; Then will I kindle a
fire in its gates, And it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, And it
shall not be extinguished.

<span id="xii.ix"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 18

<span id="xii.ix-p3"></span>**1** The word which came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, saying, —

<span id="xii.ix-p4"></span>**2** Rise and go down to the potter’s
house, and I will cause thee to hear my words.

<span id="xii.ix-p5"></span>**3** And I went down to the potter’s house,
and, behold, he was making a work on the stone:

<span id="xii.ix-p6"></span>**4** And the vessel was marred, which he
made of the clay in the hand of the potter; and he again made another
vessel, as it seemed good in the eyes of the potter to make.

<span id="xii.ix-p7"></span>**5** And the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying, —

<span id="xii.ix-p8"></span>**6** Cannot I as this potter do to you, O
house of Israel? saith Jehovah. Behold, as the clay is in the hand of
the potter, So are ye in my hand, O house of Israel.

<span id="xii.ix-p9"></span>**7** Suddenly will I speak of a nation and
a kingdom, To pull down and to eradicate and to destroy:

<span id="xii.ix-p10"></span>**8** If that nation turn from its evil,
For which I spoke against it; Then will I repent of the evil Which I had
thought of doing to it.

<span id="xii.ix-p11"></span>**9** Suddenly also will I speak of a
nation and a kingdom, To build up and to plant:

<span id="xii.ix-p12"></span>**10** But if it do evil before mine eyes,
So as not to hearken to my voice; Then will I repent of the good Which I
had said that I would do to it. (2:398)

<span id="xii.ix-p13"></span>**11** And now, I pray, say to the men of
Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, — Thus saith Jehovah,
— Behold, I frame for you an evil, And I think for you a thought; Return
ye then, every one from his evil way, And make right your ways and your
doings.

<span id="xii.ix-p14"></span>**12** And they said, — It is all over; For
after our own thoughts will we walk, And we will do, every one, The
wickedness of his own evil heart.

<span id="xii.ix-p15"></span>**13** Therefore thus saith Jehovah, — Ask,
I pray, among the heathens, Who hath heard such a thing? A monstrous
thing hath the virgin of Israel done.

<span id="xii.ix-p16"></span>**14** Will *any one* leave the snow of
Libanus from the rock of the field? Will waters brought from another
place, And cold streams, be relinquished? (2:408)

<span id="xii.ix-p17"></span>**15** For forgotten me have my people; In
vain do they offer incense, Since they have made them to stumble In
their ways — the paths of ages, That they might walk in paths, In a way
not trodden;

<span id="xii.ix-p18"></span>**16** To make their land a desolation, A
perpetual hissing: Whosoever shall pass through it Shall be astonished
and shake his head.

<span id="xii.ix-p19"></span>**17** By the east wind will I scatter them
Before the face of the enemy; The back and not the face will I shew them
In the day of their calamity.

<span id="xii.ix-p20"></span>**18** And they said, — Come, and let us
think thoughts against Jeremiah; For perish shall not the law from the
priest, Nor counsel from the wise, Nor the word from the prophet: And
let us smite him with the tongue, And not attend to any of his words.

<span id="xii.ix-p21"></span>**19** Hearken, O Jehovah, to me, And hear
the voice of those who contend with me.

<span id="xii.ix-p22"></span>**20** Shall evil be rendered for good? For
they have digged a pit for my soul: Remember that I stood before thee To
speak good for them — To turn away from them thy wrath.

<span id="xii.ix-p23"></span>**21** Therefore give their children up to
famine, And deliver them into the hands of the sword, And let their
wives be bereaved and be widows, And their men be smitten to death, And
their youths be smitten with the sword in battle:

<span id="xii.ix-p24"></span>**22** Let a cry be heard from their
houses, When thou bringest on them an army suddenly; For they have dug a
pit to take me, And snares have they hid for my feet.

<span id="xii.ix-p25"></span>**23** And thou, Jehovah, who knowest their
counsels *To be* against me for death, Be not propitious to their
iniquity, And their sin from thy sight blot not out, But let them
stumble before thee; In the time of thy wrath deal thus with them.

<span id="xii.x"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p2"></span>CHAPTER 19

<span id="xii.x-p3"></span>**1** Thus saith Jehovah, — Go and get a
potter’s vessel, even with the elders of the people and with the elders
of the priests;

<span id="xii.x-p4"></span>**2** And enter into the valley of Hinnom,
which is at the entrance of the oriental gate, and proclaim there the
words which I shall speak to thee:

<span id="xii.x-p5"></span>**3** And thou shalt say, Hear the word of
Jehovah, ye kings of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, — Thus
saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, — Behold I bring an evil on
this place, The which whosoever hears, tingle shall his ears:

<span id="xii.x-p6"></span>**4** Because they have forsaken me, And have
alienated this place, And have made incense in it to foreign gods, Whom
they have not themselves known, Nor their fathers, nor the kings of
Judah, And have filled this place With the blood of innocents:

<span id="xii.x-p7"></span>**5** And they have built high places to
Baal, To burn their sons with fire, For a burnt-offering to Baal; Which
I have not commanded nor spoken of, And *which* came not into my mind.

<span id="xii.x-p8"></span>**6** Therefore behold the days shall come,
saith Jehovah, When this place shall no more be called Tophet, Nor The
valley of the son of Hinnom, But, The valley of slaughter:

<span id="xii.x-p9"></span>**7** And void will I make the counsel of
Judah And of Jerusalem in this place, And lay them prostrate by the
sword before their enemies, And by the hand of those who seek their
life; And I will give their carcasses for meat To the birds of heaven
and to the beasts of the earth;

<span id="xii.x-p10"></span>**8** And will set this city For an
astonishment and for hissing; Whosoever shall pass through it shall be
astonished, And shall hiss on account of all her stroke:

<span id="xii.x-p11"></span>**9** And I will feed them with the flesh of
their sons, And with the flesh of their daughters; And they shall eat,
every one the flesh of his friend, In the tribulation and straitness, By
which their enemies shall straiten them, And those who seek their life.

<span id="xii.x-p12"></span>**10** Then shalt thou break the bottle in
the presence of the men who shall go with thee;

<span id="xii.x-p13"></span>**11** And thou shalt say to them, — Thus
saith Jehovah of hosts, — So will I break this people and this city, As
one breaks an earthen vessel, Which can no more be repaired: And in
Tophet shall they be buried, For there will be no *other* place to bury
*them:*

<span id="xii.x-p14"></span>**12** Thus will I do to this place, Saith
Jehovah, and to its inhabitants, I will even make this city like Tophet;

<span id="xii.x-p15"></span>**13** For the houses of Jerusalem, And the
houses of the kings of Judah, Shall be, like the place of Tophet,
unclean, Even all the houses, on whose roofs They have made incense to
all the host of heaven, And poured a libation to foreign gods.

<span id="xii.x-p16"></span>**14** Then came Jeremiah from Tophet, where
Jehovah had sent him to prophesy, and stood in the court of the house of
Jehovah, and said to the whole people, —

<span id="xii.x-p17"></span>**15** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, — Behold, I will bring upon this city And upon all her towns,
all the evil Which I have pronounced against her; Because they have
hardened their neck, That they might not hear my words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc18011.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="xii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p3"></span> The beginning of this chapter is evidently
connected with the end of the last, and ought not to have been
separated. — *Ed.*

<span id="xii.vi-p4"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc18012.md)
