[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](otof04)  [Next](otof06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# BOOK I

## GOD PROVIDED--MAN DIVIDED

### CHAPTER 1

### THE GREAT INFLUX

Space visitors put an intensification of the Cosmic program into effect
in the late 1800's. The 1880's and 1890's saw the program manifest
itself in strange phenomena and many books; new inventions and theories
were suddenly put before the public. The Great Plan for the planet Earth
moves along on levels of rises and plateaus. We are at present on a
rising level. The 1890's experienced a rise, and the following fifty
years was a plateau of leveling off time. The movement began before the
nineteenth century, of course, but in a small way. Emanuel Swedenborg,
scientist and mystic, brought great new truths to the spiritually hungry
world in the 1700's . . . and there were other men, like Wesley and
before him Spinoza; however the great mystic, Father Jakob Lorber, was
born in 1800; Nikola Tesla, inventor, was born in 1857; Steinmetz,
electrical wizard, was born in 1865; Charles Hay Fort, writer and
researcher, was born in 1874; Charles Fillmore of Unity, was born in
1854; H. P. Blavatsky brought the great knowledge of Theosophy to the
world in the 1800's; H. W. Percival gave the world his knowledge, and
later,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Thinking And Destiny*; Dr. John B. Newbrough,
in 1882, released his monumental work, *Oahspe*; Camille Flammarion,
great French astronomer, was born in 1842; and among many others, P. D.
Ouspensky, Lecomte du Nouy, etc.

Thus, in the last half of the nineteenth century, Universal Truth made a
valiant attempt to penetrate the mind of Man before the Great Age of
Materialism set in with the advent of the colossal Machine Age. Men like
Brown Landone, and Flournoy, who wrote *From India To The Planet Mars*,
[contributed](errata.htm#1.md) greatly to this expanding program under the
influence of space intelligences. Even John Jacob Astor got in the plan
and wrote about the coining electrically governed world and
interplanetary travel in 1897.

Besides a *Great Influx* of Universal Truth coming to the minds of Man,
there was a definite pro-grain instituted on the physical plane and on
the surface of Earth, itself. Space visitors were actually deposited and
left on our world to mix, mate, and marry with us. The new ideas and
theories first came out in book form, and this was the prelude to the
appearance of spacecraft in the skies of Earth. In our present century,
first came the science-fiction tales of space travel, then came the
actual space visitation.

In Paris, France, in 1892, Flammarion said: "We dare to hope that the
day will come when scientific methods yet unknown to us will give us
direct evidence of the existence of the inhabitants of other

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

worlds, and at the same time, also, will put us in communication with
our brothers in space. What marvels does not the science of the future
reserve for our successors, and who would dare to say that Martian
humanity and terrestrial (Earth) humanity will not some day enter into
communication with each other?" Then in 1896, Flammarion wrote *Uranie*,
and in 1897 things really began to happen. Here's the report as taken
directly from the old records:

*Chicago Record*, Friday, April 2, 1897: "*See Great Airship!* Kansas
City, Missouri people excited . . . mystical black object casting before
it red light startled whole city for the last two weeks! At last
descended . . . ten-thousand people swear they have no hallucinations!
Scoffers and disbelievers claim the people have been seeing the planet
Venus or the Evening Star, even though according to the almanac this
planet should have set below the horizon at least an hour before! Object
appeared very swiftly, then appeared to stop and hover over the city for
ten minutes at a time, then after flashing its green-blue and white
lights, shot upwards into space . . . light gradually twinkling away and
looking like a bright star. Time: 8:15 p. m.

"Everest, Kansas has sighted a strange airship, Competent reporters
state that this must be the air-ship that was built in Oakland,
California and which broke away at launching time . . . this giant
air-ship hovered one half hour at a time and descended at regular
intervals very close to the Earth. A giant

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

searchlight flooded the whole city with light from this aerial monster
which with the velocity of an eagle darted up and away. Power source
must have been attached to the light for it dimmed as the ship went up
and away. On observer states that there seemed to be a basket or car
beneath a great dark object thought to be a gas [bag](errata.htm#2.md)
overhead . . . car was shaped like a canoe and had four wings, two on
each side, fore and aft . . . light was greenish or blue against the
light of a locomotive in the rail yard that was yellowish. Colored
lights seemed to be all around the car."

This unusual craft showed up later in Michigan, but before quoting from
the record, let's analyze the above report. First of all, the
authorities passed off the entire incident by calling the spacecraft the
planet Venus. That same thing has happened in our present Saucer saga.
They called the object Captain Mantell was chasing *Venus*, when it
couldn't possibly have been that planet. This craft over Kansas City
flashed blue-green lights and this color combination is now predominant
in Saucer sightings of to-day. The report goes on to state that the
power source must have been attached to the light for it *dimmed* as the
ship went up and away. It is known today that the speed of Saucers has a
great deal to do with the color changes.

*Chicago Record*, April 3, 1897: "*Flying Machine Now in Michigan!*
People of Galesburg saw a brilliant white light approach from the SW . .
. object appeared large and black with a crackling, sharp

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

sound. It hovered close to the Earth. Reporters state that they heard
*human voices* from aloft . . . from the airship! When the ship went
off, it seemed to be tipped with flame. (Local comment was that the
airship had caught fire!) Time: 10.00 p. m."

*Chicago Record*, April 6, 1897: "*Airship Now Into Illinois!* Seen
first at 8:00 p. m. in NW . . . . large red light. Suggestions of
balloon are refuted because airship flew at tremendous speed into a high
wind."

*Chicago Record*, April 7, 1897: "Airship seen many times last few
weeks. Large numbers of people first hand witnesses. One time, a
motorman of a trolley actually stopped his vehicle so he and passengers
could look at the wonderful sight . . . just ahead of his trolley, the
ship seemed about six-hundred feet up and about one-hundred feet long.
The motorman, Mr. Newville, says it was ellipsoid with large projections
fore and aft. There was a bright headlight in front and a red light in
the rear."

From Hastings, Nebraska, came the report that the "airship" had been
seen in Grand Island, Oxford, York and Kearney. Scoffers claimed these
people had seen Venus, yet all the reporters were people of substance
and not given to reporting spurious stories. This all happened in 1897,
but we could date it 1956 and it would be right up to date. To-day,
officialdom tries to explain much of it away as "natural" phenomena.
Airplanes hadn't been invented in 1897 so they explained it away as
balloons or Venus . . . today they say it's balloons, Venus, or

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

airplanes . . . two-thousand years ago they might have called it
"Apollo", or "chariots of fire", or "wheels within wheels".

*Chicago Record*, April 9, 1897: "*Airship Seen In Iowa!* Between West
Liberty and Cedar Rapids appeared a bright light . . . giant airship . .
. steel body. When leaving it appeared to be a large star weaving about
and stars do not weave around the heavens!"

*Chicago Record*, April 10, 1897: "*Airship Sighted Over Chicago And
Evanston!* People are tripping over themselves these days trying to get
the best look at this green and white-lighted giant air-ship that has
had the people all over the mid-west in a dither. Some people think the
end of the world is near . . . Scientific minds have explained the whole
thing away by now. The mystery will surely be cleared up in a few days.
Mr. Carr, an aeronaut, has built an experimental balloon and is financed
by a New York theatrical wig manufacturing company . . . Mr. Carr states
his machine works marvelously, but *cannot go against the wind* . . .
power is storage battery with propeller! Professor Hough of Northwestern
University and head astronomer of the observatory stated when asked to
train his telescope on the object: 'I am busy with sights on Jupiter and
it would be too troublesome to change to look at this new thing.' The
next day, Hough said: 'The thousands of people that are reporting this
so-called strange airship are in reality looking at Alpha Orionis in the
Constellation Orion!"

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

This great scientist was too "busy with sights on Jupiter . . . it would
be too troublesome . . ." Too *troublesome* to view for the first time a
ship from another world! Although he refused to look at the object he
seemed to know exactly what thousands of other people were seeing! How
would he know since he only had the advantage of total ignorance?

*Chicago Record*, April 12, 1897: "*Giant Airship Continues Over Chicago
And Environs!* People all over the city are in an uproar, and while
everyone is viewing this grand sight on the south side, two amateur
photographers who are news dealers in Rogers Park, looked out and saw
the airship. Their photo shows the north Western Railway station and
above it the purported airship! The photographers are Walter McCann and
G. A. Overocker. This airship was seen to come in over the lake and
traverse the whole city for several days."

The same report with an Omaha date line of April 11th says: "A gentleman
brags he has mystery airship problem solved. He is an inventor and
desires that he be allowed thirty-five acres to demonstrate his airship
for the Trans-Mississippi Exposition. The gentleman didn't sign his
name, but the reporter hopes the dilemma will be settled by his
promises."

The same report again, with a Fort Dodge, Iowa date line of April 11th
says: "Old German residents say that this very same type airship came
over Germany thirty years before and the people were scared to death . .
. said the devil's army was approaching

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

and these were his vehicles!"

The same report again, with a Milwaukee, Wisconsin date line of April
11th says: "The residents of Milwaukee cannot be talked out of what they
are seeing . . . thousands report the authenticity of a giant, beautiful
airship with colored lights . . . the police records are full of the
story for they have been called to answer what it is!"

*Chicago Record*, April 13, 1897: "*Airship Called A Hoax!* Several
notable citizens are known to have caused airship scene . . . remains of
paper and wood device in wreckage is in their yard. (No names given of
the 'notables')."

The device mentioned was supposed to have been in the wreckage, but
another column in the same paper said: "Airship seen in Rock Island,
Illinois and Elkhart, Indiana!" How could it have been seen if it was
wrecked?

*Chicago Tribune*, April 12, 1897: "One chap knows all about the
airship. He says: 'These thousands of people didn't see a steel hull
because this is the airship my friend has built in California and is on
its way here to Chicago. Although, I must say, he sure has made good
time for he isn't due until *next week* and the hull is *paper*, not
steel. My friend, O. Chanute is on board too and I will introduce all of
you to him when he arrives!' This chap is the Secretary of the Chicago
Aironautical Society, Max L. Harmar."

The same strange sightings were made at Sisterville, Virginia. In 1897
and other years, there were

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

amazing observances in Texas. The same old story, isn't it? Thousands of
[people](errata.htm#3.md) in America observed this gigantic space ship . .
. authorities called it Venus or Alpha Orionis, or a balloon. A balloon
that couldn't go against the wind, yet the "airship" did just that.
Notice where the report says: "Scientific minds have explained the whole
thing away by now." That's exactly what they have been trying to do
since 1947 in the present saga. Also, the idea that these are the
"devil's" vehicles is thrown in as of the present. Not once a mention of
their true nature!

The 1897 episode is very important: many space people were landed on
Earth at that time. The Wright Brothers brought in the Air Age a few
miles away at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina in the same era. (It is strange
or is it?) that these brothers finally flew their controversial aircraft
only a few years removed and a few short miles from the location where
the giant, lighted "airship" of 1897 had made one of its final
appearances?

After 1897 man progressed more in the coming half-century than he had in
the previous ten-thousand years. Our progression is due, in part, to
intellects coming here from outer space. Great men helped push men's
progress ahead hundreds of years in terms of advancement. Where it had
taken thousands of years to elapse between the discovery of the wheel
and the bow, the greatest discoveries the world had ever seen followed
each other in rapid succession. The telephone, electric lights, the
radio,

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

wireless, the automobile, the airplane, etc.

What actually took place in the 1800's was the first large public
demonstration of spacecraft in the modern, industrial age. After the
Industrial Revolution there had to be an influx of certain Universal
truths in order to create a semblance between highly advanced technical
skill and undeveloped spiritually. The space ships or "airships" of the
nineteenth century were the physical manifestation of that *Great
Influx*!

Communication with extraterrestrial intelligences also began at the same
time. The father of wireless, Marconi, in 1921 believed he had
intercepted messages from Mars or some point in outer space. The theory
that the waves were produced by electrical disturbances was disproved by
the regularity of the impulses.

Marconi conducted highly secret experiments before 1921 and knew beyond
the shadow of a doubt that he was in direct contact with beings of other
worlds! A woman in California writes: "During World War II was teaching
in Scotland. In 1918, headquarters of the Y.W.C.A. in London wrote
offering me the position of head of their branch office in Chelmsford
near London. The main station of the Marconi World-Wide Wireless was
also there. Many men from Britain died in World War I and it was my job
to look out for many young girls away from home. I took room and board
with a couple somewhat older than I. The husband was a very intelligent
person and had a responsible position

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

with the Marconi Wireless Company. One day, he asked me if I would like
to go through the Marconi Station. I was delighted to go. During my tour
through the laboratories I was startled and almost petrified when we
arrived in front of a huge, ten-foot square, transparent case inside of
which seemed to be a flaming mass . . . flames revolving like a wheel! I
asked my friend what this was and he said that they had been receiving
wireless messages somewhere outside of Earth! I asked him to be more
specific. And he said: 'My dear girl, we have stations all over the
Earth, but certain code is not coming from any of them! We are receiving
signals from intelligent beings on other inhabited worlds!' My friend
then told me that Marconi at that moment was in Australia conducting
experiment and trying to discover more about this momentous happening.
They believed the signals were coming from the planet Mars. I have never
mentioned this experience before, and I believe Marconi kept his work
secret because he knew what the world would say."

The lady who had the above experience lives in Santa Barbara, California
and is a respectable citizen of that city.

Later in the 1920's and 1930's more strange messages were received
throughout the world as radio was developed. And radiotelegraphic
messages from Saucers are being received today! The first radio contact
with space visitors was reported by our research group in Arizona in
1952, and now contact is being made in Ohio, Iowa, Canada, California,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Detroit, Michigan, and other places. The contact
is in both code and voice.

Space intelligences have said: "God provided--Man divided. Man has taken
this true thing and added to it his own ring."

After the period of *The Great Influx*, science went a long way toward
abolishing age-old theological dogma, but it went too far to the extreme
and man became bathed in the new glories of the materialistic scientific
world. Man on Earth had always de-lighted in dividing everything; there
are continents, nations, states and commonwealths, counties and
townships, cities and villages, wards and blocks, churches, cults, sects
and isms, races and creeds, classes and clubs, societies and shrines,
cathedrals and temples. But the Infinite Father is ONE!

Earth has been divided up so that instead of man being a brother to his
fellowman, he has set up artificial lines to separate and segregate
others different than himself. Man made boundaries, man made creeds and
ideals, man made religious groups, man made doctrine and dogma, man
made, man made. There is nothing wrong with religion, it's what man has
done to and with it that's so pitiful. Science is the twin-sister
[of](errata.htm#4.md) religion . . . truth cannot contradict truth, and
there is no religion higher than Truth. The worship of the Creator and
the study of His laws, causes and effects; of nature and the great
powers waiting for discovery within her bosom . . . all these should be
massed into ONE. Hence, science and religion are one, just as everything

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

in the Omniverse is ONE!

When Van Tassel said: "We must present to science, the religion of
science; and to religion, the science of religion," he gave the key for
understanding between the two great fields of human endeavor.

To many people today, science is the modern savior or "messiah". They
look to scientists and their discoveries for the answer to all of
mankind's ills. Recently reports said that soon we could live forever
through the latest discoveries in biological science. "What fools these
mortals be", indeed! We already possess immortal life!

Thousands of spiritually hungry people have come to realize that the
facts unearthed by science have not thus far been adequate to satisfy
the needs of humanity, and many today are searching for something . . .
orthodox theology has failed also to satisfy their deep longings, and
orthodox science presents only cold, bare materialism to them. There
are, of course, many scientists and theologians who are sincere, honest
men, working tirelessly to aid men on this planet. But, at the same
time, we must remember that all scientists are not "men of science", and
all theologians are not "men of God".

Men are most reluctant to give up their secure, comfortable positions
and pet theories. Desmond Leslie once said: "I'm convinced that the
orthodox scientists of today are the counterpart of the orthodox
theologians of the Middle Ages." Be that as it may, orthodoxy is the
same thing wherever it is found, and it doesn't matter by what name you
prefer

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

to call it. Once in a great while a man comes along, or a woman, and
although usually despised by their contemporaries, they manage somehow,
by supreme effort, to haul all the rest of lagging humanity behind them
and what we call worldly advancement or progression takes place.

In *Of Flight And Life* Charles A. Lindbergh says: "To me in youth
science was more important than either man or God. I worshipped science.
I was awed by its knowledge. Its advances had surpassed man's wildest
dreams. In its learning seemed to lie the key to all mysteries of life.

"It took many years for me to discover that science, with all its
brilliance, lights only a middle chapter of creation. I saw the science
I worshipped, and the aircraft I loved, destroying the civilization I
expected them to serve, and which I thought as permanent as the earth
itself.

"Now I realize that to survive, one must look beyond the speed and power
of aircraft, beyond the material strength of science. And, though God
cannot be seen as tangibly as I had demanded as a child, His presence
can be sensed in every sight and act and incident. Now I know that when
man loses this sense, he misses the true quality of life, the beauty of
earth, its seasons and its skies; the brotherhood of men; the joy of
wife and children. He loses the infinite strength without which no
people can survive, the element which war cannot defeat or peace
corrupt.

"Now I understand that spiritual truth is more

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

essential to a nation than the mortar in its cities' walls. For when the
actions of a people are unguided by these truths, it is only a matter of
time before the walls themselves collapse.

"The most urgent mission of our time is to understand these truths, and
to apply them to our way of modern life. We must draw strength from the
almost forgotten virtues of simplicity, humility, contemplation, prayer.
It requires a dedication beyond science, beyond self, but the rewards
are great and *it is our only hope!*"

All theology and science will not be done away with in the New Age. But
under the incoming "Golden Dawn" Man will acquire a greater concept of
Creation, free of ancient ritualism and the carried-over pagan ideas.
Likewise, man will enjoy more radiant health due to the habit of right
living and *right thinking*. Every man will be a scientist, even as
space visitors are true scientists: utilizing the Forces of the Universe
in the ever upward, spiraling climb toward divinity and the Father.

The Elder Brother, Jesus, said: "Know ye not that ye are Gods?" Man will
wake up to this fact, and will leave the pupa of ignorance,
[superstition](errata.htm#5.md), dogma, orthodoxy, etc., to emerge as a
"Son of God", claiming his rightful place in the divine scheme of
things. Man is a co-creator with the Father, but he fails to recognize
this great truth.

The great scientists of Columbus' time were no less great because they
believed Columbus to be a

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

fanatic for thinking the Earth was round. The mistakes of yesterday or
today only point the way to the greater truth of tomorrow; with each new
discovery we gain a greater comprehension of the whole.

Everything changes, but change itself. Let that change come; the Earth
has been waiting a long, long time! Four thousand years ago, Job asked:
"If a man die, shall he live again?" This question has been repeated in
vain by every generation of men who have since inhabited the Earth. Now,
space intelligences bring proof of life everlasting, and eternal
progression.

In *Conquest Of Fear*, Basil King gives us a view of the future world
when he says: "Taking Jesus as our standard we shall work out, I venture
to think, to the following points of progress:

"The control of matter in furnishing ourselves with food and drink by
means more direct than at present employed, as He turned water into wine
and fed the multitudes with the loaves and fishes.

"The control of matter by putting away from ourselves, by methods more
sure and less roundabout than those of today, sickness, blindness,
infirmity and deformity.

"The control of matter by regulating our atmospheric conditions as He
stilled the tempest.

"The control of matter by restoring to this phase of existence those who
have passed out of it before their time, or who can ill be spared from
it, as He 'raised' three young people from 'the dead' and Peter and Paul
followed His example.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

"The control of matter in putting it off and on at will, as He in His
death and resurrection.

"The control of matter in passing altogether out of it, as He in what we
call His Ascension into Heaven.

Yes, it is true that "God Provided--Man Divided", but man on Earth must
go back to the *whole* which the Creator made manifest unto His
creation. Remember the words of Paul: "O Timothy, keep that which is
committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, and
oppositions of science falsely so called." (I Timothy 6:20).

The Truth alone shall make man free, and as Bacon said: 'Truth is the
daughter of time, not of authority."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2. The Grand Man](otof06.md)
