[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index.md) 
[Mars](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mah06)  [Next](mah08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IV.

### PLANETARY ECONOMY

Economy is a virtue long cultivated on the Planet Mars. On your Earth
you waste more than you use, not only in food but in the fruits of the
Earth. You are using up your resources at a tremendous rate, and some
day you must pay the penalty. Witness the wanton destruction of your
beautiful forests, the depletion of your coal beds and crude oil
deposits. All this waste is the result of lack of Spiritual guidance; a
gross materialism: an inordinate selfish greed. Instead of laying up
Spiritual treasures you are worshiping at the altar of Mamon. Ultimately
you will find your hoardings nothing but tarnished brass--an illusion
leading you on to Spiritual destruction.

With the Martians the incentive to live is to express life and be in
harmony with the Creator, to develop spiritually and build for Eternity.
On Mars each one strives to live for his brother to the end that all may
inherit the promised Kingdom when yet as a physical being. Commercialism
with us is unknown, for no one works for profit. The products of the
toil of all the inhabitants are for the public larder and other
necessities and even luxuries.

As a result of this system of public economy and industrialism,
sweat-shops, child labor, poor houses, public reformatories, and the
long list of pernicious and iniquitous customs in vogue on your Earth
are unknown on our planet.

No worries mar the life of the people of Mars. Worry has no place in the
Martian mind. The wants of all are supplied by the Commonwealth, and
each one contributes his best efforts to the common good, and in return
each individual is supplied his every want. This is in accordance with
Christ's message: "Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and His
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Property And Property Rights](mah08.md)
