[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index.md) 
[Mars](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mah08)  [Next](mah10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI.

### DISTRIBUTION OF COMMODITIES

Barter and trade are unknown on Mars. The entire race of Martians is
cooperative, and the production of all necessities is based on the needs
of the Commonwealth.

Specialization in different branches of industrial activity is
centralized, as is the case of your Earth. That is, some particular
parts of the planet, owing to climatic and other conditions, are better
adapted for the production of some special kind of raw material used in
the manufacture of clothes or other necessities of life, or the
production of some particular foodstuff. But in every case the incentive
for industrial activity is not material profit. On the contrary the real
incentive is compliance with the Father's will.

Transportation is effected by means of flying ships actuated by the
control of gravitational attraction. These vehicles of the air, beside
your crude affairs are most perfect, and the amount of freight carried
is unlimited, for the reason that the gravitational attraction of the
cargo is nullified as well as that of the ship. (A more extended
explanation concerning this matter is given in another section of this
book.) Another motive power used is Cosmic, or Universal Energy. (We
shall refer to this later.)

Immense warehouses and depots are scattered throughout the entire
planet. These are centers of distribution. These warehouses are filled
with what all the people of the entire planet need in the way of food,
clothing and other necessities of life. These depots are in charge of
trained and competent workers who attend to the issuance and
distribution of all commodities.

When a Martian is in need of any particular commodity he makes
application to have his want supplied to the depot nearest to his
habitation. He immediately receives the needed article. If the quantity
and nature of his requisition is too large for him to carry personally,
the same is delivered at his domicile by the Commonwealth's
Transportation Department.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: Clairvoyant Visions Of Mars](mah10.md)
