[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index) 
[Mars](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mah10)  [Next](mah12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VIII.

### KNOWLEDGE OF GOD COMES FROM WITHIN

Mars, with its teeming millions of inhabitants, whose dwellings,
factories, storehouses, etc. cover most of the entire area, has no
watchmen, policemen or other guardians of the peace to prevent unlawful
acts on the part of its people.

As all property is considered as belonging to the Father, and is held in
common by the people of the planet, there exists no incentive for anyone
to steal. Each individual has all he requires for his comfort. Hence,
why should anyone covet what is in the possession of his brother?

There is no temptation on Mars for anyone to take more than he needs,
for selfishness has been entirely eliminated from our planet.
Selfishness has no place among really civilized beings. It is a relic of
the jungle where it is necessary to perpetuate the lower animal life.

You of your Earth have reverted or degenerated to a primordial condition
or state through the law of Atavism. This is a part of your fall from
Divine Grace. And to induce man on your globe to realize his pitiful
condition and redeem himself is the work of the Spirits from the higher
Spheres who are now with you.

Mars has no Church system and no Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. All Martians
recognize and worship one God, the Eternal Father. Each individual is
taught from infancy to seek God through the doors of his own soul, which
is an institutional faculty possessed by everyone.

Jesus Christ, who came to your Earth 2,000 years ago with a message, is
known to us. The Christ is one of the greatest powers in the
Universe--next to the Creator.

Your sectarian church systems are a hindrance to the proper spiritual
development of the individual. These systems engender an element of
dependability on the individual which holds back his spiritual
enfoldment and perverts his true individuality, which must grow and
unfold before real progress upwards begins.

All knowledge of God should come from within and not through the
instrumentality of imperfect individuals, such as your religious
teachers are.

The present lack of interest (in 1920) in sectarian matters on the part
of the inhabitants of your Earth is evidence of a slow but sure
disintegration of a system that has held your people in mental and
spiritual bondage for centuries, and presages the dawn of a better day
for humanity on your Earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: Mars Has No Political System](mah12)
