[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index.md) 
[Mars](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mah11)  [Next](mah13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IX.

### MARS HAS NO POLITICAL SYSTEM

When Love rules a community of people there is no need of administrative
bureaus for the regulation of the lives of the inhabitants who make up
the population of a planet. For the same reason Mars has no
gubernatorial or political administrative center.

This announcement may, in a measure, be a disappointment to many readers
who have imagined that no considerable number of human beings could live
and prosper without the aid and guidance of a complex administrative
system such as you have on your Earth.

Bureaucracy and autocracy are evils resulting from an undeveloped
civilization, and have no place in a community where selfishness has
been eliminated.

When each individual of a vast population, such as that of Mars, is
actuated and guided by the Light Within there is no need for a horde of
political parasites to direct the destinies of the race. This lack of an
administrative system on Mars also applies to its industrial and
economic side. The law of supply and demand determines just how many
factories there should be, and just what output is necessary for a given
period. But it must be remembered that the law of supply and demand on
our planet has no relation to a competitive system such as yours, for we
have no competitor, a fact that will be impressed elsewhere in this
book.

It is true that certain of our people who have been specially singled
out by the dominating influence of the Invisible World are occasionally
appealed to by those in doubt as to what is best for their individual
welfare, or the welfare of the community at large, to act in advisory
capacities. These are the Spiritual Advisers of the planet, and are
really God's prophets. There was a time when your race was guided by
similar individuals, as is evidenced from mention of them in your sacred
Scriptures. But their usefulness was lost when man on your Earth forgot
God.

It was then that man mistrusted the Light Within, and disregarded the
unwritten laws graven in the soul by the Creator. He clamored for a Code
of Laws and received them (through Moses). His next downward step was
taken when he admitted it was necessary to have interpreters of the Law:
for if the spirit of the Law had been kept there would have been no
misunderstanding or juggling of the letter.

Soon there was so much of this turning and twisting to suit man's
growing selfishness, that there was need for someone in authority over
all the interpreters, whose word should be final. So your people cried
aloud for Kings. And you have them, and your law has grown to immense
proportions, as have also the clever sins of your selfishness. WHERE
THERE IS NO SIN THERE IS NO NEED OF LAWS; FOR THE RIGHTEOUS MAN IS A LAW
UNTO HIMSELF.

It must not be imagined that because of the lack of a political system
on Mars, such as you deem necessary on your Earth, that all is chaos and
life a sort of happy-go-lucky existence. On the contrary, the Martian
existence is controlled by the acme of system, which is in accordance
with the law of Divine Harmony. A system from which has been eliminated
all the useless wheels which so clog up your lives and make your
progress slow indeed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X: Mars Is Ruled By Love](mah13.md)
