[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index.md) 
[Mars](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mah15)  [Next](mah17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XIII.

### MUSIC AN EXPRESSION OF THE FATHER

All material expressions of the Father, from the simplest chemical
element to the most complex compound; from the one-celled protoplasmic
life germ to the most complex organism, are Vibratory in their ultimate
nature.

As has been stated elsewhere in this book, material life is the
vibratory reflection from the Cause world into an Effect world. The
universe is a vibratory expression of an absolute Reality--GOD: a
material expression of Divine Harmony. And as Harmony is an expression
of the Father, its antithesis, Discord, is the creation of man.

Of all the vibrations that more fully express the Father and arouse the
Emotional within the soul, Music must of necessity head the list.

Owing to man's degeneration or fall, on your Earth, he has lost all
receptibility to the more refined vibratory tones of the chromatic
scale.

And for the same reason he has lost receptibility to intermediate
vibrations in the COLOR spectrum, which has clouded or stultified his
visional faculties. The long waves of the Infra-red and the short waves
of the Ultra-violet ends of the spectrum are invisible to your Earth
people except in rare cases of developed mediumship, though your
photograph plates are somewhat sensitive to these vibrations.

You are immersed in commercialism and other selfish pursuits while all
around you is a beautiful RAINBOW UNIVERSE, vibrating with music too
heavenly for your dulled perceptions to enjoy.

On Mars the development of the Musical talent is held to be of primary
importance. The laws of Harmony are part of the curriculum of all
schools, and all necessary paraphernalia for its proper exposition are
provided. We have instruments for measuring tone vibrations of so
delicate a pitch that the existence of these tones would be a blank to
the gross material ears of the inhabitants of your world.

Music arouses the innermost emotions of the soul and its effect on the
individual is proportionate to his degree of spiritual development.
Music is harmony, but it also creates an atmosphere of harmony.

The music of the spheres is a living reality, for Harmony is the very
essence of the Cosmos. By Music of the Spheres is meant the harmonious
interrelation of all spiritual planes. Every unit in the universe is in
perfect accord one with the other, and all are functioning in perfect
unison. Every Solar Orb and every Planet responds to Harmonious law. The
Cosmos as a whole is the expression of a Divine Symphony.

When man's spiritual progress has attained a degree of enfoldment
entitling him to come into possession of his Divine Heritage then will
the sublime vibrations of the spheres be a reality to him.

On Mars divers instruments are used for producing musical harmony, and
much of this harmony is of such a subtle nature that your crude
instruments could not give expression to it.

We have a means of producing harmony of the highest order by utilizing
Ethereal Electric Vibration which produces light vibrations
corresponding to tone production. for true Electric Vibration is real
music. This device resembles a series of globes. all transparent,
colorless when not in action. But immediately they are allowed to
produce music they become units of color and tone work that would give
you the impression of SEEING AND HEARING A RAINBOW SIMULTANEOUSLY. You
are not ready to receive the scientific explanation of this phenomenon,
but we are ready to give it to you at any time.

Singing is also highly developed on our planet, for it is the first
expression of harmony that the child is taught. This is true for the
reason that vocal music is the most natural expression of harmonious
vibrations. Much time is devoted to ensemble work among our people of
all ages. This chorus work is of great benefit to all partaking, for
individually and collectively much inspiration is received; and the
tremendous Love-force loosened by this united expression of harmony
becomes a phenomenal power and stimulus--a purifying agent for soul and
body. This will help you to realize why disease is unknown to us.

In the development of the musical talents of the individual on Mars the
pupil is impressed with the necessity of expressing the true self, and
the original improvisation or composition is the method by which the
pupil expresses his understanding of the subject. No one attempts to ape
the technique or genius of another, for on Mars all are geniuses. This
is true in every form of activity. All must be creators to express
individuality.

When an individual on Mars has surpassed all others in some special
expression of Divine Harmony the product of his genius is for the
benefit of all, hence copyrights and patents are unknown on our planet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV:](mah17.md)
