[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index) 
[Mars](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mah23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XI.

### SCIENTIFIC SOPHISTRY

"For we are of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon Earth
are a shadow." Job 8:9.

The term "Scientific Sophistry" well fits your multitude of theories
concerning Truth.

Science which connotes a higher wisdom of hidden things has degenerated
on your Earth from its original purpose (the overthrow of ignorance and
superstition and the development among intelligent beings of a near
approximation of Ultimate Truth) to an orthodox dogmatism, which today
is on a par with the unreality which this selfsame science has sought to
eliminate from the shallowness of the human mind.

It is quite true that the modern scientific method of investigation:
that is, along the lines of Observation, followed by the formation of a
theory, and finally by demonstration, has resulted in the release of
millions of souls from a darker thraldom than that which now besets
them, but nevertheless, the human race on your planet now undergoing its
probationary experience, is to be pitied for its blindness in matters of
real import, namely SPIRITUAL TRUTHS.

Your scientific methods instead of leading you onward towards the
Central Sun of Spiritual enlightenment has so beclouded your vision that
your race today--that is, the so-called enlightened and learned portions
of your population--have been deflected from the main path, and they
will soon find themselves pursuing an illusionary will-o'-the-wisp.

Another result of the adoption of the modern scientific method has been
the tendency of those endeavoring to bring light into the dark nooks and
crannies of human existence, to immerse themselves in an abysmal
materialism from which rescue is almost hopeless.

This condition is the result of a loss of Spiritual vision, and is the
final effort on the part of scientists to explain the riddle of human
existence in accordance with a cleverly thought out, but most amazingly
deficient, mechanistic conception of life.

Since the inception of modern Science on your Earth, based on the
scientific method of investigation, its devotees adopted a spirit of
skepticism concerning all problems of human activity not susceptible to
measurement with the foot-rule, or analysis with the test tube, with the
result that the newer Science of Psychology was invented to supply a
reasonable and material explanation for the subtle and mystifying
phenomena of the human mind.

That the conceivers of this science of Psychology have been successful
is attested by the many remarkable explanations given to account for
everyday manifestations of human and animal mentality.

I will venture to say that this idea applies to all branches of modern
science as there seems to be no class of phenomena in the entire
universe, whether in the realm of chemistry, physics or psychology but
what can be clearly elucidated to the satisfaction of all scientists
with the aid of an adequate terminology. So, today your Science in final
analysis, has degenerated into a system of clever word-juggling.

It is true there are today in the ranks of your foremost investigators
and God-inspired men who are seeking Truth. Their names and their
achievements will be treasured by a grateful posterity, and it is to be
regretted that their declarations, based upon tireless investigation and
honest opinion, are derided by their fellow-workers in the Realm of
Truth.

All your scientific theories are based upon certain postulates that in
time are out of agreement with observed facts, and you are compelled to
cast those postulates aside, adopt others and theorize anew. This
fruitless search for Truth must go on until a divergence is made from
the blind trail and the right path is found that will lead you to the
ultimate goal.

Be not surprised, then, that the revelations in this book will meet with
the usual criticisms launched at every new idea of Truth that has been
given to your world from the time man first walked erect and beheld the
stars in the firmament of God. Error must and will dissolve presently in
the presence of Truth, which will abide with you for all time. HELP
HASTEN THE DAY OF THE LORD.
