[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hmvp07)  [Next](hmvp09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic*, by W.J. Wilkins, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

#### ADITI, AND THE ĀDITYAS.

<span class="smallcaps">Aditi</span> has the honour of being almost the
only goddess mentioned by name in the Rig-Veda, as the mother of any of
the gods; but it is by no means an easy task to delineate her character,
as the most contradictory statements are made concerning her. She was
invoked as the bestower of blessings on children and cattle; and she is
declared to be the mother of Varuna, and other deities, sometimes eight,
sometimes twelve in number. She is supposed to be the impersonation of
"infinity, especially the boundlessness of heaven, in opposition to the
finiteness of earth." Another supposition is that Aditi is the
personification of "universal, all-embracing Nature or Being." This
latter idea seems to be the more correct from the following
verses, <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12) where a man about to be
immolated says, "Of which god, now, of which of the immortals, shall we
invoke the amiable name, who shall give us back to the great Aditi, that
I may behold my father and my mother?" Whatever may have been intended
by the poets to be expressed by this name, or whatever may have been the
precise power personified by Aditi, she is connected with the
forgiveness of sin. Thus, "May Aditi make us sinless." "Aditi be
gracious, if we have committed any sin against you." "Whatever

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

offence we have, oh Agni, through our folly committed against you, oh
most youthful god, make us free from sins against Aditi." "Whatever sin
we have committed, may Aditi sever us from it." <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13) Probably the term Aditi "the boundless,"
was originally employed as an epithet of Dyauspitar, the Heaven-father.
When the heavens came to be divided into a number of parts, over each of
which a ruler was nominated, a mother was wanted for them, and the name
Aditi was given to her.

In the account of the Creation given in the Rig-Veda, Aditi is said to
have sprung from Daksha, and in the same verse Daksha is called her son.
There is also a reference to her other sons. In the "Vishnu Purāna" we
have no less than three somewhat differing accounts of the origin of
Daksha the father of Aditi. In the first account, his name appears
amongst the mind-born sons of Brahmā; and in this connection he is said
to have had twenty-four daughters; but Aditi is not mentioned as one of
them. In the second account of Daksha, Aditi is said to have been one of
his sixty daughters, and was given in marriage to Kasypa, by whom she
had twelve sons—the Ādityas. Elsewhere we read that Vishnu, when
incarnate as the Dwarf, was a result of this marriage. In the third
account of Daksha, Aditi is again mentioned as his daughter, and the
mother of Vivasat (the Sun). The sons of Aditi are termed

##### THE ĀDITYAS.

This name signifies simply the descendants of Aditi. In one passage in
the Rig-Veda <span id="fr_14"></span>[†](#fn_14) the names of six are
given: Mitra, Aryaman, Bhaga, Varuna, Daksha and Amsa. In another
passage they are said to be seven in

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

number, though their names are not given. In a third, eight is the
number mentioned; but "of the eight sons of Aditi, who were born from
her body, she approached the gods with seven, and cast out Mārttānda
(the eighth)." <span id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15) As the names of
these sons given in different parts of the Vedas do not agree with each
other, it is difficult to know who were originally regarded as Ādityas.
Judging from the number of hymns addressed to them, some of these
deities occupied a conspicuous position in the Vedic Pantheon; whilst
others are named once or twice only, and then in connection with their
more illustrious brethren. In the "Satapatha Brāhmana," and the Purānas,
the number of the Ādityas is increased to twelve. In addition to the six
whose names are given above, the following are also described in some
hymns of the Rig-Veda as the offspring of Aditi: Surya, "as an Āditya
identified with Agni, is said to have been placed by the gods in the
sky;" <span id="fr_16"></span>[†](#fn_16) Savitri, and Indra too, are in
one passage addressed as an Āditya along with Varuna and the Moon. In
the Taittiriya Texts, the following are described as Ādityas:—Mitra,
Varuna, Aryaman, Amsu, Bhaga, Indra, and Vivasvat (Surya).

Professor Roth says <span id="fr_17"></span>[‡](#fn_17) of these
deities, "In the highest heaven dwell and reign those gods who bear in
common the name of Ādityas. We must, however, if we would discover their
earliest character, abandon the conceptions which in a later age, and
even in that of the heroic poems, were entertained regarding these
deities. According to this conception they were twelve Sun-gods, there
being evident reference to the twelve months. But for the most ancient
period we must hold fast to the primary significance of their names.
They are

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

inviolable, imperishable, eternal things. Aditi, Eternity, or The
Eternal, is the element which sustains them, or is sustained by them.
The eternal and inviolable element in which the Ādityas dwell, and which
forms their essence, is the celestial light. The Ādityas, the gods of
this light, do not therefore by any means coincide with any of the forms
in which light is manifested in the universe. They are neither the sun,
nor moon, nor stars, nor dawn, but the eternal sustainers of this
luminous life, which exists, as it were, behind these phenomena."

As noticed above, the text of the Rig-Veda says, <span
id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18) "Of the eight sons who were born from the
body of Aditi, she approached the gods with seven, but cast away the
eighth." In the commentary, the following explanation of this
circumstance is given. "The eighth son was deformed. His brothers,
seeing his deformity, improved his appearance. He was afterwards known
as Vivasvat (the Sun). From the superfluous flesh cut off his body an
elephant was formed, hence the proverb, Let no man catch an elephant,
for the elephant partakes of the nature of man.'"

According to a passage quoted in Chapter II. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[†](#fn_19) from the "Satapatha Brāhmana," Agni,
Indra, and Surya, obtained superiority over the other gods by means of
sacrifice. By whatever means this position was obtained, it is certain
that they were the most popular deities of the Vedic Age. Agni stands in
a class by himself; but with Indra and Surya there are other deities
closely associated, and possessing very similar attributes. Nearly the
whole of the more conspicuous Vedic deities may be classified as
follows:—(1) Agni, the god of Fire; (2) Sun Gods, or gods of Light; and
(3) Storm Gods, or those associated with Indra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[17:\*](hmvp08.htm#fr_12) Muir, O. S. T., v. 45.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[18:\*](hmvp08.htm#fr_13) Muir, O. S. T., v. 46,
47.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[18:†](hmvp08.htm#fr_14) Ibid. v. 54.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[19:\*](hmvp08.htm#fr_15) Muir, O. S. T., v. 49.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[19:†](hmvp08.htm#fr_16) Ibid. v. 54.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[19:‡](hmvp08.htm#fr_17) Ibid. v. 56.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[20:\*](hmvp08.htm#fr_18) Muir, O. S. T., v. 49.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20:†](hmvp08.htm#fr_19) Page 10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Agni](hmvp09)
