[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hmvp33)  [Next](hmvp35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic*, by W.J. Wilkins, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

#### UMĀ.

<span class="smallcaps">Umā</span> is the name by which the consort of
Siva is first known. In the sacred books she appears in many forms, and
is known by many names; but as there are legends giving the
circumstances connected with the names and forms more generally known,
these will be given as far as possible in chronological order.

When Devi (the goddess) appears as Umā, she is said to be the daughter
of Daksha, a son of Brahmā. Her father was at first very unwilling that
his daughter should marry a mendicant, but his scruples were overcome by
the persuasion of Brahmā. As Siva is styled Mahādeva, Umā is frequently
called simply Devi. At this period of her existence she is also called
Sati, in allusion to the fact that when her father slighted her husband
by not inviting him to the great sacrifice he made, she voluntarily
entered the sacrificial fire and was burned to death in the presence of
the gods and Brāhmans; or, according to another account, was, under the
same circumstances, consumed by her own glory. The name Sati means "the
true, or virtuous woman," and is given to those widows who ascend the
funeral pile of their husbands, and undergo a voluntary death by being
burned with his corpse. Ambikā, another name of Umā, in one of the
earliest books, is said to be the sister of

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rudra; and yet in
the later ones she is declared to be his wife.

"The earliest work, so far as I am aware, in which the name of Umā
appears, is the Talavakāra, or Kena Upanishad. In the third section of
that treatise it is mentioned that on one occasion Brahmā gained a
victory for the gods. As, however, they were disposed to ascribe the
credit of their success to themselves, Brahmā appeared for the purpose
of disabusing them of their mistake. The gods did not know him, and
commissioned first Agni and then Vāyu, to ascertain what this apparition
was. When, in answer to Brahmā's inquiry, these two gods represented
themselves, the one as having power to burn, and the other to blow away
anything whatever, he desired them respectively to burn and blow away a
blade of grass; but they were unable to do this, and returned without
ascertaining who he was. Indra was then commissioned to ascertain who
this apparition was. 'So be it,' he replied, and approached that being,
who vanished from him. In the sky he came to a woman, who was very
resplendent, Umā Haimavati. To her he said: 'What is this apparition?'
She said, It is Brahmā; in this victory of Brahmā exult.' By this he
knew that it was Brahmā. The commentators on this passage declare that
Umā means 'knowledge,' and speak of Umā as the impersonation of 'divine
knowledge.'" <span id="fr_257"></span>[\*](#fn_257)

Professor Weber <span id="fr_258"></span>[†](#fn_258) says: "As in Siva,
first of all two gods, Agni and Rudra are combined, so too his wife is
to be regarded as a compound of several divine forms; and this becomes
quite evident as we look over the mass of her epithets. While one set of
these as Umā, Ambikā, Pārvati, Haimavati, belong to the wife of Rudra,
others

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

as Kāli carry us back to the wife of Agni; while Gauri and others
perhaps refer to Nirriti the goddess of all evil." And he adds: "The
most remarkable instance of this is to be found in the Mahābhārata in
the hymn of Yudhishthira to Durgā, where he calls her Yasodā Krishna,
'born in the cowherd family of Nanda,' 'sister of Vasudeva,' 'enemy of
Kansa,' and as 'having the same features as Sankarshana.' Some such
explanation is certainly necessary when we see that Kāli is said to be
the same with Umā, the embodiment of 'heavenly wisdom.'"

In the following passage from the Rāmāyana, <span
id="fr_259"></span>[\*](#fn_259) Umā is said to be the daughter of
Himavat and Mena; the two forms of lima and Pārvati being confounded in
the writer's mind. "To Himavat, the chief of mountains, the great mine
of metal, two daughters were born in beauty unequalled upon earth. The
daughter of Meru, Mend by name, the pleasing and beloved wife of
Himavat, was their slender-waisted mother. Of her was born Gangā, the
eldest daughter of Himavat, and his second daughter was Umā, who, rich
in austere observances, having undertaken an arduous rite, fulfilled a
course of severe austerity. This daughter lima, distinguished by severe
austerity, adored by the worlds, the chief of the mountains gave to the
matchless Rudra. These were the two daughters of the King of the
Mountains: Gangā, the most eminent of rivers, and Umā the most excellent
of goddesses."

"The Harivansa <span id="fr_260"></span>[†](#fn_260) mentions three
daughters of Himavat and Mena, but Gangā is not amongst them. "Their
(the Pitris) mental daughter was Mena, the eminent wife of the great
mountain Himavat. The King of the Mountains begat three daughters upon

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Menā, viz. Aparnā,
Ekaparnā, and Ekapātalā. These three performing very great austerity,
such as could not be performed by gods or Dānavas, distressed \[with
alarm\] both the stationary and the moving worlds. Ekaparnā (one leaf)
fed upon one leaf. Ekapātalā took only one pātala (Bignonia) for her
food. One (Aparnā) took no sustenance; but her mother, distressed
through maternal affection, forbade her, dissuading her with her words
*u mā* (Oh, don't). The beautiful goddess, performing arduous austerity,
having been thus addressed by her mother, became known in the three
worlds as Umā. In this manner the contemplative goddess became renowned
under that name. All these three had mortified bodies, were
distinguished by the force of contemplation, and were all chaste, and
expounders of divine knowledge. Umā was the eldest and most excellent of
the three. Distinguished by the force derived from deep contemplation,
she obtained Mahādeva \[for her husband\]."

Several of the names under which Umā is now known and worshipped are to
be found in the older writings of the Hindus, though at that time they
did not refer to Siva's wife. Umā, as we have already seen, was
"Wisdom;" Ambikā was a sister of Rudra; Durgā "in a hymn of the
Taittiriya Āranyaka is an epithet of the sacrificial flame; and Kāli, a
word which occurs in the Mandaka Upanishad, is the name of one of the
seven flickering tongues of Agni, the god of fire." <span
id="fr_261"></span>[\*](#fn_261)

Umā is called the mother of Kartikeya, and in a certain sense of Ganesa
too; but it is not at all clear whether it was really as Umā or in her
succeeding birth as Pārvati that she had these children.

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

The "Kurmā Purāna" <span id="fr_262"></span>[\*](#fn_262) has an account
of Umā's creation which takes us back, a stage anterior to her birth as
a daughter of Daksha. "When Brahmā was angry with his sons for adopting
an ascetic life \[and refusing to perpetuate the human race\], a form
half male and half female was produced from that anger, to whom Brahmā
said, 'Divide thyself,' and then disappeared. The male half became
Rudra, and the female, at the command of Brahmā, became the daughter of
Daksha under the name of Sati, and was given in marriage to Rudra, and
when she subsequently gave up her life on being treated with disrespect
by her father, she was born a second time as the daughter of Himavat and
Mena, and named Pārvati."

It should be noticed that although Umā is called the *wife* of Siva, it
is understood that she represents the energy or active power of that
deity; she assumed a body in order that she might be united to him in
due form; in like manner Vishnu's energy became incarnate in Lakshmi,
Sita, etc.

##### PĀRVATI.

The goddess in this form is the constant companion of her husband, but
few independent actions are ascribed to her. In the Purānas, Siva and
Pārvati are generally represented as engaged in making love to each
other, or (rather a singular change) as seated on Mount Kailāsa
discussing the most abstruse questions of Hindu philosophy.
Occasionally, however, quarrels arose between them, and on one occasion
Siva reproached her for the blackness of her skin. This taunt so grieved
her that she left him for a time, and, repairing to a deep forest,

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

performed a most severe course of austerities, until Brahmā granted her
as a boon that her complexion should be golden, and from this
circumstance she is known as Gauri. <span
id="fr_263"></span>[\*](#fn_263)

<span id="img_29000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SIVA AND
PĀRVATI.](tn/29000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/29000.jpg)  
SIVA AND PĀRVATI.  
</span>

The following legend from the "Vāraha Purāna" <span
id="fr_264"></span>[†](#fn_264) describes her origin. Brahmā when on a
visit to Siva

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

on Mount Kailāsa is thus addressed by him: "Say quickly, O Brahmā, what
has induced you to come to me?" Brahmā replies, "There is a mighty asura
named Andhakā (Darkness), by whom all the gods, having been distressed,
came for protection, and I have hastened to inform you of their
complaints." Brahmā then looked intently at Siva, who by thought
summoned Vishnu into their presence. As the three deities looked at each
other, "from their three refulgent glances sprang into being a virgin of
celestial loveliness, of hue cerulean, like the petals of a blue lotus,
and adorned with gems, who bashfully bowed before Brahmā, Vishnu, and
Siva. On their asking her who she was, and why she was distinguished by
the three colours black, white, and red, she said, "From your glances
was I produced; do you not know your own omnipotent energies? " Brahmā
then praising her, said, "Thou shalt be named the goddess of three times
(past, present and future), the preserver of the universe, and under
various appellations shalt thou be worshipped, as thou shalt be the
cause of accomplishing the desires of thy votaries. But, O goddess,
divide thyself into three forms, according to the colours by which thou
art distinguished." She then, as Brahmā had requested, divided herself
into three parts; one white, one red, and one black. The white was "
Sarasvati, of a lovely, felicitous form, and the cooperator with Brahmā
in creation; the red was Lakshmi, the beloved of Vishnu, who with him
preserves the universe; the black was Pārvati, endowed with many
qualities and the energy of Siva." In the preceding legend it was
narrated how Pārvati, originally black, became golden-coloured.

The "Vaivarta Purāna" <span id="fr_265"></span>[\*](#fn_265) relates the
circumstance

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

which led to the re-appearance on earth of Umā, who had sacrificed
herself and became a Sati, under the form of Pārvati. Siva, hearing of
the death of his wife, fainted from grief; on his recovery he hastened
to the banks of the river of heaven, where he beheld "the body of his
beloved Sati arrayed in white garments, holding a rosary in her hand,
and glowing with splendour bright as burnished gold. No sooner did he
see the lifeless form of his spouse, than, through grief for her loss,
his senses forsook him." When he revived, gazing on her beautiful
countenance, with tears in his eyes and sorrow in his voice, he thus
addressed her: "Arise, arise, O my beloved Sati! I am Sankara, thy lord;
look therefore on me, who have approached thee. With thee I am almighty,
the framer of all things, and the giver of every bliss; but without
thee, my energy! I am like a corpse, powerless and incapable of action:
how then, my beloved, canst thou forsake me? With smiles and glances of
thine eyes, say something sweet as amrita, and with the rain of thy
gentle words sprinkle my heart, which is scorched with grief. Formerly,
when thou didst see me from a distance, thou wouldst greet me with the
fondest accents; why then to-day art thou angry, and wilt not speak to
me, thus sadly lamenting? O lord of my soul, arise! O mother of the
universe, arise! Dost thou not see me here weeping? O beauteous one!
thou .canst not have expired. Then, O my faithful spouse! why dost thou
not honour me as usual? And why dost thou thus, disobedient to my voice,
infringe thy marriage vow?"

"Siva, having thus spoken, raised the lifeless body, and in the anguish
of separation pressed it to his bosom, and kissed it again and again.
Lip to lip, and breast to breast, Sankara clasped the corpse of his
beloved; and,

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

after frequent Paintings, arose, and, pressing Sati closely to his
bosom, rushed forward maddened with grief. Like a man deprived of his
senses, the preceptor of the universe wandered over the seven *dwipas*,
until, exhausted by fatigue and anguish, he fell down in a swoon at the
foot of a banyan tree. The gods, seeing Siva in this state, were greatly
astonished, and, accompanied by Brahmā and Vishnu, hastened to the spot
where he lay. Vishnu placed the head of the fainting Siva on his bosom
and wept aloud; after a little time he encouraged his friend by saying,
'O Siva! recover thy senses, and listen to what I say. Thou wilt
certainly regain Sati, since Siva and Sati are as inseparable as cold
from water, heat from fire, smell from earth, or radiance from the sun!"

"Hearing these words, Siva faintly opened his eyes, bedewed with tears,
and said: 'O form of splendour! who art thou? Who are these that
accompany thee? Who am I, and where are my attendants? Where art thou
and these going? Where am I, and where proceeding?' As Vishnu heard
these words he wept, and his tears, uniting with those of Siva, formed a
lake, which hence became a famous place of pilgrimage. Vishnu at length
calmed Siva, who, delighted with his words, beheld Sati, seated before
him in a gem-adorned car, accompanied by numerous attendants, arrayed in
costly garments; resplendent with ornaments, her placid face being
irradiated with a gentle smile. The anguish of separation ceased, and
joy filled his soul as Sati thus addressed him: 'Be firm, O Mahādeva!
lord of my soul! In whatever state of my being I may exist, I shall
never be separated from my lord; and now have I been born the daughter
of Himavat in order to become again thy wife; therefore no longer grieve
on account of

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

our separation.' Having thus consoled Siva, Sati disappeared."

In another chapter of the same Purāna we have an account of their
reunion. <span id="fr_266"></span>[\*](#fn_266) " Sati soon obtained
another birth in the womb of Himavat's wife; and Siva, collecting the
bones and ashes from her funeral pile, made a necklace of the bones and
covered his body with the ashes, and thus preserved them as memorials of
his

<span id="img_29400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PĀRVATI
WORSHIPPING THE LINGA.](tn/29400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/29400.jpg)  
PĀRVATI WORSHIPPING THE LINGA.  
</span>

beloved. Not long after this, Sati was born as the daughter of Menā,
excelling in beauty and virtue all created beings, and she grew up in
her mountain home like the young moon increasing to its full splendour.
Whilst still a girl, she heard a voice from heaven saying, 'Perform a
severe course of austerity, in order to obtain Siva for a husband, as he
cannot otherwise be obtained.' Pārvati, proud of her youth, smiling
disdainfully at this

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

instruction, thought within herself, 'Will he who, on account of the
grief he felt for my having formerly consumed myself, not accept me as
his spouse when redolent of life? And how can disjunction exist between
those who have been predestined from their first being to be husband and
wife?' Confident in her youth, loveliness, and numerous attractions, and
persuaded that on the first mention of her name Siva would be anxious to
espouse her, Pārvati did not seek to gain him by the performance of
austerity, but night and day gave herself to joyous sports with her
companions." Her hopes, however, were disappointed. She had to perform
most severe penance before she was reunited to her husband; and it was
only by the assistance of Kāmadeva, who, at the instigation of the gods,
wounded him with his arrows as he was engaged in meditation, whilst
Pārvati was seated in front of him, that her wish was gratified. Siva at
first was anything but grateful for this interference; and as before
narrated he rewarded Kāma by destroying him with a flame of glory that
issued from his third eye.

In a Bengali account of Durgā, a legend is given from a later work than
the Purāna from which the above extract was taken. It is to the
following effect:—When Siva raised the dead body of Sati in his arms he
began to dance in a frantic manner. The earth trembled beneath the
weight of such a load; and Vishnu, fearing there would be an utter
destruction of the universe if this were allowed to continue, let fly
his wonder-working discus, and cut the body into fifty-one pieces. These
fell in different places, a leg here, a hand there; but wherever a part
touched the earth, the spot became sacred, an image of the goddess was
set up, and a temple rose—in some places it is said they grew to her
honour

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —which pilgrims
still visit as shrines. The renowned temple at Kāli Ghat, near Calcutta,
is said to possess the big toe of her left foot; and the other principal
shrines of Pārvati profess to contain a relic of her body.

Pārvati is represented in pictures as a fair and beautiful woman, with
no superfluity of limbs. Few miraculous deeds are claimed for her. It is
when she appears as Durgā, Kāli, etc., that she manifests divine powers,
and exhibits a very different spirit from that which appears in her as
Pārvati. Hence the supposition that these were originally distinct
deities, though now believed to be one and the same.

##### DURGĀ.

The consort of Siva now assumes a very different character from that in
which she has so far been represented. In those incarnations, though the
wife of Siva, she acted as an ordinary woman, and manifested womanly
virtues; as Durgā she was a most powerful warrior, and appeared on
earth, under many names, for the destruction of demons who were
obnoxious to gods and men.

She obtained the name Durgā because she slew an asura named Durgā, the
name of the goddess being the feminine form of the demon's name. The "
Skanda Purāna" <span id="fr_267"></span>[\*](#fn_267) gives the
following account of this occurrence. Kartikeya, being asked by Agastya,
the sage, why his mother was called Durgā, says: "A giant named Durgā,
the son of Ruru, having performed penance in favour of Brahmā, obtained
his blessing, and grew so mighty that he conquered the three worlds, and
dethroned Indra and the other gods. He compelled the wives of the Rishis

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

to sing his praise, and sent the gods from heaven to dwell in the
forests, and by a mere nod summoned them to reverence him. He abolished
religious ceremonies; Brāhmans through fear of him gave up the reading
of the Vedas; rivers changed their course; fire lost its energy, and the
terrified stars retired from sight. He assumed the shape of the clouds,
and gave rain whenever he pleased; the earth, through fear, yielded an
abundant harvest, and the trees flowered and gave fruit out of the
proper season."

The gods in their distress appealed to Siva. Indra, their king, said,
"He has dethroned me!" Surya said, "He has taken my kingdom!" Siva,
pitying them, desired Pārvati to go and destroy this giant. She,
accepting the commission willingly, calmed the fears of the gods, and
first sent Kālarātri (Dark Night), a female whose beauty bewitched the
inhabitants of the three worlds, to order the demon to restore things to
their ancient order. He, however, full of fury, sent his soldiers to lay
hold of Kālarātri; but by the breath of her mouth she reduced them to
ashes. Durgā then sent 30,000 other giants, who were such monsters in
size that they covered the surface of the earth. At the sight of these
giants, Kālarātri fled to Pārvati, followed by the giants. Durgā, with
100,000,000 chariots, 120,000,000,000 elephants, 10,000,000 swift-footed
horses, and innumerable soldiers, went to fight Pārvati, on the Vindhya
mountain. As soon as he drew near, Pārvati assumed 1000 arms, called to
her assistance different beings, and produced a number of weapons from
her body (a long list of these is given in the Purāna). The troops of
the giant poured their arrows on Pārvati as she sat on the mountain
Vindhya, thick as the drops of rain in a storm; they even tore up trees,
mountains, etc., and hurled them

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

at her; in return she threw a weapon which carried away the arms of many
of the giants. Durgā himself then hurled a flaming dart at the goddess,
which she turned aside; another being sent, she stopped it by a hundred
arrows. He next aimed an arrow at Pārvati's breast; this too she
repelled, and two other weapons, a club and a pike. At last coming to
close quarters, Pārvati seized Durgā and set her left foot on his
breast, but he, managing to disengage himself, renewed the fight.

Pārvati then caused a number of helpers to issue from her body, which
destroyed the soldiers of the giants. In return, Durgā sent a dreadful
shower of hail, the effect of which Pārvati counteracted by an
instrument called Sosuna. The demon now assumed the shape of an elephant
as large as a mountain, and approached the goddess; but she tied his
legs, and, with her nails, which were like scimitars, tore him to
pieces. He rose again in the form of a buffalo, and with his horns cast
stones, trees, and mountains, tearing up the trees by the breath of his
nostrils. Pārvati then pierced him with her trident; he reeled to and
fro, and, renouncing the form of a buffalo, assumed his original body as
a giant, with a thousand arms, having a weapon in each. Approaching
Pārvati, she seized him by his arms, and carried him into the air,
whence she threw him to the ground with fearful force. Seeing that the
fall had not destroyed him, she pierced him in the breast with an arrow,
whereupon blood issued from his mouth in streams, and he died. The gods
were delighted at the result, and soon regained their former splendour.

Still another account of the origin of Durgā is found in the Chandi, a
part of the "Mārkandeya Purāna." <span id="fr_268"></span>[\*](#fn_268)
Mahisha, king of the giants, at one time overcame the

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

gods in war, and reduced them to such a state of want that they wandered
through the earth as beggars. Indra first conducted them to Brahmā, and
then to Siva; but as these gods could render no assistance, they turned
to Vishnu, who was so grieved at the sight of their wretchedness, that
streams of glory issued from his face, whence came a female figure named
Mahāmāya (another name of Durgā). Streams of glory issued from the faces
of the other gods also, which in like manner entered Mahāmāya; in
consequence of which she became a body of glory, like a mountain of
fire. The gods then handed their weapons to this dreadful being, who
with a frightful scream ascended into the air, slew the giant, and gave
redress to the gods.

The account, as found in the "Vāmana Purāna," <span
id="fr_269"></span>[\*](#fn_269) differs in some details. When the gods
had sought Vishnu in their distress, he, and at his command Sankara
(Siva), Brahmā, and the other gods, emitted such flames from their eyes
and countenances that a mountain of effulgence was formed, from which
became manifest Katyayini, refulgent as a thousand suns, having three
eyes, black hair, and eighteen arms. Siva gave her his trident, Vishnu a
discus, Varuna a conch-shell, Agni a dart, Vāyu a bow, Surya a quiver
full of arrows, Indra a thunderbolt, Kuvera a mace, Brahmā a rosary and
water-pot, Kala a shield and sword, Visvakarma a battle-axe and other
weapons. Thus armed, and adored by the gods, Katyayini proceeded to the
Vindhya hills. Whilst there, the asuras Chanda and Manda saw her, and
being captivated by her beauty they so described her to Mahisha, their
king, that he was anxious to obtain her. On asking for her hand, she
told him she must be won in fight. He came, and fought; at length Durgā

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

dismounted from her lion, and sprang upon the back of Mahisha, who was
in the form of a buffalo, and with her tender feet so smote him on the
head that he fell to the ground senseless, when she cut off his head
with her sword.

In pictures and images Durgā is represented as a golden-coloured woman,
with a gentle and beautiful countenance. She has ten arms; in one hand
she holds a spear, with which she is piercing the giant Mahisha; with
one of her left hands she holds the tail of a serpent, with another the
hair of the giant whose breast the snake is biting; her other hands are
filled with various weapons. Her lion leans against her right leg, and
the giant against her left. The images of Lakshmi, Sarasvati, Kartikeya,
and Ganesa are frequently made and worshipped with that of Durgā. The
frontispiece is a representation of Durgā and the other goddesses and
gods, as they are made in Bengal at the time of the great autumnal
festival.

In Bengal the worship of this goddess forms the most popular of all the
Hindu festivals; it continues for three days, and is the great holiday
of the year. At this season, as at Christmas in England, the members of
the family whom business detains from home during the year return; and
with the worship of Durgā is associated all that is bright and cheerful.
Sacrifices of buffaloes and goats are made to her; feasting, singing,
and dancing are continued through the greater part of the night. Though
her chief festival is in the autumn, she is also worshipped, though not
so generally, in the spring. The reason of this as taught in a Bengali
account is as follows:—Rāvana was a devout worshipper of Durgā, and had
the Chandi (an extract from one of the Purānas) read daily. When,
therefore, Rāma attacked

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

him, the goddess assisted her servant. It was in the spring that Rāvana
observed her festival. Rāma, seeing the help his enemy received from
this goddess, began himself to worship her. This was in the autumn.
Durgā was delighted with the devotion of Rāma, and at once transferred
her aid to him.

Durgā is said to have assumed ten forms for the

<span id="img_30100"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![DASABHUJĀ.](tn/30100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/30100.jpg)  
DASABHUJĀ.  
</span>

destruction of two giants, Sumbha and Nisumbha; the "Mārkandeya Purāna"
describes these incarnations in the following order:—(1) As Durgā she
received the message of the giants; (2) As Dasabhujā (the ten-armed) she
slew part of their army; (3) As Singhavāhini (seated on a lion) she
fought with Raktavija; (4) As Mahishāmardini (destroyer of a buffalo)
she slew Sumbha in the

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

form of a buffalo; (5) As Jagaddhātri (the mother of the world) she
overcame the army of the giants; (6) As Kāli (the black woman) she slew
Raktavija; (7) As Muktakesi (with flowing hair) she overcame another of
the armies of the giants; (8) As Tāra (the saviour) she slew Sumbha in
his own proper shape; (9) As Chinnamustaka (the headless) she killed
Nisumbha; (10) As Jagadgauri (the golden-coloured lady renowned through
the world) she received the praises and thanks of the gods. <span
id="fr_270"></span>[\*](#fn_270)

The great conflict for success in which Durgā assumed so many forms is
described as follows in the "Mārkandeya Purāna." <span
id="fr_271"></span>[†](#fn_271) At the close of the Treta Age, two
giants, named Sumbha and Nisumbha, performed religious austerities for
10,000 years, the merit of which brought Siva from heaven, who
discovered that by this extraordinary devotion, they sought to obtain
the blessing of immortality. He reasoned long with them, and vainly
endeavoured to persuade them to ask for any other gift. Being denied
what they specially wanted, they entered upon still more severe
austerities, for another thousand years, when Siva again appeared, but
still refused to grant what they asked. They now suspended themselves
with their heads downwards over a slow fire, till the blood streamed
from their necks: they continued thus for 800 years. The gods began to
tremble, lest, by performing such rigid acts of holiness, these demons
should supplant them on their thrones. The king of the gods thereupon
called a council, and imparted to them his fears. They admitted that
there was ground for anxiety, but asked what was the remedy.

"Acting upon the advice of Indra, Kandarpa (the god of love), with
Rambhā and Tilatamā, the most beautiful of the celestial nymphs, were
sent to fill the minds of

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

the giants with sensual desires. Kandarpa with his arrow wounded both;
upon which, awaking from their absorption, and seeing two beautiful
women, they were taken in the snare, and abandoned their devotions. With
these women they lived for 5000 years; after which they saw the folly of
renouncing their hopes of immortality for the sake of sensual
gratifications. They suspected this snare must have been a contrivance
of Indra; so, driving back the nymphs to heaven, they renewed their
devotions, cutting the flesh off their bones, and making burnt offerings
of it to Siva. They continued in this way for 1000 years, till at last
they became mere skeletons; Siva again appeared and bestowed upon them
his blessing—that in riches and strength they should excel the gods.

"Being exalted above the gods, they began to make war upon them. After
various successes on both sides, the giants became everywhere
victorious; when Indra and the gods, reduced to a most deplorable state
of wretchedness, solicited the interference of Brahmā and Vishnu. They
referred them to Siva, who declared that he could do nothing for them.
When, however, they reminded him that it was through his blessing they
had been ruined, he advised them to perform religious austerities to
Durgā. They did so; and after some time the goddess appeared, and gave
them her blessing; then disguising herself as a common female carrying a
pitcher of water, she passed through the assembly of the gods. She then
assumed her proper form, and said, 'They are celebrating my praise.'

"This new goddess now ascended Mount Himālaya, where Chanda and Manda,
two of Sumbha and Nisumbha's messengers, resided. As these demons
wandered over the mountain, they saw the goddess;

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

and being exceedingly struck with her charms, which they described to
their masters, advised them to engage her affections, even if they gave
her all the glorious things which they had obtained in plundering the
heavens of the gods.

"Sumbha sent Sugriva as messenger to the goddess, to inform her that the
riches of the three worlds were in his palace; that all the offerings
which used to be presented to the gods were now offered to him, and that
all these offerings, riches, etc., would be hers, if she would come to
him. The goddess replied that the offer was very liberal, but that she
had resolved that the person she married must first conquer her in war,
and destroy her pride. Sugriva, unwilling to return unsuccessful,
pressed for a favourable answer, promising that he would conquer her in
war, and subdue her pride; and asked in an authoritative strain: 'Did
she know his master, before whom none of the inhabitants of the worlds
had been able to stand, whether gods, demons, or men? How then could
she, a female, think of resisting his offers? If his master had ordered
him, he would have compelled her to go into his presence immediately.'
She agreed that this was very correct, but that she had taken her
resolution, and exhorted him, therefore, to persuade his master to come
and try his strength with her.

"The messenger went and related what he had heard. On hearing his
account, Sumbha was filled with rage, and, without making any reply,
called for Dhumlochana his commander-in-chief, and gave him orders to go
to Himālaya and seize the goddess and bring her to him, and, if any
attempted a rescue, utterly to destroy them.

"The commander went to Himālaya, and acquainted the goddess with his
master's orders. She, smiling,

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

invited him to execute them. On the approach of this hero, she set up a
dreadful roar, by which he was reduced to ashes. After which she
destroyed the army of the giant, leaving only a few fugitives to
communicate the tidings. Sumbha and Nisumbha, infuriated, sent Chanda
and Manda, who, on ascending the mountain, perceived a female sitting on
an ass, laughing. On seeing them she became enraged, and drew to her
ten, twenty, or thirty of their army at a time, devouring them like
fruit. She next seized Manda by the hair, cut off his head, and holding
it over her mouth, drank the blood. Chanda, on seeing the other
commander slain in this manner, himself came to close quarters with the
goddess. But she, mounted on a lion, sprang on him, and, despatching him
as she had done Manda, devoured part of his army, and drank the blood of
the slain.

"The giants no sooner heard this alarming news than they resolved to go
themselves, and collecting their forces, an infinite number of giants,
marched to Himālaya. The gods looked down with astonishment on this vast
army, and the goddesses descended to help Mahāmāya (Durgā), who,
however, soon destroyed her foes. Raktavija, the principal commander
under Sumbha, and Nisumbha, seeing all his men destroyed, encountered
the goddess in person. But though she covered him with wounds, from
every drop of blood which fell to the ground a thousand giants arose
equal in strength to Raktavija himself. Hence innumerable enemies
surrounded Durgā, and the gods were filled with alarm at the amazing
sight. At length Chandi, a goddess who had assisted Kāli (Durgā) in the
engagement, promised that if she would drink the giant's blood before it
fell to the ground, she (Chandi) would engage him and destroy the whole
of his strangely-formed

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

offspring. Kāli consented, and the commander and his army were soon
despatched.

"Sumbha and Nisumbha, in a state of desperation, next engaged the
goddess in single combat, Sumbha making the first onset. The battle was
inconceivably dreadful on both sides, till at last both the giants were
slain, and Kāli sat down to feed on the carnage she had made. The gods
and goddesses chanted the praises of the celestial heroine, who in
return bestowed a blessing on each."

It seems scarcely correct to speak of these forms of Durgā as
incarnations; they are rather epithets descriptive of her appearance or
method of fighting at different times during the great conflict. There
is, however, so great a difference in appearance and character between
Pārvati and Kāli that it is not easy to regard them as the same being;
yet Durgā, whilst represented as a warrior fully armed, has the calm
features and golden colour of the goddess in her earlier manifestation.
It appears a reasonable hypothesis that Kāli was originally altogether
distinct from Umā or Pārvati.

In the following hymn of Arjuna to Durgā in the Mahābhārata, <span
id="fr_272"></span>[\*](#fn_272) her many names are
mentioned:—"Reverence be to thee, Siddha-Senāni (generaless of the
Siddhas), the noble, the dweller on Mandara, Kumāri (Princess), Kāli,
Kapāli, Kapilā, Krishnapingalā. Reverence to thee, Bhadrakāli; reverence
to thee, Mahā Kāli, Chandi, Chandā, Tārini (deliveress), Varavarini
(beautiful-coloured). O fortunate Kālyāyani, O Karāli, O Vijayā, O Jayā
(victory), younger sister of the chief of cowherds (Krishna), delighting
always in Mahisha's blood! O Umā, Sakambhari, thou white one, thou black
one!

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> O destroyer of
Kaitabha! Of sciences, thou art the science of Brahma (or of the Vedas),
the great sleep of embodied beings. O mother of Skanda (Kartikeya),
divine Durgā, dweller in wildernesses! Thou, great goddess, art praised
with a pure heart. By thy favour let me ever be victorious in battle."
In another verse of this same book she is said to dwell perpetually in
the Vindhya hills, and "to delight in spirituous liquors, flesh, and
sacrificial victims."

The statement that Durgā was the younger sister of Krishna refers to the
fact that it was she who took Krishna's place in Devaki's womb after
Vasudeva had carried the infant Krishna to Nanda, and whom Kansa
attempted to destroy by dashing her against a stone immediately after
her birth. Krishna promised, if she would take his place as Devaki's
child, "becoming assimilated to him in glory, she would obtain an
eternal place in the sky, be installed by Indra amongst the gods, obtain
a perpetual abode on the Vindhya mountains, where meditating upon him
(Vishnu) she would kill two demons, Sumbha and Nisumbha, and would be
worshipped with animal sacrifices." <span
id="fr_273"></span>[\*](#fn_273)

##### THE CHIEF FORMS OF DURGĀ.

1\. <span class="smallcaps">Durgā</span> received Chanda and Manda, the
messengers of the giants; they, struck with her beauty, spoke so
rapturously of her to their lords that Sumbha sent her an offer of
marriage by Sugriva.

2\. <span class="smallcaps">Dasabhujā</span>, <span
id="fr_274"></span>[†](#fn_274) the ten-handed, destroyed Sumbha's army
under the commander-in-chief Dhumlochana. Of these troops only a few
fugitives escaped to carry the news of their defeat to their master.

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

3\. <span class="smallcaps">Singhavāhini</span> (riding on a lion)
fought with Chanda and Manda, and has four arms only. She drank the
blood of the leaders, and devoured a large part of their troops.

4\. <span class="smallcaps">Mahishamārdini</span> (the slayer of
Mahisha) slew Sumbha as he attacked her in the form of a buffalo. She
had eight or, according to other accounts, ten arms.

<span id="img_30800"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![JAGADDHĀTRI.](tn/30800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/30800.jpg)  
JAGADDHĀTRI.  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There is little to
distinguish the account of this form from that of Durgā.

5\. <span class="smallcaps">Jagaddhātri</span> (the mother of the world)
destroyed another army of the giants; is dressed in red garments, and is
seated on a lion. She, too, has four arms only, and is very similar to
Singhavāhini; the difference being in the weapons she wields, As
Singhavāhini, she

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

carries a sword and spear, and with two hands is encouraging her
worshippers; as Jagaddhātri, she carries a conch-shell, discus, bow and
arrow. In all the above forms she is represented as a fair, beautiful,
gentle-looking lady.

6\. <span class="smallcaps">Kāli</span> (the black woman), or, as she is
more commonly called, Kāli Mā, the black mother, with the aid of Chandi,
slew Raktavija, the principal leader of the giant's army. Seeing his men
fall, he attacked the goddess in person; when from every drop of blood
that fell from his body a thousand giants equal in power to himself
arose. At this crisis another form of the goddess, named Chandi, came to
the rescue. As Kāli drank the giant's blood and prevented the formation
of new giants, Chandi slew the monster herself.

Kāli is represented as a black woman with four arms; in one hand she has
a sword, in another the head of the giant she has slain, with the other
two she is encouraging her worshippers. For earrings she has two dead
bodies; wears a necklace of skulls; her only clothing is a girdle made
of dead men's hands, and her tongue protrudes from her mouth. Her eyes
are red as those of a drunkard, and her face and breasts are besmeared
with blood. She stands with one foot on the thigh, and another on the
breast of her husband. This position of Kāli is accounted for by the
fact that, when her victory over the giants was won, she danced for joy
so furiously that the earth trembled beneath her weight. At the request
of the gods Siva asked her to desist, but as, owing to her excitement,
she did not notice him, he lay down amongst the slain. She continued
dancing until she caught sight of her husband under her feet;
immediately she thrust out her tongue with shame at the disrespect she
had shown him.

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

In the "Adhyatma <span id="fr_275"></span>[\*](#fn_275) Rāmāyana," <span
id="fr_276"></span>[†](#fn_276) is a legend giving quite a different
origin of Kāli; the object of the writer evidently being to enhance the
glory of Sita, by showing that Kāli was but a form that she had assumed.
On Rāma's return from the destruction of Rāvana, he was boasting of his
prowess, when Sita smiled and said, "You rejoice because you have slain
Havana with ten

<span id="img_31000"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![KALI.](tn/31000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/31000.jpg)  
KALI.  
</span>

heads, but what would you say to a Rāvana with a thousand?" "Destroy him
too," said Rāma. Sita advised him to remain at home; but he collected
his army of monkeys, and with his wife and brothers set off for
Satadwipa to meet this new Rāvana. Hanumān

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

was despatched to discover the residence of the monster, and to gather
all the information he could about him, and on his return Rāma went to
the attack. The giant regarded the army of his assailant as so many
children.

<span id="img_31100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![KĀLI DANCING ON
SIVA.](tn/31100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/31100.jpg)  
KĀLI DANCING ON SIVA.  
</span>

He shot three arrows. One of these sent all the monkeys to their home at
Kiskindha; a second drove the giants and demons to Lanka; whilst the
third despatched the soldiers to Ayodha, Rāma's capital. Rāma was
thunderstruck as he found himself alone, and, imagining that

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

all his forces were destroyed, began to weep. Sita, laughing at her
husband, assumed the terrific form of Kāli, and furiously attacked the
thousand-headed Rāvana. The conflict lasted ten years, but at length she
slew the giant, drank his blood, and began to dance and toss about the
limbs of his lifeless body. Her dancing shook the earth to its centre;
but not until Siva lay on the ground, and her attention was called to
the disrespect she was showing him, could she be prevailed upon to
desist. Thus Siva saved the universe; and Sita, assuming her proper
form, went home with Rāma and his brothers.

The "Skanda Purāna" <span id="fr_277"></span>[\*](#fn_277) explains that
Chandi, who came to the rescue and assisted Kāli in the destruction of
Raktavija, was a form of Devi, assumed on another occasion for the
destruction of Chanda. It is interesting to see that these leaders of
Sumbha's army reappear, although they were slain, and their blood was
drunk by Singhavāhini. Two asuras, named Chanda and Manda, through a
boon received from the divine mothers, became so powerful as to subdue
the three worlds. The gods besought Devi, who appeared to them under the
form of Chandi, to deliver them; she replied, "that she could do nothing
for them until she had propitiated Siva." To accomplish this she retired
to a forest, and, whilst engaged in worship, Siva first appeared, under
the form of a vast Linga, and then, in answer to Chandi's prayer,
revealed himself, and in answer to her praises thus addressed her: O
goddess! Thou art celebrated in the three worlds as Parasakti (the
energy of the supreme being). Wherever thou art, there am I; and
wherever I am, there is Chandikā. There is no difference between us.
What shall I do for you? " Chandi replies:

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Formerly I slew
Chanda and Manda in battle; but they have been born again as mighty
asuras, and have oppressed the three worlds. It is therefore to be
enabled to destroy them that I seek thy protection." Siva promises his
help, and sends her in the guise of a messenger to challenge them to
fight. They accept the challenge, and are slain by Siva.

The "Linga Purāna" <span id="fr_278"></span>[\*](#fn_278) seems to teach
that Kāli, though produced by Durgā, was yet distinct from her. Formerly
a female asura named Dārukā had through devotion obtained such power
that she consumed like fire the gods and Brāhmans. But as she was
attended by a host of female asuras, Vishnu and the gods feared to
attack her, lest they should be guilty of the great sin of slaying a
woman. Siva is then appealed to, who, addressing Devi, said, "Let me
request, O lovely one! that thou wouldst effect the destruction of this
Dārukā." Pārvati, having heard these words, created from her own
substance a maiden of black colour, with matted locks, having an eye in
her forehead, bearing in her hand a trident and a skull; she was of
aspect terrible to behold, was arrayed in celestial garments, and
adorned with all kinds of ornaments. On beholding this terrific form of
darkness, the gods retreated in alarm. Pārvati then created innumerable
ghosts, goblins, and demons; attended by these, Kāli, in obedience to
her order, attacked and destroyed Dārukā.

Maurice <span id="fr_279"></span>[†](#fn_279) gives another account of
Kāli: "The origin of this singular deity is perfectly in union with her
life and history. Arrayed in complete armour, she sprang from the eye of
the dreadful war-bred goddess Durgā, the vanquisher of demons and
giants, at the very instant

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

that she was sinking under their united assaults. Kāli joining her
extraordinary powers to those of her parent, they renew the combat and
rout their foes with great slaughter."

The "Mārkandeya Purāna" <span id="fr_280"></span>[\*](#fn_280) makes
Kāli a production of Lakshmi. The origin of all things is Mahā Lakshmi,
who visibly or invisibly pervades and dwells in all that is. Separating
from herself the quality of darkness, she gave origin to a form black as
night, with dreadful tusks and large eyes, and holding a sword, a
goblet, a head and a shield, and adorned with a necklace of skulls. She
is distinguished by the names of Mahākāli, Ekāvirā, Kālarātri, and other
similar appellations. Then from the quality of purity she produced
Sarasvati. As soon as they were formed, Mahā Lakshmi thus addressed
Mahākāli and Sarasvati: "Let us from our own forms produce twin
deities." She then generated a male and female, named Brahmā and
Lakshmi; in the same manner Mahākāli produced Siva and Sarasvati, and
Sarasvati produced Gauri and Vishnu. Mahā Lakshmi then gave in marriage
Sarasvati to Brahmā, Gauri to Siva, and Lakshmi to Vishnu.

In the accounts of the forms of Durgā, and also in those of the other
deities, if the writer of the book is commending Lakshmi, as in the last
quotation, she is declared to be the source of all: if the book is in
praise of Durgā, she is equally declared to be the source. Unless this
is borne in mind the varying origins of the deities become somewhat
confusing. But when it is ascertained on whose special behalf a book was
written, it may be expected that he or she will be described as the
source, the greatest of all.

There can be no doubt that human sacrifices were

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

formerly offered to Kāli, though now they are forbidden both by British
law and the Hindu scriptures; the prohibition in Hindu books, however,
is in a more recent class of books than those in which they were
ordained. In the "Kālika Purāna," <span id="fr_281"></span>[\*](#fn_281)
from which the following extracts are made, nothing could be clearer
than the instruction regarding this cruel practice. Siva is addressing
his sons the Bhairavas, initiating them in these terrible mysteries.

"The flesh of the antelope and the rhinoceros give my beloved (Kāli)
delight for five hundred years. By a human sacrifice, attended by the
forms laid down, Devi is pleased for a thousand years; and by the
sacrifice of three men, a hundred thousand years. By human flesh
Kāmākhyā, Chandikā, and Bhairavā, who assume my shape, are pleased a
thousand years. An oblation of blood which has been rendered pure by
holy texts, is equal to ambrosia; the head and flesh also afford much
delight to Chandikā. Blood drawn from the offerer's own body is looked
upon as a proper oblation to the goddess Chandikā.

"Let the sacrificer repeat the word Kāli twice, and say, 'Hail, Devi!
goddess of thunder; hail, iron-sceptred goddess!' Let him then take the
axe in his hand, and again invoke the same by the Kālarātri text, as
follows: Let the sacrificer say, Hrang, Hrang! Kāli, Kāli! O
horrid-toothed goddess! Eat, cut, destroy all the malignant; cut with
this axe; bind, bind; seize, seize; drink blood! Spheng, spheng! secure,
secure. Salutation to Kāli.' The axe being invoked by this text, called
the Kālarātri Mantra, Kālarātri herself presides over the axe, uplifted
for the destruction of the sacrificer's enemies.

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

"Different mantras (or forms) are used in reference to the description
of the victim to be immolated. If a lion, this—

"'O Hari! who in the shape of a lion bearest Chandika, bear my evils and
avert my misfortunes. Thy shape, O lion! was assumed by Hari \[in the
Nrisingha incarnation of Vishnu\] to punish the wicked part of the human
race; and under that form, by truth, the tyrant Hiranyakasipu was
slain!'

"Females are not to be immolated, except on very particular occasions;
the human female never.

"Let princes, ministers of State, councillors, and vendors of spirituous
liquors make human sacrifices, for the purpose of attaining prosperity
and wealth. Let the victim offered to Devi, if a buffalo, be four years
old; and if human, twenty-five. On these occasions this is the mantra to
be used: 'Hail! three-eyed goddess, of most terrifying appearance,
around whose neck a string of human skulls is pendent; who art the
destroyer of evil spirits; who art armed with an axe and a spear,
salutation to thee with this blood.'

"An enemy may be immolated by proxy, substituting a buffalo or a goat,
and Calling the victim by the name of the enemy through the whole
ceremony, thereby infusing, by holy texts, the soul of the enemy into
the body of the victim; which will when immolated deprive the foe of
life also. On this occasion, let the sacrificer say: 'O goddess of
horrid forms! O Chandikā! Eat, devour such an one my enemy. Consort of
fire! salutation to fire. This is the enemy who has done me mischief,
now personated by an animal—destroy him, O Mahāmāri!'"

A great variety of regulations and invocations, rites, etc., are laid
down for the performance of sanguinary

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

offerings, whether the immolation of a victim, or an offering of the
sacrificer's own blood, or burning his flesh. Until very recent times
commonly, and in some quiet places even now, at certain festivals, the
worshippers cut their flesh and burn their bodies in order to please
this cruel deity. Before the Thugs set out on their murderous projects
they first sacrificed to Kāli to obtain her blessing; and, on their
return, paid a portion of the spoils as an offering for her help.

7\. <span class="smallcaps">Muktakesi</span> <span
id="fr_282"></span>[\*](#fn_282) (having flowing hair) destroyed another
part of the giant's forces. In appearance there is little to distinguish
her from Kāli: she has four arms; holds a sword and a helmet in her left
hands, and with her right she is bestowing a blessing and dispelling
fear. She, too, is standing upon the body of her husband.

8\. <span class="smallcaps">Tārā</span> (the saviour) slew Sumbha, and
holds his head in one hand and a sword in another. Her appearance, too,
is similar to that of Kāli. She must not be confounded with Tārā, the
wife of Vrihaspati; or Tārā, the wife of Bāli, the asura king.

9\. <span class="smallcaps">Chinnamustaka</span> (the beheaded) slew
Nisumbha, the other giant. It is evident from her appearance that she
found her task rather difficult, for her head is half-severed from her
body. She is painted as a fair woman, naked, and wearing a garland of
skulls, standing upon the body of her husband.

10\. <span class="smallcaps">Jagadgauri</span> (the yellow woman
\[renowned\] through the world) received the thanks and praises of the
gods and men for the deliverance she wrought; in her four hands she
holds a conch-shell, a discus, a club, and a lotus.

Images are made of Durgā at different seasons of the

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

year in nearly all of these forms, and various blessings are sought from
her by her worshippers. In addition to these she is worshipped under
other names; some of the more generally known will now be given. It
should be noticed that the Hindus who worship Durgā in any of her forms,
and the other female deities, when they represent the Sakti, or energy
of their husbands, are called Saktas, and form a class distinct from the
Hindus generally. An exception, however, must be made in respect to
Sarasvati, Lakshmi, and the autumnal worship of Durgā; this particular
form of worship being common to almost all Hindus.

11\. <span class="smallcaps">Pratyangirā</span> (the well-proportioned
one). Of this form of Durgā no images are made, but at night the
officiating priest, wearing red clothes, offers red flowers, liquors,
and bloody sacrifices. The flesh of animals dipped in some intoxicating
drink is burned; the worshipper believing that the flesh of the enemy
for whose injury the ceremony is performed will swell, as the flesh of
the sacrifice swells in the fire.

12\. <span class="smallcaps">Annapurnā</span> (she who fills with food)
is represented as a fair woman, standing on a lotus, or as sitting on a
throne. In one hand she holds a rice bowl, and in the other a spoon used
for stirring rice when it is being boiled. Siva, as a mendicant, is
receiving alms from her. She is the guardian deity of many Hindus, who
have a proverb to the effect that a sincere disciple of this deity will
never want rice. It is in connection with this form of Durgā that the
"Linga Purāna" <span id="fr_283"></span>[\*](#fn_283) gives a legend
explaining an image called Ardhanārishwara, which represents Siva and
Durgā as together forming one body. Siva as a mendicant supported his
wife and children by begging; but on one occasion,

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

owing to his use of intoxicating. herbs, he was unable to go his rounds.
Durgā told him there was nothing in the house to eat; half the previous
day's contributions they had eaten; Ganesa's rat and Kartikeya's peacock

<span id="img_31900"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![ANNAPURNĀ](tn/31900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/31900.jpg)  
ANNAPURNĀ  
</span>

having finished the rest. Siva then went out to beg, and Durgā started
for her father's house with the children, but was met by Nārada, who
advised her, as Annapurnā, to lay an embargo on the food of the houses
where Siva asked for alms. The result was no one

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

would give him anything. Nārada meeting him advised him to go home;
Annapurnā met him at the door, and so pleased him by giving him food,
that he pressed her to his breast with such force that they became one
body.

13\. <span class="smallcaps">Ganesajanani</span> (the mother of Ganesa)
is worshipped with her infant in her arms.

14\. <span class="smallcaps">Krishnakrora</span> (she who holds Krishna
on her breast). When Krishna fought with the serpent Kaliya in the river
Yamuna, he was bitten, and in pain called upon Durgā for help. She heard
his cry, and, by suckling him from her breast, restored him to health.

This list might be almost indefinitely enlarged. From the number of her
names, it is evident she is largely worshipped in North India; and from
the number of Hindus bearing one or other of her names, it is certain
she is most popular. It is a common custom for the Hindus to give their
children names indicating the god or goddess through whose favour they
are believed to have been given, and Durgā seems to have had a part in
the bestowal of a very large proportion of the children in Bengal. "By
the favour of Kāli, or Durgā, or Tārā," is expressed in the names of
multitudes, and every day witnesses the payment of vows made to this
goddess when some desired good is granted, or threatened evil averted.

##### THE SAKTIS.

Although a full account of the three chief goddesses, Sarasvati,
Lakshmi, and Pārvati, has already been given, there still remains
something to be said in order to indicate the position they occupy in
the Pantheon. By far the greater part of the Hindus in Bengal, and a

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

considerable number in other provinces, devote their chief, almost their
exclusive worship to the wives of the gods rather than to their
husbands; and by these people they are declared to be the source and
support of all things. Of the three, Pārvati, chiefly in her more
dreadful forms, is by far the most popular. Comparatively few assign to
the other two a similarly exalted position.

All the Hindus acknowledge the consorts of the gods in a general way,
and on the days commonly devoted to their worship are careful to present
the customary offerings. But the sects now under consideration are not
content with this. As the goddesses fill their field of vision, their
husbands are almost entirely neglected. Originally the term Sakti
signified the energy, or power of a deity. In process of time this
energy was supposed to dwell in the wife, and as a result the devotion
of the worshippers was transferred to her. And for many centuries a
special name has been given to those who pay their supreme worship to
the energy of the gods that are, so to speak, incarnated in their wives.
These are known as Saktas, just as those who make Siva their chief
object of adoration are Saivites; or those who regard Vishnu as the
supreme are Vaishnavas.

There is a respectable and recognized cult of Sakti worship, known as
the right-handed; and there is one that is quite the opposite, known as
the left-handed. The rites and ceremonies in the one case are openly
performed, and do not greatly differ from those in common with other
Hindu sects. But amongst the left-handed sects the greatest care is
taken to keep secret, from the uninitiated, the doctrines and practices
that regulate and form their worship. But enough is known to make the
members generally ashamed of their

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

connection with the system. Meat, strictly prohibited by ordinary
Hinduism, intoxicating drinks, also strictly forbidden by the same
authority, and grossly obscene acts are performed as part of the worship
that is offered to the deity. Of old, without doubt, human sacrifices
were offered at such festivals. But as this forms part of Hindu worship,
rather than of mythology, it does not call for further notice here. The
goddesses, and especially Devi, or Durgā, the wife of Siva, are the
supreme objects of worship amongst the Saktas; and they are worshipped
as the incarnation of the energy or force of their divine husbands. The
authority for this form of Hinduism are the Tantras, not the Purānas. As
in the case of the more modern deities an attempt is made to identify
them with the older, so expressions in the more ancient books are caught
up and explained in such a way as to make it appear that the Tantric
teaching is in harmony with, or a legitimate development of them.

<span id="img_32200"></span> ![](img/32200.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_257"></span>[286:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_257) Muir, O. S. T., iv.
420.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[286:†](hmvp34.htm#fr_258) Ibid., iv. 425.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[287:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_259) Muir, O. S. T., iv.
430.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[287:†](hmvp34.htm#fr_260) Ibid., iv. 432.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[288:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_261) Goldstücker,
Chambers's Cyclopædia, *s.v.* "Umā."

<span id="fn_262"></span>[289:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_262) Kennedy, "Hindu
Mythology," p. 329.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[290:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_263) Kennedy, "Hindu
Mythology," p. 334.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[290:†](hmvp34.htm#fr_264) Ibid., p. 209.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[291:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_265) Kennedy, "Hindu
Mythology," p. 331.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[294:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_266) Kennedy, "Hindu
Mythology," p. 334.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[296:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_267) Ward, ii. 83.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[298:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_268) Ward, ii. 88.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[299:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_269) Kennedy, "Hindu
Mythology," p. 335.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[302:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_270) Ward, ii. 101.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[302:†](hmvp34.htm#fr_271) Ibid., p. 98.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[306:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_272) Muir, O. S. T., iv.
432.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[307:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_273) Muir, O. S. T., iv.
34.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[307:†](hmvp34.htm#fr_274) See illustration,
[p. 301](#img_30100).

<span id="fn_275"></span>[310:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_275) There are four
recensions of the Rāmāyana: Valmiki's, Vyasadeva's, the Adhuta, and the
Adhyatma.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[310:†](hmvp34.htm#fr_276) Ward, ii. 116.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[312:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_277) Kennedy, "Hindu
Mythology," p. 338.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[313:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_278) Kennedy, "Hindu
Mythology," p. 337.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[313:†](hmvp34.htm#fr_279) "Indian
Antiquities," ii. 184.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[314:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_280) Kennedy, "Hindu
Mythology," p. 210.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[315:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_281) Moor's " Hindu
Pantheon," 144 ff.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[317:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_282) Ward, ii. 101-117.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[318:\*](hmvp34.htm#fr_283) Ward, ii. 187.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Sons of Siva and Pārvati](hmvp35)
