[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray028)  [Next](pray030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>27.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p1"></span>On the whole, since Scripture places the
principal part of worship in the invocation of God (this being the
office of piety which he requires of us in preference to all
sacrifices), it is manifest sacrilege to offer prayer to others. Hence
it is said in the psalm: "If we have forgotten the name of our God, or
stretched out our hands to a strange god, shall not God search this
out?" (<span id="iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Ps.
44:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#021)<span id="iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>).
Again, since it is only in faith that God desires to be invoked, and he
distinctly enjoins us to frame our prayers according to the rule of his
word: in fine, since faith is founded on the word, and is the parent of
right prayer, the moment we decline from the word, our prayers are
impure. But we have already shown, that if we consult the whole volume
of Scripture, we shall find that God claims this honour to himself
alone. In regard to the office of intercession, we have also seen that
it is peculiar to Christ, and that no prayer is agreeable to God which
he as Mediator does not sanctify. And though believers mutually offer up
prayers to God in behalf of their brethren, we have shown that this
derogates in no respect from the sole intercession of Christ, because
all trust to that intercession in commending themselves as well as
others to God. Moreover, we have shown that this is ignorantly
transferred to the dead, of whom we nowhere read that they were
commanded to pray for us. The Scripture often exhorts us to offer up
mutual prayers; but says not one syllable concerning the dead; nay,
James tacitly excludes the dead when he combines the two things, to
"confess our sins one to another, and to pray one for another" (<span
id="iii.xxvii-p1.2"></span>[James
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)<span
id="iii.xxvii-p1.2"></span>). Hence it is sufficient to condemn this
error, that the beginning of right prayer springs from faith, and that
faith comes by the hearing of the word of God, in which there is no
mention of fictitious intercession, superstition having rashly adopted
intercessors who have not been divinely appointed. While the Scripture
abounds in various forms of prayer, we find no example of this
intercession, without which Papists think there is no prayer. Moreover,
it is evident that this superstition is the result of distrust, because
they are either not contented with Christ as an intercessor, or have
altogether robbed him of this honour. This last is easily proved by
their effrontery in maintaining, as the strongest of all their arguments
for the intercession of the saints, that we are unworthy of familiar
access to God. This, indeed, we acknowledge to be most true, but we
thence infer that they leave nothing to Christ, because they consider
his intercession as nothing, unless it is supplemented by that of George
and Hypolyte, and similar phantoms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28.](pray030)
