[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray004)  [Next](pray006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iii-p0.1"></span>3.

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span>But some one will say, Does he not know
without a monitor both what our difficulties are, and what is meet for
our interest, so that it seems in some measure superfluous to solicit
him by our prayers, as if he were winking, or even sleeping, until
aroused by the sound of our voice? <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)
Those who argue thus attend not to the end for which the Lord taught us
to pray. It was not so much for his sake as for ours. He wills indeed,
as is just, that due honour be paid him by acknowledging that all which
men desire or feel to be useful, and pray to obtain, is derived from
him. But even the benefit of the homage which we thus pay him redounds
to ourselves. Hence the holy patriarchs, the more confidently they
proclaimed the mercies of God to themselves and others felt the stronger
incitement to prayer. It will be sufficient to refer to the example of
Elijah, who being assured of the purpose of God had good ground for the
promise of rain which he gives to Ahab, and yet prays anxiously upon his
knees, and sends his servant seven times to inquire (<span
id="iii.iii-p1.3"></span>[1 Kings
18:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#042)<span id="iii.iii-p1.3"></span>);
not that he discredits the oracle, but because he knows it to be his
duty to lay his desires before God, lest his faith should become drowsy
or torpid. Wherefore, although it is true that while we are listless or
insensible to our wretchedness, he wakes and watches for use and
sometimes even assists us unasked; it is very much for our interest to
be constantly supplicating him; first, that our heart may always be
inflamed with a serious and ardent desire of seeking, loving and serving
him, while we accustom ourselves to have recourse to him as a sacred
anchor in every necessity; secondly, that no desires, no longing
whatever, of which we are ashamed to make him the witness, may enter our
minds, while we learn to place all our wishes in his sight, and thus
pour out our heart before him; and, lastly, that we may be prepared to
receive all his benefits with true gratitude and thanksgiving, while our
prayers remind us that they proceed from his hand. Moreover, having
obtained what we asked, being persuaded that he has answered our
prayers, we are led to long more earnestly for his favour, and at the
same time have greater pleasure in welcoming the blessings which we
perceive to have been obtained by our prayers. Lastly, use and
experience confirm the thought of his providence in our minds in a
manner adapted to our weakness, when we understand that he not only
promises that he will never fail us, and spontaneously gives us access
to approach him in every time of need, but has his hand always stretched
out to assist his people, not amusing them with words, but proving
himself to be a present aid. For these reasons, though our most merciful
Father never slumbers nor sleeps, he very often seems to do so, that
thus he may exercise us, when we might otherwise be listless and
slothful, in asking, entreating, and earnestly beseeching him to our
great good. It is very absurd, therefore, to dissuade men from prayer,
by pretending that Divine Providence, which is always watching over the
government of the universes is in vain importuned by our supplications,
when, on the contrary, the Lord himself declares, that he is "nigh unto
all that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth (<span
id="iii.iii-p1.4"></span>[Psalm
145:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iii-p1.4"></span>). No better is the frivolous allegation of
others, that it is superfluous to pray for things which the Lord is
ready of his own accord to bestow; since it is his pleasure that those
very things which flow from his spontaneous liberality should be
acknowledged as conceded to our prayers. This is testified by that
memorable sentence in the psalms to which many others corresponds: "The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto
their cry" (<span id="iii.iii-p1.5"></span>[Psalm
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#015)<span id="iii.iii-p1.5"></span>).
This passage, while extolling the care which Divine Providence
spontaneously exercises over the safety of believers, omits not the
exercise of faith by which the mind is aroused from sloth. The eyes of
God are awake to assist the blind in their necessity, but he is likewise
pleased to listen to our groans, that he may give us the better proof of
his love. And thus both things are true, "He that keepeth Israel shall
neither slumber nor sleep" (<span id="iii.iii-p1.6"></span>[Psalm
121:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii-p1.6"></span>);
and yet whenever he sees us dumb and torpid, he withdraws as if he had
forgotten us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](pray005.htm#fr_0) <span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>French, "<span id="iii.iii-p1.2"></span>Dont il
sembleroit que ce fust chose supeflue de le soliciter par prieres; veu
que nous avons accoustumé de soliciter ceux qui ne pensent à nostre
affaire, et qui sont endormis."—Whence it would seem that it was a
superfluous matter to solicit him by prayer; seeing we are accustomed to
solicit those who think not of our business and who are slumbering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4.](pray006)
