[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray027)  [Next](pray029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>26.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p1"></span>But some seem to be moved by the fact,
that the prayers of saints are often said to have been heard. Why?
Because they prayed. "They cried unto thee" (says the Psalmist), "and
were delivered: they trusted in thee, and were not confounded" (<span
id="iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>).
Let us also pray after their example, that like them we too may be
heard. Those men, on the contrary, absurdly argue that none will be
heard but those who have been heard already. How much better does James
argue, "Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he
prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth
by the space of three years and six months. And he prayed again and the
heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit" (<span
id="iii.xxvi-p1.2"></span>[Jas. 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#018)<span id="iii.xxvi-p1.2"></span>).
What? Does he infer that Elias possessed some peculiar privilege, and
that we must have recourse to him for the use of it? By no means. He
shows the perpetual efficacy of a pure and pious prayer, that we may be
induced in like manner to pray. For the kindness and readiness of God to
hear others is malignantly interpreted, if their example does not
inspire us with stronger confidence in his promise, since his
declaration is not that he will incline his ear to one or two, or a few
individuals, but to all who call upon his name. In this ignorance they
are the less excusable, because they seem as it were avowedly to contemn
the many admonitions of Scripture. David was repeatedly delivered by the
power of God. Was this to give that power to him that we might be
delivered on his application? Very different is his affirmation: "The
righteous shall compass me about; for thou shalt deal bountifully with
me" (<span id="iii.xxvi-p1.3"></span>[Psalm
142:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#007)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p1.3"></span>). Again, "The righteous also shall see, and
fear, and shall laugh at him" (<span id="iii.xxvi-p1.4"></span>[Psalm
52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxvi-p1.4"></span>).
"This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all
his troubles" (<span id="iii.xxvi-p1.5"></span>[Psalm
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxvi-p1.5"></span>).
In The Psalms are many similar prayers, in which David calls upon God to
give him what he asks, for this reason, viz., that the righteous may not
be put to shame, but by his example encouraged to hope. Here let one
passage suffice, "For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee
in a time when thou mayest be found" (<span
id="iii.xxvi-p1.6"></span>[Psalm
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxvi-p1.6"></span>,
Calv. Com.). This passage I have quoted the more readily, because those
ravers who employ their hireling tongues in defense of the Papacy, are
not ashamed to adduce it in proof of the intercession of the dead. As if
David intended anything more than to show the benefit which he shall
obtain from the divine clemency and condescension when he shall have
been heard. In general, we must hold that the experience of the grace of
God, as well towards ourselves as towards others, tends in no slight
degree to confirm our faith in his promises. I do not quote the many
passages in which David sets forth the loving-kindness of God to him as
a ground of confidence, as they will readily occur to every reader of
The Psalms. Jacob had previously taught the same thing by his own
example, "I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and of all
the truth which thou hast showed unto thy servant: for with my staff I
passed over this Jordan; and now I am become two bands" (<span
id="iii.xxvi-p1.7"></span>[Genesis
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#010)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p1.7"></span>). He indeed alleges the promise, but not the
promise only; for he at the same time adds the effect, to animate him
with greater confidence in the future kindness of God. God is not like
men who grow weary of their liberality, or whose means of exercising it
become exhausted; but he is to be estimated by his own nature, as David
properly does when he says, "Thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of truth"
(<span id="iii.xxvi-p1.8"></span>[Psalm
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxvi-p1.8"></span>).
After ascribing the praise of his salvation to God, he adds that he is
true: for were he not ever like himself, his past favour would not be an
infallible ground for confidence and prayer. But when we know that as
often as he assists us, he gives us a specimen and proof of his goodness
and faithfulness, there is no reason to fear that our hope will be
ashamed or frustrated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27.](pray029)
