[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray052)  [Next](pray054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.li"></span>

#### <span id="iii.li-p0.1"></span>51.

<span id="iii.li-p1"></span>If, with minds thus framed to obedience, we
allow ourselves to be governed by the laws of Divine Providence, we
shall easily learn to persevere in prayer, and suspending our own
desires wait patiently for the Lord, certain, however little the
appearance of it may be, that he is always present with us, and will in
his own time show how very far he was from turning a deaf ear to
prayers, though to the eyes of men they may seem to be disregarded. This
will be a very present consolation, if at any time God does not grant an
immediate answer to our prayers, preventing us from fainting or giving
way to despondency, as those are wont to do who, in invoking God, are so
borne away by their own fervour, that unless he yield on their first
importunity and give present help, they immediately imagine that he is
angry and offended with them and abandoning all hope of success cease
from prayer. On the contrary, deferring our hope with well tempered
equanimity, let us insist with that perseverance which is so strongly
recommended to us in Scripture. We may often see in The Psalms how David
and other believers, after they are almost weary of praying, and seem to
have been beating the air by addressing a God who would not hear, yet
cease not to pray because due authority is not given to the word of God,
unless the faith placed in it is superior to all events. Again, let us
not tempt God, and by wearying him with our importunity provoke his
anger against us. Many have a practice of formally bargaining with God
on certain conditions, and, as if he were the servant of their lust,
binding him to certain stipulations; with which if he do not immediately
comply, they are indignant and fretful, murmur, complain, and make a
noise. Thus offended, he often in his anger grants to such persons what
in mercy he kindly denies to others. Of this we have a proof in the
children of Israel, for whom it had been better not to have been heard
by the Lord, than to swallow his indignation with their flesh (<span
id="iii.li-p1.1"></span>[Num. 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#018),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#033)<span id="iii.li-p1.1"></span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 52.](pray054)
