[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray045)  [Next](pray047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xliv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xliv-p0.1"></span>44.

<span id="iii.xliv-p1"></span>Now comes the second part of the prayer,
in which we descend to our own interests, not, indeed, that we are to
lose sight of the glory of God (to which, as Paul declares, we must have
respect even in meat and drink, <span id="iii.xliv-p1.1"></span>[1 Cor.
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031)<span
id="iii.xliv-p1.1"></span>), and ask only what is expedient for
ourselves; but the distinction, as we have already observed, is this:
God claiming the three first petitions as specially his own, carries us
entirely to himself, that in this way he may prove our piety. Next he
permits us to look to our own advantage, but still on the condition,
that when we ask anything for ourselves it must be in order that all the
benefits which he confers may show forth his glory, there being nothing
more incumbent on us than to live and die to him.

<span id="iii.xliv-p2"></span>By the first petition of the second part,
GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD, we pray in general that God would give
us all things which the body requires in this sublunary state, not only
food and clothing, but everything which he knows will assist us to eat
our bread in peace. In this way we briefly cast our care upon him, and
commit ourselves to his providence, that he may feed, foster, and
preserve us. For our heavenly Father disdains not to take our body under
his charge and protection, that he may exercise our faith in those
minute matters, while we look to him for everything, even to a morsel of
bread and a drop of water. For since, owing to some strange inequality,
we feel more concern for the body than for the soul, many who can trust
the latter to God still continue anxious about the former, still
hesitate as to what they are to eat, as to how they are to be clothed,
and are in trepidation whenever their hands are not filled with corn,
and wine, and oil (<span id="iii.xliv-p2.1"></span>[Psalm
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#008)<span id="iii.xliv-p2.1"></span>):
so much more value do we set on this shadowy, fleeting life, than on a
blessed immortality. But those who, trusting to God, have once cast away
that anxiety about the flesh, immediately look to him for greater gifts,
even salvation and eternal life. It is no slight exercise of faith,
therefore, to hope in God for things which would otherwise give us so
much concern; nor have we made little progress when we get quit of this
unbelief, which cleaves, as it were, to our very bones.

<span id="iii.xliv-p3"></span>The speculations of some concerning
supersubstantial bread seem to be very little accordant with our
Saviour's meaning; for our prayer would be defective were we not to
ascribe to God the nourishment even of this fading life. The reason
which they give is heathenish, viz., that it is inconsistent with the
character of sons of God, who ought to be spiritual, not only to occupy
their mind with earthly cares, but to suppose God also occupied with
them. As if his blessing and paternal favour were not eminently
displayed in giving us food, or as if there were nothing in the
declaration that godliness hath "the promise of the life that now is,
and of that which is to come" (<span id="iii.xliv-p3.1"></span>[1
Timothy 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span
id="iii.xliv-p3.1"></span>). But although the forgiveness of sins is of
far more importance than the nourishment of the body, yet Christ has set
down the inferior in the prior place, in order that he might gradually
raise us to the other two petitions, which properly belong to the
heavenly life, — in this providing for our sluggishness. We are enjoined
to ask *our bread*, that we may be contented with the measure which our
heavenly Father is pleased to dispense, and not strive to make gain by
illicit arts. Meanwhile, we must hold that the title by which it is ours
is donation, because, as Moses says (<span
id="iii.xliv-p3.2"></span>[Leviticus
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#020)<span id="iii.xliv-p3.2"></span>,
<span id="iii.xliv-p3.3"></span>[Deuteronomy
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#017)<span id="iii.xliv-p3.3"></span>),
neither our industry, nor labour, nor hands, acquire anything for us,
unless the blessing of God be present; nay, not even would abundance of
bread be of the least avail were it not divinely converted into
nourishment. And hence this liberality of God is not less necessary to
the rich than the poor, because, though their cellars and barns were
full, they would be parched and pine with want did they not enjoy his
favour along with their bread. The terms *this day*, or, as it is in
another Evangelist, *daily*, and also the epithet *daily*, lay a
restraint on our immoderate desire of fleeting good — a desire which we
are extremely apt to indulge to excess, and from which other evils
ensue: for when our supply is in richer abundance we ambitiously
squander it in pleasure, luxury, ostentation, or other kinds of
extravagance. Wherefore, we are only enjoined to ask as much as our
necessity requires, and as it were for each day, confiding that our
heavenly Father, who gives us the supply of to-day, will not fail us on
the morrow. How great soever our abundance may be, however well filled
our cellars and granaries, we must still always ask for daily bread, for
we must feel assured that all substance is nothing, unless in so far as
the Lord, by pouring out his blessing, make it fruitful during its whole
progress; for even that which is in our hand is not ours except in so
far as he every hour portions it out, and permits us to use it. As
nothing is more difficult to human pride than the admission of this
truth, the Lord declares that he gave a special proof for all ages, when
he fed his people with manna in the desert (<span
id="iii.xliv-p3.4"></span>[Deuteronomy
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)<span id="iii.xliv-p3.4"></span>),
that he might remind us that "man shall not live by bread alone, but by
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God" (<span
id="iii.xliv-p3.5"></span>[Matthew
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004)<span id="iii.xliv-p3.5"></span>).
It is thus intimated, that by his power alone our life and strength are
sustained, though he ministers supply to us by bodily instruments. In
like manner, whenever it so pleases, he gives us a proof of an opposite
description, by breaking the strength, or, as he himself calls it, the
*staff* of bread (<span id="iii.xliv-p3.6"></span>[Leviticus
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026)<span
id="iii.xliv-p3.6"></span>), and leaving us even while eating to pine
with hunger, and while drinking to be parched with thirst. Those who,
not contented with daily bread, indulge an unrestrained insatiable
cupidity, or those who are full of their own abundance, and trust in
their own riches, only mock God by offering up this prayer. For the
former ask what they would be unwilling to obtain, nay, what they most
of all abominate, namely, daily bread only, and as much as in them lies
disguise their avarice from God, whereas true prayer should pour out the
whole soul and every inward feeling before him. The latter, again, ask
what they do not at all expect to obtain, namely, what they imagine that
they in themselves already possess. In its being called *ours*, God, as
we have already said, gives a striking display of his kindness, making
that to be ours to which we have no just claim. Nor must we reject the
view to which I have already adverted, viz., that this name is given to
what is obtained by just and honest labour, as contrasted with what is
obtained by fraud and rapine, nothing being our own which we obtain with
injury to others. When we ask God to *give us*, the meaning is, that the
thing asked is simply and freely the gift of God, whatever be the
quarter from which it comes to us, even when it seems to have been
specially prepared by our own art and industry, and procured by our
hands, since it is to his blessing alone that all our labours owe their
success.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 45.](pray047)
