[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray029)  [Next](pray031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxviii-p0.1"></span>28.

<span id="iii.xxviii-p1"></span>But though prayer is properly confined
to vows and supplications, yet so strong is the affinity between
petition and thanksgiving, that both may be conveniently comprehended
under one name. For the forms which Paul enumerates (<span
id="iii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[1 Timothy
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>)
fall under the first member of this division. By prayer and supplication
we pour out our desires before God, asking as well those things which
tend to promote his glory and display his name, as the benefits which
contribute to our advantage. By thanksgiving we duly celebrate his
kindnesses toward us, ascribing to his liberality every blessing which
enters into our lot. David accordingly includes both in one sentence,
"Call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt
glorify me" (<span id="iii.xxviii-p1.2"></span>[Psalm
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p1.2"></span>). Scripture, not without reason, commands
us to use both continually. We have already described the greatness of
our want, while experience itself proclaims the straits which press us
on every side to be so numerous and so great, that all have sufficient
ground to send forth sighs and groans to God without intermission, and
suppliantly implore him. For even should they be exempt from adversity,
still the holiest ought to be stimulated first by their sins, and,
secondly, by the innumerable assaults of temptation, to long for a
remedy. The sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving can never be
interrupted without guilt, since God never ceases to load us with favour
upon favour, so as to force us to gratitude, however slow and sluggish
we may be. In short, so great and widely diffused are the riches of his
liberality towards us, so marvellous and wondrous the miracles which we
behold on every side, that we never can want a subject and materials for
praise and thanksgiving.

<span id="iii.xxviii-p2"></span>To make this somewhat clearer: since all
our hopes and resources are placed in God (this has already been fully
proved), so that neither our persons nor our interests can prosper
without his blessing, we must constantly submit ourselves and our all to
him. Then whatever we deliberate, speak, or do, should be deliberated,
spoken, and done under his hand and will; in fine, under the hope of his
assistance. God has pronounced a curse upon all who, confiding in
themselves or others, form plans and resolutions, who, without regarding
his will, or invoking his aid, either plan or attempt to execute (<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>[James
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#014)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>; <span id="iii.xxviii-p2.2"></span>[Isaiah
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.2"></span>; <span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.3"></span>[31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.3"></span>). And since, as has already been observed,
he receives the honour which is due when he is acknowledged to be the
author of all good, it follows that, in deriving all good from his hand,
we ought continually to express our thankfulness, and that we have no
right to use the benefits which proceed from his liberality, if we do
not assiduously proclaim his praise, and give him thanks, these being
the ends for which they are given. When Paul declares that every
creature of God "is sanctified by the word of God and prayers" (<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.4"></span>[1 Timothy
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.4"></span>), he intimates that without the word and
prayers none of them are holy and pure, *word* being used metonymically
for *faith*. Hence David, on experiencing the loving-kindness of the
Lord, elegantly declares, "He hath put a new song in my mouth" (<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.5"></span>[Psalm
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.5"></span>); intimating, that our silence is malignant
when we leave his blessings unpraised, seeing every blessing he bestows
is a new ground of thanksgiving. Thus Isaiah, proclaiming the singular
mercies of God, says, "Sing unto the Lord a new song" (<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.6"></span>[Isaiah
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.6"></span>). In the same sense David says in another
passage, "O Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall show forth thy
praise" (<span id="iii.xxviii-p2.7"></span>[Psalm
41:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#015)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.7"></span>). In like manner, Hezekiah and Jonah
declare that they will regard it as the end of their deliverance "to
celebrate the goodness of God with songs in his temple" (<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.8"></span>[Isaiah
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#020)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.8"></span>; <span id="iii.xxviii-p2.9"></span>[Jonah
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#010)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.9"></span>). David lays down a general rule for all
believers in these words, "What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the
name of the Lord" (<span id="iii.xxviii-p2.10"></span>[Ps.
116:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.10"></span>). This rule the Church follows in another
psalm, "Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen,
to give thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise" (<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.11"></span>[Psalm
106:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#047)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.11"></span>). Again, " He will regard the prayer of
the destitute, and not despise their prayer. This shall be written for
the generation to come: and the people which shall be created shall
praise the Lord." "To declare the name of the Lord in Zion, and his
praise in Jerusalem" (<span id="iii.xxviii-p2.12"></span>[Ps.
102:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#018),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#021)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.12"></span>). Nay, whenever believers beseech the Lord
to do anything *for his own name's sake*, as they declare themselves
unworthy of obtaining it in their own name, so they oblige themselves to
give thanks, and promise to make the right use of his lovingkindness by
being the heralds of it. Thus Hosea, speaking of the future redemption
of the Church, says, "Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously;
so will we render the calves of our lips" (<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.13"></span>[Hosea
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.13"></span>). Not only do our tongues proclaim the
kindness of God, but they naturally inspire us with love to him. "I love
the Lord, because he hath heard my voice and my supplications" (<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.14"></span>[Psalm
116:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#001)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.14"></span>). In another passage, speaking of the help
which he had experienced, he says, "I will love thee, O Lord, my
strength" (<span id="iii.xxviii-p2.15"></span>[Psalm
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.15"></span>). No praise will ever please God that does
not flow from this feeling of love. Nay, we must attend to the
declaration of Paul, that all wishes are vicious and perverse which are
not accompanied with thanksgiving. His words are, "In everything by
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made
known unto God" (<span id="iii.xxviii-p2.16"></span>[Philippians
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.16"></span>). Because many, under the influence of
moroseness, weariness, impatience, bitter grief and fear, use murmuring
in their prayers, he enjoins us so to regulate our feelings as
cheerfully to bless God even before obtaining what we ask. But if this
connection ought always to subsist in full vigour between things that
are almost contrary, the more sacred is the tie which binds us to
celebrate the praises of God whenever he grants our requests. And as we
have already shown that our prayers, which otherwise would be polluted,
are sanctified by the intercession of Christ, so the Apostle, by
enjoining us "to offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually" by
Christ (<span id="iii.xxviii-p2.17"></span>[Hebrews
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.17"></span>), reminds us, that without the
intervention of his priesthood our lips are not pure enough to celebrate
the name of God. Hence we infer that a monstrous delusion prevails among
Papists, the great majority of whom wonder when Christ is called an
intercessor. The reason why Paul enjoins, "Pray without ceasing; in
everything give thanks" (<span id="iii.xxviii-p2.18"></span>[1 Thess.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#018)<span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.18"></span>), is, because he would have us with the
utmost assiduity, at all times, in every place, in all things, and under
all circumstances, direct our prayers to God, to expect all the things
which we desire from him, and when obtained ascribe them to him; thus
furnishing perpetual grounds for prayer and praise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29.](pray031)
