[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray026)  [Next](pray028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxv-p0.1"></span>25.

<span id="iii.xxv-p1"></span>The other passages of Scripture which they
employ to defend their error are miserably wrested. Jacob (they say)
asks for the sons of Joseph, "Let my name be named on them, and the name
of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac" (<span
id="iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016)<span id="iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>).
First, let us see what the nature of this invocation was among the
Israelites. They do not implore their fathers to bring succour to them,
but they beseech God to remember his servants, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. Their example, therefore, gives no countenance to those who use
addresses to the saints themselves. But such being the dulness of these
blocks, that they comprehend not what it is to invoke the name of Jacob,
nor why it is to be invoked, it is not strange that they blunder thus
childishly as to the mode of doing it. The expression repeatedly occurs
in Scripture. Isaiah speaks of women being called by the name of men,
when they have them for husbands and live under their protection (<span
id="iii.xxv-p1.2"></span>[Isaiah
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxv-p1.2"></span>).
The calling of the name of Abraham over the Israelites consists in
referring the origin of their race to him, and holding him in
distinguished remembrance as their author and parent. Jacob does not do
so from any anxiety to extend the celebrity of his name, but because he
knows that all the happiness of his posterity consisted in the
inheritance of the covenant which God had made with them. Seeing that
this would give them the sum of all blessings, he prays that they may be
regarded as of his race, this being nothing else than to transmit the
succession of the covenant to them. They again, when they make mention
of this subject in their prayers, do not betake themselves to the
intercession of the dead, but call to remembrance that covenant in which
their most merciful Father undertakes to be kind and propitious to them
for the sake of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. How little, in other
respects, the saints trusted to the merits of their fathers, the public
voice of the Church declares in the prophets "Doubtless thou art our
Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not;
thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer" (<span
id="iii.xxv-p1.3"></span>[Isaiah
63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016)<span id="iii.xxv-p1.3"></span>).
And while the Church thus speaks, she at the same time adds, " Return
for thy servants' sake," not thinking of anything like intercession, but
adverting only to the benefit of the covenant. Now, indeed, when we have
the Lord Jesus, in whose hand the eternal covenant of mercy was not only
made but confirmed, what better name can we bear before us in our
prayers? And since those good Doctors would make out by these words that
the Patriarchs are intercessors, I should like them to tell me why, in
so great a multitude, <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) no place
whatever is given to Abraham, the father of the Church? We know well
from what a crew they select their intercessors. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) Let them then tell me what consistency
there is in neglecting and rejecting Abraham, whom God preferred to all
others, and raised to the highest degree of honour. The only reason is,
that as it was plain there was no such practice in the ancient Church,
they thought proper to conceal the novelty of the practice by saying
nothing of the Patriarchs: as if by a mere diversity of names they could
excuse a practice at once novel and impure. They sometimes, also, object
that God is entreated to have mercy on his people "for David's sake"
(<span id="iii.xxv-p1.8"></span>[Psalm
132:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxv-p1.8"></span>;
see Calv. Com.). This is so far from supporting their error, that it is
the strongest refutation of it. We must consider the character which
David bore. He is set apart from the whole body of the faithful to
establish the covenant which God made in his hand. Thus regard is had to
the covenant rather than to the individual. Under him as a type the sole
intercession of Christ is asserted. But what was peculiar to David as a
type of Christ is certainly inapplicable to others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](pray027.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iii.xxv-p1.4"></span>The French adds, "<span
id="iii.xxv-p1.5"></span>et quasi en une fourmiliere de saincts;"—and as
it were a swarm of saints.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](pray027.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iii.xxv-p1.6"></span>French, "<span id="iii.xxv-p1.7"></span>C’est
chose trop notoire de quel bourbieu ou de quelle racaille ils tirent
leur saincts."—It is too notorious out of what mire or rubbish they draw
their saints.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26.](pray028)
