[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray003)  [Next](pray005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii-p0.1"></span>2.

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span>To *prayer*, then, are we indebted for
penetrating to those riches which are treasured up for us with our
heavenly Father. For there is a kind of intercourse between God and men,
by which, having entered the upper sanctuary, they appear before Him and
appeal to his promises, that when necessity requires they may learn by
experiences that what they believed merely on the authority of his word
was not in vain. Accordingly, we see that nothing is set before us as an
object of expectation from the Lord which we are not enjoined to ask of
Him in prayer, so true it is that prayer digs up those treasures which
the Gospel of our Lord discovers to the eye of faith. The necessity and
utility of this exercise of prayer no words can sufficiently express.
Assuredly it is not without cause our heavenly Father declares that our
only safety is in calling upon his name, since by it we invoke the
presence of his providence to watch over our interests, of his power to
sustain us when weak and almost fainting, of his goodness to receive us
into favour, though miserably loaded with sin; in fine, call upon him to
manifest himself to us in all his perfections. Hence, admirable peace
and tranquillity are given to our consciences; for the straits by which
we were pressed being laid before the Lord, we rest fully satisfied with
the assurance that none of our evils are unknown to him, and that he is
both able and willing to make the best provision for us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3.](pray005)
