[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray039)  [Next](pray041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxxviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxxviii-p0.1"></span>38.

<span id="iii.xxxviii-p1"></span>The instruction given us, however, is
not that every individual in particular is to call him Father, but
rather that we are all in common to call him Our Father. By this we are
reminded how strong the feeling of brotherly love between us ought to
be, since we are all alike, by the same mercy and free kindness, the
children of such a Father. For if He from whom we all obtain whatever is
good is our common Father (<span id="iii.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#009)<span
id="iii.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>), everything which has been distributed to
us we should be prepared to communicate to each other, as far as
occasion demands. But if we are thus desirous as we ought, to stretch
out our hands and give assistance to each other, there is nothing by
which we can more benefit our brethren than by committing them to the
care and protection of the best of parents, since if He is propitious
and favourable nothing more can be desired. And, indeed, we owe this
also to our Father. For as he who truly and from the heart loves the
father of a family, extends the same love and good-will to all his
household, so the zeal and affection which we feel for our heavenly
Parent it becomes us to extend towards his people, his family, and, in
fine, his heritage, which he has honoured so highly as to give them the
appellation of the " fulness" of his only begotten Son (<span
id="iii.xxxviii-p1.2"></span>[Ephesians
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023)<span
id="iii.xxxviii-p1.2"></span>). Let the Christian, then, so regulate his
prayers as to make them common, and embrace all who are his brethren in
Christ; not only those whom at present he sees and knows to be such, but
all men who are alive upon the earth. What God has determined with
regard to them is beyond our knowledge, but to wish and hope the best
concerning them is both pious and humane. Still it becomes us to regard
with special affection those who are of the household of faith, and whom
the Apostle has in express terms recommended to our care in everything
(<span id="iii.xxxviii-p1.3"></span>[Galatians
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010)<span
id="iii.xxxviii-p1.3"></span>). In short, all our prayers ought to bear
reference to that community which our Lord has established in his
kingdom and family.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 39.](pray041)
