[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray012)  [Next](pray014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xi-p0.1"></span>11.

<span id="iii.xi-p1"></span>The fourth rule of prayer is, that
notwithstanding of our being thus abased and truly humbled, we should be
animated to pray with the sure hope of succeeding. There is, indeed, an
appearance of contradiction between the two things, between a sense of
the just vengeance of God and firm confidence in his favour, and yet
they are perfectly accordant, if it is the mere goodness of God that
raises up those who are overwhelmed by their own sins. For, as we have
formerly shown (chap. iii. sec. 1, 2) that repentance and faith go hand
in hand, being united by an indissoluble tie, the one causing terror,
the other joy, so in prayer they must both be present. This concurrence
David expresses in a few words: "But as for me, I will come into thy
house in the multitude of thy mercy, and in thy fear will I worship
toward thy holy temple" (<span id="iii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007)<span id="iii.xi-p1.1"></span>).
Under the goodness of God he comprehends faith, at the same time not
excluding fear; for not only does his majesty compel our reverence, but
our own unworthiness also divests us of all pride and confidence, and
keeps us in fear. The confidence of which I speak is not one which frees
the mind from all anxiety, and soothes it with sweet and perfect rest;
such rest is peculiar to those who, while all their affairs are flowing
to a wish are annoyed by no care, stung with no regret, agitated by no
fear. But the best stimulus which the saints have to prayer is when, in
consequence of their own necessities, they feel the greatest
disquietude, and are all but driven to despair, until faith seasonably
comes to their aid; because in such straits the goodness of God so
shines upon them, that while they groan, burdened by the weight of
present calamities, and tormented with the fear of greater, they yet
trust to this goodness, and in this way both lighten the difficulty of
endurance, and take comfort in the hope of final deliverance. It is
necessary therefore, that the prayer of the believer should be the
result of both feelings, and exhibit the influence of both; namely, that
while he groans under present and anxiously dreads new evils, he should,
at the same times have recourse to God, not at all doubting that God is
ready to stretch out a helping hand to him. For it is not easy to say
how much God is irritated by our distrust, when we ask what we expect
not of his goodness. Hence, nothing is more accordant to the nature of
prayer than to lay it down as a fixed rule, that it is not to come forth
at random, but is to follow in the footsteps of faith. To this principle
Christ directs all of us in these words, " Therefore, I say unto you,
What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive
them, and ye shall have them" (<span id="iii.xi-p1.2"></span>[Mark
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#024)<span id="iii.xi-p1.2"></span>).
The same thing he declares in another passage, "All things, whatsoever
ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive" (<span
id="iii.xi-p1.3"></span>[Matthew
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#022)<span id="iii.xi-p1.3"></span>).
In accordance with this are the words of James, "If any of you lack
wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith,
nothing wavering" (<span id="iii.xi-p1.4"></span>[James
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005)<span id="iii.xi-p1.4"></span>). He
most aptly expresses the power of faith by opposing it to wavering. No
less worthy of notice is his additional statement, that those who
approach God with a doubting, hesitating mind, without feeling assured
whether they are to be heard or not, gain nothing by their prayers. Such
persons he compares to a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and
tossed. Hence, in another passage he terms genuine prayer "the prayer of
faith" (<span id="iii.xi-p1.5"></span>[James
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015)<span id="iii.xi-p1.5"></span>).
Again, since God so often declares that he will give to every man
according to his faith he intimates that we cannot obtain anything
without faith. In short, it is faith which obtains everything that is
granted to prayer. This is the meaning of Paul in the well known passage
to which dull men give too little heed, "How then shall they call upon
him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of
whom they have not heard?" "So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God" (<span id="iii.xi-p1.6"></span>[Rom.
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span id="iii.xi-p1.6"></span>).
Gradually deducing the origin of prayer from faith, he distinctly
maintains that God cannot be invoked sincerely except by those to whom,
by the preaching of the Gospel, his mercy and willingness have been made
known, nay, familiarly explained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12.](pray014)
