[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray016)  [Next](pray018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xv-p0.1"></span>15.

<span id="iii.xv-p1"></span>Here, by way of objection, several questions
are raised. Scripture relates that God sometimes complied with certain
prayers which had been dictated by minds not duly calmed or regulated.
It is true, that the cause for which Jotham imprecated on the
inhabitants of Shechem the disaster which afterwards befell them was
well founded; but still he was inflamed with anger and revenge (<span
id="iii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Judges
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#020)<span id="iii.xv-p1.1"></span>);
and hence God, by complying with the execration, seems to approve of
passionate impulses. Similar fervour also seized Samson, when he prayed,
" Strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I may be at
once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes" (<span
id="iii.xv-p1.2"></span>[Judges
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#028)<span id="iii.xv-p1.2"></span>).
For although there was some mixture of good zeal, yet his ruling feeling
was a fervid, and therefore vicious longing for vengeance. God assents,
and hence apparently it might be inferred that prayers are effectual,
though not framed in conformity to the rule of the word. But I answer,
*first*, that a perpetual law is not abrogated by singular examples;
and, *secondly*, that special suggestions have sometimes been made to a
few individuals, whose case thus becomes different from that of the
generality of men. For we should attend to the answer which our Saviour
gave to his disciples when they inconsiderately wished to imitate the
example of Elias, "Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of" (<span
id="iii.xv-p1.3"></span>[Luke
9:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055)<span id="iii.xv-p1.3"></span>).
We must, however, go farther and say, that the wishes to which God
assents are not always pleasing to him; but he assents, because it is
necessary, by way of example, to give clear evidence of the doctrine of
Scripture, viz., that he assists the miserable, and hears the groans of
those who unjustly afflicted implore his aid: and, accordingly, he
executes his judgments when the complaints of the needy, though in
themselves unworthy of attention, ascend to him. For how often, in
inflicting punishment on the ungodly for cruelty, rapine, violence,
lust, and other crimes, in curbing audacity and fury, and also in
overthrowing tyrannical power, has he declared that he gives assistance
to those who are unworthily oppressed though they by addressing an
unknown deity only beat the air? There is one psalm which clearly
teaches that prayers are not without effect, though they do not
penetrate to heaven by faith (<span id="iii.xv-p1.4"></span>[Ps.
107:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#006),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#013),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#019)<span id="iii.xv-p1.4"></span>).
For it enumerates the prayers which, by natural instinct, necessity
extorts from unbelievers not less than from believers, and to which it
shows by the event, that God is, notwithstanding, propitious. Is it to
testify by such readiness to hear that their prayers are agreeable to
him? Nay; it is, first, to magnify or display his mercy by the
circumstance, that even the wishes of unbelievers are not denied; and,
secondly, to stimulate his true worshippers to more urgent prayer, when
they see that sometimes even the wailings of the ungodly are not without
avail. This, however, is no reason why believers should deviate from the
law divinely imposed upon them, or envy unbelievers, as if they gained
much in obtaining what they wished. We have observed (chap. iii. sec.
25), that in this way God yielded to the feigned repentance of Ahab,
that he might show how ready he is to listen to his elect when, with
true contrition, they seek his favour. Accordingly, he upbraids the
Jews, that shortly after experiencing his readiness to listen to their
prayers, they returned to their own perverse inclinations. It is also
plain from the Book of Judges that, whenever they wept, though their
tears were deceitful, they were delivered from the hands of their
enemies. Therefore, as God sends his sun indiscriminately on the evil
and on the good, so he despises not the tears of those who have a good
cause, and whose sorrows are deserving of relief. Meanwhile, though he
hears them, it has no more to do with salvation than the supply of food
which he gives to other despisers of his goodness.

<span id="iii.xv-p2"></span>There seems to be a more difficult question
concerning Abraham and Samuel, the one of whom, without any instruction
from the word of God, prayed in behalf of the people of Sodom, and the
other, contrary to an express prohibition, prayed in behalf of Saul
(<span id="iii.xv-p2.1"></span>[Genesis
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023)<span id="iii.xv-p2.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.xv-p2.2"></span>[1 Samuel
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#011)<span id="iii.xv-p2.2"></span>).
Similar is the case of Jeremiah, who prayed that the city might not be
destroyed (<span id="iii.xv-p2.3"></span>[Jer.
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#016)<span id="iii.xv-p2.3"></span>).
It is true their prayers were refused, but it seems harsh to affirm that
they prayed without faith. Modest readers will, I hope, be satisfied
with this solution, viz., that leaning to the general principle on which
God enjoins us to be merciful even to the unworthy, they were not
altogether devoid of faith, though in this particular instance their
wish was disappointed. Augustine shrewdly remarks, "How do the saints
pray in faith when they ask from God contrary to what he has decreed?
Namely, because they pray according to his will, not his hidden and
immutable will, but that which he suggests to them, that he may hear
them in another manner; as he wisely distinguishes" (August. de Civit.
Dei, Lib. xxii. c. 2). This is truly said: for, in his incomprehensible
counsel, he so regulates events, that the prayers of the saints, though
involving a mixture of faith and error, are not in vain. And yet this no
more sanctions imitation than it excuses the saints themselves, who I
deny not exceeded due bounds. Wherefore, whenever no certain promise
exists, our request to God must have a condition annexed to it. Here we
may refer to the prayer of David, "Awake for me to the judgment that
thou hast commanded" (<span id="iii.xv-p2.4"></span>[Psalm
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006)<span id="iii.xv-p2.4"></span>);
for he reminds us that he had received special instruction to pray for a
temporal blessing. <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](pray017.htm#fr_5) <span
id="iii.xv-p2.5"></span>The French adds, "<span
id="iii.xv-p2.6"></span>duquel id n’eust pas autrement esté asseuré;"—of
which he would not otherwise have felt assured.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16.](pray018)
