[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray053)  [Next](pray055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.lii-p0.1"></span>52.

<span id="iii.lii-p1"></span>But if our sense is not able till after
long expectation to perceive what the result of prayer is, or experience
any benefit from it, still our faith will assure us of that which cannot
be perceived by sense, viz., that we have obtained what was fit for us,
the Lord having so often and so surely engaged to take an interest in
all our troubles from the moment they have been deposited in his bosom.
In this way we shall possess abundance in poverty, and comfort in
affliction. For though all things fail, God will never abandon us, and
he cannot frustrate the expectation and patience of his people. He alone
will suffice for all, since in himself he comprehends all good, and will
at last reveal it to us on the day of judgment, when his kingdom shall
be plainly manifested. We may add, that although God complies with our
request, he does not always give an answer in the very terms of our
prayers but while apparently holding us in suspense, yet in an unknown
way, shows that our prayers have not been in vain. This is the meaning
of the words of John, "If we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we
know that we have the petitions that we desired of him" (<span
id="iii.lii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#015)<span id="iii.lii-p1.1"></span>).
It might seem that there is here a great superfluity of words, but the
declaration is most useful, namely, that God, even when he does not
comply with our requests, yet listens and is favourable to our prayers,
so that our hope founded on his word is never disappointed. But
believers have always need of being supported by this patience, as they
could not stand long if they did not lean upon it. For the trials by
which the Lord proves and exercises us are severe, nay, he often drives
us to extremes, and when driven allows us long to stick fast in the mire
before he gives us any taste of his sweetness. As Hannah says, "The Lord
killeth, and maketh alive; he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth
up" (<span id="iii.lii-p1.2"></span>[1 Samuel
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006)<span id="iii.lii-p1.2"></span>).
What could they here do but become dispirited and rush on despair, were
they not, when afflicted, desolate, and half dead, comforted with the
thought that they are regarded by God, and that there will be an end to
their present evils. But however secure their hopes may stand, they in
the meantime cease not to pray, since prayer unaccompanied by
perseverance leads to no result.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](pray055)
