[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray025)  [Next](pray027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxiv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxiv-p0.1"></span>24.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p1"></span>They again object, Are those, then, to be
deprived of every pious wish, who, during the whole course of their
lives, breathed nothing but piety and mercy? I have no wish curiously to
pry into what they do or meditate; but the probability is, that instead
of being subject to the impulse of various and particular desires, they,
with one fixed and immoveable will, long for the kingdom of God, which
consists not less in the destruction of the ungodly than in the
salvation of believers. If this be so, there cannot be a doubt that
their charity is confined to the communion of Christ's body, and extends
no farther than is compatible with the nature of that communion. But
though I grant that in this way they pray for us, they do not, however,
lose their quiescence so as to be distracted with earthly cares: far
less are they, therefore, to be invoked by us. Nor does it follow that
such invocation is to be used because, while men are alive upon the
earth, they can mutually commend themselves to each other's prayers. It
serves to keep alive a feeling of charity when they, as it were, share
each other's wants, and bear each other's burdens. This they do by the
command of the Lord, and not without a promise, the two things of
primary importance in prayer. But all such reasons are inapplicable to
the dead, with whom the Lord, in withdrawing them from our society, has
left us no means of intercourse (<span id="iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Eccl.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>),
and to whom, so far as we can conjecture, he has left no means of
intercourse with us. But if any one allege that they certainly must
retain the same charity for us, as they are united with us in one faith,
who has revealed to us that they have ears capable of listening to the
sounds of our voice, or eyes clear enough to discern our necessities?
Our opponents, indeed, talk in the shade of their schools of some kind
of light which beams upon departed saints from the divine countenance,
and in which, as in a mirror, they, from their lofty abode, behold the
affairs of men; but to affirm this with the confidence which these men
presume to use, is just to desire, by means of the extravagant dreams of
our own brain, and without any authority, to pry and penetrate into the
hidden judgments of God, and trample upon Scripture, which so often
declares that the wisdom of our flesh is at enmity with the wisdom of
God, utterly condemns the vanity of our mind, and humbling our reason,
bids us look only to the will of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25.](pray027)
