[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray019)  [Next](pray021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xviii-p0.1"></span>18.

<span id="iii.xviii-p1"></span>And we must carefully attend to the
circumstance of time. Christ enjoins his disciples to have recourse to
his intercession after he shall have ascended to heaven: "At that day ye
shall ask in my name" (<span id="iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[John
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#026)<span
id="iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>). It is certain, indeed, that from the very
first all who ever prayed were heard only for the sake of the Mediator.
For this reason God had commanded in the Law, that the priest alone
should enter the sanctuary, bearing the names of the twelve tribes of
Israel on his shoulders, and as many precious stones on his breast,
while the people were to stand at a distance in the outer court, and
thereafter unite their prayers with the priest. Nay, the sacrifice had
even the effect of ratifying and confirming their prayers. That shadowy
ceremony of the Law therefore taught, first, that we are all excluded
from the face of God, and, therefore, that there is need of a Mediator
to appear in our name, and carry us on his shoulders and keep us bound
upon his breast, that we may be heard in his person; And secondly, that
our prayers, which, as has been said, would otherwise never be free from
impurity, are cleansed by the sprinkling of his blood. And we see that
the saints, when they desired to obtain anything, founded their hopes on
sacrifices, because they knew that by sacrifice all prayers were
ratified: " Remember all thy offerings," says David, "and accept thy
burnt sacrifice" (<span id="iii.xviii-p1.2"></span>[Psalm
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003)<span
id="iii.xviii-p1.2"></span>). Hence we infer, that in receiving the
prayers of his people, God was from the very first appeased by the
intercession of Christ. Why then does Christ speak of a new period ("at
that day") when the disciples were to begin to pray in his name, unless
it be that this grace, being now more brightly displayed, ought also to
be in higher estimation with us? In this sense he had said a little
before, "Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name; ask." Not that they
were altogether ignorant of the office of Mediator (all the Jews were
instructed in these first rudiments), but they did not clearly
understand that Christ by his ascent to heaven would be more the
advocate of the Church than before. Therefore, to solace their grief for
his absence by some more than ordinary result, he asserts his office of
advocate, and says, that hitherto they had been without the special
benefit which it would be their privilege to enjoy, when aided by his
intercession they should invoke God with greater freedom. In this sense
the Apostle says that we have "boldness to enter into the holiest by the
blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for
us" (<span id="iii.xviii-p1.3"></span>[Heb.
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020)<span id="iii.xviii-p1.3"></span>).
Therefore, the more inexcusable we are, if we do not with both hands (as
it is said) embrace the inestimable gift which is properly destined for
us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19.](pray021)
