[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray023)  [Next](pray025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxii-p0.1"></span>22.

<span id="iii.xxii-p1"></span>But here stupidity has proceeded to such a
length as to give a manifestation of the genius of superstition, which,
when once it has shaken off the rein, is wont to wanton without limit.
After men began to look to the intercession of saints, a peculiar
administration was gradually assigned to each, so that, according to
diversity of business, now one, now another, intercessor was invoked.
Then individuals adopted particular saints, and put their faith in them,
just as if they had been tutelar deities. And thus not only were gods
set up according to the number of the cities (the charge which the
prophet brought against Israel of old, <span
id="iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jer.
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#028)<span id="iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>;
11:13), but according to the number of individuals. But while the saints
in all their desires refer to the will of God alone, look to it, and
acquiesce in it, yet to assign to them any other prayer than that of
longing for the arrival of the kingdom of God, is to think of them
stupidly, carnally, and even insultingly. Nothing can be farther from
such a view than to imagine that each, under the influence of private
feeling, is disposed to be most favourable to his own worshippers. At
length vast numbers have fallen into the horrid blasphemy of invoking
them not merely as helping but presiding over their salvation. See the
depth to which miserable men fall when they forsake their proper
station, that is, the word of God. I say nothing of the more monstrous
specimens of impiety in which, though detestable to God, angels, and
men, they themselves feel no pain or shame. Prostrated at a statue or
picture of Barbara or Catherine, and the like, they mutter a *Pater
Noster;* <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) and so far are their
pastors <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) from curing or curbing this
frantic course, that, allured by the scent of gain, they approve and
applaud it. But while seeking to relieve themselves of the odium of this
vile and criminal procedure, with what pretext can they defend the
practice of calling upon Eloy (Eligius) or Medard to look upon their
servants, and send them help from heaven, or the Holy Virgin to order
her Son to do what they ask? <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) The
Council of Carthage forbade direct prayer to be made at the altar to
saints. It is probable that these holy men, unable entirely to suppress
the force of depraved custom, had recourse to this check, that public
prayers might not be vitiated with such forms of expression as *Sancte
Petre, ora pro nobis — St Peter, pray for us.* But how much farther has
this devilish extravagance proceeded when men hesitate not to transfer
to the dead the peculiar attributes of Christ and God?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](pray024.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iii.xxii-p1.2"></span>Erasmus, though stumbling and walking
blindfold in clear light, ventures to write thus in a letter to Sadolet,
1530: "<span id="iii.xxii-p1.3"></span>Primum, constat nullum esse locum
in divinis voluminibus, qui permittat invocare divos nisi fortasse
detorquere huc placet, quod dives in Evangelica parabola implorat opem
Abrahae. Quanquam autem in re tanta novare quicquam praeter auctoritatem
Scripturae, merito periculosum videri possit, tamen invocationem divorum
nusquam improbo," &c.—First, it is clear that there is no passage in the
Sacred Volume which permits the invocation of saints, unless we are
pleased to wrest to this purpose what is said in the parable as to the
rich man imploring the help of Abraham. But though in so weighty a
matter it may justly seem dangerous to introduce anything without the
authority of Scripture, I by no means condemn the invocation of saints,
&c.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](pray024.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iii.xxii-p1.4"></span>Latin, "<span
id="iii.xxii-p1.5"></span>Pastores;"—French, "<span
id="iii.xxii-p1.6"></span>ceux qui se disent prelats, curés, ou
precheurs;"—those who call themselves prelates, curates, or preachers.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](pray024.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iii.xxii-p1.7"></span>French, "<span id="iii.xxii-p1.8"></span>Mais
encore qu’ils taschent de laver leur mains d'un si vilain sacrilege,
d'autant qu’il ne se commet point en leurs messes ni en leurs vespres;
sous quelle couleur defendront ils ces blasphemes qu’il lisent a pleine
gorge, où ils prient St Eloy ou St Medard, de regarder du ciel leurs
serviteurs pour les aider? mesmes ou ils supplient la vierge Marie de
commander a son fils qu’il leur ottroye leur requestes?"—But although
they endeavour to wash their hands of the vile sacrilege, inasmuch as it
is not committed in their masses or vespers, under what pretext will
they defend those blasphemies which they repeat with full throat, in
which they pray St Eloy or St Medard to look from heaven upon their
servants and assist them; even supplicate the Virgin Mary to command her
Son to grant their requests?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23.](pray025)
