[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray034)  [Next](pray036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxxiii-p0.1"></span>33.

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p1"></span>It is also plain that the public prayers
are not to be couched in Greek among the Latins, nor in Latin among the
French or English (as hitherto has been every where practised), but in
the vulgar tongue, so that all present may understand them, since they
ought to be used for the edification of the whole Church, which cannot
be in the least degree benefited by a sound not understood. Those who
are not moved by any reason of humanity or charity, ought at least to be
somewhat moved by the authority of Paul, whose words are by no means
ambiguous: "When thou shalt bless with the spirit, how shall he that
occupieth the room of the unlearned say, Amen, at thy giving of thanks,
seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest? For thou verily givest
thanks, but the other is not edified" (<span
id="iii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>[1 Cor.
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#017)<span
id="iii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>). How then can one sufficiently admire the
unbridled license of the Papists, who, while the Apostle publicly
protests against it, hesitate not to bawl out the most verbose prayers
in a foreign tongue, prayers of which they themselves sometimes do not
understand one syllable, and which they have no wish that others should
understand? <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) Different is the course
which Paul prescribes, "What is it then? I will pray with the spirit,
and I will pray with the understanding also; I will sing with the
spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also:" meaning by the
*spirit* the special gift of tongues, which some who had received it
abused when they dissevered it from the mind, that is, the
understanding. The principle we must always hold is, that in all prayer,
public and private, the tongue without the mind must be displeasing to
God. Moreover, the mind must be so incited, as in ardour of thought far
to surpass what the tongue is able to express. Lastly, the tongue is not
even necessary to private prayer, unless in so far as the internal
feeling is insufficient for incitement, or the vehemence of the
incitement carries the utterance of the tongue along with it. For
although the best prayers are sometimes without utterance, yet when the
feeling of the mind is overpowering, the tongue spontaneously breaks
forth into utterance, and our other members into gesture. Hence that
dubious muttering of Hannah (<span id="iii.xxxiii-p1.4"></span>[1 Samuel
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xxxiii-p1.4"></span>), something similar to which is experienced
by all the saints when concise and abrupt expressions escape from them.
The bodily gestures usually observed in prayer, such as kneeling and
uncovering of the head (Calv. in <span id="iii.xxxiii-p1.5"></span>[Acts
20:36](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#036)<span
id="iii.xxxiii-p1.5"></span>), are exercises by which we attempt to rise
to higher veneration of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](pray035.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iii.xxxiii-p1.2"></span>French, "<span
id="iii.xxxiii-p1.3"></span>Qui est-ce donc qui se pourra assez
esmerveiller d’une audace tant effrenee qu’ont eu les Papistes et ont
encore, qui contre la defense de l’Apostre, chantent et brayent de
langue estrange et inconnue, en laquelle le plus souvent ils n'entendent
pas eux mesmes une syllabe, et ne veulent que les autres y
entendent?"—Who then can sufficiently admire the unbridled audacity
which the Papists have had, and still have, who, contrary to the
prohibition of the Apostle, chant and bray in a foreign and unknown
tongue, in which, for the most part, they do not understand one
syllable, and which they have no wish that others understand?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 34.](pray036)
