[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray014)  [Next](pray016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xiii-p0.1"></span>13.

<span id="iii.xiii-p1"></span>And first, indeed in enjoining us to pray,
he by the very injunction convicts us of impious contumacy if we obey
not. He could not give a more precise command than that which is
contained in the psalms: "Call upon me in the day of trouble" (<span
id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015)<span
id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>). But as there is no office of piety more
frequently enjoined by Scripture, there is no occasion for here dwelling
longer upon it. "Ask," says our Divine Master, "and it shall be given
you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you"
(<span id="iii.xiii-p1.2"></span>[Matthew
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="iii.xiii-p1.2"></span>).
Here, indeed, a promise is added to the precept, and this is necessary.
For though all confess that we must obey the precept, yet the greater
part would shun the invitation of God, did he not promise that he would
listen and be ready to answer. These two positions being laid down, it
is certain that all who cavillingly allege that they are not to come to
God directly, are not only rebellious and disobedient but are also
convicted of unbelief, inasmuch as they distrust the promises. There is
the more occasion to attend to this, because hypocrites, under a
pretense of humility and modesty, proudly contemn the precept, as well
as deny all credit to the gracious invitation of God; nay, rob him of a
principal part of his worship. For when he rejected sacrifices, in which
all holiness seemed then to consist, he declared that the chief thing,
that which above all others is precious in his sight, is to be invoked
in the day of necessity. Therefore, when he demands that which is his
own, and urges us to alacrity in obeying, no pretexts for doubt, how
specious soever they may be, can excuse us. Hence, all the passages
throughout Scripture in which we are commanded to pray, are set up
before our eyes as so many banners, to inspire us with confidence. It
were presumption to go forward into the presence of God, did he not
anticipate us by his invitation. Accordingly, he opens up the way for us
by his own voice, "I will say, It is my people: and they shall say, The
Lord is my God" (<span id="iii.xiii-p1.3"></span>[Zechariah
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009)<span id="iii.xiii-p1.3"></span>).
We see how he anticipates his worshippers, and desires them to follow,
and therefore we cannot fear that the melody which he himself dictates
will prove unpleasing. Especially let us call to mind that noble
description of the divine character, by trusting to which we shall
easily overcome every obstacle: O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee
shall all flesh come" (<span id="iii.xiii-p1.4"></span>[Psalm
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#002)<span id="iii.xiii-p1.4"></span>).
What can be more lovely or soothing than to see God invested with a
title which assures us that nothing is more proper to his nature than to
listen to the prayers of suppliants? Hence the Psalmist infers, that
free access is given not to a few individuals, but to all men, since God
addresses all in these terms, "Call upon me in the day of trouble: I
will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me" (<span
id="iii.xiii-p1.5"></span>[Psalm
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015)<span
id="iii.xiii-p1.5"></span>). David, accordingly, appeals to the promise
thus given in order to obtain what he asks: "Thou, O Lord of hosts, God
of Israel, hast revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an
house: therefore hath thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer
unto thee" (<span id="iii.xiii-p1.6"></span>[2 Samuel
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#027)<span id="iii.xiii-p1.6"></span>).
Here we infer, that he would have been afraid but for the promise which
emboldened him. So in another passage he fortifies himself with the
general doctrine, "He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him"
(<span id="iii.xiii-p1.7"></span>[Psalm
145:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#019)<span
id="iii.xiii-p1.7"></span>). Nay, we may observe in The Psalms how the
continuity of prayer is broken, and a transition is made at one time to
the power of God, at another to his goodness, at another to the
faithfulness of his promises. It might seem that David, by introducing
these sentiments, unseasonably mutilates his prayers; but believers well
know by experience, that their ardour grows languid unless new fuel be
added, and, therefore, that meditation as well on the nature as on the
word of God during prayer, is by no means superfluous. Let us not
decline to imitate the example of David, and introduce thoughts which
may reanimate our languid minds with new vigour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14.](pray016)
