[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20137) 
[Next](rp20139) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. I*, ed. by A. H. Sayce, \[1888\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

### BABYLONIAN LAWSUITS AND JUDGMENTS

#### <span class="smallcaps">Translated by Dr. Oppert</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Having</span> worked for more than
five-and-twenty years at the Babylonian and Assyrian deeds of contract
and legal decisions, and having explained the documents relating to
these subjects which have been discovered in Mesopotamia, I am now able
to state that the meaning of these difficult texts is at length fairly
well understood by us. The simplest explanation is that which is the
most difficult to obtain, and I have no doubt that the translations and
interpretations I offer will appear to many scholars so easy and
conclusive as to make them assume that any one might have discovered
them at the outset. Fortunately, however, not only the translations of
other scholars, but my own imperfect ones as well, have been published,
and will thus convince younger students of the immense difficulty there
is in arriving at results which seem so evident.

The first texts which I have selected contain certain contracts and
legal decisions relating indubitably to captive Jews who had been
carried to Babylon after

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

the destruction of Jerusalem. One of the most interesting of them is a
lawsuit commenced by a Jewish slave named Barachiel in order to recover
his original status. A copy of the text has been published by Father
Strassmaier in the *Transactions of the Oriental Congress* at Leyden,
No. 42.

My translation of it, which will appear in the *Transactions of the
Oriental Congress* at Vienna, has been amended in one or two points. The
translations offered by Dr. V. Revillout and a young Assyriologist, Dr.
Peiser, are very imperfect, Dr. Revillout having entirely misunderstood
the nature of the suit referred to, and having fallen into several
grammatical errors, while Dr. Peiser's rendering is not less
unacceptable.

The case was as follows:—Barachiel, who bears the same name as the
father of Elihu in the Book of Job (xxxii. 2, 6), had been the property
of a wealthy person named Akhi-nuri, who had sold him to a widow of the
name of Gagâ, about 570 B.C. He remained in the house of this lady as a
slave, with the power of liberating himself by paying a sum equal to his
*peculium*, or private property which he had been allowed to acquire,
like a slave in ancient Rome; but it seems that he was never fortunate
enough to be able to afford the sum of money required. He remained with
Gaga twenty-one years, and was considered the *res* or property of the
house, and as such was handed over in pledge, was restored, and finally
became the dowry of Nubtâ ("Bee"), the daughter of Gaga. Nubtâ gave him
to her son and husband in exchange for a house

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

and some slaves. After the death of the two ladies he was sold to the
wealthy publican Itti-Marduk-baladh, from whose house he escaped twice.
Taken the second time, he instituted an action in order that he might be
recognised as a free-born citizen, of the family of Bel-rimanni; and to
prove that he was of noble origin he pretended that he had performed the
matrimonial solemnities at the marriage of his master's daughter Qudasu
with a certain Samas-mudammiq. <span id="fr_311"></span>[1](#fn_309)
Such a performance, doubtless, implied that the officiating priest was
of free birth, and that no slave or freedman was qualified to take part
in it. He declared, "I am a *mar-banî*," or "descendant of a
*banû* <span id="fr_312"></span>[2](#fn_310)," literally a "generator,"
or "ancestor," one of those semi-mythical heroes who gave their names to
the noble families of Babylon. <span id="fr_313"></span>[2](#fn_310) "I
belong," he went on to say, "to the family of Bel-rimanni," who in other
texts is called a high-priest. The case was brought before a court of
justice, and the royal judges asked Barachiel to prove that he was of
free birth. This *actio præjudicialis de ingenuitate* was urged for and
against, and eventually Barachiel was obliged to retract his former
statements. He was unable to rebut the evidence alleged against him, and
though it is probable that the two married persons whose "hands he had
joined" were dead, other witnesses came forward who proved that he

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

was a slave with the power of purchasing his freedom.

The exact date at which the judgment was delivered is not quite certain,
but it must be later than the seventh year of Nabonidus, when the father
Itti-Marduk-baladh was still alive.

I will now proceed to make some further remarks on the details of the
case, as it is very interesting, and offers some useful hints as to the
legal procedure of the Babylonians.

The name of Bariki-ili or Barachiel is evidently that of a Jew. He is
called "a slave of ransom," that is to say, not a slave who has already
purchased his freedom, since in that case he would have been free, but a
slave who was allowed by special laws to employ his private fortune in
the work of liberating himself. He professes to have been the *avil
taslisu* or "joiner" of the hands of bride and bridegroom at a wedding
which must have taken place before the thirty-fifth year of
Nebuchadnezzar's reign, when he still belonged to the house of
Akhi-nuri, "the seller of the slave," as he is called at the end of the
text.

After the declaration of the slave, the document is comparatively easy
to understand. The judges, after perusing all the evidence, do not find
any proofs that Barachiel was a man of free birth, and accordingly say
to him: "Prove to us that you are the descendant of a (noble) ancestor."
Thereupon Barachiel confesses that he is not free-born, but has twice
run away from the house of his master; as, however, the act was seen

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

by many people he was afraid, and said, "I, am the son of a (noble)
ancestor." "But I am not free-born," he continues, and then gives an
account of the events of his life.

The words *mar-banut* in line 16 signify "condition of being a free-born
citizen," and not "letter of clientship," as Dr. Peiser supposes. The
expression "letter of citizenship" (*dippi mar-banut*) occurs several
times, and signifies the warrant given by a master to his emancipated
slave. "Non-citizenship" was the fourth fact guaranteed by the seller of
a slave to the purchaser, the other three being: (1) that the slave
should not rebel or run away; if he returned to his former master he was
to be sent back; (2) that no claim should lie against the validity of
the sale on account of technical or other errors; and (3) that the
purchaser should be secured against any claim made upon the services of
a slave by a royal officer.

Barachiel adds that after the death of the two ladies Gaga and Nubtâ, he
was sold for money to Itti-Marduk-baladh, of the Egibi family, thus
becoming a *servos redimendus argento*, a slave who could be ransomed
with money, and that he awaits the sentence of the court.

The judges decided that Barachiel should be restored to his original
status, and added that it was in the *uzuz* (or *usuz*) of the two
married persons Samas-mudammiq and Qudasu that the judgment was
pronounced. This may signify "absence," the two having died during the
interval of more than

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

twenty years which had elapsed since the marriage. It is probable that
Barachiel had invented the story of his taking part in the wedding
because he thought that its falsity could not be detected. If, however,
the word is equivalent to the expression *ina du-zu*, the texts from
Sippara would go to show that it must mean "in the presence of."

It may be remarked that not a word is said about "a deed of slavery,"
which was certainly not given to a slave in order to prove his own
servile condition as a *vindex libertatis*, as Dr. Revillout seems to
imagine.

The only penalty imposed upon the slave is his restoration to his
ancient condition; penalties were decreed against those who wished to
annul a contract, not against those who pretended to be free citizens.
In this respect the Babylonian law was more humane than the Roman. This
is the more surprising, since it cannot be denied that severe penalties
were at times inflicted. The Micheaux-stones, for example, inscribed in
the twelfth century before our era, threaten the transgressors of a
contract and those who annul their covenants with the curses of the
gods, each of whom would inflict a special punishment. The old Jew
escaped with the failure of his attempt to recover his undeserved loss
of liberty; perhaps the court took into serious consideration his
fidelity to his former master, who had esteemed him to be worth not only
a house but other slaves as well.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

#### TRANSLATION OF A BABYLONIAN LAWSUIT RELATING TO A JEW

1\. Barachiel is a slave of ransom <span id="fr_314"></span>[1](#fn_311)
belonging to Gagâ the daughter of

2 …… whom in the 35th year of Nebuchadnezzar, king of <span
class="smallcaps">Babylon</span>, <span id="fr_315"></span>[2](#fn_312)

3\. \[from Akhi-\]nuri, the son of Nabu-nadin-akh, for the third of a
mina and 8 shekels

4\. she had bought. Recently <span id="fr_316"></span>[3](#fn_313) he
has instituted an action, saying thus: I am the son of a (noble)
ancestor, of the family <span id="fr_317"></span>[4](#fn_314) of
Bel-rimanni,

5\. who have joined the hands (in matrimony) of Samas-mudammiq the son
of Nabu-nadin-akh

6\. and the woman Qusadu the daughter of Akhi-nuri, even I. In the
presence of

7\. the high-priest, <span id="fr_318"></span>[5](#fn_315) the nobles
and the judges of Nabonidus king of <span
class="smallcaps">Babylon</span>

8\. they pleaded the case and listened to their arguments in regard to
the obligation of servitude

9\. of Barachiel. From the 35th year of Nebuchadnezzar king of <span
class="smallcaps">Babylon</span>

10\. to the 7th year of Nabonidus king of <span
class="smallcaps">Babylon</span>, <span id="fr_319"></span>[6](#fn_316)
he had been sold for money, had been put

11\. in pledge, (and) as the dowry of Nubtâ the daughter

12\. of Gagâ had been given. Afterwards Nubtâ had alienated him by a
sealed contract; <span id="fr_320"></span>[7](#fn_317)

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

13\. in exchange for a house and slaves to Zamama-nadin

14\. her son and Idinâ her husband had given him. They read (the
evidence) and

15\. said thus to Barachiel: Thou hast brought an action and said: The
son of a (noble) ancestor

16\. am I. Prove to us thy (noble) ancestry. Barachiel his former
statement

17\. retracted, saying: Twice have I run away from the house of my
master, but many people (were present),

18\. and <span id="fr_321"></span>[1](#fn_318) I was seen. I was afraid
and said (accordingly) that I am the son of a (noble) ancestor.

19\. My citizenship exists not; I am the slave of ransom of Gaga.

20\. Nubtâ her daughter received me as (her) dowry; Nubtâ

21\. alienated me by a sealed contract, and to Zamama-nadin her son and
Idinâ <span id="fr_322"></span>[2](#fn_319) her husband

22\. gave me in exchange; and after the death of Gagâ (and) Nubtâ,

23\. to Itti-Marduk-baladh the son of Nabu-akhe-iddin of the family of
Egibi, for silver

24\. I \[was sold\]. I am a slave. Go now, \[pronounce sentence\] about
me.

25\. \[The high-priest\], the nobles and the judges heard the evidence

26\. \[and\] restored \[Barachiel\] to his condition as slave of ransom,
notwithstanding the absence of Samas-mudammiq

27\. \[the son of Nabu-nadin-akh\] and Qudasu the daughter of Akhi-nuri,
the seller <span id="fr_323"></span>[3](#fn_320)

28\. \[of the slave\]. For the registration of this \[decision\] Musezib
the \[priest\]

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

29\. \[and\] Nergal-akhe-iddin the judges

30 of the family of Epis-el, in the city of the palace of the king of
<span class="smallcaps">Babylon</span>, the 17th day of

31\. the month Marchesvan <span id="fr_324"></span>[1](#fn_321) \[the
7th? year\] of Nabonidus king of <span class="smallcaps">Babylon</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_309"></span>[156:1](rp20138.htm#fr_311) The father of
Akhi-nuri was Nabu-nadin-akh ("Nebo gives a brother"), and the father of
the son-in-law bears the same name. But it is by no means certain that
the uncle married his niece, since the two persons may have been
different.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[156:2](rp20138.htm#fr_313) It would be a
useful work to collect the names of all the *banû* or ancestors, men of
noble birth, like Egibi, Nur-Sin, and others.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[160:1](rp20138.htm#fr_314) For the meaning of
this expression see above, [p. 158](#page_158).

<span id="fn_312"></span>[160:2](rp20138.htm#fr_315) B.C. 590.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[160:3](rp20138.htm#fr_316) *Ana eninni*, not a
proper name as Dr. Revillout supposes!

<span id="fn_314"></span>[160:4](rp20138.htm#fr_317) Read *lu zir*.
Several distinguished persons were called Bel-rimanni, among others a
priest of the Sun-god.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[160:5](rp20138.htm#fr_318) *Sangu*.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[160:6](rp20138.htm#fr_319) B.C. 549.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[160:7](rp20138.htm#fr_320) The text does not
seem to me to have been correctly copied here.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[161:1](rp20138.htm#fr_321) Not *ka*.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[161:2](rp20138.htm#fr_322) Such names are all,
I think, emphatic imperatives: Idinâ, "give!" Basâ, "exist!" Iribâ,
"multiply!" Considering the Aramaic transcription of the last name, we
ought perhaps to pronounce Idinai, Basai.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[161:3](rp20138.htm#fr_323) *Nadinan*, a
singular noun with the same termination as *makhiranu*, "the buyer;"
*masikhanu*, "the measurer;" *paqiranu*, "the plaintiff;"
*napalkattanu*, "the defendant."

<span id="fn_321"></span>[162:1](rp20138.htm#fr_324) October.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Inscription of Menuas, King of Ararat, in the Vannic
Language](rp20139)
