[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4330) 
[Next](sbe4332) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2">9:1:2</span></span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:1">9:1:2:1</span></span>1. He
then sprinkles him (Agni-Rudra, the fire-altar). For the gods, having
now appeased him by the *S*atarudriya, thereby appeased him still
further; and in like manner does this (Sacrificer), now that he has
appeased him by the *S*atarudriya, still further appease him thereby.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:2">9:1:2:2</span></span>2. With
water he sprinkles him <span id="fr_290"></span>[1](#fn_289),--water is
a means of appeasing (soothing): he thus appeases him thereby. He
sprinkles him all over; he thus appeases him all over. Thrice he
sprinkles,--threefold is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his
measure, with so much he thus appeases him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:3">9:1:2:3</span></span>3. And,
again, as to why he sprinkles him,--that Agni (the fire-altar),
doubtless, is these worlds: by water he thus encompasses these worlds,
by the ocean, indeed, he encompasses them. On every side (he sprinkles
the altar): hence the ocean flows round these worlds on every side. From
left to right (he sprinkles): hence the ocean flows round these worlds
from left to right.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:4">9:1:2:4</span></span>4. For
safety from injury it is the Agnîdh who sprinkles, for the Agnîdh is the
same as Agni, and no one injures his own self. From a stone (he
sprinkles), for from the rock water springs forth;--from the arm-pit,
for from the arm-pit water springs forth; from the right arm-pit <span
id="fr_291"></span>[2](#fn_290), for from the right arm-pit water
springs forth.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:5">9:1:2:5</span></span>5. \[He
sprinkles the stone, with, Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 1\], 'The food that is lying
in the rock, in the mountain,'--for that food, water, is indeed
contained in the rock, in the mountains;--'the drink that is gathered
from waters, plants and trees,'--for from all that that drink is indeed
gathered;--'that sap and food bring ye unto us, O Maruts, as bountiful
givers!'--for the Maruts are the rulers of the rain. With 'In the rock
is thy hunger,' he (after watering the altar) sets down (the pitcher on
the stone): he thus lays hunger into the stone, whence the stone is not
fit for eating. But hard also is the stone, and hard is hunger: he thus
puts the hard along with the hard. With, 'In me thy food!' he takes up
(the pitcher): he thereby takes up the food into his own self. Thus (he
does) a second and a third time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:6">9:1:2:6</span></span>6. Having
(finally) set down the pitcher, he perambulates thrice (the altar); for
when (in sprinkling) he walks all round it, he, as it were, makes light
of him (Agni-Rudra). He now makes amends to him, for (his own) safety.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:7">9:1:2:7</span></span>7. And,
again, as to why he perambulates it,--he then (in sprinkling the altar)
goes after him <span id="fr_292"></span>[1](#fn_291) (Agni-Rudra):
thereupon he now recovers his own self unto life, and so does he by that
self of his obtain all vital power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:8">9:1:2:8</span></span>8. Thrice
he perambulates it, for thrice he walks round it (whilst sprinkling):
thus as many times as he walks round it, so many times does he
perambulate it.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:9">9:1:2:9</span></span>9. Having
thereupon put that stone into the water-pitcher, they throw it in that
(south-western) direction, for that is Nir*ri*ti's region: he thus
consigns pain <span id="fr_293"></span>[1](#fn_292) to Nir*ri*ti's
region.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:10">9:1:2:10</span></span>10. For
at that time, the gods, having appeased him by the *S*atarudriya and the
water, thereby drove out his pain, his evil; and in like manner does
this (Sacrificer) now, after appeasing him by the *S*atarudriya and the
water, cast away his pain, his evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:11">9:1:2:11</span></span>11.
Outside the fire-altar he throws it; for this fire-altar indeed is the
same as these (three) worlds: he thus puts pain outside these
worlds;--outside the sacrificial ground (vedi); for the Vedi is this
(earth): he thus puts pain outside this earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:12">9:1:2:12</span></span>12.
Whilst standing at the right thigh of the Vedi, with his face to the
east, he throws it southwards, with, 'Let thy pain enter him whom we
hate!' and thus its pain enters whomsoever he hates. He may say, 'Let
thy pain enter so-and-so!' naming him whom he hates, and then he has no
longer any hold upon him; but let him take no notice of this, for
indicated of himself is he whom he who knows this hates. If it <span
id="fr_294"></span>[2](#fn_293) should remain unbroken, let him bid (the
Pratiprasthât*ri*) to break it; for only when it is broken, the pain
enters him whom he hates. They return (to the altar) without looking
back: they thus leave pain and evil behind without looking back to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:13">9:1:2:13</span></span>13.
Having returned, he makes the bricks his own

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

milch cows; for the gods, having now appeased him (Agni-Rudra) by the
*S*atarudriya and the water, and having driven out his pain and evil,
returned (to the altar) and made the bricks their own milch cows; and in
like manner does this (Sacrificer) now, after appeasing him by the
*S*atarudriya and the water, and casting off his pain and evil, return
and make the bricks his own milch cows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:14">9:1:2:14</span></span>14. And
some say, 'Let him make them his own whilst sitting, for sitting one
milks the cow.' But let him rather make them his own standing; for that
fire-altar is these worlds, and these worlds are, as it were, standing.
And, moreover, one is stronger whilst standing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:15">9:1:2:15</span></span>15.
\[He does so\], whilst standing (near the right thigh of the altar) with
his face towards the north-east; in front stands that cow by the
Sacrificer with her face towards the west (back), for from the right
side they approach the cow which stands with its face towards the back
(west).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:16">9:1:2:16</span></span>16. And
wherever he reaches (whilst stretching his arms over the altar), there
he touches it and mutters this formula (Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 2), 'Let these
bricks be mine own milch cows, O Agni!' for Agni rules over this making
of cows, whence he addresses Agni out of so many deities;--'One, and
ten <span id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_294) . . . . and a hundred thousand
millions, and a billion;'--for the one, to wit, one and ten, is the
lowest quantity, and the other, to wit, a hundred thousand millions, and
a billion, is the highest quantity; thus, having comprehended them by
the

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

lowest and the highest quantity, the gods made them their own milch
cows; and in like manner does this (Sacrificer), having thus
comprehended them by the lowest and the highest quantity, make them his
own milch cows. Hence also he need not care to make many (cows) his
own <span id="fr_296"></span>[1](#fn_295), for in yonder world that
(Sacrificer), by means of the Brahman (holy writ), the Ya*g*us, will
make many (cows) his own. And in that he carries on (the numbers)
uninterruptedly, thereby he carries on, without interruption, his
objects of desire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:17">9:1:2:17</span></span>17. And
as to why he makes the bricks his own milch cows,--this fire-altar is
speech, for with speech it is built up; and when he says, 'One, and ten,
. . . and a hundred thousand millions, and a billion,'--'one' is speech,
and a hundred thousand millions is speech, and a billion is speech: it
is Speech herself that the gods thereby made their own milch cow; and in
like manner does the Sacrificer thereby make Speech herself his own
milch cow. And in that he carries on (the numbers) uninterruptedly,
thereby it is Speech herself that he carries on:--'Let these bricks be
mine own milch cows, O Agni, hereafter in yonder world!' He thereby
makes them his own milch cows in this world, and he also makes them his
own milch cows in yonder world; and thus they are profitable to him in
both worlds, in this one and in the other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:18">9:1:2:18</span></span>18.
\[Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 3\], 'The seasons ye are,'--for these (bricks) are
indeed the seasons;--'law-sustaining,' that is, 'truth-sustaining;'--'be
ye season-abiding, law-sustaining!--for the bricks

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

are the days and nights, and the days and nights indeed abide in the
seasons;--'fat-showering, honey-showering,'--he thereby makes them
fat-showering and honey-showering for himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:19">9:1:2:19</span></span>19.
'The widely-shining by name,'--for the gods then called those bricks to
them by their names, and in the same way in which they called them, they
turned unto them; but the 'space-fillers' alone stood with averted faces
discharging water, having no names applied to them. They called them by
the name 'the widely-shining,' and they turned unto them. Hence, each
time he has laid down ten bricks, he addresses them with the
'space-filling <span id="fr_297"></span>[1](#fn_296) (verse)': he
thereby makes them widely-shining (virâ*g*), for the Virâ*g* (metre)
consists of ten syllables:--'wish-milking, never-failing,'--he thereby
makes them wish-milking and never-failing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:20">9:1:2:20</span></span>20. He
then draws a frog, a lotus-flower, and a bamboo-shoot across (the
central part of the altar). For the gods having now appeased him by the
*S*atarudriya and the water, and having driven out his pain and evil,
thereby still further appeased him; and in like manner does this
(Sacrificer), now that he has appeased him by the *S*atarudriya and the
water, and driven out his pain and evil, still further appease him
thereby. In every direction he draws them: he thus appeases him
everywhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:21">9:1:2:21</span></span>21.
And, again, as to why he draws them across. Now, in the beginning, when
the *Ri*shis, the vital airs, made up that Agni <span
id="fr_298"></span>[2](#fn_297), they sprinkled him with water: that
water dripped off and became the frogs.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:22">9:1:2:22</span></span>22.
They (the waters) said to Pra*g*âpati, 'Whatever moisture <span
id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_298) we had, has gone down.' He said, 'This
tree shall know it!'--he shall know (vettu), he shall taste it (sa*m*
vettu)--that one, indeed, they mystically call 'vetasa' (bamboo), for
the gods love the mystic. And because they said, 'Down (avâk) has gone
our moisture (ka),' they became avâkkâs;--'avâkkâs,' they mystically
call 'avakâs (lotuses),' for the gods love the mystic. These, then, are
those three kinds of water, to wit, the frog, the lotus-flower, and the
bamboo-shoot: by means of these three kinds of water he appeases him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:23">9:1:2:23</span></span>23.
And, again, why he draws them across it;--when he (Agni, the fire-altar)
is built up, he is being born, and he is born for every kind of food;
and these are every kind of food, to wit, the frog, the lotus-flower,
and the bamboo-shoot, for these, indeed, are animals, water, and trees:
with all this food he gratifies him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:24">9:1:2:24</span></span>24.
With the frog, on the part of animals, whence, of animals, the frog is
the one affording least subsistence, for he is used up;--with the
lotus-flower, on the part of water, whence of the kinds of water
(plants), lotus-flowers are those affording least subsistence, for they
are used up;--and with the bamboo-shoot, on the part of trees; whence,
of trees, the bamboo is the one affording least subsistence, for it is
used up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:25">9:1:2:25</span></span>25.
Having tied them to a cane, he, in the first place, draws them eastwards
along the right (south) part of the (body of the) altar inside the
enclosing-stones,

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

with (Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 4), 'With the lotus-flower of the ocean we
encompass thee, O Agni: be thou bright and propitious unto us!' that is,
'With the waters of the ocean we appease thee.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:26">9:1:2:26</span></span>26.
Then northwards along the hind part (of the altar), with (Vâ*g*. S.
XVII, 5), 'With an outer vesture of cold we encompass thee, O Agni: be
thou bright and propitious unto us!'--that part of the cold which is
frozen hard is an outer vesture of cold: thus, 'By the frozen part of
cold we appease thee!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:27">9:1:2:27</span></span>27.
Then eastwards along the left (north) part, with (Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 6),
'Upon the earth, into the reed, into the rivers descend thou, O Agni,
thou art the bile <span id="fr_300"></span>[1](#fn_299) of waters: with
them, come thou, O she-frog, and make the sacrifice bright-coloured and
propitious for us!' as the text, so the meaning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:28">9:1:2:28</span></span>28.
Then southwards along the forepart, with (Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 7), 'Thou art
the receptacle of waters, the abode of the ocean: let thy darts burn
others than us! unto us be thou bright and propitious!' as the text, so
the meaning. He first draws them thus <span
id="fr_301"></span>[2](#fn_300), then thus, then thus, then thus: that
is from left to right, for so it is with the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:29">9:1:2:29</span></span>29.
Over the body (of the altar) he draws them

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

first, for of (the bird, or Agni) that is born the body is born first,
then the right wing, then the tail, then the left wing: that is from
left to right, for so it is with the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:30">9:1:2:30</span></span>30.
Over the wings and tail he draws them in the direction of the body
(self): he thus lays calmness into his own self;--from the further end
(he draws) hitherwards: he thus lays calmness into his own self from the
further end hitherwards. The right wing, with (Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 8), 'O
bright Agni, with thy light, (with thy dainty tongue, O god, bring
hither the gods, and worship them)!' The tail, with (Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 9),
'O bright and shining Agni, (bring hither the gods to our sacrifice and
our offering)!' The left wing, with (Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 10), 'He who with
bright and glittering light (shineth upon the earth, as the dawns with
their glow, who, the ever young, speeding, as in the race, in the
battle, of the steed, thirsteth not in the heat).' 'Bright,' he says
each time, for whatever is kindly and propitious is bright: he thus
propitiates him thereby.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:31">9:1:2:31</span></span>31.
With seven (formulas) he draws them across,--the altar consists of seven
layers, and seven seasons are a year, and Agni is the year: as great as
Agni is, as great as is his measure, with so much he thus crosses him.
Having thrown the cane on the heap of rubbish;--

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:32">9:1:2:32</span></span>32.
\[The Adhvaryu\] then sings hymns round it (the altar);--for therein
that whole Agni is completed; and the gods laid into him that highest
form, immortality; and in like manner does this (Sacrificer) thereby lay
into him that highest form, immortality. Sâman-hymns are (used), for
sâmans are vital airs,

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

and the vital airs are immortality: immortality, that highest form, he
thus lays into him. On every side he sings around it: everywhere he thus
lays immortality, that highest form, into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:33">9:1:2:33</span></span>33.
And, again, as to why he sings sâman-hymns round about it;--the gods
then desired, 'Let us make this body of ours boneless and immortal.'
They spake, 'Think ye upon this, how we may make this body of ours
boneless and immortal!' They spake, 'Meditate (*k*it) ye!' whereby
indeed they meant to say, 'Seek ye a layer (*k*iti)! seek ye how we may
make this body of ours boneless and immortal!

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:34">9:1:2:34</span></span>34.
Whilst meditating, they saw those sâman-hymns, and sang them round about
it, and by means of them they made that body of theirs boneless and
immortal; and in like manner does the Sacrificer, when he sings the
sâman-hymns round about it, make that body of his boneless and immortal.
On every side he sings: everywhere he thus makes that body of his
boneless and immortal. Standing he sings, for these worlds stand, as it
were; and whilst standing one doubtless is stronger. He sings, after
uttering (the syllable) 'hi*m*,' for therein the sâman-hymn becomes
whole and complete.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:35">9:1:2:35</span></span>35. He
first sings the Gâyatra hymn <span id="fr_302"></span>[1](#fn_301), for
the Gâyatrî metre is Agni: he thus makes Agni his

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

head, and that head of his (or of him, Agni) he thus makes boneless and
immortal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:36">9:1:2:36</span></span>36. The
Rathantara <span id="fr_303"></span>[1](#fn_302) (hymn he sings) at the
right wing; for the Rathantara is this (earth), and this (earth),
doubtless, is the most essential (rasatama) of these worlds, for it is
in her that all these essences (rasa) are contained, and 'rasantama,'
indeed, they call mystically, 'rathantara,' for the gods love the
mystic: he thus makes this (earth) his right wing, and that right wing
of his he thus makes boneless and immortal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:37">9:1:2:37</span></span>37. The
B*ri*hat <span id="fr_304"></span>[1](#fn_302) (hymn he sings) at the
left wing; the B*ri*hat (great), doubtless, is the sky, for the sky is
the greatest (of worlds): he thus makes the sky his (Agni's) left wing,
and that left wing of his he thus makes boneless and immortal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:38">9:1:2:38</span></span>38. The
Vâmadevya <span id="fr_305"></span>[1](#fn_302) (hymn he sings) on the
body (of the altar); for the Vâmadevya is the breath, and the breath is
air (vâyu, the wind), and he, Vâyu, doubtless, is the self (body) of all
the gods: he thus makes the air (wind) his body, and that body of his he
thus makes boneless and immortal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:39">9:1:2:39</span></span>39. The
Ya*gñ*âya*gñ*iya <span id="fr_306"></span>[1](#fn_302) (hymn he sings)
near the tail;--the Ya*gñ*âya*gñ*iya, doubtless, is the moon; for
whenever a sacrifice becomes completed <span
id="fr_307"></span>[2](#fn_303), the essence of its oblations goes up to
him (the moon);

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

and inasmuch as sacrifice after sacrifice (ya*gñ*a) goes up to him, the
moon is the Ya*gñ*âya*gñ*iya: he thus makes the moon his (Agni's) tail,
and that tail of his he thus makes boneless and immortal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:40">9:1:2:40</span></span>40. He
then sings the heart of Pra*g*âpati <span
id="fr_308"></span>[1](#fn_304);--the heart assuredly is yonder sun, for
he (the sun) is smooth, and the heart is smooth; he is round, and the
heart is round. On the body (of the altar) he sings, for the heart is in
the body;--at the armpit <span id="fr_309"></span>[2](#fn_305), for the
heart is in (the vicinity of) the armpit;--

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

at the right armpit, for the heart is nearer thereto <span
id="fr_310"></span>[1](#fn_306): he thus makes the sun his (Agni's)
heart, and that heart of his he thus makes boneless and immortal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:41">9:1:2:41</span></span>41. He
sings about offspring (pra*g*â) and Pra*g*âpati (the lord of creatures
and procreation);--when he sings about offspring, he lays the heart into
offspring; and when he sings about Pra*g*âpati, he lays the heart into
Agni.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:42">9:1:2:42</span></span>42.
And, again, as to why he sings about offspring and Pra*g*âpati;--this
Agni, doubtless, is both offspring and the lord of offspring, and hence,
when he sings about Agni, he lays the heart both into the offspring and
into the lord of offspring.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:1:2:43">9:1:2:43</span></span>43.
These (hymns) are the immortal bricks; he lays them down last (highest)
of all:--he thereby makes immortality the highest thing of all this
(universe), and hence immortality is the highest thing of all this
(universe). Let none other but the Adhvaryu <span
id="fr_311"></span>[2](#fn_307) sing; for these (hymns) are bricks, and
he (Agni, the fire-altar) would be built up in the wrong way <span
id="fr_312"></span>[3](#fn_308), were any other than the Adhvaryu to
sing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_289"></span>[169:1](sbe4331.htm#fr_290) Or rather, he pours
water on it (the altar).

<span id="fn_290"></span>[169:2](sbe4331.htm#fr_291) That is, from the
lower (or hindmost) point where the right <span id="page_170">p.
170</span> wing joins the body of the altar. Re there places a stone,
from which he begins the sprinkling of the altar.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[170:1](sbe4331.htm#fr_292) See [IX, I, 1,
33](sbe4330.htm#9:1:1:33).

<span id="fn_292"></span>[171:1](sbe4331.htm#fr_293) The burning heat of
the fire, and all physical and mental suffering.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[171:2](sbe4331.htm#fr_294) Viz. the stone, or
the pot, according to others; cf. Katy. *S*rautas. XVIII, 2, 5-8.
According to Prof. Weber the stone is meant to represent the hungry
greed of the fire.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[172:1](sbe4331.htm#fr_295) The intervening
numbers here omitted increase by multiples of ten.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[173:1](sbe4331.htm#fr_296) ? That is to say,
he need not touch the altar more than once.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[174:1](sbe4331.htm#fr_297) That is with the
verse Vâ*g*. S. XII, 54, beginning 'Lokam p*rin*a,' 'Fill thou the
space;' see part iii, p. 153 note.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[174:2](sbe4331.htm#fr_298) See VI, 1, 1, 1-5.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[175:1](sbe4331.htm#fr_299) Thus, or essence
(ra*s*a), according to Sâya*n*a; cf. [X, 6, 5, 1](sbe4375.htm#10:6:5:1).
The word 'ka' has, however, also the meaning 'joy.'

<span id="fn_299"></span>[176:1](sbe4331.htm#fr_300) That is, 'the heat'
which is considered the chief property of the bilious humour.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[176:2](sbe4331.htm#fr_301) The procedure in
this case is an exact counterpart of the ploughing of the altar-site,
for which see VII, 2, 2, 8-12, with notes. Hence also the verbs
expressive of the two actions are closely analogous, viz. vik*ri*shati
and vikarshati.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[178:1](sbe4331.htm#fr_302) The Gâyatra-sâman
is the hymn-tune composed on the verse called 'the Gâyatrî,' *par
excellence*, or 'Sâvitrî' (tat savitur varenyam, Rig-veda III, 62, 10),
which plays an important part in the religious fife of the Hindu. The
verse, as figured for chanting, is given, Sâma-v. Calc. ed. vol. v, p.
60 1. On the present occasion, according to Lâ*t*y. *S*r. I, 5, 11, a
different text, viz. Sâma-v. II, 8, 14 (*Ri*g-veda IX, 66, 19, agna
âyû*m*shi payase), is to be sung to this tune.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[179:1](sbe4331.htm#fr_306) The Rathantara,
B*ri*hat, Vâmadevya, and Ya*gñ*âya*gñ*iya tunes are apparently to be
sung here on their original texts (Sâma-v. II, 30, 31, abhi tvâ *s*ûra
nonuma*h*; II, 159, 160, tvâm id dhi havâmahe; II, 32, 33, kayâ na*s*
*k*itra â bhuvat; and II, 53, 54, ya*gñ*â-ya*gñ*â vo agnaye), though
hardly in their elaborate setting, as performed in chanting.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[179:2](sbe4331.htm#fr_307) It should be
remembered that the chanting of the Ya*gñ*âya*gñ*iya (or
Agnish*t*oma)-sâman marks the completion (sa*m*sthâ) of the ordinary
(Agnish*t*oma) Soma-sacrifice.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[180:1](sbe4331.htm#fr_308) The
Pra*g*âpati-h*ri*daya, or Pra*g*âpater h*ri*dayam, as figured for
chanting, is given, Sâma-v. Calc. ed. vol. ii, p. 499. It consists of
the words, imâ*h* pra*g*â*h* pra*g*âpate(r) h*ri*dayam pra*g*ârûpam
a*g*î*g*ane, with inserted stobhas and modulations. It is followed by a
simpler form, which is perhaps the one used on the present occasion.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[180:2](sbe4331.htm#fr_309) Viz. on the place
where the right wing joins the body of the altar. According to other
authorities, the *S*yaita hymn-tune is likewise to be sung near the left
arm-pit (or, according to Sâ*nd*ilya, at the place where the Adhvaryu
mounts the altar). For other variations, see Weber, Ind. Stud. XIII, p.
276. I do not think that the ritual of the White Ya*g*us, in omitting
the left arm-pit, shows any gap or inconsistency, since the right
arm-pit is marked out, not for any bodily parallelism, but for the
simple reason that it is supposed to indicate the position of the heart.
Whilst all the other places on which hymns are sung are essential parts
of the bird Agni, the arm-pit is not an essential part, but is merely
indicative of the central organ of the body. Lâ*t*y. I, 5, 11 seqq.
supplies the following directions, apparently implying a somewhat
different order of procedure from that followed in our text: He passes
along the south, and whilst standing (east of the altar) with his face
towards the west, he sings the Gâyatra at the head. Returning, he sings
the Rathantara at the right wing. Going round behind, he sings the
B*ri*hat at the left wing. Going back, and standing behind the tail,
with his face towards the east, he sings the Ya*gñ*âya*gñ*iya. The
Vâmadevya he sings at the right, and the Pra*g*âpati-h*ri*daya at the
left, arm-pit. Then follow different views held by different
teachers.--With this ceremony, by which homage is paid to the different
parts of Agni-Pra*g*âpati's body, compare the similar, but more
elaborate, ceremony of the Parimâda*h* at the Mahâvrata, [X, 1, 2,
9](sbe4346.htm#10:1:2:9) with note.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[181:1](sbe4331.htm#fr_310) That is, by taking
the auricles as parts of the heart.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[181:2](sbe4331.htm#fr_311) According to
Lâ*t*y. I, 5, 1 seq., it is the Prastot*ri* who sings these sâmans. A
similar conflict of competence in this respect is referred to not only
in regard to detached sâmans (cf. Kâty. IV, 9, 6-9), but even in regard
to such solemn performances as the chanting of the Mahâvrata-sâman (cf.
note on [X, 1, 1, 5](sbe4345.htm#10:1:1:5)).

<span id="fn_308"></span>[181:3](sbe4331.htm#fr_312) Vi-*k*ita, in this
sense, appears to be a ἅπαξ λεγόμενον. Sâya*n*a seems to have read
vi*g*ita (parâbhûta, defeated) instead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX, 2, 1. Second Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe4332)
