[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4354) 
[Next](sbe4356) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6">10:2:6</span></span>

### SIXTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:1">10:2:6:1</span></span>1. The
one hundred and one-fold Pra*g*âpati, doubtless, is the year, and
thereto belong days and

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

nights, half-months, months, and seasons. The days and nights of a month
are sixty, and in the month, doubtless, the days and nights of the year
are obtained; and there are twenty-four half-months, thirteen months,
and three seasons (of four months)--that makes a hundred parts, and the
year itself is the one hundred and first part.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:2">10:2:6:2</span></span>2. By
the seasons it is sevenfold,--six seasons (of two months), and the year
itself as the seventh part. And he who shines yonder is the light of
that year: his rays are a hundredfold, and the (sun's) disk itself is
the one hundred and first part.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:3">10:2:6:3</span></span>3. By
the regions it is sevenfold,--the rays which are in the eastern region
are one part, and those in the southern are one, and those in the
western are one, and those in the northern are one, and those in the
upper (region) are one, and those in the lower (region) are one, and the
disk itself is the seventh part.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:4">10:2:6:4</span></span>4.
Beyond this (year) lies the wish-granting world; but the wish-granting
one is the immortal (element): it is thus the immortal that lies beyond
this (year, temporal existence); and that same immortal (element) is
that very light which shines yonder.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:5">10:2:6:5</span></span>5. Now
that same boon (the immortal light), bright with wealth, he, Savit*ri*
(the sun), distributes among the distributed creatures, and among plants
and trees, too; and to some, indeed, he gives more of it, and to some
less; and they to whom he gives more of it live longest, and they to
whom he gives less live less long.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:6">10:2:6:6</span></span>6. It
is regarding this that it is said in the *Rik* (I, 22, 7; Vâ*g*. S. XXX,
4), 'The distributer of wealth, the bright boon, we invoke, Savit*ri*,
the beholder of men.' And that is the full

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (measure of) life,
for it is long, it is unending <span id="fr_631"></span>[1](#fn_621);
and when people here say, 'May thy life be long! mayest thou reach the
full (extent of) life!' it is as much as to say, 'May that, world, may
that (immortal light) be thine!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:7">10:2:6:7</span></span>7. It
is Vâ*k* (Speech) that, seeing it, speaks (thus). That same (immortal
light), indeed, is to be obtained either by the one hundred and one-fold
(altar), or by a life of a hundred years: whosoever builds a one hundred
and one-fold (altar), or whosoever lives a hundred years, he, indeed,
obtains that immortality. Therefore, whether they know it, or whether
they do not, people say, 'The life of a hundred years makes for heaven.'
Hence one ought not to yield to his own desire and pass away before (he
has attained) the full extent of life, for (such shortening of one's
life) does not make for the heavenly world <span
id="fr_632"></span>[2](#fn_622); and these are indeed the worlds, to
wit, the days and nights, the half-moons, moons, and seasons, and the
year.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:8">10:2:6:8</span></span>8.
Those who pass away in the years below twenty are consigned to the days
and nights as their worlds; and those who (pass away) in the years above
twenty and below forty, to the half-moons; and those who (pass away) in
the (years) above forty and below sixty, to the months; and those who
(pass away) in the (years) above sixty and below

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

eighty, to the seasons; and those who (pass away) in the (years) above
eighty and below a hundred (are consigned) to the year; and he alone who
lives a hundred years or more attains to that immortal (life).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:9">10:2:6:9</span></span>9. Only
by many sacrifices, indeed, is a single day, or a single night (of life)
gained; and only he who builds the one hundred and one-fold (altar), or
he who lives a hundred years, is certain of his attaining to that
immortal (life). But he, indeed, builds a one hundred and one-fold
(altar) who carries him (Ukhya Agni) for a year: hence one should only
build (an altar for) such an (Agni) who has been carried for a year.
Thus much as to the deity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:10">10:2:6:10</span></span>10.
Now as to the sacrifice. When he measures out those one hundred and one
men (man's lengths) with upstretched arms, that is a one hundred and
one-fold (altar) in form, and a sevenfold one in respect of its layers:
the layers contain six seasonal <span id="fr_633"></span>[1](#fn_623)
(bricks) and the fire (or altar) itself is the seventh form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:11">10:2:6:11</span></span>11.
And, indeed, it is a hundred and one-fold in respect of bricks,--the
first fifty bricks and the last fifty <span
id="fr_634"></span>[2](#fn_624) which are (laid down) make a hundred
forms (parts); and the bricks which are laid down between (those two
sets) are the one hundred and first form.

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:12">10:2:6:12</span></span>12.
And, having the Ya*g*us for its light, it is a hundred and one-fold in
respect of the Ya*g*us (formulas),--the first fifty and the last fifty
which are (used) make a hundred forms; and the Ya*g*us which are used
between them are the one hundred and first form. In this way also the
sevenfold one becomes a hundred and one-fold, and whosoever knows this
obtains even by the sevenfold one whatever wish there is both in a life
of a hundred years and in the one hundred and one-fold (altar).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:13">10:2:6:13</span></span>13.
In this way, indeed, all sacrifices <span
id="fr_635"></span>[1](#fn_625) up to the Agnihotra are a hundred and
one-fold by way of verses, formulas, words, syllables, rites, and
hymn-tunes; and whosoever knows this obtains by every sacrifice whatever
wish there is either in a life of a hundred years, or in the one hundred
and one-fold (altar), or in the sevenfold one. Thus much as to the
sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:14">10:2:6:14</span></span>14.
Now as to the body. There are these four sets of five fingers and toes,
the two--wrist and elbow <span id="fr_636"></span>[2](#fn_626),--the
arm, the shoulder-blade, and the collarbone,--that makes twenty-five;
and in the same way (each of) these other limbs,--that makes a hundred
parts, and the trunk itself is the one hundred and first part. As
regards the sevenfold state this has been explained <span
id="fr_637"></span>[3](#fn_627).

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:15">10:2:6:15</span></span>15.
And, having the vital air for its light, it is a hundred and one-fold by
the vital airs limb by limb, for there is vital air in each limb:
whosoever knows this obtains, even by his knowledge, whatever wish there
is in a life of a hundred years, or in the one hundred and one-fold
(altar), or in the sevenfold one, or in all sacrifices; for he has
obtained a body perfected by all the sacrifices.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:16">10:2:6:16</span></span>16.
Now, there are these three fivefold (objects), the year, the fire, and
man: their five forms are food, drink, well-being <span
id="fr_638"></span>[1](#fn_628), light, and immortality. Whatever food
there is in the year, that is its food; whatever water, that is its
drink; its well-being is the night, for in the night, as in well-being
(contentment or goodness), all beings dwell together <span
id="fr_639"></span>[2](#fn_629); its light is the day, and its immortal
element the sun. Thus much as to the deity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:17">10:2:6:17</span></span>17.
Now as to the sacrifice. Whatever food is placed on the fire, that is
its food, and whatever water, that is its water; its well-being is the
enclosing-stones, for they are of the nature of nights <span
id="fr_640"></span>[3](#fn_630); its light the (bricks) with special
formulas, for they are of the nature of days; and its immortal

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

element the fire, for that is of the nature of the sun. Thus much as to
the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:18">10:2:6:18</span></span>18.
Now as to the body. Whatever food there is in man, that is his food;
whatever water, that is his water; his well-being (safety, strength) is
the bones, for they are of the nature of enclosing-stones; his light the
marrow, for that is of the nature of the ya*g*ushmatî (bricks); his
immortal element the breath, for that is of the nature of fire;--and,
indeed, people say, 'The breath is fire, the breath is the immortal.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:2:6:19">10:2:6:19</span></span>19.
Now, hunger ceases through food, thirst through drink, evil through
well-being (goodness), darkness through light, and death through
immortality; and, in truth, whosoever knows this from him all these pass
away, and he conquers recurring death, and attains the whole (perfect)
life. And let him hold this to be immortality in yonder world and life
here below. Some, indeed, hold it to be breath, saying, 'The breath is
fire, the breath is the immortal;' but let him not believe this, for
something uncertain is breath. And regarding this it has also been said
in the Ya*g*us (Vâ*g*. S. XII, 65), 'That (bond) of thine I unloose, as
from the middle of Âyus (life):' let him therefore hold it to be
immortality in yonder world, and life here below, and thus, indeed, he
attains the whole life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_621"></span>[323:1](sbe4355.htm#fr_631) Thus Sâya*n*a--tad
etat sarvam âyur iti sarvapadasyârtham âha, dîrgham ananta*m* hi.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[323:2](sbe4355.htm#fr_632) Literally,
'conducive to the world,' or, perhaps, 'conducive to a place (in yonder
world).' Sâya*n*a interprets it by--his death is 'alokyam,' that is, not
procuring the world consisting of immortality. Some such meaning as
'(such conduct) is not world-winning' seems to be implied by the words
which follow.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[324:1](sbe4355.htm#fr_633) The five layers
contain five sets of two such bricks, each representing the two months
of the respective season; except the third layer, which contains four
such bricks, only, however, of half the thickness of the others.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[324:2](sbe4355.htm#fr_634) According to
Sâya*n*a, this refers to the fifty Prâ*n*abh*ri*ts in the first, and to
the forty Virâ*g*s, five Nâkasads, and five Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs in the
fifth layer.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[325:1](sbe4355.htm#fr_635) That is, according
to Sâya*n*a, all Soma-sacrifices,--ekâhas, ahînas, sattras, &c. In this
case we should perhaps translate, 'down to the Agnihotra,' that being
the simplest kind of Soma-sacrifice.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[325:2](sbe4355.htm#fr_636) This meaning is
assigned by Sâya*n*a to 'kalkushî' (= ma*n*ibandhâratnî); it cannot mean
here 'the two wrists' (? 'kalyusha,' Mon. Will. Dict.), as both must be
parts of the same limb.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[325:3](sbe4355.htm#fr_637) Viz. [X, 2, 2,
1](sbe4351.htm#10:2:2:1). [5](sbe4351.htm#10:2:2:5) (VI, 1, 1, 1 seq.).

<span id="fn_628"></span>[326:1](sbe4355.htm#fr_638) Or, perhaps,
goodness, excellence (*s*rî).

<span id="fn_629"></span>[326:2](sbe4355.htm#fr_639) According to
Sâya*n*a, this is an etymological play on the word '*s*rî' (well-being,
contentment, peace), as connected with the verb '*s*ri'--*s*riyanti
nivasanty asmin kâla iti râtri*h* *s*rî*s*abdavâ*k*yâ. Cf. II, 3, 1, 3,
where, with the Kâ*n*va, we have to read, 'ilitâ hi *s*ere (*s*erate,
K.) sa*mg*ânâ*h*'--'for (when the sun has set) those who are at variance
with one another lie quiet (together).'

<span id="fn_630"></span>[326:3](sbe4355.htm#fr_640) Viz. inasmuch as
they enclose the altar, and protect it on all sides. Cf. VII, 1, 1, 12
seq., where the enclosing-stones are said to represent the womb in which
the embryo Agni is contained; and are also compared with the ocean which
flows round the earth like a protecting moat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X, 3, 1. Third Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe4356)
