[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4307.md) 
[Next](sbe4309.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:2:2">8:2:2</span></span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:2:2:1">8:2:2:1</span></span>1. He
then lays down the Vai*s*vadevî (All-gods’ bricks). For this second
layer is that one which the A*s*vins at that time laid down for them
(the gods); and by laying it down they became everything here whatsoever
there is here.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:2:2:2">8:2:2:2</span></span>2. The
gods spake, 'The A*s*vins have become everything here: think ye upon
this as to how we also may share in it!' They said, 'Meditate ye
(*k*it)!' whereby, no doubt, they meant to say, Seek ye a layer
(*k*iti)! seek ye in what way we also may share in it!' whilst
meditating, they saw these Vai*s*vadevî (All-gods’) bricks.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:2:2:3">8:2:2:3</span></span>3. They
said, 'The A*s*vins have become everything here: with the help of the
A*s*vins let us lay down (bricks) along with the A*s*vins’ layer!' With
the help of the A*s*vins they accordingly laid down (bricks) along with
the A*s*vins’ layer, whence they call this the A*s*vins’ layer. Hence
the end of these (bricks) is the same as that of the former ones; for
they laid them down with the help of the A*s*vins along with the
A*s*vins’ layer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:2:2:4">8:2:2:4</span></span>4. And,
again, as to why he lays down the

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> All-gods’
(bricks). These indeed are those same All-gods who saw this second
layer, and who came nigh with that life-sap: it is them he thereby
bestows, that is, all these creatures. He lays them down in the range of
the Reta*h*si*k*; for the Reta*h*si*k* are these two (heaven and earth):
within these two (worlds) he thus places creatures; whence there are
creatures within these two (worlds). He places (bricks) on every side:
he thus places creatures everywhere, whence there are creatures
everywhere. He places them alongside of the regional ones <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_85.md): he thus places creatures in the regions
(quarters); whence there are creatures in all the (four) quarters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:2:2:5">8:2:2:5</span></span>5. And,
again, as to why he lays down the All-gods’ (bricks). When Pra*g*âpati
had become relaxed, all creatures went forth from the midst of him, from
that birth-place of theirs. When that (central part) of his body had
been restored, they entered him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:2:2:6">8:2:2:6</span></span>6. Now
the Pra*g*âpati who become relaxed is this very Agni (fire-altar) that
is now being built up; and the creatures who went forth from the midst
of him are these same All-gods’ bricks; and when he lays these down, he
causes those creatures, which went forth from the midst of him, to enter
him. In the range of the Reta*h*si*k* (he places the Vai*s*vadevî
bricks), for the Reta*h*si*k* are the ribs, and the ribs

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

are the middle: he thus causes the creatures to enter him in the very
middle. He places them on all sides: on all sides he thus causes the
creatures to enter him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:2:2:7">8:2:2:7</span></span>7. And,
again, as to why he lays down the Vai*s*vadevî (bricks). At that time,
when that (part) of his body had been restored, Pra*g*âpati desired,
'May I create creatures, may I be reproduced!' Having entered into union
with the seasons, the waters, the vital airs, the year, and the
A*s*vins, he produced these creatures; and in like manner does this
Sacrificer, by entering into union with those deities, now produce these
creatures. Hence with all (of these bricks, the word) sa*g*ush ('in
union with') recurs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:2:2:8">8:2:2:8</span></span>8. \[He
lays down the Vai*s*vadevî bricks, with Vâ*g*. S. XIV, 7\], 'In union
with the seasons,'--he thereby produced the seasons, and having entered
into union with the seasons he produced (creatures);--'in union with the
ranges,'--the ranges, doubtless, are the waters, for by water everything
is ranged (distributed or produced) here: having entered into union with
the waters he produced (creatures);--'in union with the gods,'--he
thereby produced the gods,--those who are called 'gods <span
id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_86.md);'--'in union with the life-sustaining
gods,'--the life-sustaining gods, doubtless, are the vital airs, for by
the vital airs everything living here is sustained; or, the
life-sustaining gods are the metres, for by the metres (sacred writ)
everything living is sustained here; having entered into union with the
vital airs he produced creatures;--

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'for Agni
Vai*s*vânara,'--Agni Vai*s*vânara ('belonging to all men'), doubtless,
is the year: having entered into union with the year he produced
creatures;--'May the A*s*vins, the Adhvaryus, settle thee here!'--having
entered into union with the A*s*vins he produced creatures.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:2:2:9">8:2:2:9</span></span>9. 'In
union with the Vasus,' he says on the right side: he thereby produced
the Vasus;--'in union with the Rudras,' he says at the back: he thereby
produced the Rudras;--'in union with the Âdityas,' he says on the left
side: he thereby produced the Âdityas;--'in union with the All-gods,' he
says upwards: he thereby produced the All-gods. These (bricks) have the
same beginning and end, but are different in the middle: as to their
having the same beginning and end, it is because having become united
with the deities in front and behind, he produced creatures; and as to
their being different in the middle, it is that each time he produced
different creatures from within him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[31:1](sbe4308.htm#fr_86.md) The Â*s*vinî (or
Di*s*yâ) bricks were placed in a circle round the centre, at the
distance of a foot from where the central brick (Svayamât*rinn*â) was
placed in the first layer,--that is to say, in the third place from the
centre. They were, moreover, placed in the second space (or at the
distance of half a foot) from the two spines, see [p.
23](sbe4307.htm#page_23), note [1](sbe4307.htm#fn_76.md). The five
Vai*s*vadevîs are then placed alongside of the Â*s*vinîs, so as to fill
up the 'first spaces,' that is to say, to lie on the spines themselves;
each of the two half-foot bricks laid down in the south being, as it
were, halved by the spine.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[32:1](sbe4308.htm#fr_87.md) Lit. what they (viz.
the Vedic hymns, according to the commentator) call gods:--Yat ki*mk*id
ity eva vedavâdâ â*k*akshate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII, 2, 3. Third Brâhma*n*a](sbe4309.md)
