[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4302) 
[Next](sbe4304) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# *S*ATAPATHA-BRÂHMA*N*A,

## EIGHTH KÂ*ND*A.

#### THE BUILDING OF THE SACRED FIRE-ALTAR

#### (continued).

#### THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE FIRST LAYER

#### (continued).

### FIRST ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.<span class="margnote"><span id="8:1:1">8:1:1</span></span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:1:1:1">8:1:1:1</span></span>1. He
lays down the Prâ*n*abh*ri*ta*h* (breath-holders) <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34): now, the Prâ*n*abh*ri*ta*h* being--the
vital

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

airs, it is the vital airs he thereby bestows upon (Agni). He lays them
down in the first layer;--that which is the first layer is the forepart
(ground-part) of Agni: it is thus in front that he puts (into Agni) the
vital airs, whence there are (in creatures) these (orifices of the)
vital airs in front.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:1:1:2">8:1:1:2</span></span>2. He
lays them down by ten and ten, for there are ten vital airs; and even
though 'ten-ten' may mean many, times, here they mean only ten. Five
times he puts on ten (bricks) each time; for it is those five (kinds of
sacrificial) animals he bestows, and there are ten vital airs in each
.animal: upon all of them he thus bestows the vital airs. He lays down
(the bricks) so as not to be separated from the animals: he thus bestows
vital airs not separated from the animals. He lays them down on every
side: on every side he thus bestows on them (orifices of) the vital
airs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:1:1:3">8:1:1:3</span></span>3. And
again why he lays down the Prâ*n*abh*ri*ta*h*. From Pra*g*âpati, when
relaxed (by producing creatures), the vital airs departed. To them,
having become deities, he spake, 'Come ye to me, return ye unto me that
wherewith ye have gone out of me!'--'Well then, create thou that food
which we will await here looking on!'--'Well then, let us both
create!'--'So be it!'--So both the final airs and Pra*g*âpati created
that food, these Prâ*n*abh*ri*t (bricks).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:1:1:4">8:1:1:4</span></span>4. In
front (of the altar) he lays down (ten bricks <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35),--the first) with (Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 54),
'This one in front, the Existent,'--in front, doubtless, is Agni; and as
to why he speaks of him (as being) 'in front,' it is because they take
out the fire (from the Gârhapatya) towards the front, and attend on Agni
towards the front <span id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36). And as to why he
says 'the

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

existent (bhuva),' Agni is indeed the existent, for it is through Agni
that everything exists (bhû) here. Agni, indeed, having become the
breath, remained in front <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37): it is
that very form <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38) he now bestows (on
Agni).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:1:1:5">8:1:1:5</span></span>5. \[The
others with\], 'His, the Existent's son, the Breath,'--from out of that
form, fire, he (Pra*g*âpati) fashioned the breath;--'Spring, the son of
the breath,'--from out of the breath he fashioned the
spring-season <span id="fr_39"></span>[3](#fn_39);--'The Gâyatrî, the
daughter of the Spring,'--from out of the spring-season he fashioned the
Gâyatrî metre;--'From the Gâyatrî the Gâyatra,'--from out of the Gâyatrî
metre he fashioned the Gâyatra <span id="fr_40"></span>[4](#fn_40)
hymn-tune;--'From the Gâyatra the Upâ*ms*u,'--from out of the Gâyatra
hymn-tune he fashioned the Upâ*ms*u-graha <span
id="fr_41"></span>[5](#fn_41);--

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'From the Upâ*ms*u
the Triv*ri*t,'--from out of the Upâ*ms*u-graha he fashioned the
nine-versed hymn-form;--'From the Triv*ri*t the Rathantara,'--from out
of the Triv*ri*t-stoma he fashioned the Rathantara-p*ri*sh*th*a <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:1:1:6">8:1:1:6</span></span>6. 'The
*Ri*shi Vasish*th*a <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43),'--the *Ri*shi
Vasish*th*a, doubtless, is the breath: inasmuch as it is the chief
(thing) therefore it is Vasish*th*a (the most excellent); or inasmuch as
it abides (with living beings) as the best abider (vast*ri*), therefore
also it is Vasish*th*a.--'By thee, taken by Pra*g*âpati,'--that is, 'by
thee, created by Pra*g*âpati,'--'I take breath for my descendants (and
people)!'--therewith he introduced the breath from the front. Separately
he lays down (these ten bricks): what separate desires there are in the
breath, those he thereby lays into it. Only once he settles them <span
id="fr_44"></span>[3](#fn_44): he thereby makes it one breath; but were
he to settle them each separately, he assuredly would cut the' breath
asunder. This brick is triv*ri*t (threefold): the formula, the settling,
and the sûdadohas <span id="fr_45"></span>[4](#fn_45), that is
threefold, and threefold is Agni,--as great as

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Agni is, as great
as is his measure, so much he lays down (on the altar) by so dying.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:1:1:7">8:1:1:7</span></span>7. And on
the right (south) side <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46) with (Vâ*g*.
S. XIII, 55), 'This one on the right, the all-worker,'--the all-worker
(vi*s*vakarman), doubtless, is this Vâyu (the wind) who blows here, for
it is he that makes everything here; and because he speaks of him as
(being) 'on the right,' therefore it is in the south that he blows most.
Vâyu, indeed, having become the mind, remained in the right side (of the
body): it is that form (part) he now bestows (on Agni).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:1:1:8">8:1:1:8</span></span>8. 'His,
the all-worker's child, the Mind,'--from out of that (all-working) form,
the wind, he fashioned the mind;--'the summer, the son of the
mind,'--from out of the mind he fashioned the summer season <span
id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47);--'the Trish*t*ubh, the daughter of
Summer,'--from out of the summer season he fashioned the Trish*t*ubh
metre;--'from the Trish*t*ubh the Svâra tune,'--from out of the
Trish*t*ubh metre he created the Svâra hymn-tune <span
id="fr_48"></span>[3](#fn_48);--'from

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

the Svâra the Antaryâma,'--from out of the Svâra-sâman he fashioned the
Antaryâma-graha;--'from the Antaryâma the Pa*ñk*ada*s*a,'--from out of
the Antaryâma-cup he fashioned the fifteen-versed hymn-form;--'from the
Pa*ñk*ada*s*a the B*ri*hat,'--from out of the Pa*ñk*ada*s*a-stoma he
fashioned the B*ri*hat-p*ri*sh*th*a.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:1:1:9">8:1:1:9</span></span>9. 'The
*Ri*shi Bharadvâ*g*a,'--the *Ri*shi Bharadvâ*g*a, doubtless, is the
mind;--'vâ*g*a' means 'food,' and he who possesses a mind, possesses
(bharati) food, 'vâ*g*a;' therefore the *Ri*shi Bharadvâ*g*a is the
mind.--'By thee, taken by Pra*g*âpati,'--that is, 'by thee, created by
Pra*g*âpati;'--'I take the mind for my descendants!'--therewith he
introduced the mind from the right side. Separately he lays down (these
ten bricks): what separate desires there are in the mind, those he
thereby lays into it. Only once he settles them: he thereby makes it one
mind; but were he to settle them each separately,

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

he assuredly would cut asunder the mind. This brick is threefold: the
meaning of this has been explained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[1:1](sbe4303.htm#fr_34) The construction of the
first of the five layers of the altar which, as far as the special
bricks are concerned, is now nearing its completion, may be briefly
recapitulated here. The altar (agni) is constructed in the form of a
bird, the body (âtman) of which consists of a square, usually measuring
four man's lengths, or forty feet (Indian=c. 30 ft. Engl.) on each side.
The ground of the 'body' having been ploughed, watered, and sown with
seeds of all kinds of herbs, a square mound, the so-called uttaravedi,
measuring a yuga (yoke= 7 ft. Ind.) on each side, is thrown up in the
middle of the 'body,' and the whole of the latter then made level with
it. In the centre of the 'body' thus raised, where the two
'spines'--connecting the middle of each of the four sides of the square
with that of the, opposite side--meet, the priest puts down a
lotus-leaf, and thereon the gold plate (a symbol of the sun) which the
Sacrificer wore round his neck during the time of initiation. On this
plate he then lays a small gold figure of a man (representing
Agni-Pra*g*âpati, as well as the Sacrificer himself), so as to lie on
his back with the head towards the east; and beside him he places two
offering-spoons, one on each side, filled with ghee and sour curds <span
id="page_2">p. 2</span> respectively. Upon the man he then places a
brick with naturally-formed holes in it (or a porous stone), a so-called
Svayam-ât*rinn*â (self-perforated one), of which there are three in the
altar, viz. in the centre of the first, third, and fifth layers,
supposed to represent the earth, air, and sky respectively, and by their
holes to allow the Sacrificer (in effigy) to breathe, and ultimately to
pass through on his way to the eternal abodes. On this stone he lays
down a plant of dûrvâ grass--with the root lying on the brick, and the
twigs hanging down--meant to represent vegetation on earth, and food for
the Sacrificer. Thereupon he puts down in front (east) of the central
stone, on the 'spine,' a Dviya*g*us brick; in front of that, on both
sides of the spine, two Reta*h*si*k*; then in front of them, one
Vi*s*va*g*yotis; then again two *Ri*tavyâ*h*; and finally the Ashâ*dh*â,
representing the Sacrificer's consecrated consort. These bricks, each of
which is a pada (foot, Ind.) square, occupy nearly one-third of the line
from the centre to the middle of the front side of the 'body' of the
altar. South and north of the Ashâ*dh*â, leaving the space of two
bricks, he places a live tortoise, facing the gold man, and a wooden
mortar and pestle respectively. On the mortar he places the ukhâ, or
fire-pan, filled with sand and milk; and thereon the heads of the five
victims, after chips of gold have been thrust into their mouths,
nostrils, eyes, and ears. At each of the four ends of the two spines' he
then puts down five Apasyâ*h* bricks, the middle one lying on the spine
itself, with two on each side of it. The last set of five bricks, those
hid down at the north (or left) end of the 'cross-spine,' are also
called *Kh*andasyâ*h* by the Brâhma*n*a. He now proceeds to lay down the
Prâ*n*abh*ri*ta*h*, meant to represent the orifices of the vital airs,
in five sets of ten bricks each. The first four sets are placed on the
four diagonals connecting the centre with the four corners of the body
of the altar, beginning from the corner (? or, according to some,
optionally from the centre), in the order S.E., N.W., S.W., N.E.; the
fifth set being then laid down round the central stone at the distance
(or, on the range) of the reta*h*si*k* bricks. See the diagram at [p.
17](sbe4305.htm#img_01700).

<span id="fn_35"></span>[3:1](sbe4303.htm#fr_35) Whilst standing in
front (east) of the altar, he puts down the first set of ten bricks on
the line from the south-west corner (or right shoulder) of the altar
towards the centre. The formulas with which each set of ten bricks are
deposited are spread over three paragraphs, the first of which gives
that of the first brick, the second those for two to eight, the third
for the last two.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[3:2](sbe4303.htm#fr_36) Viz. in taking out the
fire from the Gârhapatya and transferring <span id="page_4">p. 4</span>
it to the Âhavanîya, as well as in approaching the sacrificial fire for
offerings. It should also be borne in mind that the altar (agni) is
built in form of an eagle flying towards the east, or front.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[4:1](sbe4303.htm#fr_37) See VII, 5, 1, 7, 'The
breath is taken in from the front backwards.'--In the text 'prâ*n*o
hâgnir bhûtvâ purastât tasthau,' I take 'prâ*n*a*h*' to be the
predicate.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[4:2](sbe4303.htm#fr_38) At VII, 4, 1, 16, the
vital air is called Pra*g*âpati's (Agni's) pleasing form (or part).

<span id="fn_39"></span>[4:3](sbe4303.htm#fr_39) For a similar
connection of the East with the Gâyatrî, the Rathantara, the Triv*ri*t,
the Spring, and the Brahman (priesthood) see V, 4, I, 3, (part iii, p.
91).

<span id="fn_40"></span>[4:4](sbe4303.htm#fr_40) The Gâyatra-sâman is
the simplest, and by far the most common of all hymn-tunes. It is
especially used in connection with the triv*ri*t-stoma, or nine-versed
hymn, and is invariably employed for the Bahishpavamâna-stotra. It is
also the tune of the first triplet both of the Mâdhyandina and
Ârbhava-pavamâna; as well as for all the four Â*g*ya-stotras.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[4:5](sbe4303.htm#fr_41) See part ii, pp. 238
seqq., where this soma-cup is repeatedly connected with the Gâyatrî.
Though its pressing is performed by three turns of eight, eleven, and
twelve beatings respectively, representing the three chief metres, it is
expressly stated (IV, 1, 1, 14) <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> that he
who is desirous of obtaining holiness, should press eight times at each
turn.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[5:1](sbe4303.htm#fr_42) For this and the other
P*ri*sh*th*a-sâmans see part iii, introd. pp. xvi, xx seqq.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[5:2](sbe4303.htm#fr_43) In Taitt. S. IV, 3, 2,
1, this formula is connected with the preceding one,--'from the
Rathantara (was produced) the *Ri*shi Vasish*th*a.' Similarly in the
corresponding passages of the subsequent sets of bricks.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[5:3](sbe4303.htm#fr_44) The sâdana, or
settling, consists in the formula, 'By that deity, Aṅgiras-like, lie
thou steady!' being pronounced over the bricks. See VI, 1, 2, 28.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[5:4](sbe4303.htm#fr_45) For the sûdadohas
verse, the pronunciation of which, together with the 'settling,'
constitutes the two necessary (nitya) ceremonies, see part iii, p. 307.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[6:1](sbe4303.htm#fr_46) Whilst standing on the
right (south) side of the altar he lays down the third set of ten
Prâ*n*abh*ri*ta*h*, viz. those on the diagonal from the south-west
corner (or right thigh) towards the centre. Whilst, in the actual
performance, these bricks are only laid down after those referred to in
paragraphs 1-3 of the next Brâhma*n*a, the author, in his explanation of
the formulas, follows the course of the sun from left to right.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[6:2](sbe4303.htm#fr_47) For a similar
combination of the south with the Trish*t*ubh metre, the B*ri*hat-sâman,
the Pa*ñk*ada*s*a-stoma, the summer season, and the Kshatra, see V, 4,
1, 4 (part iii, p. 91).

<span id="fn_48"></span>[6:3](sbe4303.htm#fr_48) Svâra-sâman is called a
chanted verse which has no special concluding nidhana, or finale, but in
which the svarita (circumflex), or first rising then falling pitch
(e*g*., f-g-f) of the final vowel, takes the place of the finale; whence
'svâra' is often explained by 'svaranidhana,' i.e. having the svara
(svarita) for its nidhana. See <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> Pa*ñk*. Br.
IX, 3, 11, where a svâra-sâman is prescribed in case the Udgât*ri*s have
previously committed an excess in their chanting. The last tristich of
the Mâdhyandina-pavamânastotra of the Agnish*t*oma, the Au*s*ana-sâman
(to Sâma-v., vol. ii, pp. 27-29), is chanted in this way, probably in
order to make good the excess committed in the preceding triplet, the
Yaudhâ*g*aya (ii, pp. 25, 26), in which each verse is chanted with three
nidhanas, one at the end, and two inserted inside the sâman. Lâ*t*y.
*S*rautas. VI, 9, 6, the svâra-sâmans thus treated are called
'padânusvârâ*n*i;' whilst those with which the musical syllables 'hâ-i'
are used with a similar effect, are called 'hâikârasvârâ*n*i.' As an
instance of the former, the Au*s*ana (Sâma-v., vol. iii, p. 8r) is
adduced, and of the latter the Vâmadevya (iii, p. 89). It is not only
the final syllable of a sâman, however, that may be modulated in this
way, but also that of a musical section of the sâman; cf. Pa*ñk*. Br. X,
12, 2, where the Udgîtha is to be so treated to make up for the
preceding Prastâva, chanted without a Stobha. Sacrificial calls such as
the 'Svâhâ' and 'Vasha*t*' are also modulated in this way,' ib. VII, 3,
26; XI, 5, 26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII, 1, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe4304)
