[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4324) 
[Next](sbe4326) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3">8:6:3</span></span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:1">8:6:3:1</span></span>1. He
lays down the Gârhapatya. For the gods, having obtained this much,
thought they had succeeded. They spake, 'Whereby have we succeeded in
this?'--'By means of the Gârhapatya,' they said; 'for, after building
the Gârhapatya <span id="fr_213"></span>[1](#fn_212) and mounting
thereon, we saw the first layer, from the first (we saw) the second,
from the second the third, from the third the fourth, from the fourth
the fifth, and from the fifth this one.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:2">8:6:3:2</span></span>2. They
spake, 'Think ye upon this, how there may be success here for us!' They
spake, 'Meditate ye (*k*it)!' whereby, indeed, they meant to say, 'Seek
ye a layer (*k*iti)! seek ye whereby there may be success here for us!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:3">8:6:3:3</span></span>3. Whilst
meditating, they said this: 'Let us bring this one here and put it on
(the fire-altar)!' Having brought this (Gârhapatya) here, they put it

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

on. They disputed about it:--in the front part (of the fifth layer) the
Vasus, on the right side the Rudras, on the hind part the Âdityas, on
the left side the Maruts, and above it the Vi*s*ve Devâs said. 'Here let
us lay it down! here. let us lay it down!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:4">8:6:3:4</span></span>4. They
spake, 'Let us lay it down in the middle: when laid down in our midst,
it will belong to all of us.' They laid it down in the middle (of the
fifth layer), and thus they laid that success into the self (or the body
of the altar);--in the middle (they laid it): they thus laid that
success into the very middle of (Agni's and their own) self. And in like
manner does the Sacrificer, when he lays down the Gârhapatya, lay that
success into (his own) self; and (by laying it down) in the middle, he
lays that success into the very middle of the self.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:5">8:6:3:5</span></span>5. And,
again, as to why he lays down the Gârhapatya. The Gârhapatya, doubtless,
is food, and this built Agni is an eater: it is to the eater he thus
offers that food;--in the centre (he lays down the Gârhapatya): in the
very middle (of the body) he thus lays food into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:6">8:6:3:6</span></span>6. And,
again, as to why he lays down the Gârhapatya. The world of the gods,
doubtless, is the Vedi (altar-ground); but that (original Gârhapatya) is
built up outside the Vedi: thus, when he brings it here and lays it down
(on the fire-altar), he then establishes it (or him, Agni) on the Vedi,
in the world of the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:7">8:6:3:7</span></span>7. And,
again, as to why he lays down the Gârhapatya. The lotus-leaf <span
id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_213), doubtless, is a womb, but

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

that (Gârhapatya) is built up outside the womb, and outside of the womb
indeed takes place that performance regarding the fire-altar which takes
place prior to the (laying down of the) lotus-leaf: thus, when they
bring it (the Gârhapatya) here and lay it down, he then establishes it
in the womb. on the lotus-leaf; and thus indeed it is not outside. Eight
bricks he lays down: the significance of this has been explained <span
id="fr_215"></span>[1](#fn_214). He builds it up with the same formulas
and in the same order, for this one is the same as that (former
Gârhapatya Agni) he thus brings it (or him) here and lays it down.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:8">8:6:3:8</span></span>8. He
then lays down the Puna*sk*iti <span id="fr_216"></span>[2](#fn_215).
Now at that time the gods, having built the Gârhapatya, did not find
success therein; for the Gârhapatya pile is a womb, and success in a
womb consists in seed, in generative power; and in this womb they saw no
seed, no generative power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:9">8:6:3:9</span></span>9. They
spake, 'Think ye upon this, how we may lay seed and generative power
into this womb!' They spake, 'Meditate ye!' whereby, indeed, they meant
to say, 'Seek ye a layer! seek ye that we may lay seed and generative
power into this womb!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:10">8:6:3:10</span></span>10.
Whilst meditating, they saw this Puna*sk*iti, and put it on (the
Gârhapatya), and thereby laid seed and generative power into this
womb;--in the centre (they placed it): they thus laid seed and

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

generative power into the very middle of this womb. And in like manner
does the Sacrificer now, when he lays down the Puna*sk*iti, lay seed and
generative power into this womb;--in the centre (he lays it down): he
thus lays seed and generative power into the very middle of this womb.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:11">8:6:3:11</span></span>11. Now
some lay it down on the hind part (of the bird-like altar), because it
is from the hind part that seed is introduced,--(to wit) on the juncture
of the tail (and the body), for it is from (the part near) the tail that
seed is introduced. Let him not do this, for they who do this lay seed
and generative power outside the womb; but let him rather place it in
the centre: he thus lays seed and generative power right into the womb.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:12">8:6:3:12</span></span>12. He
lays down eight bricks,--the Gâyatrî (metre) consists of eight
syllables, and Agni (the fire-altar) is of Gâyatrî nature: as great as
Agni is, as great as is his measure, so great he thus introduces him in
the form of seed. Five times he 'settles' it,--of five layers consists
the fire-altar, five seasons make a year, and Agni is the year: as great
as Agni is, as great as is his measure, by so much he thus introduces
him in the form of seed. Eight bricks he 'settles' five times, that
makes thirteen,--thirteen months make a year, and there are thirteen
'layer-fillings' of the altar: as great as Agni is, as great as is his
measure, so great he thus becomes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:13">8:6:3:13</span></span>13. And
as to why he lays down the Puna*sk*iti. Now, in laying down the
Gârhapatya (hearth) upon the Âhavanîya, he surely does what is improper;
but when he lays down the Puna*sk*iti he thereby brings this Agni (or
altar) that has been built, and builds it up again thereon; and because
he again

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (punas) builds up
(*k*i) that (Agni) already built, therefore (this is called)
Puna*sk*iti.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:14">8:6:3:14</span></span>14. Now
some lay down the Gârhapatya on the hind part, and the Puna*sk*iti on
the front part (of the built altar), for these two are the Âhavanîya and
the Gârhapatya, and these two fires are (placed) in this way <span
id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_216). Let him not do this, for the Gârhapatya
is this (terrestrial) world, and the Âhavanîya is the sky; and above
this (earth) surely is yonder (sky); let him therefore place it (the
Puna*sk*iti) on the top of that (Gârhapatya).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:15">8:6:3:15</span></span>15. And
as to why he lays down both the Gârhapatya and the Puna*sk*iti. These
two, doubtless, are the Vedi and the Uttaravedi (high-altar) of Agni.
Now those two former (altars of this kind) which he throws up <span
id="fr_218"></span>[2](#fn_217) belong to the Soma-sacrifice, but these
belong to the fire-altar; and when, after laying down these two; he
deposits Agni (the fire) thereon, then he establishes him both on the
Vedi and the Uttaravedi.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:16">8:6:3:16</span></span>16.
And, again, as to why he lays down the Puna*sk*iti. This, doubtless, is
a repeated sacrifice (punarya*gñ*a), and higher (than the ordinary
sacrifice) is this worship of the gods: he thus sets up a repeated
sacrifice, and the higher worship of the gods; and the repeated
sacrifice inclines (accrues) to him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:17">8:6:3:17</span></span>17.
And, again, as to why he lays down the

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Puna*sk*iti. This
(altar), doubtless, is that same Agni whom in the beginning the vital
airs, the *Ri*shis, made up <span id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_218). He
now builds him up again; and inasmuch as he again (punas) builds up
(*k*i) that (Agni) already built, therefore also it is (called)
Puna*sk*iti.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:18">8:6:3:18</span></span>18.
\[He lays down the first brick, with, Vâ*g*. S. XV, 49\], 'With what
fervour the *Ri*shis entered upon the sacrificial session,'--he thereby
means those *Ri*shis (the vital airs);--'kindling the fire and gaining
the light,'--that is, 'kindling the fire, and gaining the heavenly
world;'--'upon that firmament I place the Fire,'--the firmament,
doubtless, is the heavenly world;--'whom thinkers call the
straw-spreader,'--the thinkers (or men) are they who are wise; and
'straw-spreader' he says, because he (Agni) has ever the (sacrificial)
straw spread for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:19">8:6:3:19</span></span>19.
\[The second brick, with, Vâ*g*. S. XV, 50\], 'With our wives let us
follow him, O gods! with our sons and brothers, or our golden
treasures;'--that is, 'let us follow him with our all;'--'gaining the
firmament in the world of righteousness;'--the firmament, doubtless, is
the heavenly world: thus, 'gaining the heavenly world in the world of
righteousness;'--'above the third luminous back of the sky,'--for this,
indeed, is the third luminous back of the sky where this (Agni) now
burns <span id="fr_220"></span>[2](#fn_219).

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:20">8:6:3:20</span></span>20.
\[The third brick, with, Vâ*g*. S. XV, 51\], 'Unto the centre of speech
did he mount, the nimble,'--for this, indeed, is the centre of speech
where he now is built up; and 'the nimble (bhura*n*yu),' that is, 'the
sustainer <span id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_220) (bhartar);'--'this Agni,
the good lord, the heedful,'--that is, 'this Agni, the lord of the good,
the heeding one;'--'established upon the back of the earth, he the
brilliant,'--that is, 'established on the back of the earth, the shining
one;'--'let him tread under foot any hostile!'--that is, 'let him tread
under foot all evildoers.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:21">8:6:3:21</span></span>21.
\[The fourth brick, with, Vâ*g*. S. XV, 52\], 'This Agni, the most
mettlesome bestower of strength,'--that is, 'the most vigorous bestower
of strength; may he glow a thousandfold, unremitting,'--that is, 'may he
shine a thousandfold, not unheedful;'--'blazing in the middle of the
sea,'--the sea, doubtless, means these worlds: thus, 'shining in these
worlds;'--'go forth to the divine abodes!'--that is, 'go forth to the
heavenly world!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:22">8:6:3:22</span></span>22.
\[The fifth brick, with, Vâ*g*. S. XV, 53\], 'Gather ye together! draw
ye nigh together!'--he thereby says to those *Ri*shis, 'Gather ye him
together! draw ye nigh to him together!'--'Make ye Agni's <span
id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_221) paths to lead to the gods!'--as the text
so the meaning;--'making the parents

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

young again,'--the young parents, doubtless, are speech and mind, and
these two fires also are speech and mind;--'in thee hath he spun out
this thread,'--he thereby means that thread (of the sacrifice) which has
been spun out by the *Ri*shis.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:23">8:6:3:23</span></span>23.
\[The sixth brick, with, Vâ*g*. S. XV, 54\], 'Awake, O Agni, and be
watchful!'--he thereby says to this Agni, 'Wake thou over this one <span
id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_222), and watch thou over him! Wish and
fulfilment, meet ye and he together <span
id="fr_224"></span>[2](#fn_223)!'--as the text, so the meaning;--'Upon
this, the higher seat,'--the higher seat, doubtless, is the sky;--'sit
ye down, O All-gods, and the Sacrificer!'--he thereby makes the
Sacrificer sit down together with the Vi*s*ve Devâs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:3:24">8:6:3:24</span></span>24.
\[The seventh brick, with, Vâ*g*. S. XV, 55\], 'Whereby thou carriest a
thousand, whereby, O Agni, all wealth,'--for that, indeed, is his most
acceptable power whereby he carries a thousand, and all
wealth;--'thereby lead thou this sacrifice of ours unto the light to go
to the gods!'--that is, 'thereby lead thou this our sacrifice to the
heavenly world to go to the gods.'--\[The eighth brick, with, Vâ*g*. S.
XV, 56\], 'This is thy natural womb . . .;'--the meaning of this has
been

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

explained <span id="fr_225"></span>[1](#fn_224). Eight bricks he lays
down: the meaning of this also has been explained <span
id="fr_226"></span>[2](#fn_225).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_212"></span>[117:1](sbe4325.htm#fr_213) For the building of
the separate Gârhapatya hearth, on which the sacred fire was transferred
from the Ukhâ (fire-pan), see part iii, p. 298 seq.; its sketch, p. 302.
A similar hearth is now built on the fifth layer of the Âhavanîya
fire-altar.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[118:1](sbe4325.htm#fr_214) For the lotus-leaf,
which is the first thing laid down in the centre <span id="page_119">p.
119</span> of the altar-site on which the (Âhavanîya) altar is to be
raised, see VII, 4, 1, 7 seqq. The Gârhapatya had been built previous to
that (VII, 1, 1, 1 seqq.).

<span id="fn_214"></span>[119:1](sbe4325.htm#fr_215) See VII, 1, 1, 19
seqq.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[119:2](sbe4325.htm#fr_216) The Puna*sk*iti
(re-piling) is a second pile or layer of eight bricks corresponding
exactly to the first, and placed thereon.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[121:1](sbe4325.htm#fr_217) In the ordinary
sacrifices the Gârhapatya hearth is placed behind (west of), and the
Âhavanîya on the front (or east) end of, the Vedi.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[121:2](sbe4325.htm#fr_218) That is, at the
performance of an ordinary Soma-sacrifice. For the vedi and uttaravedi
on that occasion, see III, 5, 1, 1 seq.; 12 seqq. (part ii, p. 111
seqq.)

<span id="fn_218"></span>[122:1](sbe4325.htm#fr_219) See part iii, p.
143.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[122:2](sbe4325.htm#fr_220) That is, on this
altar where the fire will soon be burning. It seems also to refer to the
sun burning over the third heaven--as the counterpart of the Agni of the
fire-altar.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[123:1](sbe4325.htm#fr_221) That is, the
sustainer of the world (*g*agad-bhartar), according to Mahîdhara; an
etymological play on the word 'bhura*n*yu.'

<span id="fn_221"></span>[123:2](sbe4325.htm#fr_222) The texts have
'agne,' O Agni! the verbal form 'k*rin*udhvam' being explained by
Mahîdhara as an irregular singular form for 'k*rin*u,' (make thou). The
verse seems, however, corrupt.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[124:1](sbe4325.htm#fr_223) The author (not
Mahîdhara) seems rather to take 'udbudhyasva' in a transitive sense
('wake thou him'), as Mahîdhara certainly does the second imperative
'prati*g*âg*ri*hi,' 'make him (the Sacrificer) careful!'

<span id="fn_223"></span>[124:2](sbe4325.htm#fr_224) The text has the
2nd person dual, which Mahîdhara explains by the 3rd dual (ya*g*amânena
saha sa*m*s*ri*sh*t*e bhavatâm--'May the two become united with the
Sacrificer'), because of the nominative 'ish*t*âpûrve,' instead of the
vocative.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[125:1](sbe4325.htm#fr_225) Viz. VII, 1, 1, 28.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[125:2](sbe4325.htm#fr_226) Viz. VII, 1, 1, 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII, 7, 1. Seventh Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe4326)
