[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4362.md) 
[Next](sbe4364.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3">10:4:3</span></span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:1">10:4:3:1</span></span>1. The
Year, doubtless, is the same as Death; for he <span
id="fr_707"></span>[1](#fn_695.md) it is who, by means of day and night,
destroys the life of mortal beings, and then they die: therefore the
Year is the same as Death; and whosoever knows this Year (to be) Death,
his life that (year) does not destroy, by day and night, before old age,
and he attains his full (extent of) life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:2">10:4:3:2</span></span>2. And
he, indeed, is the Ender, for it is he who, by day and night, reaches
the end of the life of mortals, and then they die: therefore he is the
Ender, and whosoever knows this Year, Death, the Ender, the end of his
life that (Year) does not reach, by day and night, before old age, and
he attains his full (extent of) life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:3">10:4:3:3</span></span>3. The
gods were afraid of this Pra*g*âpati, the Year, Death, the Ender, lest
he, by day and night, should reach the end of their life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:4">10:4:3:4</span></span>4. They
performed these sacrificial rites--the Agnihotra, the New and Full-moon
sacrifices, the Seasonal offerings, the animal sacrifice, and the
Soma-sacrifice: by offering these sacrifices they did not attain
immortality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:5">10:4:3:5</span></span>5. They
also built a fire-altar,--they laid down

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

unlimited enclosing-stones; unlimited Ya*g*ushmatî (bricks), unlimited
Lokamp*rin*â (bricks), even as some lay them down to this day, saying,
'The gods did so.' They did not attain immortality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:6">10:4:3:6</span></span>6. They
went on praising and toiling, striving to win immortality. Pra*g*âpati
then spake unto them, 'Ye do not lay down (put on me) all my forms; but
ye either make (me) too large or leave (me) defective: therefore ye do
not become immortal.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:7">10:4:3:7</span></span>7. They
spake, 'Tell thou us thyself, then, in what manner we may lay down all
thy forms!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:8">10:4:3:8</span></span>8. He
spake, 'Lay ye down three hundred and sixty enclosing-stones, three
hundred and sixty Ya*g*ushmatî (bricks), and thirty-six thereunto; and
of Lokamp*rin*â (bricks) lay ye down ten thousand and eight hundred; and
ye will be laying down all my forms, and will become immortal.' And the
gods laid down accordingly, and thereafter became immortal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:9">10:4:3:9</span></span>9.
Death spake unto the gods, 'Surely, on this wise all men will become
immortal, and what share will then be mine?' They spake, 'Henceforward
no one shall be immortal with the body: only when thou shalt have taken
that (body) as thy share, he who is to become immortal either through
knowledge, or through holy work, shall become immortal after separating
from the body.' Now when they said, 'either through knowledge or through
holy work,' it is this fire-altar that is the knowledge, and this
fire-altar that is the holy work.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:10">10:4:3:10</span></span>10.
And they who so know this, or they who do this holy work, come to life
again when they have died, and, coming to life, they come to immortal
life. But they who do not know this, or do not do this

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

holy work, come to life again when they die, and they become the food of
him (Death) time after time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:11">10:4:3:11</span></span>11.
But when he builds the fire-altar, he thereby gains Agni, Pra*g*âpati,
the Year, Death, the Ender, whom the gods gained; it is him he lays
downy even as the gods thus laid him down.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:12">10:4:3:12</span></span>12.
By the enclosing-stones he gains his nights; by the Ya*g*ushmatî
(bricks) his days, half-moons, months, and seasons; and by the
Lokamp*rin*âs the muhûrtas (hours).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:13">10:4:3:13</span></span>13.
Thus the enclosing-stones, supplying the place of nights, are made the
(means of) gaining the nights, they are the counterpart of the nights:
there are three hundred and sixty of them, for there are three hundred
and sixty nights in the year. Of these, he lays twenty-one round the
Gârhapatya, seventy-eight round the Dhish*n*ya hearths, and two hundred
and sixty-one round the Âhavanîya.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:14">10:4:3:14</span></span>14.
Then the Ya*g*ushmatî (bricks with special formulas):--the grass-bunch,
the (four) clod-bricks, the lotus-leaf, the gold plate and man, the two
spoons, the naturally-perforated (brick), the dûrvâ-brick, the (one)
dviya*g*us, two reta*h*si*k*, a vi*s*va*g*yotis, two seasonal ones, an
ashâ*dh*â, the tortoise, the mortar and pestle, the fire-pan, the five
victims’ heads, fifteen apasyâs, five *kh*andasyâs, fifty
prâ*n*abh*ri*ts--these ninety-eight are (in) the first layer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:15">10:4:3:15</span></span>15.
Then the second (layer):--five a*s*vinîs, two seasonal ones, five
vai*s*vadevîs, five prâ*n*abh*ri*ts, five apasyâs, nineteen
vayasyâs--these forty-one are (in) the second layer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:16">10:4:3:16</span></span>16.
Then the third (layer):--the naturally-perforated one, five regional
ones, a vi*s*va*g*yotis, four seasonal ones, ten prâ*n*abh*ri*ts,
thirty-six *kh*andasyâs,

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

fourteen vâlakhilyas--these seventy-one are (in) the third layer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:17">10:4:3:17</span></span>17.
Then the fourth (layer):--first eighteen, then twelve, then
seventeen--these forty-seven are (in) the fourth layer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:18">10:4:3:18</span></span>18.
Then the fifth (layer):--five asapatnâs, forty virâ*g*s, twenty-nine
stomabhâgâs, five nâkasads, five pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs, thirty-one
*kh*andasyâs, eight (of) the Gârhapatya hearth, eight (of) the
Puna*sk*iti, two seasonal ones, a vi*s*va*g*yotis, a vikar*n*î, a
naturally-perforated one, the variegated stone, the fire which is placed
on the altar--these one hundred and thirty-eight are (in) the fifth
layer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:19">10:4:3:19</span></span>19.
All these make three hundred and ninety-five. Of these, three hundred
and sixty, supplying the place of days, are made the (means of) gaining
the days, they are the counterpart of the days: There are three hundred
and sixty of them, for there are three hundred and sixty days in the
year. And for the thirty-six (additional days) which there are <span
id="fr_708"></span>[1](#fn_696) the filling of earth (counts as.md) the
thirty-sixth; and twenty-four thereof, supplying the place of
half-moons, are made the (means of) gaining the half-moons, they are the
counterpart of the half-moons. And the (remaining) twelve, supplying the
place of months, are made the (means of) gaining the months, they are
the counterpart of the months. And, lest the seasons should be wanting,
these (twelve bricks), by two and two (taken) together, supply the place
of seasons.

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:20">10:4:3:20</span></span>20.
And as to the Lokamp*rin*â (space-filling bricks), supplying the place
of muhûrtas (hours), they are made the (means) of gaining the muhûrtas,
they are the counterpart of the muhûrtas: there are ten thousand and
eight hundred of them, for so many muhûrtas there are in the year. Of
these, he lays down twenty-one in the Gârhapatya (altar), seventy-eight
in the Dhish*n*ya-hearths, and the others in the Âhavanîya. So many,
indeed, are the (different) forms of the year: it is these that are here
secured for him (Pra*g*âpati, the Year), and are put on him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:21">10:4:3:21</span></span>21.
Now, some wish to get this total amount <span
id="fr_709"></span>[1](#fn_697.md) in the Âhavanîya itself, arguing, 'Those
are different brick-built fire-altars: why should we here (in the
Âhavanîya altar) take into account those laid down there (in the
Gârhapatya and Dhish*n*yas)?' But let him not do so. There are, indeed,
ten of these fire-altars he builds--eight Dhish*n*yas, the Âhavanîya and
the Gârhapatya--whence they say, 'Agni is Virâ*g* (wide shining or
ruling),' for the Virâ*g* (metre) consists of ten syllables: but,
surely, all these (altars and hearths) are looked upon as only one, as
Agni; for it is merely forms of him that they all are,--even as the days
and nights, the half-moons, the months, and the seasons (are forms) of
the year, so are they all forms of him (Agni).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:22">10:4:3:22</span></span>22.
And, assuredly, they who do this put those forms of his <span
id="fr_710"></span>[2](#fn_698.md) outside of him, and produce confusion
between the better and the worse; they make the peasantry equal and
refractory to the nobility. Surely, on the Âgnîdhrîya he places the
variegated

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

stone <span id="fr_711"></span>[1](#fn_699.md), and that he takes into
account: why, then, taking that into account, should he not take others
into account? That (altar) by which they ward off Nir*ri*ti <span
id="fr_712"></span>[2](#fn_700.md), evil, is the eleventh.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:23">10:4:3:23</span></span>23.
As to this they say, 'Why, then, do they not take into account here
those (of Nir*ri*ti's altar)?' Because he makes no offering on them, for
it is by offering that a brick becomes whole and complete.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:4:3:24">10:4:3:24</span></span>24.
As to this they say, 'How are these (bricks) of his laid down so as not
to be excessive?' Well, these (bricks) are his (Agni's) vital power, and
man's vital power is not excessive. Thus whosoever, knowing this,
performs this holy work, or he who but knows this, makes up this
Pra*g*âpati whole and complete.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_695"></span>[356:1](sbe4363.htm#fr_707.md) Father Time,
Pra*g*âpati.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[359:1](sbe4363.htm#fr_708.md) Namely, in an
intercalary month. The layers of loose soil have to be counted in for
the reason that only 35 ya*g*ushmatîs remain after taking away the 360.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[360:1](sbe4363.htm#fr_709.md) Viz. of 10,800
Lokamp*rin*âs.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[360:2](sbe4363.htm#fr_710.md) Viz. the Gârhapatya
and Dhish*n*ya hearths.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[361:1](sbe4363.htm#fr_711.md) See [IX, 2, 3,
14](sbe4334.htm#9:2:3:14)-[17](sbe4334.htm#9:2:3:17.md); [4, 3,
6](sbe4341.htm#9:4:3:6.md).

<span id="fn_700"></span>[361:2](sbe4363.htm#fr_712.md) See VII, 2, 1, 1
seq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X, 4, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe4364.md)
