[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4336) 
[Next](sbe4338) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3">9:3:3</span></span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:1">9:3:3:1</span></span>1. He
then offers these Ya*gñ*akratus <span id="fr_372"></span>[1](#fn_366)
(sacrificial rites), with,' May the Agni and the Gharma (prosper) for
me!'--by these sacrificial rites he thus gratifies him, and by these
sacrificial rites he thus consecrates him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:2">9:3:3:2</span></span>2. He
then offers (the libations relating to) the Uneven Stomas <span
id="fr_373"></span>[2](#fn_367);--for the gods, having now obtained
their desires, by means of the uneven Stomas went up to heaven; and in
like manner does the Sacrificer, now that he has obtained all his
desires, by means of the uneven Stomas go up to heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:3">9:3:3:3</span></span>3. Now
this (set runs) up to the thirty-three-versed (hymn-form), for the
Trayastri*ms*a is the last of the uneven Stomas: at the last the gods
thus

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

went up to heaven; and in like manner does the Sacrificer thereby at the
last go up to heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:4">9:3:3:4</span></span>4. He
then offers (those relating to) the Even (Stomas) <span
id="fr_374"></span>[1](#fn_368);--for the metres then said, 'The uneven
stomas are worn out, by means of the even ones we will go up to heaven!'
By means of the even stomas they went up to heaven; and in like manner
does the Sacrificer thus, by means of the even stomas, go up to heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:5">9:3:3:5</span></span>5. This
(set runs) up to the forty-eight-versed (hymn-form), for the
Ash*t*â*k*atvâri*ms*a is the last of the even stomas: at the last the
metres thus went up to heaven; and in like manner does the Sacrificer
thereby at the last go up to heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:6">9:3:3:6</span></span>6. He
says, 'May the One and the Three (prosper) for me!'--'May the Four and
the Eight (prosper) for me!'--even as one climbing a tree would climb up
by taking hold of an ever higher branch, so is this. And as to why he
offers the Stomas,--the stomas are food: it is with food he thus
consecrates him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:7">9:3:3:7</span></span>7. He
then offers (the libations relating to) the Age-grades <span
id="fr_375"></span>[2](#fn_369) (of cattle),--age-grades mean cattle: it
is by cattle, for his food, that he thus gratifies

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

him; and by cattle, for his food, he thus consecrates him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:8">9:3:3:8</span></span>8. He
then offers whilst mentioning names <span
id="fr_376"></span>[1](#fn_370);--for the gods, having obtained all
their wishes, now gratified him directly; and in like manner does the
Sacrificer, having obtained all his wishes, now gratify him directly.
'To Strength, hail! to Gain, hail!'--these are his (Agni's) names: it is
by mentioning his names that he thus gratifies him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:9">9:3:3:9</span></span>9. There
are thirteen of these names,--a year consists of thirteen months, and
the layers and fillings of the fire-altar amount to thirteen: as great
as Agni is, as great as is his measure, with so much he thus gratifies
him. And as to why he offers while mentioning names,--it is thus in
mentioning his (Agni's) names that he consecrates him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:10">9:3:3:10</span></span>10. He
then says, 'This is thy realm; a supporter and sustainer art thou for
the friend: for sustenance, for rain, for the lordship of creatures (do
I consecrate) thee;'--sustenance, doubtless, means food, and rain means
food: by food he thus gratifies him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:11">9:3:3:11</span></span>11. And
when he says, 'This is thy realm; a supporter and sustainer art thou for
the friend: for sustenance, for rain, for the lordship of
creatures--thee!' this is to say, 'This is thy kingdom; thou art
consecrated (anointed)! thou art thy friend's supporter and sustainer:
for our sustenance art thou, for rain unto us art thou, for our lordship
of

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

creatures art thou!' They thereby entreat him, 'For all this art thou
unto us: for all this have we consecrated thee!' And therefore people
thus entreat a human king who has been consecrated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:12">9:3:3:12</span></span>12. He
then offers the Prospering <span id="fr_377"></span>[1](#fn_371)
(libations);--the prospering (libations) are the vital airs: it is the
vital airs he thus puts into him.--'May the vital strength prosper by
sacrifice! may the vital air prosper by sacrifice! . . .' He thus puts
proper vital airs into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:13">9:3:3:13</span></span>13.
Twelve prospering (libations) he offers,--a year consists of twelve
months, and Agni is the year: as great as Agni is, as great as is his
measure, by so much he thus puts proper vital airs into him. And as to
why he offers the prospering (libations),--the prospering (libations)
are vital airs, and the vital airs are the immortal element: with the
immortal element he thus consecrates him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:14">9:3:3:14</span></span>14. He
then says, 'The Stoma, and the Ya*g*us, and the *Ri*k, and the Sâman,
and the B*ri*hat, and the Rathantara,'--this, doubtless, is the triple
science, and the triple science is food: it is with food he thus
gratifies him, and with food he thus consecrates him;--'to the heavenly
light we gods have gone, we have become immortal,'--for he indeed goes
to the heavenly light, and becomes immortal;--'Pra*g*âpati's children
have we become!'--for he indeed becomes Pra*g*âpati's child,--'ve*t*!
svâhâ!'--the Ve*t*-call, doubtless, is

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

esoterically the same as the Vasha*t*-call, and either with the
Vasha*t*-call, or the Svâhâ-call is food offered to the gods: he thus
gratifies him by both the Vasha*t* and the Svâhâ, and also consecrates
him by both of them. He now throws the offering-ladle after (the ghee
into the fire) lest what there is anointed with ghee should remain
outside of the fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:15">9:3:3:15</span></span>15. Now
as to this same shower of wealth, the body (from which it flows) is the
sky, the udder the cloud, the teat the lightning, and the shower (of
ghee) is the (rain-) shower: from the sky it comes to the cow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:16">9:3:3:16</span></span>16. Its
body is the cow, its udder the (cow's) udder, its teat the (cow's) teat,
its shower the shower (of milk): from the cow (it comes) to the
Sacrificer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:17">9:3:3:17</span></span>17. Its
body is the Sacrificer, its udder his arm, its teat the offering-ladle,
its shower (of milk) the shower of (ghee): from the Sacrificer (it goes)
to the gods; from the gods to the cow, from the cow to the Sacrificer:
thus circulates this perpetual, never-ending food of the gods. And,
verily, for whosoever knows this, there will thus be perpetual,
never-ending food. Now as to the (mystic) correspondence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:18">9:3:3:18</span></span>18. As
to this they say, 'How does this wealth-shower of his obtain (conformity
with) the year, and Agni? how does it correspond to the year, to Agni?'
Well, this shower of wealth consists of three hundred and sixty
(libations), and of (other) six, and of thirty-five. Now, the three
hundred and sixty which there are,--so many being the days in the
year,--thereby it obtains the days of the year. And what six there
are,--the seasons being

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

six in number,--thereby it obtains the nights of the seasons: thus it
obtains both the days and nights of the year. And what thirty-five there
are, they are the (intercalary) thirteenth month <span
id="fr_378"></span>[1](#fn_372), and that is the body,--the body
(consists) of thirty (limbs), the feet of two, the breath of two
(in-breathing and up-breathing), and the head is the thirty-fifth: so
much is the year; and thus that shower of wealth of his obtains
(conformity with) the year, and Agni; and thus it corresponds to the
year, to Agni. And so many are the bricks with special formulas which
are placed in the centre of a *S*â*nd*ila fire-altar; for these bricks
indeed are the same as these different Agnis <span
id="fr_379"></span>[2](#fn_373); and thus these Agnis of his come to
have oblations offered to them separately by means of the shower of
wealth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:3:19">9:3:3:19</span></span>19. As
to this they say, 'How does this shower of wealth of his attain to
(conformity with) the Great Litany, how does it correspond to the Great
Litany?' Well, the first nine formulas of this shower of wealth are the
threefold <span id="fr_380"></span>[3](#fn_374) head; and the
forty-eight which follow are the twenty-four-fold wings <span
id="fr_381"></span>[4](#fn_375); and the twenty-five which follow are
the twenty-five-fold body <span id="fr_382"></span>[5](#fn_376); and the
twenty-one which follow are the tail, as the twenty-first <span
id="fr_383"></span>[6](#fn_377); and the

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

thirty-five which follow are the Va*s*a (hymn); and by the eighties (of
verses) which follow those eighties (Of the mahad uktham) are obtained,
for by eighties the Great Litany is counted; and what there is after the
eighties, that to him (corresponds to) what, in the Great Litany, there
is after the eighties <span id="fr_384"></span>[1](#fn_378); and thus
this shower of wealth of his attains to (conformity with) the Great
Litany, and corresponds to the Great Litany.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_366"></span>[217:1](sbe4337.htm#fr_372) These are two sets
of libations in the formulas of which (XVIII, 22; 23) objects connected
with 'special sacrifices' are enumerated. Thus, of the first pair, 'Agni
and Gharma,' 'Agni,' according to Mahîdhara, represents either the
Agni*k*ayana or the Agnish*t*oma (ordinary Soma-sacrifice); whilst the
'Gharma (cauldron)' stands for the Pravargya offering (part i, p. 44
note).

<span id="fn_367"></span>[217:2](sbe4337.htm#fr_373) The formula of this
set of libations (XVIII, 24) enumerates the seventeen uneven numbers (in
the feminine gender) from 1 to 33, repeating the second number of each
pair, so as to be the first number of the next pair (thus, 1 and 3, 3
and 5, &c.). These numbers are meant to represent the corresponding
Stomas, consisting of an uneven number of verses, up to the
Trayastri*ms*a, or thirty-three-versed hymn-form.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[218:1](sbe4337.htm#fr_374) The formula of this
set of libations (XVIII, 25) enumerates (the twelve quadruples of 4 (in
the feminine gender), from 4 to 48 again repeating each number, except
the first and last), as representing the Stomas consisting of an even
number of verses, up to the Ash*t*â*k*atvâri*ms*a, or forty-eight-versed
hymn-form.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[218:2](sbe4337.htm#fr_375) The two formulas
relating to these two sets of libations (XVIII, 26; 27) contain
respectively five and four pairs of teams of cattle of different ages,
beginning with 'tryavi and tryavî,' 'an eighteen-months bull and an
eighteen-months cow;' and ending with 'a bullock and a milch cow.'

<span id="fn_370"></span>[219:1](sbe4337.htm#fr_376) This set of
thirteen libations (XVIII, 28) is offered to the months Vâ*g*a, Prasava,
&c., here apparently considered as manifestations of Agni (the year).
Each name is followed by 'svâhâ (hail!);' and the last of these
dedicatory formulas is followed by the special benedictory formula,
referred to in [paragraph 10](sbe4337.htm#9:3:3:10).

<span id="fn_371"></span>[220:1](sbe4337.htm#fr_377) This final set of
twelve (? sixteen) libations is called thus (kalpa), because, in the
formulas used with them (Vâ*g*. S. XVIII, 29), the verb 'k*li*p (to
prosper, to be right and proper)' is repeated each time. At the
conclusion of these twelve formulas the priest mutters the final
benediction given in full in [paragraph 14](sbe4337.htm#9:3:3:14).

<span id="fn_372"></span>[222:1](sbe4337.htm#fr_378) See [p.
167](sbe4330.htm#page_167), note [1](sbe4330.htm#fn_283).

<span id="fn_373"></span>[222:2](sbe4337.htm#fr_379) Viz. the different
forms, or powers, of Agni, to which the 401 libations are offered. See
[IX, 1, 1, 43](sbe4330.htm#9:1:1:43), where the very same calculations
are applied to the *S*atarudriya.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[222:3](sbe4337.htm#fr_380) See [p.
114](sbe4324.htm#page_114), note [1](sbe4324.htm#fn_207).

<span id="fn_375"></span>[222:4](sbe4337.htm#fr_381) Paksha, wing, also
means half-month, fortnight, of which there are twenty-four in the year.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[222:5](sbe4337.htm#fr_382) See [p.
168](sbe4330.htm#page_168), note [3](sbe4330.htm#fn_287).

<span id="fn_377"></span>[222:6](sbe4337.htm#fr_383) Apparently in
addition to the fingers and toes (? of monkeys).

<span id="fn_378"></span>[223:1](sbe4337.htm#fr_384) See pp.
[110](sbe4324.htm#page_110), note [3](sbe4324.htm#fn_202);
[112](sbe4324.htm#page_112), n. [1](sbe4324.htm#fn_204);
[113](sbe4324.htm#page_113), n. [1](sbe4324.htm#fn_206).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX, 3, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe4338)
