[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0811)  [Next](t0813) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 8: Tract Sanhedrin*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

# CHAPTER IX.

RULES AND REGULATIONS CONCERNING THOSE TO WHOM BURNING AND THOSE TO WHOM
SLAYING APPLIES. WHO IS CONSIDERED A MURDERER DESERVING CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT AND WHO IS TO BE EXILED. THOSE WHO RECOVERED AFTER THEY WERE
DIAGNOSED TO DIE; KILLING SOME OTHER ONE INSTEAD OF THOSE WHOM HE HAD
INTENDED.

MISHNA *I*.: To the following the punishment of burning applies: To one
who has intercourse with a woman and her daughter, and to a daughter of
a priest who has sinned. Under the general rule of a woman and her
daughter comes his own daughter, the granddaughters of his daughter and
son, the daughter of his wife, her granddaughters of her daughter and
her son, his mother-in-law, and the mother of his mother and
father-in-law.

GEMARA: The Mishna does not state a woman whose daughter he has married,
but "a woman and her daughter," which seems to be that the intercourse
with both of them was a sin, and this can only be with his mother-in-law
and her mother. And from the expression, "Under the general rule of a
woman and her daughter," it is to be assumed that both are mentioned in
the Scripture, which is not so, as the mother of his mother-in-law is
only inferred from an analogy. Read: If one has had intercourse with a
woman whose daughter he has married. Whence is this deduced? From what
the rabbis taught: It reads \[Lev. xxi. 4\]: "And if a man take a woman
and her mother." This is concerning a legal wife and her mother. But
whence do we know that the same is the case with the illegal daughter of
a ravisher (referring to Deut. xxii. 28), and her granddaughters from
her daughter and her son? From the analogy of the expression "incest"
(zimha), which is to be found here in the verse cited and also in Lev.
xviii. 17. And as there it speaks of an ordinary woman, and it is
plainly mentioned the granddaughters of her son and daughter, the same
is the case here (that all of them must be punished by burning).

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And whence do we
know that the males who have committed the crimes in question are also
to be punished by burning, the same as the females? Again from the same
analogy of the expression zimha. As there the verse speaks of the male
perpetrator of the crime, so also in the case here we are not to make
any difference in the punishment between males and females. And whence
do we know that the latter generations--*i.e.*, the daughters and the
granddaughters--are to be equalized to the earlier generations--*i.e.*,
the mothers of one's father and mother-in-law? Again from the analogy of
the same expression. As there the Scripture does not make any difference
between the expression in verse 15, which speaks of a father with his
daughter-in-law, and that of the seventeenth, which speaks of the latter
generations, and at the end of which it reads: for *they* are near
kins-"women," which refers to all of them, so here the punishment of the
earlier generations is to be equalized to that of the latter. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70)

The father of R. Abbin taught: Because there is no definite commandment
in the Scripture concerning the daughter of a ravisher, it was necessary
for the scripture to state \[Lev. xxi. 9\]."And if the daughter of *any*
priest"--"esh cohn," instead of "cohen." From which we infer that, were
she a legal or an illegal daughter, if he sins with her, she must be
burned.

But if so, let the punishment of burning apply only to the daughter of
the abuser, but not to the abuser himself, as so is the case with the
daughter of a priest in which the punishment applies only to her, but
not to her abuser. Said Abayi: Concerning the daughter of a priest it
reads: "Her father does she profane." Exclude this case, in which the
father is profaning her. Rabha, however, said: For this no verse is
necessary, as it is common sense. In the case of a priest's daughter, if
you have excluded her abuser from burning, he is nevertheless left under
the category of choking, which applies to any one having intercourse
with a married woman. But here, if you exclude the abuser from the
punishment which applies to her, under what category can you put him?
Should you put him under the category of those who have had intercourse
with single women, who are free from any

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

punishment, is it possible that she should be burned for this crime, and
he who is the abuser of her mother and the seducer of herself should be
free? Now we have had the punishment for such, but where is the warning?
It is correct for both Abayi and Rabha as they infer the warning from
the same which states the punishment. But according to the father of R.
Abbin, whence is deduced? Said R. Ailea, from \[Lev. xix. 29\]: "Do not
profane thy daughter, to cause her to be a prostitute." R. Jacob, the
brother of R. Abha b. Jacob, opposed: Is not the verse just cited
necessary to that of the following Boraitha: "Thou shalt not profane thy
daughter," etc? Lest one say that it speaks of a priest who marries his
daughter to a Levite or an Israelite, therefore it reads "to cause her
to be a prostitute." Hence it speaks only of him who gives his daughter
other than in marriage. From the "ll" in the word "techallel" (profane),
instead of "tochal," which would have the same meaning, the warning in
question may also be inferred. And both Abayi and Rabha, who have
inferred the warning in this case from the same verse mentioning the
punishment--what do they infer from the verse just cited? Said R. Mani:
Him who marries his daughter to an old man, as the following Boraitha
states: "You shall not profane your daughter," etc. According to R.
Eliezer: He who marries his daughter to an old man is meant; and
according to R. Aqiba, he who leaves his daughter unmarried until she
becomes "vigaros."

R. Kahana in the name of R. Aqiba said: There is none poor in Israel,
but a shrewd-wicked and he who has left his daughter unmarried until
"vigaros." How is this to be understood? Is not one to be called a
shrewd-wicked if he left his daughter unmarried for his own benefit,
that she should do the housework until "vigaros"? Said Abayi: He means
thus: There is none poorer than he who is compelled because of his
poverty to leave his daughter unmarried until "vigaros," as then he is
equal to a shrewd-wicked.

R. Kahana in the name of R. Aqiba said again: Be careful in your
counsellor in order that you shall not listen to him who counsels you
for his own benefit.

R. Jehudah said in the name of Rabh: He who marries his daughter to an
old man and he who marries his minor son to a woman of age; to both the
verses \[Deut. xxix. 18, 19\]: "In order that the indulgence of the
passions may appease the thirst (for them): The Lord will not pardon
him," apply.

The rabbis taught: Concerning the verse Lev. xx. 14, in which

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

the words "him and them" are mentioned, R. Ismael and R, Aqiba differ.
According to the former it means "him and one of them," and according to
the latter, "him and both of them." What is the point of their
differences (even R. Ismael agrees that both of them are to be
punished)? Said Abayi: They differ only as to the texts from which the
law is derived. According to R. Ismael, who maintains "him and one of
them," it is because in Greek εν means one, and the expression in the
passage is "es'-en." Hence, biblically his mother-in-law is to be
burned, while her mother is inferred only rabbinically by an analogy of
expression. And according to R. Aqiba both of them are meant in this
verse. Hence both, biblically, are to be burned. Rabha, however,
maintains that the point of their difference is an intercourse with
one's mother-in-law after the death of his wife. According to R. Ismael,
even then she must be burned, as in the verse cited it reads "and them,"
which makes no difference whether his wife is still alive or dead. And
according to R. Aqiba, after the death of his wife, it is only a
prohibition, but not a crime to which burning applies.

MISHNA *II*.: To the following, punishment with the sword applies: To a
murderer and the men of a misled town. A murderer who strikes his
neighbor with a stone or with an iron so that he dies; if one pressed
down a person while he is in water or in fire, preventing him from
coming out, until he dies--he is guilty. If, however, he pushes him into
water or into fire and he was able to come out, but nevertheless dies
without being prevented by him who pushed him, he is not guilty of a
capital crime. If he sets a dog or a serpent upon him, he is not guilty
of a capital crime. If, however, he applies the snake to his body with
his hand, and it bites him to death, R. Jehudah makes him guilty of a
capital crime, and the sages free him.

GEMARA: Samuel said: Why is there not mentioned in the Scripture the
word "yod" concerning iron in Num. xxxv. 16, as is done concerning
stones and wood in ibid., ibid. 17, 18? Because even a fragment of iron
brings death. So also we have learned in a Boraitha: Rabbi said: It is
known to Him who created the whole world by one word, that a fragment of
iron may bring death, and therefore He has not prescribed any size
concerning iron. (Says the Gemara:) This is only when he pierced him
with it; but if (he struck him with iron), it must be of a size to cause
death.

"*If he presses down*," etc. The first part teaches a preponderance, and
so does the second. The preponderance of the first

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

part is that, although he did not push him, but only prevented him from
coming out, he is nevertheless guilty of a capital crime. And the
preponderance of the second part is that, although he pushed him in,
yet, so long as the victim could come out and was not prevented, he is
not guilty of a capital crime. But whence do we know that one is guilty
for pressing down? Said Samuel: From \[ibid., ibid. 21\]: "Or if in
*enmity* he have smitten him with his hand," which means to include him
who pressed him down.

There was one who urged cattle of his neighbor into the sun until they
died. And Rabbini made him liable, but R. A'hal b. Rabh freed him. The
former made him liable because of an *a fortiori* conclusion drawn from
a murderer. As concerning a murderer the Scripture makes a difference
between intentionally and unintentionally, between accident and
premeditation, and nevertheless makes guilty the presser; and as
concerning damages, where there is no difference between intentionally
and unintentionally, between accident and premeditation, so much the
more should a pusher be liable. And as to the reason of R. A'hal, who
freed him, said R. Mesharshia: The reason of my grandfather, who freed
him, is the above-cited verse: "He that smote him shall surely be put to
death, for he is a murderer," meaning only in case of murder is one
guilty of pressing, but not in a case of damages.

Rabha said: If one bound a person, and he died thereafter of hunger, he
is not guilty of a capital crime. If, however, he bound him and put him
in a sunny place, and he dies because of the sun, or he puts him in a
cold place and he dies of cold, he is guilty. But if he put him in a
sunny or a cold place, where there was not as yet either sun or cold,
and thereafter, when it came, it caused his death, he is not guilty of a
capital crime.

The same said again: If one bound a person and left him before a lion,
he is not guilty of a capital crime. (Rashi explains that he could not
save himself from the lion even if he were unbound. Rashi's reasons are
not quite clear to us.) But if he bound him in a place where mosquitoes
are abundant, he is guilty. R. Ashi, however, maintains that even in the
latter case he is not guilty, as the mosquitoes which were on his body
at the time he tied him, went away, and others came. Hence he did not
cause his death directly.

It was taught: If one places a vat over a person and he dies from heat,
or he removes the ceiling to let the cold come in,

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

and he dies from cold-Rabha and R. Zerah--one of them makes him guilty
and the other frees him. Says the Gemara: It seems that Rabha is the one
who frees him, as it is in accordance with his theory. Said above: If
one bound a person and he dies of hunger, he is free. On the contrary,
it seems R. Zerah is the one that makes him free, as it is in accordance
with his theory elsewhere: He who puts a person in a house closed from
all sides so that the air cannot go out, and lights a candle, which
causes his death, is guilty. Hence we see that the reason of making him
liable is the lighting of the candle, and if this were not done he would
be free? Nay! It may be said that the heat which caused his death began
with the lighting of the candle. The same is the case with the vat-the
heat began just when he turned it over him.

Rabha said again: If one pushed a person into an excavation in which a
ladder stood for coming out, and someone came and removed the ladder, or
even if he himself removed it after he pushed him in, he is not guilty
of a capital crime, as at the time he pushed him in he was able to come
out.

The same said again: If one shot an arrow at a person who wore an armor
and someone removed the armor, or even if he himself removed it after he
shot, he is not guilty of a capital crime, as at the time he shot the
arrow it could not injure him.

And he said again: If one shot an arrow at a person who was supplied
with spices which could cure the wounds from the arrow, and someone came
and scattered them, or even if he himself scattered them before the
arrow reached him, he is not guilty, because the victim, at the time he
shot, could be healed by the spices. Said R. Ashi: According to this
theory he would not be guilty if there should be spices in the market
which could cure the wounds? Said R. Ahbah, the son of Rabha, to R.
Ashi: How is the law if it happened that spices were brought to him
after he was shot, and he did not make use of them? And he answered: In
such a case the court would not overlook this, and would accept the
defence to his advantage.

Rabha said again: If one throws a stone at a wall, with the intention of
killing a person with it, the stone, however, killing the man only by
the rebounding, he is guilty of a capital crime. In explanation of this,
it was taught, *e.g.*, ball-players--if one threw a ball with the
intention of killing someone, he is to be put to death, and if it was
unintentionally, he is to be exiled. Is this not self-evident? The
teaching that one is to be put to death, if done intentionally, was
necessary. Lest one say that such a

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

warning was of a doubtful nature, as who could predict that the ball
would kill him by rebounding so that he should be forewarned of it, he
comes to teach us that he is nevertheless guilty.

R. Tachlifa of the West taught in the presence of R. Abuhu concerning
those who play ball: If the ball killed one by rebounding within a
distance of four ells from the wall, he is free from exile, but if it
exceeded four ells, he is guilty.

Said Rabhina to R. Ashi: Let us see, how was the case! If the player was
pleased with the rebounding of the ball, then let him be guilty if the
man was killed even within a nearer distance (as the law of killing a
man unintentionally prescribes). And if he was not pleased with the
rebounding, let him be free even at a greater distance. And he answered:
The greater the distance a ball rebounds, the more is the pleasure of
the ball-player.

It was taught: R. Papa said: If one bound a person and turned a stream
of water upon him, it is considered as if the man were killed directly
by his arrow, and he is guilty of a capital crime. However, this is only
when he was killed by the first stream which poured upon him; but if he
dies from the continued flow, it is not considered direct killing, but
only a cause of death.

The same said again: If one throws a stone on high and it swerves and
kills a man, he is guilty. Said Mar. b. R. Ashi to him: Let us see what
is the reason of your theory! Because the stone went by his force? But
if so, the force must only be considered when it went on high; and when
his force ends it should fall down vertically. But according to your
theory it swerves, hence it is not by his force. It must be said,
however, if this cannot be called his exact force, it may nevertheless
be considered a part of his force.

The rabbis taught: If one was assaulted by ten different persons, no
matter whether at once or at different times, and was killed, none of
them has to suffer capital punishment, as according to the Scripture it
must be known who was the cause of the death. R. Jehudah b. Bathyra,
however, holds: In case the assault was made by one after the other, the
last one is guilty, for he hastened his death. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71) Said R. Johanan: Both parties took their
theories from one and the same passage \[Lev. xxiv. 17\]: "And he that
taketh the life of all the soul of man." <span
id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72) The rabbis hold that all the "soul" means
one is not guilty unless he

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

takes the whole soul. And R. Jehudah holds that it means all that was as
yet left of the soul.

Said Rabha: All agree that if one kills a person whose windpipe and
larynx (gullet) are cut, or whose skull is fractured, he is free (for it
is considered as if he had attacked a dead man). And they agree also
that, if one killed a person who was struggling with death through
sickness caused by Heaven, he is guilty of a capital crime. And the
point of their difference in the above Boraitha is, if one killed a man
who was struggling with death through sickness caused by man. According
to the rabbis, it is similar to him whose windpipe, etc., are cut. But
according to R. Jehudah b. Bathyra, it is similar to him who was
struggling with death through sickness caused by Heaven.

A disciple taught in the presence of R. Shesheth: The above cited verse,
which commences with "and a man," means if one struck a person with an
article which can cause death, but the man was not entirely without
life, and another came and put an end to him entirely, the latter is
responsible, as the ordinary opinion is in accordance with R. Jehudah b.
Bathyra.

Rabha said: If one kills a person whose windpipe and larynx are cut he
is free; but if the latter killed a person, if this was in the presence
of the court, he is guilty. As it reads \[Deut. xiii. 6\]: "And thou
shalt put the evil away from the midst of thee." But if not in the
presence of the court, but in the presence of other witnesses, he is
free, as their testimony cannot be taken into consideration, because
they cannot be made collusive (as their intention was to kill a man
already dead). And there is a rule that such a testimony as was given by
those cannot be made collusive is not considered as testimony at all.

And he said again: Although the witnesses who had testified against the
man whose windpipe, etc., were cut were thereafter found collusive, they
are not to be put to death; if the windpipe, etc., of the witnesses
themselves were cut at the time they, testified, and thereafter they
were found collusive, they are to be put to death, because of the
above-cited verse. R. Ashi, however, maintains that they are not,
because the witnesses who made them collusive could not be punished if
their testimony were found false, as their intention was to kill men who
are considered already dead.

And Rabha said again: An ox of such a kind, if he killed a person, is
guilty. But if the ox was a healthy one and his owner was of that kind,
he is free; because it reads \[Ex. xxi. 29\]: "The ox

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

should be put to death and the owner also." And as in this case the
owner is considered already dead, and the expression "he shall also be
put to death," does not apply to him, we therefore do not apply to the
ox the beginning of the verse. R. Ashi, however, maintains that even if
the ox was of that kind, he is also free for if its owner would be such
it would be free; therefore it is to be tree when it itself is of this
kind.

"*If he set a dog or a serpent*," etc. Said R. Abbah b. Jacob: If you
wish to know the reason of their difference, it may be said thus:
According to R. Jehudah, the venom of the serpent is always between its
teeth (*i.e.*, with the bite of the serpent the venom is injected into
the body, which causes death directly) and, therefore, if he applied the
serpent to the body he is to be decapitated, and the serpent is free.
And according to the sages, the poisoning comes after the bite, from the
venom of the serpent Hence the biting did not cause death directly, and
therefore the serpent must be stoned and he who applied it is free from
capital punishment.

MISHNA *III*.: If one strikes a person with a stone or with his fists,
and he was diagnosed (by the physicians of the court) to die, and
thereafter he improved, and was diagnosed to live, and then again
becomes worse and dies, he is guilty of a capital crime. R. Nehemiah,
however, maintains that he is free, because it is reasonable to say that
he did not die directly from the blow, but from some other cause.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: The lecture of Nehemiah concerning this
matter was thus: It reads \[Ex. xxi. 19\]: "If he rise again and walk
abroad upon his crutch, then shall he that smote him be acquitted." Can
it be supposed that one should be put to death because he struck a
person who later walks in the market, if there were not a passage which
commands the contrary? We must then say that the passage means that if
when he was struck he was diagnosed to die, and thereafter he improved,
walked in the street, and was diagnosed to live, and then became worse
and died, he is nevertheless free. What do the opponents of R. Nehemiah
infer from the words "be acquitted"? That the person who struck must be
kept in arrest until the outcome shall be known. R. Nehemiah, however,
maintained that no verse is necessary for this, as this is to be
inferred from the woodgatherer, who was arrested immediately after
committing the crime. Why did not the rabbis also infer from the
woodgatherer? (Moses was aware that) he was surely guilty of a capital

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

crime, but did not know [what](errata.htm#6) kind of death applied to
him. But concerning the murderer in question, it is not known whether he
came under the category of capital punishment at all? R. Nehemiah,
however, infer this from the blasphemer, of whom Moses did not know
whether he came under the category of capital punishment at all, and
nevertheless he was imprisoned. The rabbis, however, do not infer this
from the blasphemer, as according to their opinions it was only a
decision for that time, as we have learned in the following Boraitha:
Moses our master was aware that the woodgatherer was guilty of capital
crime. As it reads (Ex. xxxi. 14\]: "Everyone that defileth it shall be
put to death." But he did not know what kind of death; as it reads:
\[Num. xv. 341: Because it had not been declared what should be done to
him." Concerning the blasphemer, however, it is not so written, but "To
the decision of the Lord," hence Moses was not aware whether he came
under the category of death at all.

The rabbis taught: If one struck a person and he was diagnosed to die,
but he nevertheless remained alive, they may free him. And if he was
diagnosed to die and he improved, the sick man must be examined again,
and appraisement made concerning the money which is to be collected from
his smiter; and if thereafter he becomes worse and dies, he must be
charged according to the second examination. So is the decree of
Nehemiah. The sages, however, maintain that there is no other
examination after the first. There is another Boraitha: If he was
diagnosed to die, but he did not, he must be examined again. But if the
first opinion was that he would live no second examination as to dying
may take place (for if it happened that he dies, it is probably not from
the previous blow). If, however, he was diagnosed to die, and he becomes
better, the sick man must undergo an appraisement concerning money. And
if thereafter he becomes worse and dies, his murderer must pay for
damages and the suffering of the deceased, to the heirs from the time he
was struck till his death. And this anonymous Boraitha is in accordance
with R. Nehemiah, who frees such from capital punishment.

MISHNA *IV*.: To the following, capital punishment does not apply: To
one who intended to kill an animal and killed a man, an idolator and
killed an Israelite, a miscarried child and killed a mature one. The
same is the case with one who intended to strike another on the loins
with an article which was not sufficient to cause death, but the blow
was made on his heart, for which it was sufficient, and he dies; or if
he intended to

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

strike him on the heart with an article which was sufficient to cause
death if striking same, but he struck the loins and the man dies,
although it was not sufficient to cause death if struck on the heart or
even if he intended to strike an adult with an article which was not
sufficient for such, but it happened that he struck a minor and he dies,
as for a minor it was sufficient; or, on the contrary, if be intended to
strike a minor with an article which was sufficient for such, but not
for an adult, and it happened that he struck with it an adult and he
nevertheless dies. To the following, however, capital punishment does
apply: To one who intended to strike a person on the loins with an
article which was sufficient for this purpose, and he strikes him to
death on his heart, or if he intended to strike an adult with an article
which was sufficient to cause his death, but it happens that he strikes
to death a minor with it. R. Simeon, however, maintains: Capital
punishment does not apply even to him who intended to kill a certain
person, and it happened that he killed another.

GEMARA: To which part of the Mishna belongs R. Simeon's, theory? If to
the latter part only it should read: And R. Simeon frees him (*i.e.*,
him who intended to kill an adult and killed a minor). We must then say
that it belongs to the first part, which states: an animal--an
idolater--an Israelite--a miscarried child, etc., to which capital
punishment does not apply, from which it is to be understood that if
there were two resembling persons, and he intended to kill one and
killed the other, capital punishment does apply. And to this R. Simeon
came to say that even in such a case capital punishment does not apply.
Now, let us see! If, *e.g.*, there were Reuben and Simeon, and the
murderer said, "I intend to kill Reuben and not Simeon," and finally
Simeon was killed, and not Reuben--this is the case in which the first
Tana and R. Simeon differ. But how is it if the murderer said, "I intend
to kill one of them"; or the murderer mistook Simeon for Reuben? Does R.
Simeon differ even in this? Come and hear the following Boraitha: R
Simeon said: Capital punishment does not apply, unless one said, "I
intended to kill so and so," and he did so. And what is his reason?
\[Deut. xix. 11\]: "But if any man be an enemy to his neighbor and lie
in wait for him," which means only when he killed the intended person.
Said the disciples of Janai: And what do the rabbis say to this verse?
It excludes him who throws a stone into an excavation in which men are
standing without the intention of killing any particular one. Now, let
us

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

see! According to the rabbis, who apply capital punishment to him who
killed one person, although he intended to kill another, the verses Ex.
xxi. 22 and 23, "If men strive . . . then shalt thou give life for
life," are in accordance with the explanation of R. Elazar, stated
above, that the verses speak about him who intends to kill. But how
should this passage be explained in accordance to Simeon's theory? In
accordance with Rabbi of the following Boraitha: "Thou shalt give life
for life" means money (*i.e.*, the value of the woman should be paid to
her heirs). You say "money," but perhaps it means literally it life"?
The expression here "thou shalt give," is to be explained similarly to
ibid., ibid. 22: "He shall give according to the decision," etc. As
there it means money, the same is the case here.

Rabha said: The following statements, taught in the school of Hiskia,
correspond neither with Rabbi nor with the rabbis mentioned above.
Namely: It reads \[Lev. xxiv. 21\]: "And he that killeth a beast shall
make restitution for it, and he that killeth a man shall be put to
death." As in the case of a beast there is no difference whether it was
intentionally or unintentionally, by an error or by premeditation, while
he was ascending or descending, he is always liable and must pay. The
same is it in the latter case of a human being: there is no difference
whether it was intentionally, etc.,--he is absolved from any money
payment.

Now let us see what is meant by the expression "unintentionally"
concerning a human being. Shall we assume, *i.e.*, that it was done
without any intention? Then it was an error, which has been already
mentioned. Why, then, the repetition? You must then say that it means,
if he intended to kill one and killed another person, and nevertheless
it states that he is absolved from any payment. Now, if he should hold
with the rabbis that such is guilty of a capital crime, then such a
statement is not necessary, as there is a rule that no payment is
required in a case of capital punishment. We must therefore say that it
does not agree with them; nor can we say, on the other hand, that it
agrees with Rabbi, as the latter requires payment, while Heskia does
not.

MISHNA *V*.: A murderer mixed up among others--all of them are free. R.
Jehudah maintains: All of them must be taken to χυφος; (a life-long
prison, to be done with as explained farther on). If it happen that the
persons sentenced to deaths of different

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

kinds, and are so mixed that it is not known who comes under this kind
of death and who under another, all of them must be executed with the
more lenient death, *e.g.*, if those who are to be stoned are mixed up
among those who are to be burned, according to the sages all of them
must be executed by burning, as stoning is more rigorous; and according
to R. Simeon all of them are to be executed by stoning, as burning is
more rigorous. Said R. Simeon to the sages: Were burning not more
rigorous, it would not apply to a daughter of a priest who had sinned.
Answered the sages: Were stoning not more rigorous, it would not apply
to a blasphemer and an idolater. If they who are to be slain by the
sword are mixed among those who are to be choked, according to R. Simeon
they must be decapitated, and according to the sages, they must be
choked.

GEMARA: What does the Mishna mean by the words, "among others"? Does it
mean others who are innocent? Is it not self-evident that they are all
free? And secondly, could R. Jehudah say that such are to be imprisoned?
Said R. Abuhu in the name of Samuel: It speaks of a murderer who was not
as yet sentenced, and was mixed among those who were already sentenced;
and as the verdict of death must be rendered only in the presence of the
criminal, therefore all of them are free from execution according to the
rabbis. R. Jehudah, however, maintains that such cannot be entirely
free, since they are murderers, and therefore, they must be taken to the
kyphos.

Resh Lakish said: The Mishna does not mean human beings at all, but
oxen--*i.e.*, whether an ox which was not as yet sentenced to death was
mixed among others which were already sentenced is the point of their
difference. According to the rabbis the ox must be judged the same as
its owner. As its owner cannot be sentenced to death if not present, the
same is the case with the ox; and as he is now mixed among others, all
of them are free. And R. Jehudah maintains that all of them must be
taken to the kyphos.

Said Rabha: How can such an explanation be given to the Mishna? Does not
a Boraitha add to this: Said R. Jose: Even if among the others was Abbah
Halafta (who was known as a great man). How, then, can the Mishna be
interpreted that it means other murderers or oxen? Therefore explains
he: It means if, *e.g.*, two were standing shoulder to shoulder and an
arrow came out from one of them and killed a person, both of them are
free. And to this R. Jose said: Even if Abbah Halafta was among the

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

two, and it is certain that Abbah Halafta would not commit such a crime.
Nevertheless, the other is free. And the saying of R. Jehudah belongs to
another case, as the Mishna is not completed, and should read thus: And
if an ox which was sentenced to death was mixed among other innocent
oxen, they must all be stoned. R. Jehudah, however, maintains that all
of them must be taken to the kyphos, and it is in accordance with the
following Boraitha: If a cow has killed a human being, and thereafter
gave birth, before she was sentenced to death, the offspring is valid;
but if it happened after she was sentenced, the offspring is invalid.
And if such were mixed among others, and even if some of the others
among which it is mixed were mixed with still others, all of them must
be taken to the kyphos. R. Elazar b. Simeon, however, maintains: All of
them are to be brought to the court and stoned.

"*All who were sentenced to death*," etc. Infer from this that if one is
forewarned of a rigorous crime, it suffices for a lenient one. (This
question was not yet solved.) Said R. Jeremiah: The Mishna speaks of a
case where the criminal was warned in general; and it is in accordance
to the Tana of the following Boraitha: All the crimes to which capital
punishment applies, the perpetrators of them are not put to death unless
there were witnesses who warned them, and unless they warned them that
they were liable to die by the decision of the court. And according to
R. Jehudah, only when they notified them by which kind of death they
would be executed.

The first Tana, who does not require that they should be notified by
which death, infers it from the case of the woodgatherer; and according
to R. Jehudah, nothing is to be inferred from the case of the
woodgatherer, as it was only a decision of that time.

"*Among those who are to be burned*," etc. R. Ezekiel taught to Rami his
son: If those who are to be burned were mixed among those who are to be
stoned, according to R. Simeon, they are to be executed by stoning, as
burning is more rigorous. Said R. Jehudah (his older son) to him:
Father, do not teach so, for, according to your teaching (as "those who
are to be burned were mixed among those who are to be stoned") it seems
that the majority of them come under the category of stoning: Hence the
reason why they are to be stoned is not because it is more lenient, but
because so was it to be done with the majority. And to the question of
his father: How, then, shall I teach? The answer was: As our Mishna
states: If those who are to be stoned

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

were mixed among those who are to be burned, R. Simeon said, etc. But if
so, how is the latter part, "And the sages said that they are to be
executed by burning, because burning is more rigorous," to be
understood? Also here the reason may be that the majority who are to be
executed come under the category of burning? Nay! The expression of the
rabbis, "stoning is more rigorous," was not as a reason, but as an
answer to R. Simeon. And it is to be explained thus: If they were mixed
among those who are to be burned, it must be done with them in
accordance with their majority. And your supposition to care about the
minority, because we have to select for them a lenient death, does not
hold good, as in reality stoning is more rigorous. Said Samuel to R.
Jehudah: Genius! do not express yourself in such terms to your father,
as there is a Boraitha: If a son saw his father transgressing what is
written in the Scripture, he must not say to him, "Father, you have
transgressed the law," but, "Father, so and so is written in the
Scripture."

But is it not finally one and the same? It means he shall say: "Father,
there is a verse in the Scripture which reads so and so," and in such a
tone that it shall not seem a rebuke, but an intimation.

MISHNA *VI*.: If one committed a crime which deserves two kinds of death
(*e.g.*, one who has intercourse with his mother-in-law who is married,
commits two crimes--with a married woman, to which choking applies, and
with his mother-in-law, to which burning applies), he must be tried for
the more rigorous one. R. Jose, however, maintains: According to that
act, he began first. (Illustrations in the Gemara.)

GEMARA: Is this not self-evident? Should one who has committed another
crime which brings an easier punishment be benefited by it? Said Rahba:
It speaks of where he was tried for a case which deserved a lenient
death, and was sentenced, and then committed a crime to which a more
rigorous death applies. Lest one say that this man is to be considered
as already killed and not to be tried again, it comes to teach us that
he must be tried and punished with the more rigorous death.

The brother of R. Jose b. Hanna questioned Rabba b. Nathan: Whence is
this law deduced? (And the answer was:) from Ezek. xviii. 10-13; " . . .
Upon the mountains he eateth . . . and his eyes he lifteth up to the
idols of the house of Israel . . . and the wife of his neighbor he
defileth . . . " To bloodshed the sword applies, to adultery with a
married woman choking

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

applies, and to idolatry stoning applies, and it ends with "his blood
shall be upon him," which means stoning. Hence he is to be executed with
the more rigorous one. R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak opposed: Perhaps all the
crimes mentioned in this passage come under the category of stoning,
namely, a "dissolute son," means a stubborn and rebellious son, to whom
stoning applies; "he defileth the wife of his neighbor" means a
betrothed damsel, to whom also the same applies; "to the idols he
lifteth up," which is idolatry, to which stoning applies? If it were so,
then what came Ezekiel to teach? And lest one say that he was only
repeating what is in the Scripture, then he ought to have done as did
Moses our master, who said \[Deut, xvii. 18\]: "He shall write the
*repetition* of the law." <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73)

R. Abhah b. Hanina lectured about the passage \[ibid. 6\]: Upon the
mountains he eateth not," which ends with \[ibid. 9\]: "He is righteous,
he shall surely live." Is it possible that, because he has not committed
such crimes, he should be called righteous? Therefore these verses must
not be taken literally, but "upon the mountains he eateth not" means
that he does not live upon the reward of the meritorious acts done by
his parents; "his eyes he lifteth not up to the idols" means that he
never walked overbearingly; "and the wife of his neighbor he defileth
not," means that he never tried to compete in the special trade of his
neighbor; "unto a woman on her separation he cometh not near" means that
he never tried to derive any benefit from the treasure of charity--and
to this it reads: "He is righteous, he shall surely live."

Rabban Gamaliel, when he came to this passage, used to weep, saying: It
seems as if he who has done all of them is righteous, but not he who has
done only one. Said R. Aqiba to him: According to your theory, the verse
\[Lev. xviii. 24\]: "Do not defile yourself with all of these things,"
also means with all of them, but one of them is allowed? Hence it means
to say with "any" of them. The same is to be said here: If one does one
of the things mentioned above, he is righteous.

"*A crime which deserves two kinds*," etc. There is a Boraitha: How is
R. Jose's decision in our Mishna to be illustrated?--*e.g.*, if the
crime which he committed with this woman was that she became first his
mother-in-law and then married. Hence the prohibition of having
intercourse with her applied, even before she

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

married again. Then he must be tried under the crime "with a
mother-in-law." But if she became his mother-in-law after her marriage,
then he must be tried under the crime "with a married woman," as the
prohibition against intercourse with her existed already before she
became his mother-in-law.

Said R. Adda b. Ahabah to Rabha: In the first case, in which she married
after she became his mother-in-law, why should he not also be tried for
the crime with a married woman? Did not R. Abuhu say that R. Jose agrees
in case a prohibition were added. (*E.g.*, when she was his
mother-in-law but unmarried, she was prohibited to him only, but allowed
to the whole world, and when married she became prohibited to the whole
world. Hence one prohibition was added. And in such a case R. Jose
agrees that the second crime must also be taken into consideration.) And
Rabha answered: Adda, my son, do you want us to execute him twice? (R.
Jose considers the added prohibition to be only concerning
sin-offerings, when incurred through error.)

MISHNA *VII*.: He who receives stripes, and relaxes into the same crime,
and is punished again and does not repent, the court takes him to the
kyphos, and feeds him with barley until his abdomen bursts.

GEMARA: Because he received stripes twice, should the court imprison him
in the kyphos forever? Said Jeremiah in the name of Resh Lakish: The
Mishna speaks of crimes to which korath applies, and he was forewarned
of stripes, and was punished twice for the same crime. And as this man
deserves death by Heaven, but his time has not yet come, and we see that
he devotes his life to sin, the court imprisons him to hasten his death.
Said R. Jacob to R. Jeremiah b. Tahlifa: Come and I will explain to you
the real meaning of Resh Lakish: The Mishna means that he has committed
the same crime thrice, for two of which he has received stripes. And as
the court does not see any remedy for him, it puts him in the kyphos
after the third time. If, however, he has committed different crimes to
which korath applies, he is not taken to the kyphos, as he is not
considered as devoting his life to this crime, but as one careless
concerning prohibitions.

"He who receives stripes twice," etc. Twice, although he was not
punished a third time! Shall we assume that our Mishna is not in
accordance with R. Simeon b. Gamaliel, who says that until one has
repeated the same crime thrice it is not considered

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

a hazakah <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) (habit), Said Rabhina: It
may be even in accordance with R. Simeon, as the crime was committed
thrice, and he considers it a habit, although he was not beaten thrice.

An objection was raised from the following: He who has committed a crime
twice to which the punishment of stripes applies receives the stripes
twice; repeating same a third time, the court puts him in the kyphos.
Abba Shaul, however, maintains that even to the third time he receives
stripes, and only after he has committed the crime a fourth time does
the court imprison him. Is it not to be assumed that the Tanaim of this
Boraitha differ in the same point as R. Simeon b. Gamaliel and Rabbi
differ--namely, whether it should be considered a hazakah after two
times, which is the opinion of Rabbi, or after three times, according to
R. Simeon? Nay; all agree with R. Simeon. And the point of their
difference is that, according to the first Tana, the crimes which were
committed thrice counted, and according to Abba Shaul, the stripes, and
not the crimes, are to be counted.

Where is to be found an allusion in the Scripture to the kyphos in
question? Said Resh Lakish \[Ps. xxxiv. 22\]: "The evil will slay the
wicked." And the same said again: It reads \[Eccl. ix. 12\] "For man
also knoweth not his time, like the fishes that are caught in an evil
net," from which the same is to be inferred.

MISHNA *VIII*.: He who kills a person, not in the presence of witnesses,
is taken to the kyphos and is fed on scant bread and water.

GEMARA: But whence do we know if it was not in the presence of
witnesses? Said Rabh: If there was only one witness, or even if there
were two who saw this from separate places. And Samuel said: If he
committed the crime without forewarning. And R. Hisda in the name of
Abimi said: Even when the witnesses contradicted themselves in
unimportant matters--as, *e.g.*, a Mishna stated above. Ben Sakkai
examined them concerning the size of figs, etc., and they were not
contradicted in the examination.

"*And is fed with scant bread and water*." And above it was said that he
was fed with barley? Said R. Shesheth: In both cases it is meant that he
was first fed with scant bread and water till his abdomen shrank, and
afterwards with barley, from which it swelled till it burst.

MISHNA *IX*.: If one steals a kisvah, or one curses his

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

neighbor, Invoking God as "a carver," or one has intercourse with a
female heathen, zealous people (like Pinehas) have a right to strike him
when caught in the act. If a priest performed the service in the Temple
while he was unclean, his fellow-priests would not bring him to the
court, but the youths would take him out of the sanctuary and split his
head. If a common Israelite served in the Temple, according to R. Aqiba,
he was choked by the court, and according to the sages he would come to
his death by Heaven.

GEMARA: What is meant by "*kisvah*"? Said R. Jehudah: It means service
vessels \[cf. Num. iv. 7\]. And where is there to be found an allusion
to this in Scripture? \[Ibid., ibid., 20\]: "That they may not go in to
see when the holy things are covered, and die."

"*Who curses*," etc. R. Joseph taught: May the carver strike his
carving. And another explanation by Rabah b. Mari is: May the carver
strike him himself, and his creator and his creation.

"*One who has intercourse*," etc. R. Kahana questioned Rabh: What is
this punishment if there were no zealous men? Rabh forgot his
traditional answer to this, and it happened that it was read before R.
Kahan in a dream, etc. \[Mal. ii. 11\]: "Judah hath dealt treacherously,
and an abomination hath been committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for
Judah hath profaned the sanctuary of the Lord which he loveth, and hath
married the daughter of a strange god." And he came to Rabh and told him
that so was it read to him, and therefrom Rabh recollected that this
passage was an answer to his question, as it reads immediately after it:
"The Lord will cut off, unto the man that does this, son and grandson,
out of the tents of Jacob, and him that bringeth near an offering unto
the Lord of hosts"--which means, if he was a scholar, that he should not
have a son among the scholars or a grandson among the disciples; and if
he was priest, that he should not have a son who should bring an
offering, etc. Hyya b. Abuhu said: He who has had intercourse with the
daughter of an idolater is considered as if he mingles himself with the
idols. As it reads: "He hath married the daughter of a strange god."
Has, then, an idol a daughter? Hence it means as is just mentioned
above.

When R. Dimi, or Rabbin, came from Palestine, he said that the court of
the Maccabees decreed: He who does so transgresses concerning the
following four things: Neda (menstruation), Shif'ha (female-slave),
Goiye (strangers in faith), and prostitution.

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

Said R. Hisda: If one comes to the court with the question, "May one
take revenge on the criminal mentioned above?" his question must not be
answered. And so also said Rabba b. Hana in the name of R. Johanan, and
not only this, but if it should happen that Zimri were killed by
Phinehas after he separated himself from Cozbi, Phinehas would be put to
death for this crime. Furthermore, if Zimri, seeing that Phinehas seeks
his life, were to kill him in self-protection, he would not be punished,
as Phinehas would be considered a seeker of life.

It reads \[Num. xxv. 5\]: "Moses said to the judges of Israel," etc. The
tribe of Simeon went to Zimri ben Saul and said: They (the judges) are
judging cases of capital punishment, and you keep silent! What did he
do? He gathered twenty-four thousand of his tribe and went to Cozbi,
pleading with her to listen to him. And to her answer, "I am a princess,
the daughter of a king, and my father commanded me not to listen to any
one but the greatest of Israel," he said: I myself am a prince of a
tribe in Israel, and I am greater than Moses, as I am from the second
tribe, while he is from the third. He took her by the locks of her hair,
and brought her to Moses, saying: Son of Amram, is this damsel allowed
to me, or prohibited? And should you say that she is prohibited, I would
ask you, Who allowed to you the daughter of Jethro? Moses, however, had
forgotten the traditional Halakha, and he and all who accompanied him
wept. As it reads \[ibid., ibid. 6\]: "And these were weeping by the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation."

And farther on it reads: "And Phinehas saw." What did he see? Said Rabh:
He saw Zimri's act, from which he recollected the traditional Halakha.
And he said to Moses: Granduncle, didst thou not teach me, on thy
descending from Mount Sinai, that zealous men might take revenge on him
who has had intercourse with the daughter of an idolater? To which Moses
answered: Let him who reads the letter be the carrier--*i.e.*, let him
who gives the advice be its executor.

Samuel, however, said: Phinehas saw \[Prov. xxi. 30\]: "There is no
wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord--*i.e.*, in a
case where there is a violation of the Holy Name the honor of the master
must not be considered (and therefore Phinehas did it without the
consent of his master Moses).

R. Itz'hak, in the name of R. Elazar said: He saw the angel who
destroyed the people. It reads: "Arose and took a javelin in his hand."
From this it may be inferred that one must not

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

enter with arms into the house of learning. He took out the javelin from
its sheath, sharpened it, and replaced it in the sheath so that it
should not be visible; and went to the headquarters of Simeon's tribe,
saying: Whence do we know that the tribe of Levi is greater than
Simeon's? And the people who were there thought: Phinehas himself is
coming to do the same as Zimri has done. Hence the scholars decided that
this is allowed.

Said R. Johanan: Six miracles occurred to Phinehas when he came to smite
Zimri. One--Zimri has not separated himself, etc (The continuation of
the Haggadah will be translated farther on.)

"*If a priest performed the service while he is defiled*," etc. R. Ahbah
b. Huna questioned R. Shesheth: Is a priest who does service, being
defiled, deserving of death by Heaven, or not? And he answered: This we
have learned in our Mishna: "A priest who does service in the Temple,
being defiled, his fellow-priests would not bring him to court, but the
youths would take him out and split his head." Now, if it should be
supposed that he was guilty of death by Heaven, why did not they leave
him to the heavenly punishment? Rejoined he: Do you mean to say that he
was not guilty at all? Is there such a thing--that Heaven frees him and
we should put him to death? Yea! Does not the court put one who is twice
beaten with stripes in the kyphos and cause him to die? (What comparison
is this?) Did not R. Jeremiah say that it speaks of crimes of a kind to
which korath applies? Hence such an offender deserves death. But is the
case not the same with him who steals a kisvah, and with the two other
cases mentioned in our Mishna? To all of them it is taught that there
are allusions in the Scripture implying that they deserve death, viz.,
concerning a kisvah \[Num. iv. 20\]: "That they may not go in to see
when the holy things are covered, and *die*," concerning one cursing his
neighbor, etc., it was explained by R. Joseph that it looks like
blasphemy, and concerning an intercourse with a daughter of an
adulterer, Rabh recollected his tradition, as said above.

An objection was raised from a Boraitha which states: And the following
are liable to death by Heaven: An unclean priest who served in the
Temple, etc. Hence we see that his punishment is death, R. Shesheth
being objected to, and the objection remains.

The same Boraitha continues thus, The following deserve death by Heaven:
One who eats grain in which the heave-offering

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

is mixed, an unclean priest who eats a heave-offering while defiled, and
a commoner who partakes of the heave-offering, a commoner who performs
service in the Temple, a priest, while defiled, serving in the Temple, a
priest who has had a legal bath after defilement and performs the
service in the Temple before sunset, the same is if he performs the
service without the prescribed dress, or he who performs service before
the prescribed offering after defilement is brought, and also he who
serves without the prescribed washing of his hands and feet, or he
serves while drunk, or without having cut his hair at the prescribed
time. However, one uncircumcised, a mourner while the corpse is not yet
buried, and he who worships while sitting, do not come under the
category of death by Heaven, but are only forewarned. A priest who has a
blemish and he who derives benefit from the sanctuary
intentionally--according to Rabbi he comes under the category of death
by Heaven, and according to the sages he comes under the category of the
forewarned.

Concerning heave-offering mentioned in the Boraitha, said Rabh: A
commoner who partakes of heave-offering is to be punished with stripes.
Said R. Kabana and R. Assi to him: Let the master say he deserves death
by Heaven. And he answered: It reads \[Lev. xxii. 9, 10\]: "They die
therefore . . . I am the Lord who sanctify them. And no stranger shall
eat of a holy thing." Hence between "they will die" and "no stranger
shall eat" intervenes "I am the Lord," etc., to teach that the
punishment of death does not apply to a stranger. But does not the above
Boraitha state that such comes under the category of punishment by
Heaven? Do you want to contradict Rabh from a Boraitha? Rabh is a Tana,
and has the right to differ. <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75)

"*If a common Israelite served in the Temple*," etc. There is a
Boraitha: R. Ismael said: It reads \[Num. xviii. 7\] "And the stranger
that cometh nigh shall be put to death"; and \[ibid. xvii. 28\]
"Everyone that cometh near at all unto the tabernacle of the Lord shall
die." As the verse just cited speaks of death by Heaven, the same is the
case with the former.

R. Aqiba, however, said: Here the Scripture says: "And die therefore";
and \[Deut. xiii. 6\]: "And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams,
shall be put to death." And as there it means by stoning, the same is
the case here. And R. Johanan

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

b\. Nuri said: As a false prophet is punished with choking, the same is
the case here. What is the point of their difference? R. Aqiba holds
that the expression "put to death" must be analogized with "put to
death," and not "put to death" with "shall die." And R. Ismael holds
that we should equalize a commoner with a commoner, and not a commoner
with a prophet. According to R. Aqiba, however, a prophet who has misled
is worse than a commoner.

And the point of difference between R. Aqiba and R. Johanan b. Nuri is
the same wherein R. Simeon and the rabbis differ in the following
Boraitha: To a prophet who has misled, stoning applies; according to R.
Simeon, however, choking applies. But does not a Mishna above state ([p.
239](#page_239)): R. Aqiba said: Choking applies. There are two Tanaim
who differ concerning R. Aqiba's statement. Our Mishna mentioned R.
Simeon, who said so, in accordance with R. Aqiba's theory; but the
Boraitha is in accordance with the rabbis, who are of the opinion, with
R. Aqiba. that choking applies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[223:1](t0812.htm#fr_70) It is impossible to
give a literal translation of this Boraitha with even an abstract of the
explanation as discussed by the Amoraim at length in the text. It is so
complicated that the Amoraim themselves could not explain it without
correcting the Boraitha or without giving to it an entirely strange
interpretation. As was said by Rabha: "In any event, the analogy of
expressions cannot be used without objections and difficulties." We
therefore give a free rendering of the Boraitha, omitting the
discussion.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[228:1](t0812.htm#fr_71) Against our method,
here are repeated a few lines from First Gate, pp. 55 and 56; but we
could not do otherwise, because of the explanation in the text.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[228:2](t0812.htm#fr_72) Leeser's translation
does not correspond.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[237:1](t0812.htm#fr_73) Leeser's translation,
"a copy of the law," is entirely wrong.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[239:1](t0812.htm#fr_74) See footnote, Vol.
XIV., p. 217

<span id="fn_75"></span>[243:1](t0812.htm#fr_75) All that is mentioned
in the Boraitha cited is inferred from different passages in the
Scripture by analogy of expression, followed by a discussion at length
about them, which does not belong here and is therefore omitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](t0813)
